The I was thinking in mind for
all those people that work and
do a lot of work upside services
for everyone hello keeping this
in mind today with the kind of
weather that we have all.
Some of state senator Roberto
Bobby J. one Senator districts
six compasses so Los Alamos
reverse of the famed talks.
We'll go to Senator Wirth thank
you madam chair my name is Pat
Woods
Representative curry where in
Union County is that we're
hoping for a lot of snow today
thank you.
Senator time good morning madam
chair and senator crystals I'm
gonna have the blue hill area of
New Mexico State are a little
bit of Dona Ana daga county and
all of Luna and I see our county
manager Chris prices here today
so welcome thank you for having
us.
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam chair it's really
great to be here with each and
everyone of you state senator
Pete Campos representing all or
parts of seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico Senate
district eight thank you looking
at this morning.
Well I had
Senator Richard is thank you
madam chairman here it's nice
thank you for helping us I've
got three bills and rules will
be running out here quickly but
I'm Nancy Senator Nancy
Rodriguez and I from Santa Fe
twenty four thank you so much of
the vice chair of the committee
and senator Munoz is a little
tied up here and so we've got
other members always willing to
help us thank you.
Can I am Senator I put a I
Hemphill from Silver City of
Representative Senate district
twenty eight which is Grant
County catching County most is
the core of County good morning
we're gonna start with you guys
to have.
All right madam chair members of
the committee.
Just for having us this morning
I'm Kelly cars well capital
outlay analyst with the
legislative finance committee we
also have Anna Silva she's the
director of the facility's
Management Division of the
General Services Department and
Wesley Billingsley capital
outlay bureau chief at DFS so
I'm gonna take you through a
couple just high level points to
get the conversation started
from this handout and then and
and Wesley will take it away and
we can all answer any questions
that you have
so on in the table on this
handout you can see a total
appropriations to state agency
capital projects where which are
the focus of this morning's
hearings as well as their
outstanding balances as we
mentioned last week state agency
projects tend to have the money
spent down more quickly the
local or higher education
projects those are three major
categories of capital outlay.
For point of comparison that the
outstanding balances for state
agency projects at the end of
the first quarter second quarter
of FY twenty three were five ten
twenty five point four million
and for local projects that seem
figure was eight hundred ninety
two point four million and the
second bullet I also just wanted
to give you a sense of how much
of the total outstanding
projects state agency projects
account for so again as of
December twenty two twenty two.
They're approximately three
hundred active state agency
capital outlay projects under
way and that Representative
about seven percent of the forty
one hundred outstanding projects
overall.
this is reflecting the fact that
appropriations to state agency
projects go to fewer projects
and higher average dollar
amounts in the last session you
can see in this third goal at.
that the legislature funded
about eighty state agency
projects with an average
appropriation of four point nine
million dollars in comparison
you also funded over eleven
hundred local projects with an
average appropriation of three
hundred forty four thousand
dollars.
Many of the state facilities
that these appropriations go to
are managed by the facilities
management division and they
worked what they work with most
major state agencies to plan
prioritize and execute their
capital projects they have a
staff that includes project
managers the staff architect as
well as an operations and
maintenance staff that works
on buildings in Santa Fe.
That and I'm in Santa Fe is
funded through the capitol
building repair fund you can see
some details on the revenue to
that it receives a monthly
distribution from the land grant
permanent fund that is over a
million dollars currently so
through the first half of this
fiscal year.
The revenues to that fund
totaled nearly seven million
dollars the fund balance in the
capitol buildings repair Fund
was twenty five point six
million dollars of that about
sixteen was unencumbered but
committed to projects that had
been approved through the board
of finance and about four point
three million was uncommitted.
as I mentioned before I also
wanted to point out that in
addition to capital outlay state
agencies received significant
appropriations to capital
projects in the twenty twenty
one and twenty twenty two
special and regular sessions.
those appropriations.
Went through house bill two
primarily so they're not
necessarily tracked in our
capital outlay data but we have
been providing you summary
information on those in our
quarterly reporting.
And also just one more point I
wanted to head to head on
I wanted to point out that the
LFC budget recommendation.
This year does support funding
for a new project manager
position for the spaceport
Authority which is intended to
help move some of their
outstanding outstanding balances
and projects that have been
stalled due to a lack of project
management capacity and now I
will turn it over to an agency
of us.
Thank you Kelly good morning
madam chair members of the
committee of before it is a hand
out and I'll just go over a few
slides just really quickly
looking at slide to this is a
little bit of an overview of the
facilities management division
this slide illustrates FMC's
jurisdiction FMD oversees
roughly forty five percent of
all state owned buildings and
land totaling approximately six
point five billion dollars in
assets.
Looking at slide three some of
the services that we provide are
overseeing leases for agencies
under our purview which is
approximately three hundred
eighty eight properties totaling
two point seven million square
feet and forty eight million
dollars and rent payments
annually.
Additionally we provide
operations and maintenance
services for Santa Fe and our
pine tree Capas Capas in
Albuquerque totaling over one
point five million square feet
however today's focus is on
capital projects some of the
services we provide as Kelly
mentioned is master planning in
accordance with executive order
twenty twelve dash twenty three
requiring state agencies to
submit five year facility master
plans and providing for plan
guidance FMD conducts workshops
for all state agencies and
provides guidance on the
preparation and approval of
agency master plans.
Management.
FMD provides project management
services for new construction
renovations major repairs and
upgrades including furniture
Fund furnishings and equipment.
Management functions include all
aspects of a capital project
from initial planning to all
design phases construction and
warranty an architectural and
engineering services FMD
architects and engineers provide
professional guidance to the
development of capital project
aptly requests including
generation a project scope and
estimates the project costs
architectural and engineering
services include participation
in design reviews and detailed
evaluation of project drawings
and specifications price release
for bidding for proposing FMD
professional services will
include facility condition
assessments system engineering
support and setting priorities
for repairs and renovations.
The next few slides are just a
few projects that FMD is either
completed or is in the process
of being completed.
If we look at the second to the
last slide.
Which is slide eleven of this is
a snapshot of appropriations
from the last four years you can
see seventy received over three
hundred and sixty five million
in capital outlay and has
expended over one hundred eighty
five million dollars leaving an
unencumbered balance of a
hundred and twenty eight million
seven hundred and forty six
thousand three dollars however
we are currently working on two
hundred and seventy two active
capital projects and we have
fifty eight currently projects
thank you that have not been
encumbered.
Turning.
Been working really closely with
the LFC DFA and over the years
with the Senator Campos I always
get questions on how can we make
the capital outlay process
better so just a couple of
recommendations when we
appropriate money or when the
legislature appropriates money
to the two different agencies
there's never any money for
maintenance so we have
appropriations for the capital
project but then we don't have
on going support and maintenance
also right now now in the
current statute thirteen this
one this one fifty eight the
statute does not allow for any
pre payments of of items such as
long lead time items so if
there's possibly an amendment to
the statute to help facilitate
agencies or entities in
providing maybe some monies to
with approval with DFA to help
support maybe some of the items
that have long lead times and
then also making appropriations
maybe some of the language that
would allow for the.
Different appropriations without
approval from DFA on how those
long wait times can be purchased
and with that I'll stand for
questions.
Question.
Mr chair we can go over it line
by line but if you would like us
to we can't.
With one.
What we.
Mr chairman of the committee
star the first page project
number D. fifty two ninety six
for cultural affairs Public
Library source
looks like it was plucked due to
large remaining balance the
twenty twenty G. O. funds have
to be approved by voters so
that's why there was some delay
and and not funding but it looks
like DC is going to be working
on getting that funding expended
The CA typically has they have
also experienced a video bond so
they're really good about
getting their funds expended
quickly.
Yes.
Along with I feel.
Mr chairman the twenty twenty
deal bonds they weren't sold
until April may of twenty twenty
one and so they wouldn't they
wouldn't on that fire till next
year twenty four twenty four.
The next project is border
authorities this is for their PO
we infrastructure and I think we
actually might have someone from
border Authority here to speak
to this one as well Mr chairman
but the funding not expended due
to number of reasons the which
is has been resolved the project
was only partially funded we are
working with border authority to
give them some of our cost over
run funding and so they have to
projects whether receiving cost
overrun funding from us we'll
get those words out hopefully by
the end of the month is our
plan.
A pass on that in.
Additional members if you have
more questions right now on
individual projects and I need
the best where most efficient
use of this.
So how much is our cost over.
That.
For.
So Mister chairman for this
particular project I don't have
that information in front of me
unfortunately but they are
receiving a one million dollars
for one of their projects and
two million dollars for another
one of their projects.
What the projects some of.
Try to add capital six.
The.
Mr chair.
Is this Mister chair members of
the committee for the cost
overruns we had a two million
for the water tower and said
that that is a and one million
for a facultative wastewater
pond in Columbus those are the
cost overrun projects.
The thank you for costs.
Mr Chairman yes we are we are
going to be they are gonna be
receiving the full amount
requested.
Okay so those projects.
Mr chair members of the
committee that's correct.
The funding for all.
Thanks.
That's.
Mr chair members of the
committee so that that is a
separate project that's a.
Odjick that we are working with
the with Luna County in the Luna
County manager to get that one
completed you know the big step
that we've taken which is
something that we we were
mentioning in the past this
acquiring purchase agreements
with the major landowner and and
with the great work of the Luna
County manager we've since
resolved that issue.
Thanks we also just be sure
Mr chair members of the
committee.
We don't believe so no which we
should be we should not be on a
list two years from now right.
Mr chair members the committee
that's correct we we will get
that project okay thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman next
project is the mortgage finance
authority I'm just three million
dollars for the affordable
housing construction and so they
have obligated the full amount
of the three million dollars in
December so they should start
spending on funding it starts
showing expenditures on
relatively soon.
Next project is the DPS firing
range improvements
And maybe have an aspect of this
but if you went through a little
bit
Mr chair members of the
committee so initially F. M. D.
had to assess the quality and
capacity other available springs
of water for the fort Bayard
Medical Center in general the
assessment of the spring fed
system indicated that the twelve
act springs had sufficient
capacity
we conducted the first study the
second study it was to assess
the viability of the for water
supply options and financial
impact of each option evaluated.
however before that we also have
to determine of any what
infrastructure engineering
related to the for water
delivery system we have to
determine the Water Rights so
F. M. D. with our legal counsel
worked with the office of the
state engineer to detail the
history of the two hundred
eighty two acre feet required a
detail the passage of those
rights to the facilities
management division once
approval of an affidavit to this
office of the state engineer is
approved an analysis of the
water supply and demand based on
decided engineering studies will
be finalized and then we can
outline the distribution of
those water rights are still are
still a few steps before we can
complete the infrastructure
project.
Thank.
Mr chairman the next project is
the Santa Fe capitol campus
master plan implements and
analysis on how to help out with
our Mr chair members of the
committee so FMD conducted a
Santa Fe master plan and the
outgrowth of that was the
executive office building so
included in the executive office
building once completed then the
purpose of that is to move
agencies from the space the
state space once that projects
completed that those agencies
that back fill the executive
office building we will then
look at
reorganizing the state's assets
and determining which agencies
will go into state owned space
that well then of those
buildings will need to be
modified and with that money
that's we intend to use that
that's going to be purpose for
those facilities.
What what.
Okay.
This is a question of in at
thinking about for quite some
time so we're building.
New buildings.
And we're moving agencies out of
old buildings so do we ever sell
the old buildings it is issues
and act you know our our
employees
numbers aren't expanding so.
Explain to me.
What happens to the old
buildings do we do we sell those
do we you said re purpose.
Will move that domino here here
here here.
The last though to sell his
bills.
Mr chair Senator Woods
so the purpose of the executive
office building is to move
agencies from leased space the
state space so that's priority
number one then once we move
agencies from lease based estate
space there are some agencies
that will move into the
executive office building
however right now we have more
agencies and lease space that we
do that we have space for in
state owned space so for
instance of the Public Education
Department they made about plus
the facilities management
division two years for a new
facility that will be one of the
agencies that will be moving to
the executive office building
once that agency moves to the
executive office building the
Apodaca building will then
become available for another
agency so we will renovate that
space for another agency.
Okay so you answer my question
you said that we are leasing a
lot of space and we will be.
I'm getting done with that space
and will quit leasing.
And so those contracts are such
that we can just terminate those
contracts I'm sure.
Mr chair Senator what's there is
language in our leases that
allows agencies to move from the
space the state space okay well.
You probably aren't aware but I
did introduce a bill.
Of one state purchases new lands
that they keep the local
government hold by somehow
paying the taxes that private
enterprise would be paying on
that so.
What you're telling me today is
we've already pretty well got
the properties
already schedule so.
I was looking for a a straight
swap so if we got a new property
we got rid one.
Mr chair Senator Woods
we would be
vacating the lease ends
realizing the savings but not a
state owned facility okay.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you I guess I'm gonna roll
to cell these pre we don't.
Thank you Mr chairman you're
just access to the members only
just rolled Grumman asked what
questions can kind seamless
right.
Fund.
The masses we go but I'm just
going to have a speed up just a
little bit.
There's one that pops out in
your eyes number thirteen I want
to know quite a bit about what
we need to do their.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm sorry
internet thirteen and I'm think
it's.
Thirteen sixty finally thank you
Mr chairman number thirteen is
the delete for bears water
infrastructure again I'll see if
I can help with that one.
Mr chair members of the
committee that was the update
that again just a little while
ago regarding the water.
Next one is the experiments
Mexico Mr African American
performing arts center kitchen
addition I'm not sure if anyone
is here from the state fair
commission.
I did speak with with bill from
sticker Commission and so this
project is on hold right now
since since Representative
Stapleton and was the one who
sponsor this project they're
trying to see what the best
steps forward are to continue
this project and so right now
that's around when you go back
to the exact kill that project
is twenty nineteen and if we
need to put it somewhere else or
we authorizing if they come in
requests eight twenty nineteen
project to take that one out.
It's not gonna go anywhere in
twenty nineteen nobody wants to
do anything and so.
Thank you Mr chairman and so
what we'll do what we need to do
is a yes since Representative
Stapleton was the Sanchez he
will have to re authorize it
differ wanted to be authorized I
just wanted to take it out
completely and she no longer
remember the legislature so okay
thank you for that.
That.
Generally yes trump.
Thank you
when a member leaves
legislature's we know I mean
that project goes to the
succeeding member the
legislature general.
So for that funding does so.
I just think there's a process
there that.
What we're suggesting is we just
eighty six the project I think
that other member has to be
routed to I don't think this is
a direct capital appropriation
yeah this was done through the
budget process and was headed
that way so it wasn't a members
add in the in the STBs but I
told them also if you weren't
paying attention I told him if
someone wants to pick it up and
we authorize it that's fine but
it's twenty nineteen project it
will expire in two and June
twenty twenty three so if if
somebody wants to pick it up and
we authorize it for twenty
twenty three the exact or
somebody that's fine but it's
going to die if we don't do
something.
Mr chair I just want to point
out this was a capital project
twenty nineteen was the last
year we capitol billet General
Fund so it was part of the
capital.
And it wasn't just that it will
it that it will revert and
twenty twenty three and less
three authorized at but she
didn't have one point seven
million and capital that she
used.
The.
Capital.
Okay yes.
Mr chair but it was some of her
capital so I think just as a
matter process I mean
Replacement it would get to re
authorize these funds.
And to your point etcetera I
don't care as long as it's we
authorized a but it's going to
go away if they don't have any
plans or designs there is no way
that the project is going to be
viable in their chair you know I
I months from now understand
understand and normally.
Normally
Legislators were always set.
Letters from the LFC which is
really helpful telling us about
these things in her case she has
a new Representative replacing
or wondering if your office is
in communication whether.
replacement letting her know to
re authorize these phones Mister
chairman Senator Steinborn bill
noting with expert Mexico he is
actually the communications with
her to to figure out what the
next step is for these funds I
haven't completely unfinished I
think going through that process
as senator that's that's
determined pointed out it is not
going to be reverting during
this year so they do need to
quickly take action but that's
good to hear there's a
conversation going if they don't
lose the funds thank you Mr.
Senator.
Mr chair I was just curious if
if we done we talk about the
space versus owning it we've
done a cost benefit analysis on.
Callers last week.
Talking on the other side of
that microphone it's confusing
me but have we done a cost
benefit analysis on lease versus
owning sometimes it's better to
own sometimes it's better to
lease so if we look at.
Look at that Mr chair members of
the committee yes we have so
It depends on of there's a lot
of factors well one of the items
is performing maintenance and
the facility condition
assessment of the facility that
we are either if we're buying a
facility and then having to
renovate it if.
Action so it there are many
factors and it just depends.
You're one of the things that
that was mentioned earlier is
the maintenance of the facility
so you build a new facility
which revenue money to maintain
it.
It go fall apart risking
weakness going costs more money.
If it's leased you make somebody
else pay for the ruefully so
that's that's all of question
thank.
Mr Chairman thanks for your
space Port Authority projects I
think we do have a
representative from spaceport
here as well
to to discuss their projects and
how they're moving forward with
the capital corporation.
Mr chair Senator so would you
like me just to go over them or
how in this real briefly where
you're behind if you're short
that's we're trying to figure
out capital can complete what
you've got need finish what you
got with cost new costs in if
you're shorting or that's really
one target.
Sure so as of Mr chair it's
centers we're actually moving in
all these the the one that
listed one hundred percent we it
this is for the master plan
we're about ready to make an
award for the master plan with
answers are few process so that
would the master plan is about a
million dollars and then there
are other improvements that part
of that are under way.
About
ten months ago we
Higher to the state pricing
program contractors project
managers our problem and moving
forward on these projects has
been that we're running
operations on site and we don't
have anybody dedicated just to
do that so since we've gotten
those people on we made
significant improvements all
across the board they're working
on the
start building ninety building
that's listed in years ten
million dollars for now it right
now releasing the design build
for that so we'll get a building
design out of that and then
we'll move forward on the
building of a building and right
now we're not forecasting
shortfalls.
Mr chair if we believe we have
enough money to cover that as is
we also have some access to the
G. R. T. access fund revenue
that we would probably use to
cover the shortfall rather than
coming back here for additional
funds.
Me ask you one question on the
shortfall in the G. R. T. I
thought using the G. R. T. I
think it only use that G. R. T.
to pay the bonds back and you
could use it for any operational
infrastructure the Senate
representative that she may know
better than I do but.
Mr chair that we cannot use the
excess pledge revenue that's the
the pay back the bonds for
anything appropriations but a of
the statute does say it is there
for building out the space for
design construction and
management of construction so we
will choose for operations we've
we've stopped doing that since
the Attorney General
Letter from a couple years ago
but that access pledge revenue
is there for other proven so
some of the ones were planning
on asking money from or on those
are are some local road to need
improvement for the use of the
spaceport and some other onsite
thing so we're trying to be
judicious about when we come
back to
ask for money here versus what
is already been given plus taxes
plus revenue but we're not using
it for any appropriations.
I see once we started chatting
about capital that January ten
thousand within our contract so
you guys Domingo push before you
got here another over that I
mean as long as it gets done I
mean it is what it is let me ask
you one more question on the
maintenance issue when your
default space for lease are you
going to come and ask us for
general fund money or capital
money to to fix those rough
weeks and no one else to not
over here that the virgin says
that your defaulted on the lease
Mr chair if the what we found
was the growth which is a
complicated rough with the
twenty five foot skylights in
undulating plywood system did
experience weeks this year and
so we used again the statewide
pricing agreement it's a very
significant repairs we also
hired our own process of hired a
consultant to review the
construction of the roof and see
if we missed anything come up
with a maintenance plants of of
those weeks don't happen in the
future but you're right Senator
we did have leaks the summer
when the rain started up again
it is about a twelve year old
rough now it's have periodic
maintenance but it is a
complicated rough to it's not a
normal rough on a normal hair.
I'm not sure what the answer to
this question are are will you
be asking for capital dollars to
repair the roof.
Senator Senator no we will be we
have we believe we have a
sufficient dollars in the in the
some of these were general for
the capital from assisted here
and we're using some of those
general dollars to fix the roof
okay good what we've got it
looks like twenty six million in
the first place to go another
twenty million on the backs of
so forty six million in capital
waiting to be spent spaceport
that's good news for sandy Jones
for for those of us are
continuing to advocate for you
we got to get that money out
quick quickly as possible so
it's hard to continue to to
allocate more funds when we I
think for the I think we're on
the naughty list probably more
than anyone on here so let's
start spending some money out
there.
Thank you.
You Mr.
So that we go to the next page.
Page three.
Administrative office of the
courts
Looks like we're going to be
county magistrate court
relocation
and so it looks like they have
decided to relocate Senator
justice upgrades are needed I'm
not sure if anyone from AOC is
here.
Thanks to the.
Have them come up and speak
about.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes on that Guadalupe
County relocation project that's
to relocate the magistrate court
from privately leased facility
to the County facility we hadn't
had trouble
getting an architect on board
but we did recently complete in
our of P. and have selected a
successful architectural firm
and we are very close to
entering into con contract with
them that'll be the very first
project that they work on so
we'll be able to get plans and
and start really getting under
way on that project in the next
month.
our other
project that came up was
security upgrades for the
magistrate point and that
project was delayed
mainly because of supply issues
we do have quotes ready to
finish out the appropriation but
the the vendors that we've been
working for seven minimal to get
through security equipment
that we need to have installed
in the courts
just because of supply issues
but we do expect that to
get better and we should have
that done by the end of the
fiscal year.
Thank you Mr chairman the next
two projects are from the
central Texan Grover I'm not
sure if anyone is here from
there but they did have you know
some some stall to the some
other projects during the COVID
time they weren't open and
running but I think since then
they have opened up and they
should spend that's the the
funding relatively quickly again
this one is one of them the
where they did come to us for
some cost overruns and we aren't
going to fully fund their
request for that cost over.
one is economic development
apartments mainstreet
And I'm just I'm just kind of
surprises he is not here to
actually spend their funding
relatively quickly so I I don't
think they're gonna have a
problem getting this done I
think the actually did some
every authorization request to
extend the time on this for
another year and so we will be
going through that requesting
and approving that one.
Energy minerals state parks
project required planning design
approved the first phase of the
project is not completed
major remaining funds have not
been obligated and remaining
income funds are slated to be
obligated a state matching funds
to complete bring the state park
office will be expended by the
appropriation that so it seems
like they will be on time for
that one Mr chair just I wanted
to make one additional point
about state parks they did
receive twenty million dollars
to the special appropriations I
mentioned earlier for state
parks maintenance
and they did request some
additional funding through the
capital process this year for
more state parks projects
but when we asked them about
their capacity to spend an
additional significant chunk of
money on top of the twenty
million they said they had
limited limited capacity to move
additional big chunks of money
now so it we did not include
additional funding for state
parks and our capital
recommendation for twenty twenty
three.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks to
we're for GST and so I will let
their speak to both of those.
As.
The motion Mr chair members of
the committee so of with our
demolition we have that mode of
multiple projects however there
were few in Los Lunas that we
had to do assessments for one
was the of the pool and we had
to determine whether or not it
was still viable and we did an
analysis to determine if it was
better to build a new facility
or to renovate the existing
facility we found that in order
to renovate the existing
facility could be roughly of
four point five million dollars
and to purchase and do it
complete renovation doing
newbuild is roughly the same
amount so therefore we're
getting approval whether or not
to demo that facility in
addition to that as I mentioned
earlier regarding the executive
office building part of this
money will also be slated to
demo the and you can see those
and contract he's a Pino
building and with that will be
completing and expanding the
entire amount.
And the other one.
Mr chair members of the
committee regarding the pair of
building
when we again complete executive
office building part of that
will be to renovate whatever
agencies we determine will be
back filling the para building
but right now we have been
working with ECECD on a
modification to of one of the
hearing rooms where the PRC is
to occupy and we are adding
eight additional offices so that
money is currently being
encumbered and we will be
spending the majority of that as
well.
Center in thank you Mr chairman
and thank you for your for the
information on these two items
so I guess net net what what is
is this we hear all this that
we're over paying for the space
and or are we under pay what
what are we doing there so what
does this do and do we have some
of that has like the the balance
sheet in terms of what what we
need to demolish versus what we
need to lease versus what we
already have who who keeps that
information Mr chair Senator
Padilla so the facility's
Management Division keep that
information for the facilities
that we own we do facility
condition assessments on our on
eight on properties that we own
and determined that anything
above a certain criteria then of
those buildings are then put on
the demo list
those properties that are
determined that they are
salvageable and we are able to
maintain we do receive the
appropriations they were able to
put that money into deferred
maintenance and maintenance and
renovate those buildings and
then there
FC I score than goes down
regarding you know first I think
your question was then what do
we determined least versus state
owned for yeah so we always are
looking to you know make the
maximum use of our facilities
and save the taxpayer dollars so
it is prudent to move our
agencies from the space the
state space however we just
don't have enough state owned
facilities and we have a long
laundry list of agencies that
are on a waiting list for state
owned facilities in Albuquerque
alone we have agencies that are
currently on the list for new
our of peas for lease space and
because we just don't have the
state of facilities for them to
move into the agencies of in
their operating budgets are
required to pay for the leases
so agencies look for state space
in order to save operating
dollars but we just.
Don't have the inventory so so
Mr chairman what what we have
come through.
So the way that I and in in this
legislature there's a capital
council building.
Capitol buildings Council right
that's operated by the
legislature so they're doing the
executive buildings all the
executive order I'll call to
campus right there on the campus
of parking garages the pair
building.
the attorney general's building
are all run by counsel to the
council determines how much they
want to put in the bills over
time I can't remember where they
get their fund and they
determine like we need a new
parking garages and then so they
built that parking garage now
they want to expand and move
move somebody out secretary
state supposed to move over and
and in order to meet of flux of
moving around with the eighty
minute million dollars so it's
it's run really by the
legislature.
Of the state the campus
improvements just on these
grounds on this campus on this
campus yes so Mr Chairman what
about the fees are comprehensive
statewide you know we're over by
three hundred thousand square
feet
of leased and under state by
whatever is there any is anybody
putting the whole puzzle
together to make sure that we're
instead of getting trips here
and and and and you know the
media has is gone and said Hey
you know we're overpaying I
think it was eighteen or twenty
million or something like that
is that even accurate the what
they're saying Mr chair Senator
Padilla so we have the
information for those entities
and those stay on building some
leases that are under FMD
purview and I can get that
information for you.
And so but statewide I think is
is what I'm more interested in
so what where's the overage
under richer.
Mr chair Senator Padilla we have
the information statewide for
those facilities that are under
FMD from the a presentation I
gave earlier for those entities
that not that are not under our
purview we don't have the
information Mr chair Senator PF
I could clarify one thing I
think some of the figures that
you're citing are from a report
that LFC is program evaluation
unit completed this fall on
space utilization one of the
specific findings of that was
that the state was allocating
space based on budgeted F. T. E.
rather than funded F. T. E. or
actual F. T. and sometimes
there's a significant difference
between the two
I understand the FMD has made
some changes sense into how it's
evaluating space requests from
state agencies that we hope
would help facilitate some of
that right sizing where it might
not have existed before and
missile that could give you just
a couple quick updates on that
Mr chair thank you Kelly for the
clarification in the question so
Kelly is correct to that what we
have done some part of one of
the lessons learned is out we
are currently working with CPO
and when agency requests but
request a lease we then asked
CPO for the tool to determine
what the actual F. T. E. R.
versus what the agency is
requesting so that we have an
agency is requesting state forty
thousand square feet leased
space but we determined that the
amount that they're requesting
there's actually fewer number of
FTEs we'll go back to the agency
for clarification on what
they're actually what the actual
needs are Mr chairman I know we
want to keep moving but is there
a website you can point me to
that shows the a complete
accounting of all what whether
it's here on this campus or
anywhere and you know.
Where New Mexico I mean is there
an accounting somewhere that I
can look at that that's the
entire state.
Mr chair Senator Padilla on our
website the facilities benefit
Division website we it does list
all of the leases statewide and
then how did you
come to the conclusion that
fifteen buildings what what what
do you what how do you develop
that number.
The just quality of the building
or how do you how do we know
it's not seventy eight buildings
in need to be demolished Mr
chair members of the committee
Senator Padilla so we conduct
facility condition assessments
when we receive the funding we
don't always receive the funding
we did two years ago receive
funding just to do facility
condition assessment in Santa Fe
however if we don't receive
appropriations for maintenance
in the big buildings continue to
deteriorate and then the FCI
score continues to go up so once
exceed sixty percent then it
goes on our demolition however
we do and we have an internal
committee that takes a look at
that facility and see what kind
of maintenance we can find and
address and if we can
salvage the building we will but
at some point they become so
hazardous that we have to demo
them.
Yeah I thank you Mr chair.
Senator Gonzales thank you Mr
chairman the.
Pretty much in the same line of
full Senator by the the only
part that I was going to ask you
this
Like you mentioned that so
important.
So like from time frame you know
wants to move to demolish how
much how long are you looking
at.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales once
the building is put on the
demolition we can actually
demolish it pretty quickly we
use are a we have in place
statewide price agreements that
allow us to select from vendors
that are already pre authorized
in pre qualified so we could it
depending on if it needs any
remediation it could happen
within just a couple of months.
Thank you sure we're gonna going
to start run.
Mr chair the next one was base
for the order of the learned
kind of discussed so I'll skip
over that one let me let me use
that one for example.
They got twenty million dollars
sitting there right they just
went out for the R. P. for
design right they don't know
what the actual costs are going
to be.
Right because they could sales
of two million dollars line
right architects and take a
percentage of what that money
they got and then you designed
that building that based upon
the percentage that's way the
market works right.
Ten percent architectural faster
than it's been two million
dollars in architectural costs
they're gonna come back and
they're gonna say okay got
eighteen million left for need
to look at capital Kelly for
next year in state if you want
planning money come get planning
money into your plan instead of
sitting there for three years
and saying we don't have a plan
we need on all at once and then
I'll just sit there and then we
sell bonds.
Because they need the money to
to do the R. P. for the
architecture we have sell the
full amount of the bonds and
we're sitting there making
interest payments over time on
that full amount instead of
giving them two million dollars
for planning and then saying
okay now come back with a couple
of questions that we can build.
In another one of the next I
think this same situation with
the border Authority.
Chairman I will I will give
responsible to finance but I do
believe that they will only sell
bonds for the part that's ready
so it might only sell bonds for
the planning part of that
project I'll drive I make sure
that that's good that's accurate
but I believe that's the case.
Mr chair the next to our
department information
technology both of them the
first one looks like they're
going to be expending about.
Twenty twenty three and the
second one in the back to have
the lease with PNM but the
project is currently in process
the the the first one actually
is on our pre authorization
request list for this year
although I don't think they will
be needing it I think after
speaking with apartment a fresh
technology they will it's been
not fully.
the next one is energy minerals
pick those canyon state park
looks like they will also be
expending this completing this
by June thirtieth twenty twenty
three.
The gentleman is border
Authority who we've already
heard from and the minister of
the office of the courts and so
skip over to the last one former
military affairs and.
We are from military affairs
just because this further
So looks like the bonds were
initially issued FY twenty and
we authorized FY twenty two with
the new purpose for statewide
facilities and so this one is
what we authorized during this
last session so I think they're
going to get the plans in place
to to get this the funding
expended quickly.
Let me ask the border Authority
because you your they're showing
us so you're sure to million
dollars on this project.
We have the she had not.
This is a watershed system in
Columbus.
Mr chair members of the
committee that's correct that's
the of faculty to was what upon
that I referred to earlier.
And so do you need additional
money or project and go where is
saying a million dollars for
your so what our contractor the
last of the requests I think you
include another hundred forty
eight thousand
when we asked him about can we
get the project done with a
million he said that we can get
the price with a million
dollars.
The extra hundred forty eight
thousand would be for another
piece of equipment like a
could if you recall that in.
We did find that email to
Wesley.
however with the million dollars
that had we will get the project
done I think there's an extra
piece of I believe it's an
aerator that that would be paid
for with the other hundred forty
eight thousand.
Thank.
Thank you Mr.
Of all the projects Mr.
I think that's it right we're.
Let me just go back to to to
State Building versus leased
buildings right.
In small communities they really
matter because you take Gallup
grants us Vegas.
When you lease a building from
private individuals he still
pays property tax rate base
income tax on the on the rates
he has to furnish janitorial
service right so then I got to
employee service insurance is
gonna buy all is drugs right
snowplow dollars all that.
When we take an increase the
state agency buildings and I
don't have any state leases.
When when we state can make the
state agencies all that goes
away right.
So you know the perfect example
in Gallup they wanted magistrate
magistrate court right they went
out to bid in the county did
what everyone around everybody
and now that now they're saying
oh we had a ten million dollar
building well they could had ten
million dollars worth of that
thirty to ten million ten
million whatever the tax rate
is.
In property taxes.
Coming back to their budget.
But no they that all went out it
all went off the tax rolls I
mean there there is a balance
there in in some areas in Santa
Fe in Albuquerque.
We have a lot of employees and I
think the government is is kind
of better to have state
buildings but it's small rural
areas Clayton them the municipal
judge place right now what they
do health economy in certain
areas and certain benefits to
private sector.
Yeah.
Also look at it as a revenue
stream when they're able to get
these managed to point into
their facilities because the
state pays cost and then
restrict our.
So it's also a a price deal in a
revenue stream for local
government.
So it but it is a loss on the
property tax that that's
happening.
We see it right here in this.
Seven in Clovis it's it's a
common.
Currents for accounting manager
to look at that as a revenue
stream.
And now we have a thank you.
Private.
This somewhere that was being
leased for the same thing.
Additional comments thank you
Sir.
Thank you thank you Kelly as
your presentation.
Good review for capital for us
to see it it is really working
really not working.
And fifty fifty in places.
As long as everybody was honest
with us right and nobody did
anything and said you guys are
smiling.
And hit anything in updated
daily I'm moving to move in but
we got to see the sambar and
they help those they really
match now.
There's some projects that I
think.
Let me then let a fire on a man
in get a movie about it it's
just hard to come up here and
say we have three billion
dollars of capital in this some
of it's not moving right.
One example.
The event center at the
fairgrounds right.
So either have to move it we
authorize it or do something
with it but can't if you really
want it don't let it die right.
Thank you guys for gender.
