One isn't last five years who
are
Who are big actors of what we're
paying out, as you can see.
Of the 6 86% make up what we've
paid out for the fun. What?
Little over $88.5 million
everyone else about 14 5 14.5
Million and the other side is
our liability of what we've done
For this fiscal year, you'll see
for C Y f D. There's a $16.9
million.
Those are obligations that we
know that we're going to pay out
there. Not in the sunshine
portal yet because we have not
cut the check.
Once that is, it will be put on
the Sunshine portal, but we know
that it's going to be 16.95
million that we're going to be
paying out and my last slide.
Is where we're currently at our
vacancy rate.
One of the things that we've
done at GST is any position over
two years old. I sat down with
my HR manager and the manager
and we try to repurpose those
positions because if it's been
vacant for two years, we
probably could use in a
different way. We've been able
to hire new I t positions HR
positions, so
We're trying to be proactive. We
just won't want to come here and
say Please give us new
additional f D. E s. I want to
show you that we're working to
see what we can do internally
before we ask, uh
That is my presentation. Thank
you very much and ready to
answer questions.
Okay. Thank you very much for
that. Um, let's uh I think at
this point, Kelly, did you want
to say anything before we go on
to questions from the committee?
Thank you. We have Senator Woods
that has some questions and
Senator, I'm going to go to you
right away because you waited so
long yesterday.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. It's very nice of you
today.
You're always very nice.
I'm good. I do have a couple
questions so
When we start talking about the
risk management fund.
How is that funded? Is that
general funds or how is that
fun, Madam Chair and and Mr
Secretary. Madam Chair, Senator
Woods. We do assessment for the
agency's, um, this year is about
$40 million. And as I showed
you, we have some, like six
agencies who make up 86%.
I'm getting together and may
without we have advisory board
for risk management, the FAA lfc
in my staff, these agencies who
are taking more of the fun. I
want to see what we can do. Is
there a supplement that we can
charge them by the rule As the
secretary? I cannot charge more
than 5% of a budget and no more
than 40% in a given year.
Um, so there's some leeway.
In. This is the first year out
of our assessment. Madam Chair
Senator Woods that we've gone
past her assessments. We've
collected money and we've been
able to pay. You know lawsuits
are living breathing. It could
have started four years ago, and
we've decided to pay out now, so
we're trying to be also forward
thinking, Madam Chair Senator
Woods of how we're going to
Changes a little bit. Hopefully
that answers your question.
That's that's my question, Madam
Chair and and Miss Schecter that
that's exactly what I'm getting
at. Sometimes when we approve
agencies, budgets, I guess we
don't exactly see that
particular line item and
That's That was my other
question. And you don't have to
tell me directly, but I'm sure
there's some agencies that have
more.
Claims.
Requested than other agencies.
And
Sometime.
When you get a chance sometime
later on.
I'd kinda like to know And I
don't. I don't want to call him
out in public, but I'd kinda
like to know what aged. She's
the biggest claims or against
and and kinda
How that
Relationship to their premiums
are to those claims and and that
kind of a deal. Just just a
background check for me to to to
just kind of see, And the other
thing is we We own a lot of
facilities and release a lot of
facilities on those least
facilities. How would you say
the average
Um
Length of contract to Lisa
facility is would you have,
Madam Madam? Uh, German was
stricter, Madam Chair, Senator,
If you went in my as Deputy
Cabinet Secretary Ana Silva,
who's in charge of our
facilities to answer that
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair senator
was the average length of a
lease is 20 years.
Okay? And and with that.
Once and this is the loaded
question. So please excuse me.
With that.
Madam chairman.
And and Anna.
Often do we least purchase
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Woods.
We've done it twice from what I
understand, Madam Chair and Anna
that takes the legislative
approval to do at least
purchase.
Madam Chair senator was that is
correct, Okay?
Um, and that's far as I'm going
to go on that.
Uh, I, uh
I appreciate that, Uh and I
noticed in in my books here that
most agencies would rather move
into the state buildings instead
of the least purchase.
How occupied
Or are we? We've got a lot of
buildings here in Santa Fe. How
occupied our buildings within
Santa Fe itself for state
government. Are they pretty well
occupied, Madam Chair and Anna
Madam Chair. Senator was there
100% occupied and, um
And we have a waiting list of
agencies that are requiring
space. Okay? I heard it One time
Maybe we had to do some
remodeling before we could fully
occupy those buildings. But
we've got most of that done and
and they are occupied now, Madam
Chairman And then, um, Madam
Chair, Senator Woods. We do have
one building that is currently
vacant.
That we are in the process of
remodeling once we, uh, fill
that building, we will still
have agencies on a waiting list.
Okay, Well, I'm gonna cut my
question Short, Madam chair.
Thank you so much for the
opportunity.
Thank you, senator. And next I
have Senator Gonzalez and then
we've got Senator Diamond
Brentley. I like Senator Brent.
I like to call you, Senator.
Diamonds still, do I? You do
to thank you. We're gonna take a
vote here. You're gonna be
dining. Thank you and Senator,
we got two more here. Okay? Got
it. Thank you, Madam Chair and
no.
I have two questions in the
first one is, um
A little bit related to Senator
Woods.
So under the payouts when we pay
out with risk management
Is there any federal dollars
involved?
Madam Chair Center. Gonzalez.
No.
So it's all new Mexico dollars
Madam Chair Senator Gonzalez?
Yes, its assessment that we do
for the agencies and then we pay
out using that assessment.
And, um Oh, Madam Chair. Oh, I
guess that's sometime. I'll
probably have to sit with one of
you.
Because I really have a hard
time comprehending like, um
For example, it was just on the
news recently that there was a 3
million settlement.
How can we afford so much?
I mean,
So do ever build cash balance.
Madam Chair Senate. Gonzalez.
No, we we do assessment. This is
the first year that the
assessment we've we've given to
the agencies that we exceeded
that amount. Um
As I said in the house when I
was given this budget,
Unfortunately, I think this is a
new trend of the type of
payments that are coming up to
the state. Um, and insurance.
You need a 3 to 5 year trend to
really understand where it's
going.
This is just me with some
experience in this. I think this
is the first year we're seeing
something changed, but
I don't know what that is. I'm
hoping it's a blip. Madam Chair,
Senator Gonzalez. I really do.
Um, but
We're keeping a key. I on this
so much, So we know that how how
the employee health benefits are
leaving GSD.
We're going to put a lot of
emphasis on lost control, and
especially some of these
agencies that we're paying out
some of these dollars amount to
to be an advocate and to help
these agencies so we can
hopefully mitigate some of these
payouts that we have in the
future.
Um, Madam chair on on this part.
I'll just end with this and I do
want to visit with one of you or
no 1 to 1.
But you take that school
district that is issuing out of
$3 million
You know, how can they afford
it? I mean,
To me. It's beyond me, you know?
Oh,
You know, but anyway will visit
more on that.
Oh, the other one that the other
question that I have is some
On the vacancies.
And you're showing 21%.
And how much
Yes, they're a big change, or is
it pretty much stable month? Two
months.
Madam Chair, Senator Gonzalez.
Since I've been the secretary.
This has been
Pretty stable. We hire a lot
higher. A lot of custodians. We
we hire a lot of different
positions, mechanics. We hired
mechanic and then you know the
city or someone else takes takes
that position.
I meet with my HR.
Director on a weekly basis and
with my
Like Kovacs is in my high
managers what we can do to
repurpose positions to bring
this vacancy down. It is a very
large agency that were spread
across everything I'd like to
say GST is like the toothpaste
we're in. We're literally in
everything with the state and
some we've
Bureaus. We've been able to
recruit and keep and then
another barrel loses a bunch.
But this is a weekly discussion.
Madam Chair Senator and Gonzalez
that we have a GST. I wish I had
an answer. I wish I had a magic
wand. Um, where I could come to
you with a 10% vacancy.
I guess the last part of mature
that I'll say so.
Uh, during the years
Oh, there was that one time for
jobs were so tight, no jobs.
And now it just seems like
everywhere you turn abundance,
you know?
And so whatever happened to
change that, But
Very well. Thank you. Thank you,
Manager.
Thank you, Senator. Alright,
we've got Senator Diamond. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I will call
you, brown. Thank you, madam.
Sure. Thank you, Secretary.
Thank you guys for being here.
I'd like to clarify the numbers
on Page three. If we could, as
far as the five year aggregate
for our top
I guess payout agencies.
You mentioned is
This is current. This is current
payouts.
To date. Madam Chair Senator
wants a time and two. Sorry,
Bradley. Um this is for fy 19
through fy 23 with a caveat. I
put New Mexico state because it
was an $8 million payout. I
wanted to show that was an FY
24. So we're this first one for
the five year agree it's f Y.
19 through 23, but that $8
million payout where they would
go in the top. So that's what
and there's an asterix by then
that says, FY 20 for the other
slide that you have on the right
that is currently to date what
we've done for Fy 24.
Um, the 16.95 Million for C Y F
D. We have not paid out. We know
we will be paying out those
dollars amount I know Secretary
Cassatt's would over yesterday
at your meeting this seven ones,
the seven that are out there. So
Madam chairs, Senator Brentley.
Hopefully that institution the
question. Okay. So, Madam Chair
If I understand this graph,
correct. You specifically
pointed out the 16.9 with C Y F
D.
So we will have in this year FY
24 paid out 17.6 million
And settlement agreements with C
Y F D, which, if I understand is
more in the last year.
Then the five years combined. Is
that correct, Madam chairs,
Senator. I don't know if that's
the last five years combined. I
didn't specifically pull C Y F
Oh, yes. Sorry, because I'm
sorry, 14,000,005 years The
second chart tells me we had 17
million in payouts in just the
last year alone, Madam Chair
Center. Yes, I should read my
own slides. I apologize.
Thank you.
Yesterday. We had c Y f d Madam
chair come before us and in
their budget requests they are
requesting $20 million. I think
it's safe to assume it's for
these. These 16.9.
Million in settlement
agreements.
It seems to me that that money
should instead go to the risk
management and that you should
be
Paying those court settlements
and my incorrect here and I
guess I would ask you why. Then
why would we be sending directly
to the agency? Is there an
advantage in doing so?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Brentley. That appropriation
would still go to that Public
liability fund. It's just going
through a different channel. The
reason why see why have
requested it as a specialist
with liabilities? We don't have
the date yet on one that payout
is going to be so with it being
a special it will
You can just budget it
immediately. It'll go into the
fund is the same fund that risk
management currently in charge
of its just kind of who? What is
the agency that's asking for so
there is another public
liability request from GSD.
That's $24.8 million, which is
also money for public liability.
And again. Those both of those
will go straight to that risk
management fund.
Okay?
That would make after this
year's payout C Y F G, the
largest
Lost. I guess I do. You have
suggestions on how we are going
to a state government Keep that
risk management fund solvent to
continue to pay for C Y F D s
court settlements.
Madam Chair, senator, some of
things we need to do. As I said
earlier, we needed a lot more
attention on the loss
prevention, so not just see why
FD But you know, hospital G o T
Corrections.
Any of these top six that I've
point out here. Um, that is
something my new risk management
director has a lot of experience
on. That's something we're going
to focus on and also the other
part in May with I'm going to
start seeing if do we need to do
special assessment of these
entities who are taken the vast
majority of this fun? And how
does that work?
I have some ideas, but I want to
work with my advisory board. L s
l s c d f A in my experts I have
internally So this year we will
have some proposals in might be
a real change. It might be a
statute change until we start
looking at the numbers of what
we can do. Currently under
statute and rule. I won't be
able to answer that Madam Chair
Senator, But we do have a We do
have a thought process of what
we want to do. Going forward
Look forward to working with
you. I'd like to connect with
you offline on what we could do.
Kind of dress are top offenders.
Here are takers. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam chair. Can I
ask a question to that point?
You know we go, okay?
I just wanna know. Are we
duplicating monies? I mean, GSD
is asking for money for
liability issues or the
individual agencies also asking
for money. Are we Are we
developing a pot of money that
we we
Is more than we need.
Manicure, Senator
We're asking for the money
because I can see the payoffs
are coming in the future. Um,
until we cut the check
By statue. I can't get into
those details. Um, once again,
this is the first year our
assessment for the agencies that
we've gone above our assessments
of what we've collected and
We're working. We're making sure
that if we owe that we pay what
we owe Madame chair, Senator,
That's my mango. I want this
assessment.
Amateur senator.
Be realistic. That is what
something that you've all asked
me many times I've met with you
this year. They in front of you.
We're going to assess something.
Make sure that it covers what it
needs to do. This is this year
is anomaly. Madam Chair, senator
of how much we've paid out and
we need to do our due diligence.
When did these lawsuits star is
Was this three years ago Was
this just this year like a new
Mexico state?
Secretary May I interrupt you
for just a second is that we
just want to be briefing. Our
responses because I allowed it.
just Senator Burr to come in and
not put him at the end of the
list because we have two more
that have been waiting, I guess
Is that all right, Senator? Man?
I'm sure I don't. I'm still not
getting the question asked
properly.
You're you're you want a budget
to deal with these issues?
Or the individual agencies also
asking for money and their
budgets to deal with these
issues. Are we duplicating
effort and putting way too much,
Uh, budget into both the agency
as well as GST to cover the
liability, Okay, I'm gonna allow
to have that briefly responded
and if not is going to have to
be. I don't need a big
explanation. Just need no. Yes,
because I need to get to the
other very quickly. Madam Chair
and Senator Bert agencies do
have an allocation in which they
pay into these funds, and they
do.
Old those into those budgets, so
They just like any other
insurance, The agency does have
to pay GSD. However, those
payouts sometimes a shock loss
might take a few years for it to
actually become a payout. So
this is where we make that
different. That difference
that's a manager. All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair
appreciate their something they
can maybe circle around for you
later later on and give you the
information senator. But and I
can put you on it last too. If
you like for more. Thank you.
We've got Senator Padilla next.
And then we have Sanders. Time
board. Thank you for your
patience and allowing me to go
that route for a moment. Thank
you, madam chair very kind of
you to allow
That management of the
committee. So, Mr Secretary and
Team, um totally separate, full
stop. Totally separate subjects.
Believe it. Yeah, So excuse me.
On, you know, Information
management services, whether
it's do it, or it's this or it's
that it's a cloud management. Um
Broadband. I created that office
cybersecurity out there,
creating offices left and right,
you know, And so, um
In other states that you've
looked at from a general
services standpoint does does
information management services
like doing whatever is that in a
gsd, or is it the way we do it
every which way from Tuesday?
A manicure, Senator. I don't
know. I have not looked at that.
My main goal. This last 10
months was to employee benefits
and the risk management But I
will look into it and I will get
back with you. Madam Chair,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Mr Secretary. So just, you
know to for the sake of time,
Two things I would be interested
in one is it seems to me like
That would be a general service
to all state agencies in all
state government would have you?
Um you know, I'm a business
owner myself. It all lands in
one area, so everybody knows the
left hand with the right hand is
doing and all that kind of stuff
doesn't mean that's the way
government has to operate, but
it seems to work very well, you
know, in in the private sector,
so that's one question and the
other is. How does function like
information management services?
Do it? Whatever. How did you
State governments fund?
That function.
I think would be very
interesting for all of us to get
to the bottom of and learn. And
Madam Secretary, Madam Chair. I
think we have a comment from
Lfc, Madam chair, So do it is a
Fever Revenue service agency.
So just like back to Senator
Bert's question in every single
agency budget. In the other
category, there's an assessment
for do it rates for insurance
for risk rates, and those are
built into the base budget. And
then once you pass the bill,
then they are transferred into
the revenues of agencies like
GST into it to operate those
So, Madam Chair and then
Secretary and thank you very
much, Um, for that with that
response, you know, there's sort
of the modernization of
technology. So now you have
cloud and then you have cyber
security. And then you have you
know a I related issues or
whatever. I'm wondering if maybe
we also need to kind of think
about modernization of kind of
pulling some of those fees.
Across each department as well
to make sure that they are
funded as well. Cloud is one
example. So if we move
everything that we do to the
cloud, we need to have that
properly funded and make sure
that they can do their work and
keep up with it. And all that.
So I just just wanted to ask
that General question, Madam
chair, So maybe you and I can
take it offline and I want to
learn more about that and help
you with that. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Senator.
We've got Sanders time born.
Thank you for waiting. Of
course, Madam Chair. This is
sometimes you need more than one
bite at the apple to have a good
discussion. Thanks for leaving
that. Um, So thank you for the
great job you do.
Um, I have some questions,
Secretary. Good to be with you.
Good morning. Good to be with
you both as well and have a few
questions that you've heard me
talk about through the years,
but, um, so real brave because
I'm gonna ask you a few of them,
but with your health care costs
increase in state government. I
know Covid hit us really hard,
and we had a lot of financial
Needs there. But generally
speaking, how much is healthcare
costs risen within state
government as a percentage of
you know that number
Mr Chair. Senators here. Mhm. I
don't have that. But I will get
it to you.
Yeah. I mean, yesterday I heard,
um I was out of town for the
funeral. But
But I heard the presentation of
the healthcare authority and
their constituting, uh,
basically what we did with the
Pharmaceutical Pharmaceutical
Benefits Council that was run
out of GST to try to do bulk
price purchasing, But I was just
curious because on average state
healthcare Yeah, go ahead.
Mr Chairman Committee, actually,
if you turn to your volume three
page 37, there is a breakout of
GST s group health benefit your
utilization, and that gives you
a cost per cent increase and
then on page 36, there is a
similar chart for retiree health
care authority benefit, So
that'll kind of give you a
history of what the per member
cost and claims are going each
year over the last from fy 13 to
the FY 23.
Three for those
Two programs.
Okay. Thank you.
I'm just curious. Be shocked if
he answers yes expected to be
no. But
Does GSD still run the
Pharmaceutical benefits
Purchasing Council?
Ring a bell.
Mr Chair, Senator? Yes.
Hmm. Okay, So this is a law that
I passed, Um, a number of years
ago.
To try to take a whole of
government approach.
Getting everyone around the
table to explore about a dozen
explicit cost containment
strategies for pharmaceutical
benefits. Purchasing
Yeah.
It wasn't as aggressive as I
think it needs needed to be to
really
Drive towards cost savings
anyway. So yesterday I was
listening to this new health
authority, and they were
describing exactly what we
created. But with more
Leadership right from the
mountaintop to actually drive
this process, and you have to
drive the pharmaceutical
industry. You have to. You know,
you gotta be at least a savvy
and as aggressive as the PBM. So
you're gonna you're not gonna
win, so I was happy to hear it,
But I wondered if they knew
about this effort that we had
managed in state government.
So
What's the discussion at that
table and I'd love to hear
what's on your mind, and maybe
I'll stop and let you say what's
on your mind before I asked what
I'm gonna ask.
Thank you again. I am not the
analyst for GST and pitching
today, but I will say the key
differences are, um H C A is
mostly negotiating for Medicaid
patients, Prescription drugs,
and GSD is negotiating for state
employees and state Retek will
not retirees for state
employees, prescription drugs so
very similar and you could
probably do some
Team work to kind of build that
negotiating parts, so I would
say they are duplicate but semi
also separate th day. HCIA the
Healthcare authority, formerly
known as Human Services
Department, well, but at the
same time, Mr Chair, Madam
Chair, the
Authority Secretary Armijo is
describing bringing in the eye
back. She was describing more
than just Medicaid. She was
describing a whole of government
approach. I mean, she was
specifically saying that but
absolutely leveraging Medicaid
purchasing.
Um is is important and valuable.
So I think that all discussions
need to be at the table. To the
extent that you can leverage
because Medicaid is such a huge
part of our state. You can
leverage the purchasing power of
900,000 Mexicans, even though
Do it That's called business,
right. Right business. Alright,
so go ahead.
You wanna say something? Okay.
Alright. So anyway, I just think
the left hand on the right hand.
You should talk to each other
and I'm going to recommend the
same secretary Armijo. She
should be aware of whatever.
Because we spent we have
consultants. We did some
analysis.
I'm not sure why we came up
with. I wasn't
Again. I didn't think we drove
very hard, which was the goal,
but
Um, there might be some benefit
there, but it's still going on.
All right. Well, that might
become duplicative. At some
point. It missed Mr Chair. It is
duplicative now, but in fy 25
that transfers over and so
hopefully they'll be negotiating
as one as this part of GST will
be moving over to the okay. Good
right now. They're good. Thank
you. So maybe they are exactly
referring to this entity and
like this is what we're going to
be doing like. It was a new idea
What
We've, but hopefully they do a
good job at it.
All right. Why would
I'm interested in learning more.
That's kind of cool that it's
still got a heartbeat out there.
Um, okay, real quick on
buildings and cars. So she s the
owns over 800 state buildings,
roughly semanas.
And we have a lot of renewable
energy at a few of them here in
Santa Fe, because we invested
tens of millions of dollars to
do that.
So I'm curious. Two part
question number one. How much
money have we saved by doing
that?
On our energy costs. I have a
part to to see you may want to
step. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
Senator Steinberg. Um, we've
saved over a million dollars in
energy savings to date here in
Santa Fe.
And of course it costs us 1020
million to put that technology
up there.
So if we save that, beyond the
cost of deploying the technology
Yes, Madam. Madam Chair, Mr
Madam. Yes, Senator. Stein word?
Um no. The technique we have not
exceeded the life of the
technology.
Okay, but we've saved a lot of
carbon somewhere.
Maybe.
Being
That's pretty huge. A million
dollars on energy bills, and
this is really not all that long
ago. This was probably what 56
years ago. Madam Chair, senators
find
I think we're still with madam.
That's fine. Okay, madam
Sheriff, for now. Still so until
I chair that's right. That's
true. Thank you, Senator. Uh,
Yeah. And Senator especially
now. Okay, Completely invisible.
He'll never sure so. Thank you
can proceed. Q. Um Senator
Stein born um, I forgot the
question. Sure. Well, the
question was just how long ago
was it? Oh, actually, we just
completed the carports this
year.
On our West campus, and we
started the project in 2019.
So, Rihanna that long ago. You
know you you, of course,
remember because you might
remember Because we talked about
it. I had a bell to try to put
the rest of the state on a path
of looking at renewable energy
improvements. It was great that
the Santa Fe delegation rallied
for Santa Fe. What about the
other 8 800 buildings in the
state, and that Bill did not
Pass.
Um
Unfortunately, because then we
never moved forward. Has there
been any movement?
To look at those other 800
buildings for energy efficiency
and for
Renewable energy community solar
Do you think, um
Mr. Chair, Senator Stein born
Currently we have asked for an
appropriation to do investment
grade audits, and it's in our
capital outlay request, and we
also have an investment grade
audit currently underway in Las
Vegas for the facilities that we
have out there.
So the audit is for your capital
is for all the buildings in the
state that you want. Mr. Chair,
Senator Steinberg. That's
correct.
Is that for energy efficiency?
Um, Mr Chair, Senator Stanmore.
That's correct.
Okay. And then, um, for the new
buildings that we're building
Are we building renewable energy
into those construction? Mr.
Chair, Senator Steinberg? Yes,
we are.
What does that look like?
Um, currently the project that
we have in Las Vegas. Um it's
the new forensics building. We
are doing A, um um fully
electric and, um, with the
option to do, um, renewable
energy, solar, um, in the
future.
What does that mean?
Fully electric. Mr. Chair,
Senator Steinberg. Instead of
doing the, um gas boilers were
doing electric
Okay?
Okay, and you're looking into
the solar power. Mr. Chair,
Senator Stein board eventually.
Yes, eventually.
So no right now, Mr Chair,
Senator, I bring no right now.
Yeah.
I don't really get it. I mean,
with with power purchasing
agreements, you can do that kind
of stuff, and power companies
will put some of the money
upfront and deploy that
technology and you can use it
for parking and
Yeah, well, it's something that
I would I would hope the agency
would be a little more
aggressive looking at this just
because we're talking about
reducing our carbon footprint.
That reduces our carbon
footprint.
And when you can work and
utilize market agreements like
power purchase agreements that
pay for themselves.
As you just described. That's
how they get paid, too.
Um
What's a little more, in my
opinion, a little more
innovative, and, uh,
Conscientious about the
environment, but
Um, Secretary. Thank you for
shaking your head on that answer
that that request anyway, I
appreciate it because we talked
about this through the years.
Honestly, we need leadership to
move the ball forward on this if
it's gonna happen.
So, um, And then I want to just
ask about cars, your fleet of
cars and the whole movement,
too.
Move towards electric cars and
charging stations. Just
generally speaking. Where are
you at with your fleet and that
whole issue?
Um, Mr Sheriff, Senator
Steinberg. We are asking for an
additional $2 million in capital
outlay to purchase 50 electric
vehicles.
Help. Big is your fleet. Mr.
Chair, Senator Steinberg. We
have 1960 vehicles and how many
of them are electric right now?
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinberg. We
have roughly 35 vehicles that
are electric and you're
requesting money to have 20
more.
5050 more.
Okay?
And I realized they may not be a
good fit for a lot of the
states. So I guess they're
expensive, aren't they?
Yeah, and, uh,
You want to phase him out when
you need to phase them out. But
okay, that's all I have. Mr.
Thank you, Senator. And I'm just
gonna ask for a quick question,
but I'm going to go onto our
chair Senator Munoz in and
saying, But I just need to have
your cell numbers, please, if I
can thank you for your list,
Secretary Duceppe, but I just
have office numbers, and it's
hard to reach people because you
have to leave messages and then
when you call us back
We miss each other. Can we have
that later, please? Yes, I thank
you. If you don't mind, I won't
give it publicly Example.
That's a good song. Oh, yes.
Okay now are these if their
state state sale numbers than it
would be public? Yes, I'll give
you both. I would give you
personal in state. You thank
you. All right. Thank you very
much. That's all I have. Mr
Chairman in New York next. Thank
you.
To go to center stain borns part
How many if we buy an electric
vehicle? How much is the charger
for each vehicle?
On top of the vehicle.
Sorry Car really need its own
charger to charge Mr Chair. Uh,
it depends. So, um, are charging
stations here in Santa Fe have
cost roughly $35,000, However,
in Las Vegas, um, due to
transformer issues, they can be
upwards of 100,000 to install.
What? Yeah, That's a question. I
asked. How much does each
charger costs on top of the car?
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinberg.
I'm referring to how much a
charging station cost to
install.
Why that charging I don't have
one. So I don't own one. I've
seen them plugged in. So the
charging station or the the way
they use the charge, whether you
call them
Plug in or whatever you call it
so each cars 35,000 roughly Mr
Chair, Senator Stein born a
public, um
Infrastructure costs roughly
235,000 a charting
Infrastructure at home. That's a
completely separate, and I do
not know how much it costs to
install a charging plug to your
house. State employees are gonna
be charging their vehicles at
home right to charge them. Their
top of the $35,000 cost for the
vehicle.
You're saying 35 to 100,000.
And each vehicle as it comes
into the GST fleet. I'm just
going to Santa Fe has to have
its own charger.
In order to charge
independently.
They can't share they probably
could share about depending on
their battery level. Right, Mr.
Chair, actually, um
The charging station is it
depends if so, if it's a one
hour charging station or an
eight hour charging station, it
can charge an entire fleet and
they just charge and rotation.
So how much does it one hour
charger cost?
So, um, Mr Chair. Those ones
were 35,000 each, okay?
So how many? Well an eight hour
day they can only go out there
eight times in swap, cars are
moving.
Play checkers with vehicles. Um
Mr Chair, That's correct, and we
do have 30 charging stations
here in Santa Fe.
And so three times eight is
I'm just figuring out how many
vehicles a day 36.
Senator Diamond So, yeah, So on
top of that,
If we had a fleet in
Um
Of vehicles right, so we'll be
able to charge
Each one. All all 36 of those
are only charged 24 vehicles a
day, Mr Chair. We are 24, right?
We are moving towards the fast
charging stations. So those, uh,
have a charge of roughly one
hour
Okay, but I'm did the math,
right?
Correct? Yeah.
Um, Mr Secretary. I'm looking at
your GSD and your public
liability.
Because we looked yesterday and
and see why F D and N
Have we done a risk study or an
actual study with with risk
money in the last
3 to 5 years since the change in
the law.
Mr Chair, To my knowledge, No
And one of the things we're
going to do. I don't You heard
it. May I'm gonna work with my
advisory board. O c d F a in my
staff to look at if we can do
special assessments for some of
these bigger use of the two,
it's you and I'm hospitals, y f
d, uh, I know the rule currently
allows no more than 5% of their
budget no more than 40% in a
given year for their
assessments.
But the answer your question to
my knowledge. No.
So I think we kind of need to do
that right? Because I mean,
since I forget the name of the
bill passed, we've had this
uptick. And yesterday we saw the
Y F D had $20 million for
settlements and I don't know why
they're not doing that through
risk, but I have to figure that
out. But I mean,
Do we? Do you have a three year
average of what risk has
expended in that guy just raised
his eyebrows, but really making
me nervous, Mr. Right. Good
chair. We can get you a three
year average. But the concern I
have is this is the first year
the assessments that we've given
out.
That were exceeded The
assessments is this anomaly is
this And as you know, insurance,
it's 3 to 3 to 5 year. The
really get where the market is
going, So it's just the
beginning of a new trend. Or is
this anomaly? These are things
that we're going to look at Mr
Chair, and I like the idea of
hiring somebody outside to look
at it also.
Mr Chair just to add. Also, Lfc
did do a study on the public
liability fund over the summer,
where they did prescribe, um
ways or strategies for GSD to be
able to have some cost recovery
And some of that was special
assessments, along with other
things, which GSD has taken
steps to abide by what was done
in that study.
Just to note for you, Mr Chair.
I mean, do we? I think we need
an actual study right is
I mean,
You know, people talk about
insurance costs right and
Yeah, I owned a bunch of Reynold
complexes. And I had 11 policy
triple this year and insurance,
right?
And there's absolutely no way
that I can cover that basis. And
as this insurance and these
claims are going up
I mean, we need to get a handle
on
You know?
She y f d has $20 million just
by themselves, and we don't know
if that's a total number of
claims that's going to be made
right? And and so what? Does
that number that we need them to
use that instead of coming in
for a supplemental in the year
and kind of blindsiding
everybody, including including
the exact
Saying.
What? What's our number that we
really need to put in there? And
how do we get some control and
agencies when they have these
large cleans Mr Chair? I will.
I'll make sure we do an
actuarial study on this.
Okay. Um, I can make that
happen. I think anything else
that you think you really need
to tell us. I mean,
I like this because everybody
comes in and says Senator
manuals. Do you set it up at
night and making a list of
questions? I'm like, No, I'm
pretty much read your little
Presentation and ask questions
from there and in
Some people prior. Alright, but
I mean, this is your opportunity
to say Okay, tell us where you
think you need to target money.
Oh, wait, wait one quick
question Before that, You know
we were looking at the transfer
of the health care authority and
we're gonna hear them today.
And and that has to my
understanding is zero transfer.
but in your in your cash
balances on November 2023,
you're in the negative for 197.
Up from 30 million from
November.
In this
Up 30 million from November.
November of 2020 over year over
year. I mean, do we have? No, I
mean, the worst thing we can do
is
Transfer that agency of the
negative balance.
Which
That's them up for failure, but
Do we know what that number is?
Or that deficiency is because
we've targeted 150. Now I'm
seeing 160, Mr Chair and and
perhaps secretary to set can
also explain this a little bit
better, but there are two funds
that are rolling over to the
healthcare authority. Um, the
health benefits fund, which
you've seen. The LFC
recommendations splits that up
between Ann Arbor appropriation
and that should be sufficient.
However there the other piece is
the life insurance, which the
executive did recommend roughly
$2.6 million because that fun
does have to go to the
healthcare authority. Just
keeping in mind. However, there
is a structural deficit in that
fund so and and that's something
that will be addressed by the
healthcare authority in
procurement practices and
another remediation tactics that
are not going to be
Gsd, um, that cash balance
report that you're seeing. There
is kind of a
I don't want to get into a math
class. But when you look at
these kinds of funds, you have a
cash balance. You have a fun
balance, and then you have those
liabilities and those
outstanding payments and
depending on what time of the
year you look at the fund that
cash balance, not necessarily
accurate, So the cash balance
has changed from fiscal year 23
because
There it builds in arrears.
There's a delay in that fund,
and it did come in a little bit
less. So if you want to be more
than happy to get with Joey, and
we can get you a good number,
but just keeping in mind that
it's a living number of there.
get it labor system in that, But
I mean, if we get as close as we
can, and we build in a cushion
Yeah. I mean, we make the
transfer. You say it's 150. We
put 155. That's that cushion
offset the numbers that transfer
right, which is correct and Mr
Chair That also goes. That same
cushion effect goes to things
like the Public Liability fund
where C I f d. They get that
special appropriation. It just
goes straight to the risk
management fund that holds that
balance in case payouts do
happen whenever they do happen.
But again, that's another
structural deficit issue, which
we have addressed in our
analysis and we're working on Mr
Chair. The answer your question
The life insurance, um, deficits
about $2.5 million that's going
over. We asked for supplements
in the past week that
Get rid of that deficit. We
haven't received it if that
could be taken care of, because
we pay as a C 100% of that It's
roughly about 60,000 state
employees and their families,
and it's one of the really good
benefits we we offer to our
scene employees in their family
if unfortunately, something
happens, but we're running a
deficit because we can pay in a
deficit in that fun, Correct,
Kellen.
They can transfer money into
that fund from Mr Chair again.
I'm not the eight analyst for
this, but usually if there's a
deficit in a fun, we'll do a
special appropriation to it to
make it solvent. But I'll let
Sicily answer anything
Additional Mr Chair. I think
that the state acting state
controller is going to come and
speak a little bit more on the
accounting because I am that is
not my element. Budgeting and
accounting are completely two
different languages.
Of what allows an agency to, you
know, Operating a deficit is the
the authority to operate in the
deficit, which is given through
house Bill to use appropriation.
Uh so you know, a lot of state
agencies do operate on a
negative balance, and then they
have reimbursable by the federal
government and for other
reasons, money comes in after
the fact.
Um so it it's it's kind of a
tough that's why I can't I can't
ask.
Mister, Can we follow up with
you on the deficit spending?
Thank you. Okay. Anything else?
Mr. Secretary, Mr. Chair? No,
Okay. We made we made your
telephone number public, so
that's okay. I deserve it. Mr
Chair. Okay, Who's our next
person?
You each
I will. I will go very quickly.
Thank you, Mr Chair Members
Committee, Uh Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health.
Number of my leadership team are
here in the interest of time. I
won't. You're gonna have to pull
that Mike closer and make sure
the green light is on the green
light is on in the interest of
time. I won't try to to
introduce someone to talk just
very briefly about our budget.
if we could go to the next
slide, um the the
recommendations are very close
in total dollar amount, and
we're very grateful for that
differences.
Do end up being fairly
meaningful in the individual
differences. I'll talk quickly
about that. The main thing I
want to talk about is
facilities. Um, and the first
thing what you see up in front
of you are a set of assumptions
about facilities think there's
kind of a general understanding
in the building and I had it in
the agency as well that if only
we filled up our beds would be
fine at the facility. So I asked
our folks to run some numbers
run a proforma.
If we were 90% full in our beds,
and each of those beds was being
billed as it was appropriately
built, and if we had 90% of our
positions filled, and they were
filled with state employees, not
contract contract workers? Um
what would we look like? And the
answer is we lose about $12
million on our facilities. Now
there's a bunch of moving parts
in that we've made some some
steps.
On things like staffing ratios
to get down to an appropriate
level to close that gap, and
there are likely some more
things going forward. We can do
to be able to further close that
on the revenue side,
particularly around maximizing
Medicaid. But as we sit today,
with circumstances as they are,
and prices as they are, and
reads as there, we lose money on
every bed, and I think that's
really important in the if we
could go to the next slide that
just graphically shows
Um, just graphically shows what
that looks like in terms of our
expenses on the left hand side.
um and then the facilities.
Revenue in the shortfall is John
shown in red on the right hand
side, and so that really gets to
the issue of the deficiencies.
the supplementals to cover
potential 24 deficiencies, which
is, I think the most significant
difference in our in our budgets
right now.
They are not included in the LFC
recommendation, and the fact is
that leaves us at a place that's
kind of difficult if we don't
get those supplementals to fill
those gaps, we would run short
this year, and that leaves us
really only two choices. One is
go ahead and run short, which we
none of us want to do or reduced
census in the facilities, which
I don't think anybody wants us
to do, either.
And there's some places like the
forensic unit at uh, at VH. I
where we can't We have to take
who the courts send us their
places like the veterans home
where? I don't think anybody
wants us to reduce those
censuses. And so those those
supplementals to fill those
gaps, I think become extremely
extremely important. If you
could go to the next slide.
It'll be the last thing.
Um, I'll talk about just
quickly. What are some of the
other significant differences?
Um, uh, in that budget I've
talked about all of the
individual deficiencies. Uh and
you'll see the you know, the big
numbers are the big facility. So
last Linda's B h I. The LSC
recommendation does include the
supplemental, which is a one
time startup.
Expense Supplemental for the
veterans home, So that's more an
ongoing operating issue Less
slide.
And then just to quickly talk
about what are some of the other
key differences. I think they're
two or three here. I
particularly want to call out of
the six total. Um there's a base
increase and a supplemental
having to do with the state lab.
Um, failure to fund those two
line items. One is a is a is
partially in the in the
recommendation, um, have an
impact on the ability of the lab
to do its work Timely.
Um, in terms of turning around
test results, That's a critical
piece of their mission. Their
operating base increases having
to do with B h I a big theme of
what we've been trying to do in
our budget this session is to
actually understand the cost of
doing business, not talk so much
about, you know, new incent in
new initiatives and new bodies
of work to do, But what have
already charged us to to do And
what does it cost to do that?
And I think the agency has not
probably done what is needed to
do overtime. Um, uh, to keep up
with that increase in cost of
doing business, boring things
like lab chemicals, electric
bills, Um, staff increases that
aren't funded by federal grants
Those kinds of things last thing
I'll say again in the interests
of being brief, um
The agency operationally has
been really challenged this last
year, and I don't think I'm
telling anyone of you anything
you don't already know. From
constituent calls you've gotten
about contracts, not getting out
the door things not getting
funded our work not getting
done. Um we've had some pretty
significant challenges in our
business operations I've spent.
I think probably 90% of my time
in the first year as secretary
focusing on the business of
running the agency more than I
have on health, honestly.
Uh, I think we're I think we're
at a place where returning that
corner, But we're not around
that around that corner yet, And
I just want to acknowledge that
that's been a circumstances had
a negative impact on our
partners. Um, I'm I'm I'm
extremely sorry for those
impacts and what we're doing
everything we can to address
those with that. Hopefully, Mr
Chair. That was what you were
looking for. In terms of quick,
happy to answer questions.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Mr.
Secretary. I just read your
update this morning in which he
accused me of grandstanding
because of my concerns, which C
I f D and child deaths in New
Mexico. Actually not not quite
bad. Mr Chair of senator, It was
the concern that the numbers
that you tossed out in that
hearing were so shockingly wrong
that you know there's an old
saying that lie gets around the
world halfway around the world
before the truth gets its boots
on, and I wanted to get the
truth. Boots on. Thank you, Mr
Turner. I want to address those
numbers because I think it's
interesting that
I'm having a conversation with
the secretary who's splitting
hairs instead of moving the ball
forward when it comes to child
well being in the state of New
Mexico. We don't know the
numbers because you don't
provide those numbers to the
legislator.
But what I can be clear is in
that testimony. We actually
learned that two of those child
deaths took place under direct
care of C Y F D.
Did you know that the legislator
had never been privy to that
information, Direct care. The
Children died within direct care
of CFT. Until that moment, I
assumed that all of them were
indirect. So when I talk about
child deaths, what I'm referring
to is under the blanket umbrella
of management of C Y F D from
the first time there's ever been
a case file.
The time that the child has to
come into custody, there are far
more deaths.
We just had a presentation here
going over how we're going to
make the risk Management fund
solvent.
Because C y F D has cost us over
$17.5 million in one year alone
and wrongful death lawsuits.
This isn't grandstanding to come
up to the legislator.
To voice the concerns of New
Mexico that we are not moving
the ball When it comes to child
welfare. We are not addressing
the crisis and I'll tell you
during this legislative session.
We're not doing it now because
we're a truce to adopt policy
that's actually going to be
meaningful to save kids lives.
We are number one in the nation
when it comes to child well
being.
That's not grandstanding to say
We need to do things to make
sure our kids stop dying.
Into writing off Ed, in which
you're criticizing the
legislators for wanting to make
many meaningful, meaningful
impacts the child well being.
Acknowledging the difference and
what what we have before us. Mr.
Secretary is a public health
crisis that continues to go
ignored.
You can. You can talk all you
want about
The semantics of the details are
split hairs over how our kids
are dying. Here's the bottom
line. Kids are dying in New
Mexico, and we're not getting
anything from the executive. Any
proposals on how we stop that.
Would ask you, Mr Secretary. How
many kids How many child deaths?
Do we need a New Mexico this
year?
To constitute a
Health crisis. I say one.
11 is one too many.
We have We have a health prices
in this state.
I appreciate the time and input
that it went in to talk about
the details and semantics of a
stupid op ed that doesn't give
one proposed solution on how we
stop the deaths. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Senator. I think that
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair and so full
stop whole Separate topic. Um,
can we get a bit of an update on
where things are with the school
based health? You and I've
spoken a couple of times on the
secretary. You know what I'm
most concerned about is I'm
worried about providers that
maybe say, you know, Gosh, we've
got to do something else to keep
our doors open. So I'm you know,
I'm kind of concerned about
where all that is.
Yeah. Thank you. You had a great
response when we talked, But
where are we today? Thank you,
Mr Chair, Senator. All those
contracts are out most of the
SPDC SP and the small schools,
health centers. Um, I have begun
building on those. There are a
couple that I think are still
with the contractor looking at
their language getting a
signature back, so I don't want
to say every last contract has
got
Dollars up, but I think
everything that we need to do to
get that process going is now
done for all those facilities.
Okay, Thank you. Mr Chair and
Secretary. So, um, just some
extra validation I'd appreciate
you know if there's a program
that existed that might have
maybe, um
Uh, not to. Maybe the vendor
couldn't get started again. Can
we at least offer them some
potential names? Solutions to
fill the gaps of where those
this might have been previously
or do or do we know that all of
them are back up and running
again? To my knowledge, Mr
Chair, Senator, I believe
everyone is is in a place to be
operating, but certainly if
there's anyone that that has got
some kind of a lasting impact,
were absolutely able to step up
and see if there are ways we can
help with that beautiful. Thank
you.
I think you know that I'm really
shy. So I will. If I have any my
area, I will let you know. Thank
you. Thanks, sir. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Secretary. Good
morning. Um
Question from maybe the LFC, but
your d O h, um priority
requests. Where is the lfc?
On those requests.
Um, Mr Chair Members Committee.
So if you could turn to your
packet on Page two and three
particular packet agency code
665 for wh in
I'm not sure if you have a
binder.
It's no no, it's in your actual
handouts that were given to you
with the different sheets for
deal. H. Usually we start the
presentation and go over these.
It was sent
Okay?
That's fine. We will get you
some handouts. The main
differences between the LLC
executive recommendations are
actually pretty small when it
comes to the numbers about 3.6
million, um, the differences of
some of the things that the
secretary of the lfc reckon,
HFC. Um they're going to do some
work on it to help facilities
Additionally, And so that was
the main concern of the
secretary. That was
Coming out of the LFC wreck, and
I believe he has another
priority that regards to state
laboratories division for some
of their operating costs. Um,
separately, I think the main
concern and I'm not gonna
totally speak on behalf.
Secretary is they? They're
supplemental cost for personnel
in state facilities, which was
not funded by LFC but was funded
by the executive. I believe
there's some work going on about
that piece.
Um And so those, it's really the
I think the big concern is about
spending for personnel and
facilities is the biggest
financial pressure point.
Okay?
Um, I wanna miss chair. I want
to also talk about school based
health centers because I know
that we worked on this last
session to get more money for
former school based health
centers. What percentage of our
school actually have school
based health centers at this
point in time.
Percentage. Don't
Ah, Mr Chair, Senator Stein
born. I may ask one of one of
our leadership team who are here
to see if anybody has that
number of the top of their head.
Good morning. Jeff. Laura I'm
the interim division director
for Public Health Division. So,
Mr Chair, Senator Stein born. I
know that, um, with D O h
funding we fund close to 54 of
school based health centers.
There's also school based health
centers that operate without
school based health without
State funding, which is a total
of 88 was the last number that I
have off the top of my head if
that changes we'll let you know.
I know we expanded last year as
well with telehealth to be able
to be able to expand those
services, But we could get you
those numbers. Okay. Thank you.
And real quick, Jeff, and
welcome aboard How many
How many of our schools don't
have any kind of a school based
health center?
Mr. Chair, Senator Stein born. I
don't have that number, but we
can get you that number.
I know we have a lot more than
88 schools. So correct something
right there. Correct.
How many of the school based
health centers have a
psychologist or social worker on
staff.
Mr Chair. Seriously, I'm bored.
I don't have that number.
Well, I was talking to my
colleague Senator today and I
was saying this. This could be
one of his next big gold record
hits up here in the he does big
things here, and I think this
Anyway, I think with what's
going on with our kids mental
health
Crisis and school violence,
etcetera.
I would. I would love to see
this become more of a priority
for us to provide that coverage,
and I know it's interesting in
in Las Cruces, where I represent
We had to change one year where
we had a provider in a school
and then the next year they went
from just kind of providing part
time remote services made a huge
qualitative downgrade and
service.
In the perception of the school.
Only bring that up from a
standpoint of like
Evaluating to someone need to be
in the school. Are we providing
some? You know, part time
triage. We're going to show up
occasionally.
Um, seems to be having people in
the school.
Um, Mr There's 78 school based
health centers statewide. We
state funds 52 of them. Okay.
operate off of Medicaid revenue
building to help private health
insurance and Medicaid. Just
nice.
Nice. So thank you, Kelly. So on
that note, I mean, most of the
costs are being paid by the
federal government. We hope
there you go. One of those
things that
Brings in money to our state,
actually, so anyway. Um, is
there a proposal to greatly
expand school based health
centers?
Mr Chair Members Committee.
There is not one this year, but
last budget season there was a
big expansion of school based
health centers, which is slowly
getting off the ground and
hopefully that money is getting
out now, so we found it a big
expansion last session.
Sorry. And how many more would
it include Kelly?
It depends on who applied in
their cost. Yeah, Okay, That's
good. And then, um, Mr Chair,
Kelly, everyone was secretary.
Um, when we say 78 school health
centers does that is that
literally 78 schools or do some
of those centers cover more than
one school?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senior Stein
board. Uh, it also includes the
ability to have hubs to be able
to serve other schools. So, yes,
it is. With the expansion of
that.
Sounds good. And then finally,
Mr Secretary, just for your
knowledge, I've got a bill
called Senate Bill 50, which
would expand use to the county
health assistance funds, which
would greatly expand our ability
to be able to provide health
care for people. And, uh um,
talking to whoever I can in the
administration is trying to get
a message on that building.
County really wants it. And, uh,
Senate Bill 50 Great pill. Great
little Bill.
Isabelle
Anyway, that's all happens.
Chairman. Thank you all for your
work that you do appreciate you
going to promote one of your
bills or no, No, no, sir. Has a
message. Thank you, Mr Chair,
And and Mr Secretary and
director. If you just Maybe you
don't want to go anywhere. Um,
it's a real simple question
Follow up to to the school based
health so
So now that we know that the
contracts have issued and things
are moving along that way. Um,
are we seeing payments flowing
already? Do you have any update
there? I'm just curious because
you know, these are just
handshakes to make sure things
get rolling in. Yeah, Mr. Chair,
Senator, there were there were
several, um, methods of funding
school based health centers and
in the main those of the money
has actually been flowing. In.
Most of those. There were a
couple of remaining categories.
Of school based health centers
that was very small handful of
the total. That's the most
recent trance that's gotten
taken care of, and the money is
flowing for most of those
without a handful of very small,
like two or three exceptions
that I mentioned earlier. Great,
Thank you. Chair and secretary
and Mr Director, I I hope that
it's not just acting. I hope
that we have someone that's
really going to, you know, be
on.
I'll get love it knowing it and
make it all happen. So thank
you.
See anybody else on the list.
And Senator Rodriguez brothers,
Wherever we at with the health
councils, I mean, did you make
an appropriation request? I
mean,
Thank you, Mr Chair. The health
councils have base funding of
15,000 per Health council and
our budget. There's a federal
grant that does end this This
fiscal year. We did not make a
request for further funding for
health councils. There's been
lots of discussion over on the
house side with with the bill to
expand and an appropriation to
expand that funding. Um, the the
chair of the House
Appropriations Committee has
asked us for some ideas of if
funding were to be included. And
if the governor were to approve
it, what might
Be some
Conditions or or metrics or
things in exchange for that
funding. We've provided that to
to chair small and so you know,
I think I think there's a lot of
sort of final budget negotiating
yet to do on that. But there I
know there's active discussion
occurring about it.
So, Yeah, I'd like to see that
too, because the health councils
I mean,
It depends where you live,
right? We have one in our area,
but I don't see him around very
much. And
An active in healthcare
discussions. Never seen him at
the hospital meeting. Never seen
him in those arenas were health
care is a priority. I mean, so
they may work good in some, but
I don't know how well ours does,
Um, you know the semantics that
happened during the Legislature?
I don't think Cabinet secretary
should get involved in
Whether you agree with the
numbers or disagree with the
numbers, I mean,
I think Senator Diamond had it
correct. I mean, we do have a
problem in the way of D.
And last year we were told that
the exact was gonna fix it.
And well, we made a Cabinet
appointment and change is always
slow and difficult. I mean, we
haven't seen that.
But every time we come to a
legislative session is to help
the health Council, for example.
Well, yeah, we want it. We want
it. We want it in a year later.
We're sitting here in the money
hasn't moved.
Or funding hasn't moved or
Nothing's moving. I mean money
from 2019. Yesterday we heard as
it moved money from 2020 hasn't
moved. The money is not moving,
But the minute we come into
session, it's all of a sudden
we're going to move everything
tomorrow and it never really
happened.
And legislators are reaching out
in ways this not happening.
White. Why is this money not
moving and were given the same
old
Shuffle, right?
We're getting that we're getting
at the contracts are coming out.
I mean, this is a repetitive
story through agencies, not just
yours, right?
It's coming. It's coming. It's
coming. But when we go home and
go to the grocery store and send
it to ideas and the ice cream
Mile and
I was seeing if he was paying
attention, I mean people are
asking right.
I mean, in my district health
councils, they thought they were
going to be used for abortions
and all that, and it's like, no,
they're not.
It's not that it's getting
health care to Children when
they're in school, and that's
the priority. It's they want to
lead in different political
direction that it should be
there, But I mean, we want those
I mean, why is the money not
moving? It is the director not
there is the staff. Not there. I
mean, I guess we should have a
new government accountability
and say
If you don't. If you don't do
it, we're gonna start lining
appropriations to school
districts in saying we're not
gonna do it through the
Department of Health. We're just
going to send it to the school
district and tell them to to get
it handled.
Because it seems like the
agencies can't handle that.
Is there a reason? Just that one
example give us the reason why
the money is in the contracts
are not moving until we get to
session.
Afternoon.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chair. You
I think I think on on one hand,
I've got reasons to be able to
explain it. We have a 50%
vacancy rate in our finance
Department. We've had virtually
100% turnover in the financial
staff and our programs, But on
another level those are excuses,
and I don't want to stand here
and and make excuses to you.
What we are doing is working to
completely revamp how we do that
work in the agency.
Um our expectation is to be able
to hit the beginning of the
fiscal year at the beginning of
the fiscal year and get those
get those dollars out. But it is
it is sticking to her ending in
terms of the fundamentals of
operations, and like I said a
minute ago, I think I've spent
more time in my first year
focusing on that then I have on,
you know, overall overall health
issues, But if you don't have
the operational side, then we
need to send it somewhere else.
I mean, whether it's a pay
issue. I mean, I see
supplemental pay.
Increased right their salary
adjustments and we're doing a
pay study. But but I mean, if
you don't have the staff for 50%
Vacancy in your financial
And we got to send the money
where it can get out.
I mean, otherwise poor little
Johnny Montoya's and over there
is is not getting health care
and in the schools and
Little Johnny can't go get in
there. Infection checked or
right.
Or when the mother comes in, and
she's sick and and get the
health care. I mean, if it's not
moving, then we gotta figure out
a way to make the money moving.
I mean, that's the legislators
prerogative in the legislative
authority.
But you're not the only agency
that's not moving money.
Everybody's on not moving money
and in
We can blame it on the on the
environment, but I mean
You don't have that the
The financial staff.
To do that. Then we got to move
where it can get out, and I know
that's a direct appropriation
somewhere.
And so let me ask you were
looking at deficiencies, right?
Mhm and and I'm to the point Now
that
That if we don't figure out our
deficiency problem before we
expanded 660,000 pilot program,
right?
That we're never going to get
caught up because we're just
gonna keep adding stuff on top
of other stuff that
We don't get our backlog fixed
and and get a budget right?
That's correct, and that's
balanced. And you and I had that
conversation like
We can't continue to run in
deficiencies and supplementals
and agencies because we come to
the session and all of a sudden
You want a new pilot program,
and we got to figure out how to
backfill first.
Before we create anything else,
and then how to figure out your
financial
Employee problem before we move
anything else, because if we
don't figure out those problems,
you're never going to be
successful.
And we're not going to be
successful in in so
Mr Chair. I think I think we
agree with each other
completely. If you look back
last session and just count up
the new initiatives and new
investments in Department of
Health medication assisted
treatment, Reproductive Health
Office of Alcohol Prevention,
School based Health Center
expansions all those kinds of
things And if you if you looked
as you look today at our budget,
I think you see a major sea
change in the way I've tried to
approach that of really
Trying to be very targeted and
very minimal with anything new
You do You called out the
primary care, um, initiative to
try to expand access to care
through our network of 52 public
health offices, focusing on one
office to try to actually do
something that we can get done
quickly in that context, But
mostly I think what we're doing
is exactly what you're talking
about, Which is is processing
what you've already given us.
And then and then fixing the
business operations of the
agency. And then that really
gets to that whole notion of
what does it cost to run our
facilities? Are we budgeted that
way? Do we need to improve our
revenue? Are we doing the work
to get that done so that because
I want to be in the same place
you are of not having a
deficiency, But the first step
is knowing what's it actually
cost to run the facilities and
do we have the resources to do
that? So I think we're on the
same page and your opening
remarks and no matter what
you're still 90% capacity.
You're still gonna run a
deficiency? No matter what.
Because
The cost side is is more than
the reimbursement side. Yeah,
without fixing the revenue side,
exactly.
And but I I think that's a
bigger problem. Maybe your op ed
should have been is
Don't give us anything new
because
We can't handle it, and we don't
have the money to handle it. And
so when legislators starts
screaming about
Or why is it this moving? It's
because
Well, you're giving us too much.
There is such thing as too much
risk sheriff in terms of in
terms of the
The op ed. I think we all agree
that no child in New Mexico
should die ever of anything
right? And I think that I think
the challenge came up in the
context of the hearing last week
that the statement was made that
that we're paying too much
attention to gun violence and
that more kids died. What was
said was more kids died in cfd
care than from gun violence, and
the fact is it's 20 times more
kids.
Were killed by guns in New
Mexico. 2040 kids died from gun
violence 28 due to overdoses 20
due to safe sleep issues, and I
think I think trying to pit one
cause against another is is is
not a great idea. I think we
need to be concerned about all
those. I mean, The problem is
you guys want to get political
over this and and at the end of
the day, the news story this
this morning wasn't another kid
was shot right?
It's parental responsibility.
Parents need to man up and and
put their weapons in a safe
place. Parents need to
Spank their kids instead of
patting them on the back and
say, Everybody gets a trophy.
Hmm. And change that.
Thinking, And, uh I don't know
how you do that, But I mean,
No matter what we do, we're not
going to control somebody in the
end.
We can put it. Let's go. Base
House centers. Perfect example
of
That kid that shot the other one
would mental health person
there.
Or somebody was that struggles
that might have changed the
outcome.
I mean, that's what we want to
target. I mean, and if we're not
getting the money out, right,
Hfts responsible this Here's $20
million. That was HST from 2021.
And I don't know how many times
you gonna say this during the
session, but probably more than
my wife's name is $20 million
for behavioral health. It's your
way of D that never moved right?
And you talk about gun violence
and you talk about keeping
Children safe and and that And
if you guys estate agency in the
executive state agency doesn't
move the money, we're never
going to make a change.
Simple, true fact. I mean,
If the money doesn't move then
and you're overloaded. Then you
need to help us solve that
problem and
And just say, Listen.
I throw my hands.
I can do this much, but I can't
take any more buckets.
And that's what I think you need
to tell the legislature saying
Fix this. Help me fix this. I
came in as a chair and said, You
know, I want to fix one thing at
a time right? One agency at a
time because everybody was in
crisis because we really didn't
have enough money to fund
everybody. And now we went
overboard with funding and now
we can't get the money out, and
we're in the opposite direction,
and we're like everybody's
peddling through mud.
Right to get to the golden egg,
And and I don't know how we do
that, But I'm
To the point where some of this
stuff is just gonna either get a
direct appropriation to losses,
Cruises Schools district to
Gallop school district and take
it out and say here
And here's a performance measure
and report to the agency because
We don't have the staff.
Thanks, Mr Chair. I just wanted
to, um, just make sure that
everybody was aware that so in
in the request for D O h this
year, they really had very, very
few actual expansions. The
request was truly to try to fix
some of the issues that the
agency um I believe almost, if
not more than half was related
to
Um, reducing vacancies and
trying to implement appropriate
placements across the agency. So
there wasn't too much of an
expansion so
Just let you know. I don't think
that this year there was a
You know? No, I'm go. I'm using
for for an example to right.
Sure. Absolutely. Mr Caron with
231 request.
Right, And we get that on
November 30th statutorily as
students September and I guess
we're gonna have to
Write a letter. Remember this
Kelly to the attorney general,
clarifying when their budget is
due, and then we got 10 days
before we get into a budget
session to review 231 request
for I don't know how many
millions and it's unfair to
them. It's unfair to us. It's
unfair to the educational system
that we do that. And then we
find out, you know, on Friday
300 more million in shortage,
and it's just unfair the way the
system works and
And
It doesn't fix any problem with
the end of the day. Um
Just look at the secretary and
he says, You know, my gave me
all this stuff and I can't
accomplish it.
Staffing reasons.
Everything that files on and if
we don't fix one problem, then
we're just gonna keep
compounding it. And so
I think that's one of the things
but I mean, you may only had a
few expansions and we didn't
talk about your expansions into
detail. But I mean the
efficiencies clearly out seeing
the expansions and what do you
want to fix First is
deficiencies because you're
going to run in a negative and
you're getting get an audit
finding for that, and and and
then it's going to create a
different problem in and so.
It's a balance, right?
And maybe this is a message to
the executive is
You know, we got a clear problem
with deficiencies.
And end supplementals up to the
tune of what 305 million in
total.
I mean, we have a clear problem
that we
We are not funding agencies in
the right place and over funding
agencies in the wrong place
India vase shaking their head.
Yes, And I mean, it's up to us
to fix that together Otherwise
They're just gonna be singing
the same song for years and
years. Go because
2020
Prior. We've had money to fix
problems.
And and we really fixed them.
Are. We just added additional
problems and not fix the ones we
had.
So
I got to go to another meeting,
but I think there's no other
questions. But I mean, thank you
for letting me use you an
example and
I won't write an op ed, if you
don't write an op Ed, but I
mean, there's some clear points
of Legislature has to make and
and when legislators make those
points and you you, you choose
to respond to them.
I mean, you you both point at
each other, and it's an argument
that shouldn't take place in the
committee meeting, but
The legislators have
responsibility to defend
themselves in a place where they
can and Cabinet secretaries.
I don't really have that They
have to use the governor self
Thank you Appreciate your time
today. Thank you, Senator by
