Mr chairman and madam vice chair
it really is a call of the
chairman that is on here on the
question
What reading and the reading I
propose that I have advised me
to take it that you have back
and ask the government member of
the prevailing side but
ultimately I do believe in that
it really is a matter up to the
discretion of the chair okay so
I'll just keep my at my second
amendment to take it off the
table and senator Munoz if you
accept that we.
Thank.
Motion and a second any
objection to the motion.
I don't see anybody's hand
raised the so Senator Gonzalez
your bills off the table it is
that your bill is amended.
Everybody knows what it does
gonna have a motion on the bill.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna have a due
pass.
Second the motion.
We call the roll.
Yes Mr chairman
Senator birch are you here it's
not here Senator Campos.
No.
Senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria votes no on
the bill.
Senator Diamond this no no.
Senator Diamond both know
Senator Gonzales.
Yes.
Senator Gonzales votes yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator share are
you here no.
Senator share no Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes.
Senator minnows yes so I have I
yes or no and to excuse.
Dollars very well thank you Mr
chairman thank you members.
Thank you.
Just so everybody knows we're
not trying to stay past six
o'clock maybe a little bit so
we're gonna try to make sure we
get to Senator Hamblen to build
two twenty nine we're going to
House Bill to it and try to
start in on the H. J. R. one and
if it if it goes long we're just
going to roll over for tomorrow
so
I believe everyone has a
spreadsheet showing in front of
them.
House bill two and my first time
in in the chairman and I never
spent seven billion dollars are
proved seven million dollars to
be spent even my own business
since it's tough when you're
signing the bottom of the check
to spend money and to appreciate
what the value of it is and what
good work it can do so hopefully
everybody will spend their
dollars wisely.
We'll be able to get past were
at with COVID but I also want to
talk about.
We change a little bit the way
things are done in Senate
finance we traditionally handled
things with spreadsheets and
instead of finance committee
then mention and house bill two
but.
For clarity and for the public
purpose they need to know where
the dollars are going in and how
people want to spend the dollars
Senate bill three seventy seven
was the best way to address.
Senate amendments LF members
put their money where they
thought it was just muted in
agencies.
In their districts and that
really clarified the process for
us on house bill two amendments.
are able to see where that
money's going how was spent
and so that would help the
process as we move along.
So as we move along we're gonna
we're gonna talk about language
and and I'll turn it over to
staff Wayne and David and
Charles in your present house
bill two and and then we'll talk
about school.
The motion so.
When you start good evening.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
Hi my name is Andrew Propst I'm
with the staff of the Senate
finance committee I'm joined
this evening by Mr David Abbey
the director of the legislative
finance committee Mr Charles of
us only the deputy director LFC
I'm also joined by a John Gaspar
shape sitting to my left but the
memorandum is one of the
December third John is here as
well want to start off Mr
chairman by thanking David and
Charles and more staff at the
LFC.
They do all the work on the
budget and the staff here at the
Senate finance committee end up
getting all the credit.
but we could not put that these
proposed amendments together
without requiring operation and
assistance of the LFC staff to
do this on a full time basis
throughout the year I know the
state budget better than anybody
Mr chairman and I just want to
say thank you to David and
Charles again of their staff for
all the work assistance provided
to us your of the Senate finance
committee.
Senate finance committee
amendments to house bill two.
At forty one million two fiscal
year twenty to recurring general
fund appropriations.
Mostly for a one time or one
percent employer contribution
increase for the educational
education retirement fund
percent percent of bill forty
two.
The amendments also at thirty
two point four million to
special appropriations from the
general fund including twenty
one point five million.
For higher education financial
aid programs and five million
for COVID relief payments.
Senate finance committee
amendments also direct to the
general fund one point six three
billion of potential payments to
the state of New Mexico pursuant
to the American rescue plan two
thousand twenty one otherwise
known as a binding plant.
The rescue plan provides for the
use of federal revenue for the
provision of government services
to the extent of the reduction
in revenues of state state.
Contingent on receipt of this
general fund revenue Senate
finance committee amendment
provides for the use of six
hundred million for the
unemployment trust fund and
fifty million for Medicaid and
FY twenty two.
This very passage revenue
message measures detailed on the
attachment to the general fund
financial summary.
General fund balances ending
fiscal year twenty to R. one
point seven six billion or
twenty three point seven percent
and our reserves are serving and
option of the proposed Senate
finance committee the committee
members to.
House Bill to the reserve would
be at twenty three point seven
percent.
What highlights from the
proposed amendments Mr chairman
members of the committee FY
twenty two recurring general
fund I was Senate finance
committee amendments FY twenty
two general fund appropriation
total is seven billion.
Four hundred thirty six million.
Seven million four hundred
thirty six million dollars
that's an increase of three
hundred and seventy three
million or four point eight
percent over the adjusted FY
twenty one operating budget.
The public education Mr chairman
members the committee the Senate
finance committee amendment
addresses and executive all
priority adding six hundred
ninety two thousand for food and
nutrition programs the total
general fund appropriations for
public schools support R. three
point three five billion
an increase of five point eight
percent.
For higher education the Senate
finance committee amendments
include one million for
athletics at UNM New Mexico
State University both of which
have experienced severe revenue
loss losses due to the pandemic
and the five hundred fifty
thousand dollars appropriation
to eastern New Mexico university
and western New Mexico
university to better equalize
instruction and general funding
per student among comprehensive
colleges.
FY twenty two general fund for
appropriations for higher
education our eight hundred and
sixty five point five million
increase of two point eight
percent.
For health and Human Services Mr
chairman Senate finance
committee members included
additional four hundred thirty
three thousand for the aging
network.
Five hundred thousand for the
environment department.
And six hundred thousand four
three Y. F. the groups banded
texting program for years and
protective services.
As noted HSD will receive a
contingent fifty million dollars
appropriation for Medicaid from
the federal stimulus funds we
expect receive as a result of
passage of the American rescue
plan of two thousand twenty one.
The Senate finance committee
reviewed HSD productions the
prospect for continued enhanced
federal match managed care rates
and utilization.
Noted earlier Mr chairman for E.
R. B. amendment section eight of
the bill provides thirty four
million dollars to DFA to
distribute the schools and
universities to increase the
employer contribution rate for
FY twenty one by one point.
One percent.
Mr chairman and it's been
discussed on incentive for the
educational retirement funds and
report showed assets of thirteen
billion an unfunded liability
of at least seven point nine
billion so this thirty four
million dollar increase to the
for contribution is intended to
help shore up the solvency of
the fund.
Under special supplemental
appropriations Mr chairman
Senate finance committee
amendment.
From the general fund agreed to
chair provide assistance to
cities and counties experiencing
severe financial shortfall due
to the by them endemic.
One million for shortfall in the
generals General Services
departments group health
programs we don't provide health
insurance the state employees as
well as employees of cities and
counties throughout the state.
Seven hundred fifty thousand to
purchase vehicles for GSD.
And that's a switch from other
state funds.
R. two million additional
funding funding for tourism
marketing.
Five million for COVID relief
payments to to individuals
through HSD eleven million for
the opportunity scholarship
program and ten point five
million to bring a lottery
scholarship to ninety percent of
tuition.
Under transportation
appropriations Mr chairman
section nine of the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bill to.
By three hundred seventy million
to the department of
transportation with
appropriations for a number of
specific projects listed in the
bill.
The projects were identified
based on priorities for major
investment projects and smaller
projects identified B. by DOT.
The Senate finance committee
members find the DOT may expand
your appropriation on the budget
projects analysts additional
projects valued at eighty five
million identified by
legislative staff from the O. T.
plans and priorities.
Our final professional action on
president Biden stimulus plan is
imminent I leave the house of
representatives actually
approved it today.
professor will now go to the
president for his signature.
The bill includes three hundred
fifty billion and brought Corona
virus relief to states tribes
and localities.
The federal funds information
service reports the state of New
Mexico should receive about
twenty one point six billion
emergency responses Services
impaired by lost revenue and
certain infrastructure projects.
Senate finance committee members
provide for the deposit of the
federal revenue in the
appropriation contingency fund
the general fund.
Remember to provide for the use
of one point one billion for to
replace lost revenue from the
state as a result of the
pandemic.
Yes the amendment allocates six
hundred million for unemployment
insurance costs.
Providing Mr chairman noted the
couple of other key bills and
and you identified of course
Senate bill three seventy seven.
The general fund financial
summary reflects four hundred
million in pandemic relief
measures enacted the session
a chapters three four and I find
gross receipts tax relief to
restaurants a Mr lowincome New
Mexicans.
And small business recovery
grants administered by the New
Mexico finance authority.
Financial summary also show the
number of revenue measures that
have passed at least one of
which one chamber during a
session with the net revenue
reduction of fifty six million
dollars in FY twenty two.
A good portion for me Mr
chairman if those the.
X. measures or do not end up
being enacted that reduction of
fifty six million dollars would
not occur.
As you mentioned Mr chairman
Senate bill three seventy seven
a supplemental general
appropriations act included
funding for broadband tribal
remedy projects and other
priorities of the legislature
with that Mr chairman and David
and Charles and and John are and
are here to answer any questions
that we can.
Charles you have anything else.
Your muted David.
I could very quickly walk
through the spreadsheet so we
could stand for your questions
what's your pleasure Mr
chairman.
Water Street a spreadsheet
program will get question the
case that makes.
So you you got a packet this
morning and the first three
pages of the general fund
summary at the bottom of page
one you can see twenty three
point seven if you adopt it the
these proposed amendments that
along with the revenue bills and
other assumptions that that's
where you pay one point almost
one point eight million in
reserves on page three.
Are the details of the
assumptions.
And you know you can see the the
bills you've already passed you
can see the revenue bills and
then in particular you can see a
line about halfway down under
house bill two it says Senate
four five and six amendments and
it shows thirty two point four
million in the FY twenty one
column of forty one point four
million in the FY twenty two
column I mentioned that thirty
four that forty one point for
next year is the ERP
so those those are the changes
in general the financial summary
on pages four and five we have
changes to section four section
four is the bulk of the General
Appropration Act these are
recurring appropriations up to
four agencies next year most of
the changes our general fund and
and almost all of these were
intended to address concerns
what by the executive up in the
some of them on the house side
the house that will do have said
if you look at the other half of
that might include for example
the district attorneys in the
public defender and other items
were things that the executive
brought forth and said you know
what we're a little short and
could could you help us out and
staff work with our.
The LFC staff and vice chair
committee on those and and for
the most part many of the exact
highest priority executive
requests are addressed in these
pages
ages six and seven.
Well back to the bills what we
call one time appropriations
from the general fund and a mix
of general fund and other state
funds and some of the bigger
items include
Adding two million for up from
other state funds for the
housing trust fund
Adding a million for GST to
address their shortfall and
health benefits.
Two million more for tourism
online nine
more greater use of other state
fund balances that are stranded
in the early childhood education
care department from.
K. five million for HSD to make
payments to individuals who are
not eligible for federal
stimulus funding that's like
what up similar to what happened
with special session
let's see two and a half million
contingent on passage of Senate
bill eleven which is the clean
fuel standard that's also other
state funds and then on page
seven additional appropriations
from the reform Fund.
And then notably on lines twenty
one of twenty two of page seven
eleven million more for the
opportunity scholarship that's
in addition to five million that
was in House Bill to substitute
so total of sixteen for
opportunity plus ten and a half
million from the general fund to
bring lottery tuition to ninety
percent and we would note that
increasing lottery tradition
really reduces the requirement
for opportunity in fact expands
its reach so.
In those two together it's a
pretty significant supplement to
financial aid.
Twenty over twenty million
dollars.
And then some fund transfers now
on pages eight nine are a
miscellaneous language items
that staff is reviewed
extensively I think chairman
over to Mr solely at this point
to give a little background on
these items and how the process
of looking at him and what
typically happens on our
language for example in the out
year versus the current year Mr
Slee knowing that we're short on
time if you could just a real
quick please.
Mr chairman members of the
committee when it comes to our
language that means budget
adjustment request and so on the
back of the bill house bill two
authorizes agencies to increase
their budgets from other state
funds as well as inter agency
transfers as well as federal
funds all agencies are allowed
to increase their budget if they
have the revenue by five percent
then they typically ask for
authority above that and we
would look for specific amounts
for specific purposes your
granting spending increases
through the bar language and so
we we pay special attention to
ensuring that your
appropriations authority isn't
he wrote it through that process
we also look to see what an
agency might need to start out
the year with.
First says what an agency might
need to to fill out the rest of
the year so some agencies will
ask for a certain bar authority
for money that they might not
need at the beginning of the
year and that we would recommend
revisiting once you get into the
next legislative session and
give them additional authority
once we know the revenues are
actually coming in and we know
with the specific purpose will
be for.
Your but I think that's great Mr
Chairman thank nine are the road
appropriations there's a total
of a hundred and seventy million
for state roads I'm sorry that
page.
And the House named eighty five
million projects that was very
contentious for for the Senate
finance committee and senators
to deal with the house bill
strongly about retaining the
projects there are concerns in
some quarters that about
micromanaging and leaving the
department flexibility the the
staff proposed a resolution you
may want to keep in the air a
little bit us as members look at
these items in case any need
tweaking in the next day or so
but basically in in both the HSC
incentive programs called all
these projects were identified
an issue with our equipment
transportation they're all on a
set of menus and the house
looked at the Munoz prioritized
on my staff well look at the
less than about other projects
to recommend in the Senate
finance problem and maybe you
you know what this is maybe the
first time many people took this
in detail might need a little
more attention but most
important at least discretion
alright then the amendment says
the department may spend money
on these projects I'm pretty
confident actually my staff talk
to secretary Santa today these
are all projects that are
planned by the department and
they want to complete it's not
like they might move the money
somewhere else it might take you
are changing share our house
version thanks so.
Thank you was a good I hope it's
a good problem last with
addressing the need to to work
with the house on their
projects the last one is.
Thirteen it relates to the
federal funds the bill passed to
the president it will bring page
thirteen one point six three
that billion
of discretionary dollars to the
state we prepared a memo on this
that I think many of you receive
we can make available but that
on late in the six hundred page
federal built their provisions
of the state many years the
federal revenue to to address
services that were paired by
lost revenue and that was a
feature that wasn't in
previous federal stimulus bill
so they are on page thirteen our
our recommendations for how to
use the one point six three
billion notably for the
unemployment trust one third
from the bottom six hundred
million also for Medicaid
which is.
Of Medicaid isn't language
section five fifty million from
the general fund for Medicaid
contingent on positive federal
aid to the state of New Mexico
and then other major amounts are
including leader wrote so so for
that.
Finally Mr chairman on page
fourteen member remainder we
have amounts by agents so what
quick overview knowing you're
short on time I would make the
last point this is a.
Before you you have an action to
direct staff to prepare an
amendment it'll take us a couple
days LFC is the
is the is.
The only bill that the council
service doesn't draft is house
bill two so LFC will prepare
this amendment will be used
these are pages.
Plus any adjustments you make
today or tomorrow with your
language subcommittee and about
Saturday we think we can bring
back to committee report for you
which will be an amendment to
house bill two Charles did you
want to add some yes there are
three items that didn't make it
on the language thank you to our
tour with that we'd want you to
include in your motion Mr
chairman to our performance
measures one is for the Rio
Grande trail commission and the
others for the New Mexico film
office and then the third is
budget adjustment authority for
the environment department to
implement the cannabis Act.
Up to one point seven million
dollars.
What is our state employees
specially LCS.
I appreciate them I appreciate
your leadership in Charles and
everybody else see
that's the behind the scenes
that people don't get the credit
that need the credit they
deserve working with agencies on
on house bill two in bringing
together so I wanted to make
sure we thank them to so what
we're going to get some
questions on amendments we won't
be taking any public comment.
I will then entertain a motion
on adopting twenty two
reoccurring pages for I and then
nonrecurring of pages on six and
seven.
Fund transfers end of command
language in the bars on pages
eight nine and then more or get
final approval from the
subcommittee tomorrow when they
would have you all the language.
There's a lot of agencies are
making a mad dash to let us look
at things we don't want to make
sure we we try to get everything
done and get it correctly so we
don't have any issues later on.
So with that I guess we'll go to
a.
Questions from committee members
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee and
thank you to the LFC staff for
your hard work and all of the
time and effort you put into
providing new member orientation
as well that was just an
invaluable to help get it
started an item that I feel like
it's really critical to to have
added to the budget is funding
an aft Sheet� for the southwest
New Mexico cog to provide
technical support for local
water projects to complete the
application process in rural New
Mexico
as when these local communities
and ditches associations need to
complete the application process
for the water trust board
provided that H. B. two hundred
passes I was wondering if we
could add appropriation for that
you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Neville
Senator.
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman first I
really want to extend my thanks
of course.
The staff but I also really want
to thank the leadership of this
committee and the LESC for
continuing to take the position
that federal funds that are sent
to the state for general use
must be appropriated by the
legislature you know there's
been a lot of good discussion
over the last year about the
server this the this appellate
case sago be king or king the
secco.
And that you know multiple
governors have use that K. as in
support of the proposition that
the executive has unilateral
authority to spend all federal
dollars and that's a very
expensive and I would argue
incorrect reading of saco what
Saccone what our courts have
told us in New Mexico is that if
federal dollars come to the
state that are designated for a
specific agency or as in the
case of sago to I believe that
was a board of regents of a
higher education institution the
legislature does not have
appropriating power that money
has been appropriated by
Congress directly to HSD but in
cases like this shares funding
where Congress is now explicitly
appropriating money for general
use and Revenue replacement I
think it's it's absolutely
appropriate from a policy
standpoint that the legislature
appropriate those funds
by may Mr chairman to if I may
ask a question to Mr props Mr
Propst.
My understanding is that what
the bill does not do this
actually appropriates that
entire.
One point three million fund
correct.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and senator Candelaria
that is correct it under these
amendments that that one point
six billion dollars well with
the transfer I'm looking for the
exact wording
age thirteen when.
Thank you David would on the
top.
The transfer to the
appropriation contingency fund
of the general fund.
And I think that's appropriate
because Mr Chairman at that
point that the get all the the
the provisions of law that
govern the appropriation
contingency fund but that apply
I think that the that the
probation that have been laid
out and the staff recommendation
for that one point sixty three
billion are absolutely spot on
you know appropriating six
hundred million of that gets our
unemployment insurance fund back
to where it should be catches up
from our deficit that's gonna
Lloyd Mr chairman I believe that
what could have been a
significant tax increase on all
employers quite frankly
so so that's good I would I
wonder Mr chairman Mr Browde.
Session I would have is that.
Yeah I know that there's a two
million additional general fund
your is to propose but I would
suggest as an alternative is
adding language that would
appropriate I would suggest
twenty five million of that one
point six three billion to the
tourism department from the
appropriation contingency fund
for sort of recovery related
tourism advertising
you know I I we've gotta turn
our hospitality and tourist
industry back on as quickly as
possible at the more aggressive
we are versus you gauge like
Texas and Arizona and Colorado
exit or.
The better will be so I said I
submit that as the proposed
revisions to the staff
recommendation on that
Mr chairman
the other question I wanted to
go over which have.
Yes the reserve rate is now at
the reserve rate is estimated at
twenty three percent correct Mr
Chairman and Mr probes.
Mr chair.
That is correct.
SO Mr chairman the the that is
that that includes the
assumption that the net
effective tax budget situation
enacted by the legislature what
happened that that reduction of
how much in revenue to the
general fund.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and senator Candelaria
and that negative reduction of
fifty five point eight million.
Chairman Mr props I think the
reason I I like that is yeah I
had the the current house
proposal is scored at as in the
positive and and and not just
being there right now revenue
neutral but being revenue
positive I know it of course it
depends upon what the Senate
business and tax committee
elects to do with that bill but
if it comes to this committee
and that for.
Yeah I think.
You know ultimately Mr chairman
I guess the assumption I'm
making Mr probably does it all
let's assume that our assumption
regarding the the application of
of the implication of tax
legislation is wrong and and it
ends up generating a net
positive revenue that would just
improve our reserve rates
correct.
Mr chairman members and members
of the committee and senator
Candelaria that's correct and I
I think your point your point is
a fair point that that fifty
five point eight million I would
certainly turn out as a
place holder and the that number
could change.
Absolutely that Mr Chairman with
respect to again just back to
that one point six three
billion.
I noticed that a for upright
looks like about four hundred
and thirty nine million of that
is is not is just sort of
laughed and the AC eight trips
not appropriated out of the a CH
to any other program am I
correct.
Yes.
Okay SO what that four hundred
and thirty nine million since
it's in the A. C. age does that
count towards the calculation of
twenty three point seven percent
of reserve for the reserve rate
calculation no it's not
calculation.
Okay so if that four hundred and
thirty three in twenty thirty
nine million is at it again.
It out I I you know I think the
stakes you know you've been at
four thirty nine million dollars
in the ACA's.
You know.
It doesn't affect reserves I
think again you know this
committee could and should
perhaps consider additional
appropriate action appropriation
actions of those funds and I
just I just and this Mr
generally thanking you for your
leadership
it's not an easy task to take
over at endeavor of this
complexity and yeah you always
do a good job of thanking us and
the staff but I thank you for
your leadership on this and the
suggestion I would just leave us
with is you know tourism has not
was not the beneficiary of any
federal stimulus dollars as I
understand it either round one
or round two of chairs adding it
be really appropriate for the
legislature to appropriate some
of this third round funding.
Choose supplements and to really
double down on New Mexico as get
out the best dressed destination
in the United States I don't
really want to go to Texas I
mean really you now that was a
joke but really comes in New
Mexico let's just make sure we
remind everybody about thank you
very much Mr chairman and thank
you very much for staff.
Thank you senator Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr Chairman all the
very first my apologies for
being late to the meeting we had
Otero County issue that needed
my props the.
Attention and so I need to
review some more I just a quick
question so we're going to meet
tomorrow one with more of the
same working on the budget
tomorrow is that my
understanding.
We're gonna try to do it is the
the first pages so they can
begin drafting.
Sorry we're gonna prove a.
Pages form I and the
nonrecurring in pages sections
right.
Again reviewing language
tomorrow that some committee
which I think I put you on.
Which is you Senator can't by
then Senator Candelaria Senator
Campos and I believe the Senator
Steinborn C. we can begin run
that we need to begin drafting
the first part of house bill two
and and so we're going to look.
And again I apologize but I
appreciate the update to and I'm
following along here
I've had a couple requests small
requests that I will let I need
to review but I will bring to
your attention into the
committee's attention by
tomorrow thank you.
Remember you got requests.
I can't even answer my phone
anymore without a text message
or twenty seven phone calls
about somebody forgot something
so we'll look at it we're pretty
well wrapped up.
People are making some points
that need to be made and and
what I think government agencies
so.
Senator share.
Thank you Mr chair I I had a
question on some of the non
recurring things that it didn't
look like we had passed the bill
on
But I found it so never mind.
Sure I guess you're done
Senator Rodriguez your hand is
up.
Here thank you very much Mr
chairman.
First of the committee and thank
you to David Abbey in our trials
and thank you waiting for all
your hard work on this to
first I want to say that I'm
happy that
that I think it was senator
Candelaria who brought up the
and fireman Department I
remember Senator and I'm I'm
happy that that was brought up
because they do need to have
some budget flexibility to move
things around if they need to
and so I'm happy that we're
going to do a language amendment
to allow them to do that.
I more authority that they need
now I have a question maybe you
can answer for me the public
defender they they really they
had asked for seven hundred
twenty five thousand four
additional for their trial
backlog that they trial I think
the trial lawyers I don't buy
any of the backlog that they
have now during the COVID and I
don't know this five hundred
thousand on the ground recurring
or is it here on the recurring
part of general fund of the high
level page four if that five
hundred thousand the staff for
that purpose because that's for
contract attorneys in rural
areas so there's fifty thousand
dollars in junior for that
can you can somebody address
that for me.
We met with public defender
repeatedly.
During the session both on the
house side and I know a we
follow the hearing is Senate
finance that the house
amendments added five hundred
thousand already to the LFC
recommendation for the public
defender and the House
amendments addressed what we
understood the top priority from
up and our that the chief
defender to up.
Have flexibility to provide
compensation increases us for
attorneys and other staff
especially in rural areas and
also if possible to bring up
their rates for for contract
basis which or as low as three
hundred dollars for some felony
cases so they want flexibility
to address both those needs so
here's a doubling of of that in
another five hundred thousand in
the Senate amendment so in a
million dollars over the LFC
recommendation and they're
increase would be almost two
percent.
The end and that is again for
clarification that we address
that but also their backlog that
they have because that backlog
in accrued nav during the
pandemic I just wanted to make
sure they have make that request
David in your okay you that is
that what you discussed with
them.
That didn't come up in a
significant way with my
discussions with them and I'll
check no up to the hearing to
just see if there's anything
else on that but I my views are
pretty they present day pretty
happy with both the house action
in this section to my
expectations okay thank you
thank you David and then I just
right now the next question here
I'm going back to it was during
one more somebody else brought
up maybe not I mean I don't know
but either way the ball to make
additional funds but sure enough
we have the national rate they
were asking for twenty five
million and I hope that we can
work something for the tourism
department here especially we're
trying to bring back our people
to New Mexico I think trying to
pay for itself now that we're.
Getting better hopefully and
one.
one other thing I have Mister
chairman and that David or
someone
are you mentioned that they have
in your summary here to help
They basically selected eighty
five
thousand eight hundred and five
worth of.
Million worth of projects and
there is a hundred seventy
looking at this here on the page
a hundred seventy million for
the department of transportation
but if the house named eighty
five million worth of projects
that's the direction correctly
that's the purpose of the change
in language would be to add the
word may to take out shell for
example to allow flexibility to
the department of transportation
is that what this is about Mr
Chairman day that.
That's exactly right plus to
expand the list of from the ones
that house members picked.
That they were additionally
provided from the department of
transportation house members
picked some of them and the call
of showing Senate finance adds
additional projects that of.
My staff in conversations with
the department thought might
also be worthy of prioritization
under make type language.
Okay
then the one hundred and.
Sure I fully understand the
state one hundred and seventy
million for the department that
included as we know a number of
specific projects listed at and
also identified by D. O. T. so
if we were to add the or right I
think it's kind of it added to
the list as you said not
necessarily replacing but but it
could be both because the
forgiving the department
transportation the flexibility
with may then obviously could be
replacing some of the ones that
have been suggested or possibly
adding more but if we add more
of that than with more
additional funding be necessary
it would be with it the one
seventy.
Senator no because.
The house only listed eighty
five one hundred seventy nine.
Now you've got another list
added to the eighty five and it
totals a hundred and seventy and
I I I this is your.
Senate finance agencies struggle
with for many years between
trying to prioritize member
needs and not micromanagement
and this is similar to a
resolution for the cheap in the
past and I I really think what
makes this a little bit
different and maybe better is
all of the project started out a
list provided by the department
these were items were on the
house side when they saw the
list member center I want this
in my area or something else in
that area they're all started
with projects that the
department had already started
planning and designing and
bedding and bring forward as
needs to be addressed over the
coming year so you've got the
house members will concern that
the money by changing child may
the main money may go somewhere
else but I'm pretty confident in
discussions with the department
that they like to do all of
these projects and combined with
Senator Gonzalez's Bill to give
them extra
yes authority as well as extra
federal revenues there's a lot
of opportunity to get moving on
all fronts on the floor.
Thank you for vaccination data
Mr Chairman dated so basically
the eighty five million that we
would be
I guess you could call latter
replaced whatever what what
continue to give the department
flexibility because they are the
words that are changed in their
May will apply to the new eighty
five million on this chart we
cannot take your eye on one of
the pages president yes very
well so none of that changes
okay so I mean that that we
would be ninety were come out of
the balance of the one seventy
after the house but I need eight
I need to correct wait maybe
understand a little better thank
you very much for that and
whatever questions you Mr
chairman and move on all.
Hi David I did the
anything in here at all for the
echo program right now you know
they're the statewide
and the.
Our site or what it was that the
echo program is that telehealth
program that next the entire
state surely in every area of
the state to provide services
always but especially now during
the pandemic then clinics was
closed and and decisions can be
with a patient personally at the
they would have otherwise and so
on the work load for the
telehealth program at UNM who
creates very very high and we
don't have anything in here that
I've seen for that program every
year there's something
appropriated
but I see him here now this year
would be more important David do
you have anything
Yes yes I do R. Mr chairman Sir
or reduce the amount for project
echo is two and a half million.
It is about flat with where they
are for the current year so it
is two and a half but not an
increase.
Right now there may I get all
the.
Yes
I remember no of years ago we
passed legislation sponsored to
provide an additional I think
was two point six million but
the funding went to the
Department help then that time
and they used it for something
else so it turned out that the
new one and telehealth echo
program get anything they went
down to almost zero so they
retain the two point five but
they haven't gotten a request
that we look at David do you
have a comment so I sure FY
twenty as two one two six
million.
And then FY twenty one the
current year at two point five
nine million so they had an
increase of three forty for the
current year and the adjusted
budget.
Forty forty thousand in the
current year over last year.
Devanter the amendment process
when we did it last year because
I think I sponsored an amendment
to provide funding so I'm they
have a very high cost is there's
continue to provide services but
anyway so just a request that we
look at that for maybe providing
a little more on that in in
recurring because they can't
hire physicians or do anything
without the recurring section
for category thank you Mr
chairman right now that's all I
have thanks once again.
Senator Burt you have another
question yes Bernie thank you Mr
chairman and Senator Rodriguez
mentioned it and and I had a
also had a conversation with
senator Candelaria within the
last few weeks about tourism and
and I think the ask for thirty
to get the our marketing program
back in place and I think we had
budget I and I really really
would like to see if there is
some way we can supplement that
and and and maybe at least
double that I no I just I know
marketing and the mark it where
we get most of our tourism is
that a very large markets and to
re establish ourselves in those
marketplaces five million is a
lot of money but to market in
those marketplaces is a very
minimal amount and I would
certainly like to see.
in my humble opinion a Hey at
least doubling that amount to
jumpstart the tourism department
once again more most the state's
coming out of this COVID issue
and they're they're not going to
see one ad or hear one ad and
read one ad and and jump on the
plane to come out here but you
need to start planning the seed
that we need to be top of mind
number one a place on the the
place to come visit once we get
past this comment issue so I
just would like to see if
there's any opportunities there
at all to enhance the tourism.
Working budget.
And that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you Senator will
on for second.
Thank you Mr chairman really for
the first time since I didn't
pass anything with the the first
time so just in in some general
terms here I see of.
Places where there's just a
little bit of a language
adjustment that could be used as
all of that for tomorrow we need
in this case it's not money it's
just Hey can we have a couple
words in someplace that
tomorrow's deal Senator sure yes
that that committee will start
reviewing language and and then
it just went in so they'll come
back to to the full committee
with recommendations on what
they think the language should
be and make sure we don't we
have it all and we don't have
any mistakes.
So that will be the primary
tomorrow so they'll start
looking at language okay I just
need to make sure that I wasn't
to.
I wasn't missing anything thank
you Mr.
Thank you Senator Diamond do you
have any.
Thank you lot of questions today
and I think most of them have
been answered and if we're gonna
discuss language tomorrow than
Mr chairman I think I'm going on
that I had a quick question
before we hop off and it's
mainly just for clarification on
line thirteen page for we're
we're given the two hundred two
for state parks programs what
specific for those and then I'm
reading just language on that
what programs are we doing a
state parks.
Best Buy it leads to the
discretion to grant us to spread
across the programs what was
executive Representative request
on LFC recommendation on that
those are we there was a request
of the executive to add on a map
to the Department there was
request member to prioritize
parks in general with us buying
anything in particular I'm happy
to see that thank you have you
seen it before thank you for
reading that.
Mr chairman.
Campos you have any questions.
Yeah thank you thank you Charles
at the top of the meeting you
you announced and corrections
are some some language things.
I just want to bring up a few
things well as you pointed Mr
Chairman were all broken
approach now by agencies that
that you know there still a
little bit of daylight I think I
think there's an important one
that came to my attention with
CYFD where we did not adopt the
the house language on some on
non reversion language that I
guess we did last year that's
helped the new secretary kind of
get these programs stood up it's
been hugely hugely beneficial
and I know that's an area that
we're we all prioritize on that
we prioritize everything but
that's one I want to flag to
look at look at that house
language look what we did last
year and apparently if we can
continue that for another year
the really helpful.
Just sort of flag ask a question
first of all I see with the
spaceport that we have two
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
For operating costs.
And the question is is that.
Kind of an attempt to give a
little a little bit of what they
ask for of to plug that two
million dollar hole so with that
representative Mr Chairman.
The spaceport doesn't currently
have a two million dollar hole
of the the current general
issued a letter saying that what
they did was wrong they haven't
found out to be wrong in the
courts but we said this for
several years so whatever
additional money we would add.
From the state's budget would be
on top of the currently eight
million they received from the
G. R. tease.
They don't have an increase in
staff and so we looked at that
pretty hard when when the
Attorney General or someone
makes the final decision we
don't mind signing a spaceport
but they're currently funded and
at a level that's adequate for
them with the G. R. T. instead
of paying down the bonds they
chosen for the lifetime and that
agency to.
Not at here to that when we
started them on the right at the
beginning.
And so that is an issue that I
think that the spaceport and and
Dawn and and scary counties we
need to come together on and and
resolved so we can get them on
their way well I hear you Mr
chairman but let me let me put
this from a different
perspective understanding each
of these entities you just
mention come at it from a
different place I think the
spaceport just wants to get
money get their funding Sierra
County is putting in a really
small amount of money relative
to Dona Ana County and as a Dona
ana county record you know
Representative and someone who
lived in voted on that tax that
was narrowly approved.
You know it's very clearly for
construction that was explicitly
the agreement I realize the
language of the law is a little
slippery where you can make a
legal argument but this is this
is really about fairness for the
citizens of Dona ana county and.
So I'll just say that out there
trying to as a marker that this
is something I really want to
work on to help bring some
resolution to end up go speaking
a county commissioner last night
and understand we don't hold all
the cards like we can say Hey
this is a very guys but we don't
hold the we don't hold those
cards we need this committee to
help understand that look at the
law and look at how clearly it
kind of points to construction
primarily and
You know.
That's why I'm asking this
question because I'd like to
bring that commitment to some
closure and for Dona Ana County
I think they're open to
continuing to provide support as
the bond requires but maybe.
Add value to frankly the whole
enterprise and a Dona ana county
rather than pay for operation so
I'll move on Mr chairman
Just real quick clarification on
the two million dollars for
tourism is that two million that
we're adding to the house to the
house numbers.
Yes Senator Steinborn for a
total of seven right okay I'm
sure in addition there are
recurring marketing
Appropration or.
Okay well I'll bring this up
tomorrow as well I just think if
we're the offer tourism of
course it's just that I know I
throughout plug earlier for some
language about relieving
cooperative marketing
responsibilities of smaller
communities and also requiring
that that money be spent around
the state I think that would be
some good budget language if
we're gonna start massively
increasing the spend
I know my community and I just
would like to see all of us see
that money sprinkled around a
little bit I realized marketing
you gotta go to some big markets
and that's not the way the
marketing strategy works but
I'll put that out there again as
we consider big investments
there.
And
It also continue to look into
the environment department
changes there as well.
Very much more thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Thanks thirty dollars you have
any questions.
Mr chairman thank you
just a couple maybe just more
for discussion on.
On page four a line twenty four
twenty five.
Under athletics for on you in
the The New Mexico State
University.
And we see the request to
million of one.
The I know that all they all
have shortfall.
So within that
Mr at B. L..
Other shortfall they'll have to
handle that eternally.
I'm sure I'm sure they'll have
to handle about Senator well of
the two have all a lot more much
more larger all of our fallen by
a hundred but the
Mr wells where the contact at
the department and they
estimated a shortfall two and a
half million so this helps but
it's sort of a drop in the
bucket given the destruction of
the pandemic to their
enterprise.
Okay very well then again also
time of the opportunity
scholarship so this would put
sixteen point four a phone new
funding correct.
The yes.
twenty one.
Senator the base recurring for
opportunities so this adds a
Levin to that hello sixty.
Sixteen point zero and then I in
as of the house did five million
for lottery the sense ten and a
half to that five million for a
total of fifteen point five for
lottery also and putting money
in lottery structures the
opportunity dollars.
very well then the other part
and.
I know the answer but I'll just
go ahead and ask on the
reference to the department of
transportation none of this
funding will be able to use for
a quick I'm not.
that's a good question because
It.
I guess my answer to that would
be the department is getting a
hundred and seventy million that
may use for these projects but I
think in general the legislators
want used for projects I know
the department budget was very
healthy it went over billion
they have a lot of money for but
but but because of the NMAA
language on these projects there
were additional equipment needs
over and above their operating
budget they have an opportunity
to because of the main language
to to use the hundred because
the appropriation yes to the
department of transportation so
I think some flexibility there
but you'd hope most of it what
to the projects I believe.
very well
That's something I can follow up
with the with the cabinet send a
wall of Mr chairman and David
all in reference to the request
of all that money because they
to hand on seniors that that's
still stay at one million the
increase above the LFC reckons
the million for the aging
network so there's no language I
know there was a request to make
direct
the increase to rates but they
have some other needs also
besides right so right now the
language is that there's a
million dollar increase above
LESC without wind which at this
point.
Is it right one okay.
May I have my my eight
illustrator Jorgensen tells me
that the bill as drafted does
allow users were quick but.
Okay very well.
All very need you know if you do
this at any of those yards you
can really see.
You know it's hard to expect
them to do the kind of work that
we one of the internal part that
the department does you know so
you know there is a need for.
Or at it but good equipment for
the department.
Mr chairman I'll go over it
again night and you know see
that thank you for the
opportunity to ask questions.
That would be it.
Thank you any other questions
from committee members.
So Senator Campos.
Well you're on but I'll
entertain a motion to adopt the
twenty two recurring pages four
five in a nonrecurring pages six
and seven and it appropriations
including fund transfers primary
language in bars on pages eight
and nine eleven what the final
approving a final approval
pending review of the language
sept Committee tomorrow and in
the road on page ten of the
federal stimulus are Page ten
and the federal service scenario
on page thirteen and my current.
Second.
We have a motion a second but by
doing that will give the staff
time to draft that clean up the
language stuff we've heard a lot
about tourism today we've heard
a few other little agencies and
and so we were gonna take those
into consideration and so maybe
we can fix those look language
and and figure out how we're
gonna do that so we have a
motion and a second so
Mr Mr Mr chairman sorry want to
comment on the motion.
Okay so by approving this which
is that create the the space
then to add in some additional
language or whatever Senator
Steinborn we're gonna look at
language in the subcommittee
which are on so you're gonna
have that review the language in
the subcommittee by doing this
all we're getting is prepared to
get house bill two drafted it's
not a final of what we're gonna
prove but we are House Bill to
takes a long time drafted we're
gonna make sure everything is
correct what changes that that
we're approving for review and
what is not the final approval
or reviewing this forgiving our
our approval for the interview
and begin drafting and and that
will send it on the way somebody
else mentioned some.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry at.
Just to clarify so we're gonna
get another vote on the final
package.
Senator Steinborn yes that's
what I said we're gonna they're
gonna this is not this is just
for what is not the final okay
thank you to make the motion for
us to review for them to begin
drafting ability big bill make
sure everything is correct
everything in the right place
thank you I'm good thanks we've
sent.
Mr Chairman Campos thank you Mr
chairman for the discussion on
them on the motion in terms of
the
Direct language for the A. C. F.
I want to make sure that as we.
You'll directly with the
contingency.
that there are those
stipulations because that's a
quite a bit of money and I'm
just a.
yes if David possibly you can
help me a little bit with the
ACF
is there a direct language in H.
B. to regarding
how those resources would be
expanded.
Mr Mr chairman that's what page
fourteen hours laying out it's
laying out bring more revenue
into that which is in the
general fund and then it's
laying out specific uses but
continue coming Mr chairman and
and a director happy and and and
I appreciate that and I
understand that so we know what
the specific uses are but within
that sometimes we do find that
maybe.
the definition is.
Stretched and I I'm just.
Your is in terms of the ACF
definition is any specifically
what those amounts are we gonna
have to insert language.
Better specify the use of those
resources
you know this is a really
unusual situation almost
unprecedented.
For the for this money to be
coming in at the tail end of the
appropriations process
hi I applaud the committee for
trying to get ahead of this and
preserve the legislature's
appropriation well by the same
time how can.
The bill hasn't even been
enacted here last Congress has
been signed up there are rules
that are coming secretary Romero
will tell you there's a
certainty about
how the treasury will interpret
the rules about of providing
services that were impaired by
lost revenue you know we went
through this last June special
session with the cares bill and
I I think LFC staff got ahead of
it and help the legislature
really do some forward thinking
but it's.
It's so are pretty hard to be
it's challenging to be more
specific than what is shown on
page thirteen just because of
the preliminary nature of the
revenue and not seeing the rules
and and where we are the session
so I'm not saying there can't be
some more specificity or
language ready to take that up
but part of what you're saying
your of page thirteen will kind
of reflects the timing problem.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
quite a few other questions but
I'm not going to belabor the
point right now with that is the
part of the the the question if
you haven't of course I want to
stay ahead of it as well so as
we move forward I'll be looking
very closely at the Exia.
Thank you very much.
thank you.
And then it seems like everybody
that calls attention with the
DFA and the board for that that
will argue that language and
make sure that we have a correct
and right and so revert to.
Your comments so we do have a
motion we do have a second we
call the roll.
Yes Mr chair correct clarified
Senator Candelaria make the
motion.
I seconded it I I made a motion
That second whatever whatever
whatever all at all at Senator
Gonzales second it's fine.
Senator Campos make a motion
thank you.
Senator okay Senator Burt yes
thank you very yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria yes Senator
Cappelletti yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator share yes.
Here yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods is not here six K. Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz.
Are you Sir that state that
sentiment LCS yes it's ten yes
and one no.
Excuse I'm sorry.
Thank you guys thank you David
again our appreciation to you
and they and Charles and all
your staff I I just.
We need to stand behind you we
as a legislature the
appropriating bodies and so
we're all we appreciate what
you're doing and all the hard
work especially with the new
federal dollars coming and we
made to make sure they get the
right place I also do want to
say you know what we did there
did some very hard work to move
the not withstanding language
which was very crucial we
thought as we move forward in
our budgeting process is we had
a lot of change this year so so
I appreciate that a change is
not easy especially when you
deal with this dollar amount so
I I do appreciate that weighing
in and to our staff and Senate
finance that thanks all the
questions and answers all the
answers and tries to accommodate
our Senate.
Legislators and our committee
members I appreciate them to
when we think so.
Thank you.
Senator Hamblen here with us
we're gonna try to get your bill
will done.
Senator but Representative my S.
this in in Representative
Martinez we may not get to that
because I know that's going to
be a long discussion I want to
make sure everybody understands
age you are one does how it's
how it's working hours
triggering so maybe we'll roll
that over for tomorrow and as
that some committee meets and
and get real time I I do want to
get to that so so are committee
understand all the moving parts
house gonna move how much funds
are gonna be drawn out so we can
roll you over tomorrow along
with Senator Representative
Smalls and get Senator Hamblen.
On her way to the Senate floor
we appreciate that and and will
notify you tomorrow.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sorry for keeping us center
Hamblen you are up.
Thank you Mr chair thank you so
much I am very excited about
this I appreciate the
opportunity.
For yes are we do have a
committee substitute under bill.
Yes Sir are well aware that so
do you want us to move the
committee substitute and you can
explain the bill yes yes sure
please do you know as a
committee set this to budget
right just remove your fund.
Yes Mister chair I know that
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Candelaria I would move the do
not pass on the Senate bill but
they do pass on the committee
substitute for purposes of
discussion.
That Mr Chairman.
Our motion is section the
discussion on the substitute
bill Senator Hamblen you wanted.
Discuss the substitute bill yes
Mr chair and I will be very
brief because I know that you
all been doing work that causes
my brain to explode but I'm so
glad that it's all of you that
wants to do this just to
summarize the healthy food
financing act and the sub
committee substitute that you
have before you
really what it does is it allows
the the healthy food financing
act to bring new federal money
into the state since our healthy
food financing initiatives that
are eligible for up to two
million dollars and what this
does is this provides
opportunities for rural
communities and communities of
color to have access to capital
loans small interest loans and
Kristin angular my expert we
will talk more about that but it
allows them access to that
capital so that they can grow
their own healthy food have
access to healthy food and also
create jobs I have Christian
Aguilar who is the executive co
executive director of lost in
the of food center on here also
to Davis who is the attorney
from the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty if those
questions need to be answered
but ultimately what the
committee sub did was it remove
the one hundred thousand dollars
appropriations and added a word
in their call for production on
page four section for the sub
set for production so that
farmers have access to those
funds as well that just in the
the number of grass was left out
and and it allows as I mentioned
it removes the one hundred
thousand dollars appropriations
that I requested because I put
one hundred thousand dollars of
my junior money to fund this
instead.
So if I may Mister chair if
there are any questions or would
you rather my experts be very
short and sweet and to the
point.
Shortens two point Senators you
can't you stand.
And better.
But I haven't had either so oh
my goodness okay I have a
feeling Mr Davis is fine with
stepping out agency Aguilar
would be more than happy to go
ahead and step and.
Thank you Mr chair members
committee I will just say we're
very excited to support this
bill and work to move this
forward to it really well
created really strong public
private partnership to get much
needed how much the mechanism
for philanthropic private
federal government dollars to
capitalize the community
investment vehicle in our state
and using the food and farm
systems as a tool to do that
allows us to not only look at
issues of poverty and economic
development but then also look
at things like hunger and health
outcomes as well directly said
when this when when a double
sided issues which is super
exciting and I will actually
leave it there I but I will be
happy to answer any questions
about the mechanism or how it
should function or any other
questions about the bill thank
you all Mr chair.
That's your only expert witness
we're gonna hear from I believe
so I I think Mr Davis knows that
miss U. R. can handle that we
also do have those Joanna Nelson
who is willing to from the
economic development department
who is willing to give a comment
because the junior money is
funded through economic
development department to go to
a CD FY which will is a
community development financial
institution and so if miss
Nelson wouldn't mind giving her
statement that she received
permission from Secretary keys
today that would be great Mr
chair.
We have any public comment on
this bill before we.
Yes Mr chair we do we have
several people who are ready to
make very short statements.
Okay.
Mr members the committee we
receive no opposition and and
see that and they all we did
receive at the price to speak in
support and.
First up we have at eight P. at
Robinson wiles.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today my name's Alicia
Robinson Welch and I'm speaking
on behalf of lack of set track
community supported agriculture
which is I'm an organization
we're focused on equity and food
access and we stand in full
support of this bill
and that is all I will say I
will pass that on thank you so
much for your time next we have
Pam Roy.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name's camera I'm
here representing the New Mexico
food and agriculture Policy
Council rocky mountain farmers
union and farm to table and we
ask the full support of this
committee for
this bill because there's a
couple of additional things
at in in addition to what ms I
would lead and shared and that
is that it would give the
opportunity for the state to
actually apply for two million
dollars annually from the
federal treasury in support of
these kinds of programs giving
and bring additional funding to
New Mexico that we don't have to
ask you four and it that we can
actually draw down from the
federal treasury so thank you
very much for your support and
we look for to the still moving
forward.
Next we have Rebecca Lambert L..
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca Romero and I'm a
registered dietitian and I'm
here on behalf of New Mexico
Academy nutrition dietetics
which is the largest
organization of food and
nutritional professionals we
stand in strong support of
Senate bill two twenty nine
which is in direct alignment of
our vision mission to promote
nutrition health and well being
for all New Mexicans we expect
the Senate bill two twenty nine
will lessen the disproportional
impact of nutrition related
chronic diseases underserved
populations thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and to all of the
sponsors.
Next we have support right now
pass.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak my name is
Secora Nefish and I am the
registered lobbyist for covenant
pathways which is a
demonstration farm so the Gallup
near Vander wagon New Mexico and
they combine
healthy soil practices with
traditional Navajo farming
practices and covenant pathway
stance and strong support.
Next we have Jamie Phillips.
Good evening chair members of
the committee thank you for your
time I'm extremely Phillips I am
with the growing health and
justice coalition where a group
of school and community garden
folk and this bill makes so much
sense for need teaching our
students to grow their own
gardens and farms to be able to.
Have a pathway into that with
and equitable lending program
and it's green in the pocket
screen in the field screen R.
sum next so thank you for for
here and please do support as we
do try to next we have you
called byrd .
I'm not New Mexico within no
downs.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for your time and energy my
name is Daniel Jones
representing the rebels Center
five one C. three non profit
organization and house Pueblo
and we're asking for your full
support and solidarity with us
and streamlining the process of
getting these funds from the
federal government to our rural
community so we can stand in
solidarity with farmers school
farm to table and really just
continue to be a demonstration
farm as well as a source of
produce and healthy food with
our community along with others
throughout the state of New
Mexico thank you again for your
support.
Next we have how the Garcia.
Hello Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Angad sada
and I'm the executive director
of the but due to cooperative
network a cooperative in network
of forty plus farmers throughout
the state of New Mexico the
state renewable regenerative
farmers working together to meet
the larger markets and keep our
produce and economic activity
local we are in full support of
the bill and we come together as
a collective of farmers to ask
for that support for Senate bill
two twenty nine thank you.
Next we have.
Share information.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members my name is Sharon Berman
and I'm a strategic civic
engagement a policy manager in
New Mexico first we strongly
support Senate bill two twenty
nine this bill is in alignment
with our initiatives in the area
of health food hunger
agricultural resilience and
community and economic
development it aligns with
recommendations at R. five
hundred percent how health town
hall last year calling for
policies to strengthen healthy
food systems and also the food
hunger Water Act policy
workgroup is a four hundred
member coalition and it chose to
lift up Senate bill two twenty
nine as one of its top policy
priorities when we invest in
local economic development to
effectively address need to New
Mexico and in doing so leverage
federal funding to bring in
resources to strengthen our
state it is truly a win win
situation.
Please vote in favor for this
bill thank you so much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
Thank you Senator sure you have
your hand up.
Yes Mr chairman I know that
you're anxious to go eat healthy
food but I do have a couple
questions here
So it's really about the the
anti donation clause where want
to start because it talks about
loans and grants.
Is this federal money or is the
state money because I don't
think we can grant St burning.
Mr chair and Senator sure thank
you so much for that question
this is where Tim Davis from New
Mexico Center along policy will
be able to come in and talk
because this is a conversation
that we've had Center share
before I wanted to make sure
that we can address that so date
ten if you can go ahead and
address the Senators question.
Sure thank you Mr chair Senator
share there's not an anti
donation clause issue here for
three reasons in the first is
one you've already mentioned is
that that there there was no
appropriation that we go to
grants in this bill the
committee sub pulled the
appropriation and that's now
junior money but the prior
version of the bill made clear
that the appropriation was for
the economic development
department used for planning
purposes and Administration
purposes but in addition to that
the courts have held repeatedly
The New Mexico courts out that
where there is consideration
there is no anti donate donation
calls issue here as you heard
there are areas in the state
that do not have healthy foods
healthy foods have a positive
health consequence and it will
provide positive health outcomes
to the people who benefit from
this program and that is
consideration to the state of
New Mexico in the last reason is
because.
There is an exception to the
anti donation clause for the
maintenance of second indigent
persons and here again because
of the vast health benefits that
flow from healthy foods.
You have the maintenance of sick
persons in New Mexico Supreme
Court has held that that extends
to the prevention of sickness
and in.
And so for those reasons there's
no intermission calls issue.
Okay thank you senator are you
a.
I don't know certainly the
consideration means that we're
essentially buying some state
and from the from whoever it is.
so I'm just not sure that that.
I don't I I doubt anybody's
going to sue you over but I do
think that that it is a bit
problematic let me ask another
question about the loan to the
loans going to go through any
kind of bank community bank or
any other kind of bankers are
just.
Economic development loan money.
Mister chairman Senator sure
thank you for that question is
angular can go ahead and answer
that question.
And thank you Mr chairman a
Senator the way we work really
closely with economic
development to make sure that
this act would create a
partnership between economic
development and the CDFI
community development financial
institute in order to tap into
the federal funds that open up
to million dollars a year to get
that money into the state and
because of you know past issues
the economic development have
talked about if they had to
administer and run and land the
entire program the way the bill
is set up allows it for
a partnership between economic
development here at the state
and the CDFI and other private
partners to make sure the
underwriting for those loans and
the capitalization and those
vehicles those financial
vehicles to get into the
community are done through the
CDFI itself in order to do that
and we talked for the at length
with economic development also
Senator CDFI is to support are
interested including during
spring much has a pretty diverse
and deep portfolio to be able to
do the type of underwriting that
a program like this would
require.
Okay.
So Mr chair Senator well on the
top of page five here talks
about applicants for the
following eligible projects very
first one is a new grocery store
for construction.
That that also seems a bit odd
to me so we're going to we're
gonna use of state money federal
money somebody's money besides
so many investors money to go
into competition with existing
grocery stores are in there are
you know natural grocers right
here in in farm gate there are
places that that work on of that
are going after the that healthy
food market
Do we really want to go into
competition with existing
stores.
We're going to competition.
Mr chair Senator chair I think
that the secular because of the
extensive experience less imia
has with different
collaborations and as you saw on
the public testimony the
collaborations from throughout
the state I believe the secular
can kind of clarify that
question for you.
Thank you Mr chair Senator share
one of the really important
pieces in the bill to is that in
order for any of the projects to
qualify they have to be serving
primarily low to moderate income
areas and areas that are
underserved which.
In of itself and that's based on
a USDA definition as well so
that means in of itself they're
they're not grocery stores in
that area already and the reason
which is one of the main reasons
for the bill and those federal
HFI funds are also directed this
way to so it lines up with that
so there's not too much of a
concern for unfair competition I
guess between ready existing
grocery stores which is really
the last thing we wanted you
because really the intent is to
get those food access points in
the communities that don't have
them a lot of rural communities
are losing grocery stores are of
lost they're small grocery
stores and it's also an issue in
some urban areas as well so
because of those requirements
that projects serve underserved
areas in low and moderate income
areas areas hopefully that won't
the intention is that won't be
an issue.
Okay and so I in the on this
whole grocery store issue
certainly there's a lot of small
town so of I'm related to to the
metropolis of Raleigh New Mexico
with all two hundred people
maybe if the census comes up
that high.
don't live there but have
relatives there of so their
grocery store closed I don't
know twenty years ago probably.
It closed because it's simply
what the market because it's
only two hundred people live
there is only about six hundred
eleven Harding County somewhere
around thirty thousand cals six
hundred people.
How do you even maintain a store
when you don't have a customer
base but but that that probably
one of the places that qualify.
Because they don't have a
grocery store today.
Absolutely.
One Representative Mister Mister
chair Mister Senator sure thank
you so much and I think it's
it's not just and and miss you I
will be able to explain it more
but it's not just about grocery
stores it's also about people
learning how to grow their own
food being able to provide food
for themselves but the secular
she can address that question
because she works with a lot of
those smaller communities
absolutely thank you senator Mr
chair us into share I also my
grandparents have a cabin mills
so I'm also very familiar with
Roy as well
and one of the really important
things I think this bill does is
extend it from not just focusing
on the grocery stores but to
look at the entire local food
and add value chain one of the
reasons that grocery stores in
your right don't that they don't
exist in some of the small towns
is lack of market or really
small margins that make it
really difficult for a small
business owner to be able to run
a business like a grocery store
so this is a couple of things
one is you're looking at the
entire local food value chain so
it's not only supporting grocery
stores but something like a
farmer's a farm stand a roadside
stand a farmers market the
actual production of local food
and agriculture I'm aggregation
and distribution to and the
reason we ask that was written
out was because we know New
Mexico and these rural towns
can't necessarily support a full
scale grocery store it just
doesn't make sense in a lot of
our rural areas so we wanted
this to be flexible and address
the needs and the needs
innovative solutions a lot of
our small communities are coming
up with to be able to address
that need for fresh and healthy
food and that these rural
communities or these underserved
communities and.
So we're really focusing on not
looking just a grocery stores
but beyond that as well.
All right thank you Mr chairman
and Senator miss you are I
appreciate all of that I can see
that our our chair is is this
just going out of his mind
because he needs some healthy
piece or something like that
thank you.
Thank you senator share Senator
Diamond you Mr chairman thank
you senator Hamlin for reading
this for first I want to tell
you that your passion you
present this I've watched you
present this bill and another
committee when you have a much
longer time to kind of go into
the details is encouraging on
this bill and I'm quick to want
to support anything that
promotes agro business and a New
Mexico I do believe that a
program just like this will
allow my underserved and rural
communities to multiply those
dollars to federal programs and
so we need more programs like
this in the state so that we can
tap into those federal dollars
I'm just real quick on the
discussion we were having I see
on here that we are are we are
defining our lowincome
communities as defined by USDA I
just want to make sure that that
Sierra County Luna County patada
county will be able to to
benefit from that so it's as low
and moderate income communities.
Determining matter we
determining factor EDD is at a
county level at at at at city
level how are we defining those.
Those areas I guess those
application areas Mr chair
Senator Diamond thank you very
much for that great question it
has been a.
I just before and some of the
other committees in the state
you are just a really great job
of explaining that.
Thank you Mr chair US senator
yes so.
Based on how the bill as
currently written it is based on
federal guidelines for
low and moderate income
communities
based on the most recent of
federal
census I believe so and because
it's low and moderate income the
it's both bad and good news that
the majority of New Mexico
qualifies right because of our
poverty outcomes and all of that
so
it is based on a federal
measurements of those poverty
guidelines for low and moderate
income
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator that kind of answered my
question I'm afraid we all
probably qualify for which is
the good news the bad news to
but thank you for this bill I
will be supporting and I
appreciate all your time.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator Diamond and thank you
for the connections that you've
had that you've been
instrumental in providing with
connections of other
collaborators potential
collaborators throughout the
state.
Rodriguez your next year we're
gonna be short because you're
right I would be between I guess
and did you and us well I'll be
quick thanks Senator Hamblen
thank you senator I know this is
been a very important that
program for you I and it was
very meaningful to establish is
fun because you you know that
it's going to have to do great
for the many people that need it
I'm just quickly going to
mention that this is really and
and then the group we feel we've
been doing as many as we can to
help people during this time
it's been clearly stated and
improvement that COVID has hit
the hardest in underserved low
income communities and so this
year goes hand in hand that's
another reason why it would not
I do not believe it's a
violation of the anti donation
clause because it would be
focusing it's just clearly here
on underserved low to moderate
income communities and so that
helps even four of five the fact
that that it would not be any
out in anti donations problems
but anyway then the fact that
you're gonna be leveraging
federal dollars with this is
huge I think we should take
advantage anywhere we can to
leverage additional funding
especially for something like
this so Mr Chairman I'm going to
move unless you have others I
don't see any others on the list
here and the that's a right at
this point unless you have
comments Mr chairman I am going
to move a do pass on the Senate
finance committee substitute for
that go to twenty nine.
That meant.
The motion by Senator Rodriguez
in the second by Senator Diamond
Sir hamon I I just appreciate
your compassion I mean as a
legislator in and how hard you
believe in this program and and
a lot of freshmen come in and
and make you do deliver and
you're showing compassion and
and I really appreciate that and
in what you believe that we call
the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes.
Yes Senator Burt yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales.
On that note
Senator Hemphill yes thank you
have to test Senator share yes
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods is excused Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Thank you.
Yes.
Can you just.
One excuse.
Regulations Senator Hamblen.
We can all go eat some home
grown potatoes and carrots
tonight you've got a home grown
steak and I mean and I'm sorry
to keep talking about food Mr
chair thank you so much thank
you to everybody who waited and
everybody who's testified I'm
just as hungry and revise steak
with some broccoli on the side
would be really good right now
so thank you Joanna Nelson from
the economic development
department as well and I'm very
and thank you all for your for
your consideration and support.
Twenty one.
Senator up what restaurant would
you be dining at finance
committee will be glad to join
you set your mind the state.
I don't know of a good state
place here we can give you a
list okay.
You are and and and Sam Davis
thank you as well thank you
great have a great night thank
you guys I do want to wrap up I
I did find out some information
on the spaceport so so Senator
Steinborn rose that they did
take that bond money and.
The general fund money and
operational money will get you
that dollar amount they did that
we gave them money for
infrastructure was used in that
way so they they converted that
to
operational money which I don't
think that authorized so that
may be another question we may
need to throw out the tourney
General whether the if they use
their their capital money to do
that so we need to make sure we
check on that I just want to get
Senator Steinborn an answer
about what's happened the
spaceport the subcommittee.
We'll meet tomorrow Senator
Candelaria you have a time you
think you guys want to get
together now Mr chairman what
I'd suggest is that like to
confer with you and the members
of the subcommittee tomorrow
morning as we can be on the
floor and figure out a good time
tomorrow and time or we can also
sit down with staff and get kind
of an in depth run through of
the proposal and the discussion
of this evening so we'll be in
touch in the morning.
Senator Candelaria we'll we'll
we'll try to get the the that
all wrapped up and get everybody
a copy I get a copy for you to
approve it and talk about and
and then go through those.
We don't know what our our floor
days are gonna look like and
just earlier the better that we
can do that senator Candelaria
that would help us quite a bit
so we.
Thank you guys I appreciate your
work and I appreciate each and
everyone on house bill two and
and how work through some of
your new LESC will be a long
process if you're on it but it
will be good committee for you
to learn about everything from
the chicken to the rain free
ranging chickens to the.
Medicaid Medicare and it's such
a wide variety and you begin to
understand how the budget is put
together and then Senator Campos
he's the head reserves so he'll
know what how to help you do the
budget process and thank you to
everyone here and and thank you
for your time and for your
commitment to the state because
let me tell you when I told my
wife I said you know that I'm
gonna get the chairman had sent
money it uses
the state is counting on you and
so on each in one of our
shoulders rest a portion of the
state that we care about and we
are state senators we care about
every corner in the state so as
members of finance committee
we're not just dealing with just
one sector we're doing with all
sectors so along with me the
state's prosperity and how we
operate and how we recover is
upon each and everyone of us and
Senate finance and I appreciate
your support is chairman and
everything we've done to get
there to get house bill two on
its way thank you have a good
evening everybody tech center
Hamblen she's got the credit
card and will give her the
location.
Thank you guys.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
