Yeah. You gotta join the mic.
Ah, Good afternoon, everybody.
My name is Adrian Neville. I'm
the chief of staff for Senate
finance. We have brought back
the large majority of our staff
from last year to start off. We
got Phelps Anderson, former
representative of the House. We
have
Carolyn Wolff, whose the Oh
you're presiding over the bar
association. So she's our legal
counsel and analyst
We haven't reached Chavez
Special Ed Middle School
educator we have in Indiana
Cisneros, bilingual coordinator
with an elementary
And then we have Elaine and I
can't remember your last name.
Marina who we are fortunate
enough to have stolen from the
house, Um, and who's a former
paralegal and used to work
within state government as well?
We also have on staff and he
will be here on Monday. He's
working remotely today. Justin
Garrow, who used to work for the
Environment Department and the
Department of Health.
And we also have SJ who's
somewhere around the building,
probably having lunch who has
been working with the municipal
league? So he has the experience
coming in from the counties and
with local government bodies.
And then we also have our
wonderful zoom operators over
here in the corner. Um, so we
got Rosemary and David and I
think that should be sorry.
And then we have Stephen, R
attendant.
Okay?
I think when Woods
um we'll have a glass of water
and all right. Thank you. I
guess we'll get started. Joey,
you're gonna start us off.
Chairman. Tell us how much money
we're going to get back. Printed
deposit slips for agencies so we
can pull that money back and
spend it in the General fund, so
they'll be available through
every senator up here.
Well, Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman. My name is Justice.
Simon I'm, a analyst with the
Legislative Finance Committee
And with me at the table here
today is Simon Miller with the
Department of Finance and
administration and we are going
to go over for you, the
executive recommendations for
special supplemental and
deficiency appropriations as
well as the LFC recommendations
for those items.
And you should have a packet.
Mr. Chairman looks front page
Looks like this. I'm just gonna
make a couple of high level
comments before we get into
great one second, Joe, are you
gonna put the presentation up
German? I don't believe we had a
presentation. We did have the
spreadsheet for for this, Um
But we didn't have a president.
Just make a note that that every
time we come, I think we called
today so we want to up on the
screens.
Kelly, spreadsheets,
spreadsheets and everything.
That way. Senator Rodriguez
doesn't steal my glasses.
Go ahead, Joey. So, Mr Chairman,
um
Just just just start us off just
some some high high level
overview of this special
supplementals and efficiency
recommendations if you turn to
the very last page of this
package marked page 31. You can
see that the total, uh for the
executive recommendation is
2.610 billion.
That includes 1.9 billion in
Section five specials.
388 million in supplemental and
efficiency appropriation and a
$250 million fund transfer as
well as ah 54.5 million from the
appropriation contingency funds
from balances that you all
transferred there from the
American Rescue Plan Act.
The LFC recommendation totals
2.752 billion, including 821
million in special
appropriations 123.5 million in
supplemental and deficiency
appropriations.
327 million from the Government
Accountability Trust.
And, um 1.41 0.5 billion in
total fund transfers. Um
So, uh, Mr Chairman, just as as
you will remember. During the
interim, there was a lot of
discussion with lfc on. How do
we deal with sort of midterm
revenues to spread out the
current windfalls of oil and gas
revenue as long as possible and
allow the
The Legislature to grow budgets
over time. So a major part of
the LFC recommendation was the
creation of this new government
Accountability Trust. So the, uh
that those appropriations live
within sort of this special
area. It's in the back of the
bill in Section nine. So what
you'll see as we go through?
This is 300 million in total
appropriations for agency pilot
programs spread out over four
years.
Allowing the certainty of
providing those pilot programs
with some funding over the short
term, but not immediately
building those balances into
agency operating budgets, where
it's harder to track and also
really focusing those first four
years of that of those new
programs.
On performance management and
evaluation of those programs so
that we're sure that we're
having positive impacts that
really matter for new Mexicans
when we're creating new programs
in the budget.
So, as I said there's 300
million in the LFC
recommendation for the new
Government Accountability Trust
that's in appropriations. In
addition, there's 663 million in
a transfer to the trust fund
that would provide you all the
ability to continue to make
those investments in future
legislative sessions, um, based
on agency requests
So on your bullets here, you can
see I've outlined a number of
those items for you. Those
include 127 million for the
Public Education Department for
various programs to address
workforce needs to provide
support for new educators
entering the classroom and to,
um um, deal with some of the
chronic vacancies in the area of
special education through
Um, through a pay incentives.
There's 80 million for the
higher Education Department to
support community college and
regional university workforce
programs.
As well as um, 20 million for
the early childhood department,
to develop and study wage and
career ladders for childcare
assistance programs.
There's 20 million for the
Healthcare Authority Department
to expand evidence based
behavioral health services.
There's a total of 19.9 million
among several different programs
for the Children, Youth and
Families Department to provide
evidence based prevention,
intervention and differential
response programs.
There's 12.5 million for the
aging and long term services
Department to study and
implement the New Mexico
program.
There's 10.4 million for the
Workforce Solutions Department
for programs designed to keep
young, uh young adults not in
high school engaged in the in
the workforce. There's 6.5
million for the Office of Family
representation and Advocacy, um,
to evaluate outcomes for youth
that are either in the custody
of the Children, Youth and
Families Department or to at
risk of being in custody of the
Children, Youth and Family
Department.
Two and $2 million from New
Mexico Tech for geothermal
resource development and $2
million for Santa Fe Community
College for suicide prevention
training programs. So those are
that's a brief rundown of those
big Government accountability
trust programs that are part of
the LFC recommendation.
As I mentioned before.
Additionally, there's other fund
transfers that are designed to
take some of that one time money
and
And designated for future use.
That includes $300 million to
fully capitalize the
Conservation Legacy Permanent
Fund Fund, which would provide a
stable revenue sources for those
conservation programs into the
future. There's also some some
other
Fund transfers that we can go
into more detail later. But just
with that overview, Mr Chairman,
I will hand it over to Simon for
quick overview of the executive
wreck.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um again. My name is
Simon Miller. And I'm an analyst
with D. F a
Ah today, Joey and I are going
to go over some of the biggest
Differences in the non recurring
recommendations, as Joey said
the executive recommends a
larger portion of the non
recurring requests and in the
spreadsheet there over 300
items. There are certain areas
of government. I know better
than others. Um, there are
people from agencies all around
the state here to potentially
answer answer questions that we
may not know. And you also get
another crack at this when
Agencies come before you for
their budget hearings. Um
So just wanted to
Be up front with that we'll do
our best.
So, Mr Chairman, if you if you
wanna start on Page three, we
can go through this sort of page
by page addressing some of the
major differences and taking
your questions as we go.
Okay, Well, uh, that that works
will start off just then with
the courts, which are all on
page three through line nine
major difference here. There's a
There's actually a, uh
Alignment of strategy. So, uh,
bunch of the court request were
spread out through a bunch of
different requests and both the
executive recommendation in the
LFC recommendation proposed
essentially combining those into
a single appropriation to the
administration. Administrative
Office of the Courts. Um and
Ah and going from there, so
there's 10 million in the
executive recommendation for
court vehicle security and
technology. That's somewhat
similar. It's not. It's not
quite as broad as online four,
while you see the LFC
recommendation of $2 million for
technology projects
Um, there's a in addition to
that. I will just point out the
Berlin Bergoglio Metro court was
was broken out in the LFC wreck.
You can see that down on online
number eight for technology and
line number seven for
facilities.
Simon.
Um, Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. No additional
comments on this page, so it's
sort of beginning on Page three.
Mr Chairman, and, uh, going on
to page four. We have, um, the
attorney general. Uh, so the LFC
recommendation includes $1.5
million for a crime gun. Intel
Intelligence Center Pilot
program with an appropriation
from the Consumer settlement
fund.
And, uh, on the next page,
another initiative of the
attorney general, you can see
the forensic genetic testing the
L C. Recommendation of 400,000
differs a little bit from the
executive recommendation that
that comes from the consumer
settlement fund as well, whereas
the executive recommendations
from the General fund
Um, moving. Moving on Mr. Chair.
I went to the Taxation and
Revenue department. I went up
just point out one of these, um,
one of the bigger, bigger ones
on your list here line 23.
There's a $3 million
recommendation from the
executive for, um, to to allow
the department to implement
Ah!
Any legislative changes. The LFC
recommendation does include some
language allowing the Taxation
and revenue Department with the
authorization of the Board of
Finance. Um the Taxation and
Revenue Department would need to
submit a plan to the border
fight and they would need to
approve it before they could get
access to
Ah, money from the appropriation
contingency fund. That's a
language only It's not on this
list, but but you'll see when
you address your language, only,
um, items you had a question.
Mr Terror.
When we go, Okay At the end, I
can get it now, Since we're past
it.
Joey, You wanna stop right
there? We can stop right there
for questions.
So, Mr Chair. I want to go all
the way back to the first page
line. 13 excellent.
That's the first question I
have. So it's for a crime Gun
Intelligence Center pilot
program. What does that mean?
Uh So, um, Mr Chairman, and, uh,
Senator that was a request of
the attorney General's office.
Um, I don't know if we have
anyone here from the attorney
general who can
Good explain what that was. And
I don't see our analysts
Sorry. Sitting in the back.
And did the didn't did not the D
A. In Albuquerque, Albuquerque.
Here. The state police request
the same thing.
Mr Chairman, Senator. To my
knowledge, This is the only
special that is in regards to
this forensic gun lab. And so
this would be a pilot program
that is already in addition to
other crime labs, But this would
be one housed within the
attorney general's office so it
wouldn't be with other DPS
operatives. It would just be
with the attorney general. So Mr
Chaired is that a
Guess what you just asked. Is
that a duplicate?
GPS need one and the attorney
general need one in the city of
Albuquerque. Need one and
destroy need one.
Senator to my knowledge. Um, the
DPS already has a forensic lab.
This would be in addition to
that, and this would be housed
entirely within the Attorney
General's office. When it comes
to the other departments. I
don't know if I can fully answer
your question. I apologize.
Simon, you raise your eyebrows.
Um, Mr Chair. That was
unintentional.
I
thought you were going to
conflict and what he said. So
that's why
Well, Mr Tariff, It's
If it's something different,
maybe, But if it's something the
same then why and then on line
number 15
litigation for the tobacco
master settlement agreement. I
thought we'd done did that.
Mr Chairman, Senator, this is
the continued litigation for
this, so this is just continuing
this litigation That's not
finished yet. So this is
continued funds for that. It's
not finished.
Okay, so we're asking for 600.
$1000. What are we getting out
of that settlement?
I mean, we're paying more for it
than we're getting.
Mr Chairman, Senator, I don't
have that knowledge with me
right now. But I can get you
that knowledge later.
Alright. Alright. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Charles, We happen to know what
the settlement looks like for
that.
Tobacco.
Five line five.
Mr Chairman.
For the tobacco. There's ongoing
um
Review of whether the state has
complying with the settlement.
Um correctly and they're going
back.
Years, um and litigate and still
litigating that, In fact, this
Last spring as determined that
state was not in compliance with
something here's and years and
years ago in the tobacco
settlement payments that came
into the state got clipped as a
penalty. Um and that's been a
It's an ongoing
Um, issue for the state.
Mr Chairman.
Okay?
Anybody else?
Go ahead, Joey or Simon?
Whoever's next So, Yeah, Mr.
Chairman, I might just hand it
over to Simon to talk about some
of the, uh, our executive
recommendations for the
Department of Finance and
Administration. Mr. Chair.
Members of the Committee. Uh, so
turning your attention to line
17 for the state auditor for
virtual server infrastructure.
That amount was just
Uh, funded through a board of
Finance. Grant. Um so that saves
you 143,000 right there.
Um
Moving on to line
25
Or sorry line 24.
In combination with wine 35.
These are both
Appropriations or sorry
recommendations related to
affordable housing that are in
the executive recommendation.
250 million for the Housing
Trust fund at the Mortgage
Finance Authority, and then
another 250 million for the
Opportunity Enterprise Fund at
the New Mexico Finance at the
wordy
Um
And those those are obviously
two of the biggest
recommendations within the
executives non recurring
recommendation list executive
also includes online 36 $40
million to expand, UM, services
for those experiencing
homelessness. So, um, I just
wanted to touch on all three of
those together since they're all
Related to housing.
And then line 27.
In combination with line 37.
You'll see. Those are two
Recommendations of 35 million
for, um, line force mint
recruitment as well as
firefighter recruitment, so this
funding is used to assist local
departments statewide to hire
new police officers and new
firefighters. The Legislature
appropriated. Um I believe
50 million last year and 57
million the year before for this
same purpose, not for
firefighters, but for, um
Uh, police officers and D F A is
distributing that funding to
local law enforcement entities
statewide over a three year
period.
The funding pays for 100% of the
salaries for a certain number of
officers in year one, which then
tapers off in year two and year
three. As these local entities
build those positions into their
own budget.
Um, So if appropriated, VFA
plans to distribute this funding
in the same manner going
forward, Uh except for this
time, there's a $35 million
recommendation for police
officers and then also a $35
million recommendation for
firefighter recruitment.
And with that I will turn it
back over to Joey.
Oh, it's sorry. Yeah, now moving
on to the next page Page five.
Um
Line 28 at the top. There,
you'll see $100 Million
recommendation from the
executive and $20 Million from
the lfc for, uh, matching
assistance.
Um
I just like to point out that
the executive had a bit broader
language than the language you
see in front of you there.
Ah, the executive language, um,
opens up this funding to state,
tribal and local entities, um,
for matching assistance, and
it's also through, uh, year
fiscal year. 2026 so expenditure
over the next two fiscal years.
Um, so I just wanted to point
out that language difference
there.
And with that now I will turn it
back over to Joey.
So, Mr Chairman, just just a
couple of the LFC recommendation
Items just talked about line 28
that that 20 million for
matching assistance Also point
out online 32 the 58 million for
matching funds for local
infrastructure projects.
Simon talked about, you know,
big. They recommendation from
the executive for Housing,
You'll see $10 million here in
the LFC recommendation, but I
just want to point out and we'll
see this later down. There is
some more money in the fund
transfers for housing programs
that we will we'll see later on
in the
In the bell. Also point out
line, 29 $50 million to regional
recreation centers and quality
of life grants. It's been a
pretty popular program. A lot of
Local governments have have
applied for those in this would
provide additional funding to
continue that program.
And with that we can take any
questions on D F a Mr Chair.
Yeah. Thank you. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. So on
the item on housing the 250
million for
The opportunity Enterprise Act,
Mr Chair, so that is going to be
contingent on some additional
language, And I think I either
I'm gonna do it or
representative Dixon. We're
going to do it together to make
it permissible for housing
because currently, that
Opportunity Enterprise Act is
not. It's not. It's not
permissible for housing. It's
only for commercial use or
whatever. So so that will have
to happen in order for that 250
million to be usable, I guess or
whatever. So I just want to make
mention of that.
You know if any others had any
comments? Don't ask her about
how they're okay. Senator
Steinberg. Thank you, Mr Chair
of a few questions on
Hey, line 37 Correction Fund.
So
I believe this has been somewhat
successful in dire need out New
Mexico and I'm curious for the
LSC. We did not recommend any
money for that this year again.
At least in this chart. Seeing
that so, um so, Mr Chairman and
Senator, uh, that was so a lot
of these. The LFC
recommendations were based on
agency requests believe that one
was one That was not an agency
request. That was added in in
the executive budget. Um so that
that's one of the reasons not
which is understandable, Mr
Chair from the standpoint of
these are going to non state
agencies. These are going to
local government, so I don't
know who the
Question entity would be. It's
the Mexico communities.
So anyway, I'm just curious if
it's been an effective program.
Obviously, we know there's a
need out there. We're hearing
that from our constituents.
I was just curious What lfc
position on. That was because
There is a goose egg there now
so and Mr Mr Chairman and
Senator, I I don't think that
the fact that there's there's
nothing there means that the LFC
is necessarily opposed to it.
It's just it wasn't one of the
agency requested. So that's why
it didn't make it to the LFC
recommendation. It might, it
might have had we
Reviewed it as part of the
budget. I can't say that for
certain, but okay, Thank you, Mr
Chairman. If it's been
effective, I just think that's
the kind of thing we should
probably look at continuing. Um
and then I see that we have a
similar amount for firefighters,
and I wonder if there is a
parody really there in terms of
need for firefighters, as there
is for for for other law
enforcement, but that's kind of
we can go more into the weeds At
some point, perhaps where you
all can look at that, and let us
know really where the needs are.
And I just want to ask a
question about line 29 the
regional recreation centers with
someone Give me a list. Please.
Of what? Who has gotten grants
from that. I know this like the
third year we've done that. I'm
just kinda curious where that
money is gone.
Mr Chairman and senator of the
Department of Finance and
Administration just last week.
Um, well, maybe we might have
had one before, but we got a new
one last week. And so we can
give that to you would be great
I had was chair. Thank you.
Senator Woods.
On Mr Chair on number 33.
I, uh
I actually have a bill that
talks about putting money into
some regional or some small
hospital districts, and I was
told in that
That better be watching out for
the anti donation clause in
that?
So tell me explain to me what
you have going here.
On 33.
Uh, um, Mr Chair. Uh, Senator.
Uh, I'll have to follow up with
you on that. Um I don't know the
answer Your answer.
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods. So
this appropriation here is from,
um some
Some Arizona Ireland when we
were doing the tax certificates,
um for that area, and so we're
just making normally whole, um,
with this appropriation. This is
a public hospital, so there's no
issues with anti donation on
this particular.
When you say a public hospital
does that mean that it is
completely operated?
Within itself.
It doesn't have a operating
entity that manages it. What do
you mean by
Public, Mr Chairman, Senator
Woods on their special hospital
district in statutes so they're
able to receive funds.
As a special hospital district.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator
share
So, Mr Chair.
I'm looking at a number line
number 36 statewide homeless
initiatives.
What would that mean? What does
that look like?
Um, Mr Chair, Senator, Um
Services for those experiencing
homelessness. Um, I don't have
any more detail in front of me
on that, but happy to follow up
with the program manager to get
you more information. I am very
curious. What
$40 million solves the problem.
Yeah.
But if it just
You know by somebody attempt and
that's no good.
So thank you. Mr shared to that
point If I may, Um again, here's
another instance where it says
statewide homelessness.
So I'm curious as to how the
money is distributed in it is
truly statewide.
Or is it going into certain
pockets of the communities
within the Rio Grande Valley?
Or, um,
Is it going to Native Americans?
I'd like to know where this
money is designated to go and
who will facilitate that on more
of a local basis.
If someone is somebody local is
going to control that money.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. I well, I just
Tell him I'm looking hard at the
big numbers, the statewide water
and probably going to need a
bill or something.
For that, because
Not just gonna give the exact
$250 million to spend any way
they want. I want
Something statutorily required
what they're going to have to do
to get the 250 or the 500
million out over a two year
period. And then my correct,
Joey and in this is that they
did short term bonding to get to
this number, so it's sponge
bonding at a higher rate than
Mr Chairman. I don't know the
answer that question, but I'll
find out from our economists.
All right, well,
Adrian discovered that, okay?
Go ahead, I think And then, uh,
For the, uh
I know, they added.
Added corrections.
But the the prior year before
when we did police recruitment
and retention.
There was no guidelines in it
all throughout the door, and it
was kind of messy, and then we
came back and did it again.
Do you know what the balances
are? And I know there was a bill
last year. So if we're gonna do
that, for firefighters and
Them. I think we're gonna need a
bill to do that, too. So we
don't just
Miss that people don't miss out
on the appropriations. So
there's some guidelines that we
have that
He was going to start us back. I
can I can start us back on the
General Services Department. Mr.
Chairman, I'm actually gonna
flip the page over to, uh, Page
six and talk about line 40. So
there's $55 million here for
healthcare costs, including the
costs related to the testing and
treatment of the coronavirus
disease.
Ah, as you can see from the
language there that
recommendation is from the
appropriation contingency funds
for the From those are the funds
that were transferred there by
the Legislature. Um
And, uh,
So you'll you'll see nothing in
uh, the executive recommendation
for, uh, Section five. But you
will see some some in Section
six for the healthcare issue.
Simon. Did you have anything on?
Um Mr Chair? Members of the
committee, turning your
attention to line number 49.
Uh, for the tourism department,
you'll see a $2 million
recommendation from the
executive for State Agency
marketing campaigns through the
New Marketing Excellence Bureau,
which was created by uh Senate
Bill 377. I believe last
session.
Um and that is all that I have
on that page.
So back to Joey.
And Mr Chairman, I think what we
could stand for questions for,
um for the tourism department.
General services, and and
actually, we did. We did skip
over Mr Chairman line. 45 missed
it. So there's $25 million here
for broadband. Um, $42 million
in the exact executive
recommendation, so that would
supplement pretty significant
amounts coming in from the
federal government to build out.
Uh, broadband access.
And I don't know if Simon has
anything on that. But, yeah, Mr.
Chair members of the committee,
the 42 Million in the executive
recommendation, which serve as
matching funds. Um, the office
of broadband access and
expansion. Uh, has several $100
million
And
Ah!
That federal funding as well,
Um, so that's That's why both
recommendations are
significantly lower than what
the request came in at, so it's
42 million in the executive
recommendation in 25 million in
the LFC.
Okay?
Mr Chairman, if you want to turn
over the next page two, page
seven. Simon, do you have
anything on the Economic
development Department? Yes, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee,
Um, looking at line 58. This is
the leader program.
Um, the executive has a $25
million recommendation and the
lfc uh, you'll see is zero
there.
Lead on
Has spent between 30 40 million
the last three fiscal years.
Ah, the department is projecting
a year end balance of about 18
million
So without additional funds,
they would have 18 million
available next year, which would
be a pretty significant cut to
that program from the prior
three fiscal years. So that's
why the executive recommendation
as a $25 million infusion into
that fund, then
Uh um.
Uh, on line 53 Excuse me line
54.
Um, you'll see a $1 million
recommendation from the
executive for the Healthy Food
Financing Initiative, so this
has been funded as part of the
governor's Food and hunger
initiative. The last two years.
the funding has been used in a
variety of ways as a financial
incentive to improve access to
fresh and healthy food options
and food deserts.
The department has indicated
that federal matching funds
Could become available if the
state demonstrates consistent
financial commitment to this
initiative. So the executive
recommendation has, uh, $1
million to fund the third year
of this program, and the LFC
recommendation you'll see is is
zero there.
Um, line 59 that is for the
media academy.
The executive recommendation has
a $4 million has $4 million for
operations and management of the
media Academy through fiscal
year. 2026. The department is,
uh, has indicated that in a few
years, um the media Academy will
hopefully be, uh
Self sustaining.
So this $4 million is for
start up funding for a couple of
years and that again lfc
recommendation There is zero
And so I Mr. Chair. I'll turn it
back to you. If if. Are there
any questions for, um, economic
development? Steinberg did you
notice 52? That's what I was
gonna comment on. Thank you. You
know me? Well, you know me.
Well, Mr Chairman, um, this This
is what we talked about
yesterday for the that secretary
Props said the administration
supports anti litter campaign as
being fairly crucial.
So this language here, which we
spoke about before this
committee meeting also spoke
with the African tourism
secretary probably need some
specification that
That you know, a certain
percentage will go towards that
campaign and not just
You know?
Beautification.
So I just want to flag up Mr
Chair. That's an issue for the
language committee.
Thank you very much, So I have
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'd like
to go back to GSD line. 39.
We're giving him $2 million to
purchase vehicles. I assume that
after the mandate, all of those
state vehicles will be electric.
So, Mr Chairman and Senator
there, there is exceptions in
the executive order for certain
types of vehicles. Heavy
vehicles. For example,
Department of transportation
some of their vehicles, it's not
appropriate for them to be
electric. So the executive order
you're correct would apply to
anything that doesn't fall under
that heavy vehicle.
Exception.
That's what I'll be
electrically. Mr shared beat
inappropriate vehicles enrolling
in Mexico as well. I agree with
that. Let's move on to, um, line
48 is a little bit confusing
because online 47 to tourism.
We're giving him $2.5 million
for route 66.
Ah marketing and tourism because
we can meet with the federal
grants but then online 48
Dry. Read that correctly. We're
giving 15 million
Four to increase route 66
tourism and for the 100th
anniversary of the Zobar or are
we burning? That $15 million Mr
Chairman and Senator? No. So
this is this is an area where
the language doesn't necessarily
always aligned with, um We tried
to save space where possible,
both
Lfc and the executive have $15
million in their recommendation
for marketing activities, the
language in the LFC
recommendation expands that to
encompass the route 66 and those
obra items.
That's not in the executive
recommendation, which is why
they've they've got a separate
recommendation on line 47 for
2.5 million
Um so
The executive recommendation for
line 48 is just simply for
national marketing and
advertising period. Thank you,
Mr Chart. I'd like to clean that
language up just so that that's
clear When we go in, I
understand and I support
tourism. I think they do a great
job marketing nationally, but to
to put to put language that
specific is a little scary. Um
Moving on to line 53.
Could you explain to me who the
recipients of that 20 million
Grant?
$20 million Grant would be
Just an example. Um, Mr Chair
members of the Committee,
Senator Brantley. There's a
Uh, right now.
Uh, the Space Valley coalition
is New Mexico's applicant for a
big federal award. Think the
federal award is like $160
million over the next 10 years.
Um, it's it's through the
national science. Uh, I'm gonna
butcher it, but it's a regional
innovation.
Engine. Granted, I believe is
what it's called, Um and so the
New Mexico applicant like I
said, as New Mexico Space Valley
Coalition, and I think they're
one of about 16 finalists and,
uh, about four or five of those
finalists will receive the
award. And so this 20 million
here is to serve as matching
funds.
We're hoping to find out by the
end of the calendar year, but
that didn't happen. So hopefully
we'll find out soon. Thank you,
Mr Chair who is the what's the
Space Valley Coalition, The New
Mexico Space Valley Coalition
is, uh uh, conglomerate of
public and private partners who
submitted the application. Um, I
think if someone's here from the
economic Development Department,
they'd probably be a right
behind you, Joey. I mean, Simon
Mark.
Thank you, Simon. Mr. Chair. Uh,
Senator Brantley, members of the
Committee. I'm Mark Roper, the
acting direct secretary for
economic development. The NSF
Grant is for $160 million and it
is part of the space coalition.
It is a combination of those
involved in the space industry
in the in the Albuquerque area.
And including those involved in
the air. Pharrell, uh, as well
as Kirtland Air Force base, as
well as private sector.
Uh, parties involved in the
space industry in the
Albuquerque region.
They are a finalist. Uh, as
Simon mentioned, we anticipated
having the answer by the end of
the year.
Ah, it has not happened yet, but
we're hopeful that we'll hear
any day. But there's 20 million
will get us 100 and $60 million
Thank you, Mr Chair. That's a
lot of money. But the return on
that is certainly certainly
pretty good. In fact, maybe you
can help us fix the roof at
spaceport pitching towards that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
That might be more important
than getting grant money. Who's
gonna take us off again? Joey or
Simon? Do you want
You have anything on the next
page R l D R L D If you want to
start with already.
Okay, Mr. Chair members of the
committee.
Um, turning to page
Uh um.
Turning to Page eight.
Ah, um
We've got line 71.
For risk focused financial
analysis services through fiscal
year 2026. This funding is to
help the office of the
superintendent of insurance
maintain its accreditation. Um
I believe that there's funding
in the LFC recommendation in
Section six for this item.
Um
As as well as Section five. It
looks a little confusing there
because on the right side,
you'll see it says, uh,
Uh, under total 2.1 million for
the LFC recommendation, but it's
not filled in in the
Either General fund or other
funds call them. I don't know
which it's other state funds.
Other state funds, um
So the executive has a special
of 2.5 million there to go cover
several years, whereas the LFC
recommendation has a special
But then also a supplemental in
Section six for this same
purpose, so you'll see funding
in both spots.
Um, line 76 for the Cultural
Affairs Department. One big
difference here is the executive
recommendation has 10 million
for the Rural Libraries
Endowment Fund, and, um, the
recommendation there from the
LFC zero
I believe that
Covers the biggest differences
on that page. Unless Joey wants
to talk about something else.
you talked about the S I one.
Let me let me ask you real
quickly online, 17. Why did not
the exact increased the staffing
for offices Superintendent
When we were going to lose our
accreditation in that agency.
Uh, Mr Mr Chair? Um, the
executive recommendation does
have additional funding in the
operating budget for the
following fiscal year, Um, for
hiring or for appropriate
placement. Um
In addition to the special
appropriation of 2.5 million
for, um
To assist in those efforts, so
Well, that's in specials.
Yes, that that would be for
Contractual services. Um
I don't know if you know this
but me and represented small had
to write a lead letter to the
feds.
So we went lose our
accreditation.
And had almost guarantee that
the feds that we would place
that money in there.
When he wrote that letter, and I
just don't know why they exactly
want to put that at risk and
Not fun.
It, Mr. Chair? Uh, there there
is a not responsible Simon.
There's a budget increase in the
FY 25 recommendation. Um, the
agency also has 5% Bar authority
because they're mostly, um, Non
general fund, so there is
funding there.
For them to be able to
implement.
Actions is needed personnel
actions and to hire
So, Charles, Why didn't the
agency just borrow the money to
hire those employees when the
Fed sent notice?
We know
I think
I don't know if I see the
director of insurance in here.
Here in here.
The authority, um may not have
been large enough to accommodate
this level of spending need that
they've proposed Mr Chairman.
there. 5% authority may not have
given them the equivalent of
those amounts that they sought
from both the committee and the
executive.
Okay, But this is an area I
think that will wanna
Double check on before the train
leaves the station to make sure
she is properly funded to do
what it needs to do, including
the cybersecurity issues of
whether that needs to be and
what the cost is.
What they need going forward.
What they need to recover and
what role do it needs to play in
either having the money to
oversee it, or building that
into the inside budget.
Okay?
Joey. Hmm.
Uh,
So, Mr Chairman, I believe now
we're on Page nine with the
energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department.
So as you can see on, uh, line
83. There is a LFC
recommendation for $2.5 million
for inspection and compliance
backlogs for the oil
conservation division.
Um
Hmm.
But I'll but I'll just turn it
over Simon to talk about the
executive recommendation. Mr
Chair members of the committee,
The biggest difference on this
page here is line 80 for the
executive recommendation has
20 million to serve as a
financing option for the
development, adoption and
implementation of climate
friendly energy technologies for
both both residential and
commercial customers to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and
other pollutants.
Um, and the LFC recommendation
is zero there so that that is a
big difference in the two
recommendations.
Keep going.
Go ahead. You interpret state
engineer Mr Chair members of the
committee turning to the next
page page 10 line 87. There's a
big difference there for, um,
Indian water rights settlements,
The executive recommendation has
35 million. The LFC
recommendation has 5 million. Um
And then on lines, 89 and 90.
You'll see the executive
recommendation has 5 million for
the Irrigation Works
Construction fund and 2 million
for the, uh, Rio Grande Income
Fund. Those funds have been
dwindling over time they were
used to supplement the agencies
operating budget. Over the last,
Um
In a decade or so, maybe longer,
So, uh, the executive
recommendation has some funding
there to replenish those funds.
Um
And then moving on to
The C E c, D, um
And really throughout all of the
next few pages there. Uh uh, are
many differences in the health
and human services agencies? Um
For non recurring
appropriations. This is not an
area of government that is my
expertise, but you'll see
throughout that, uh there are a
lot of differences and so as
part of the hearings coming up,
I'm sure that Cabinet
secretaries um we'll be able to
answer questions about all sorts
of the different non recurring
differences there.
Um so I'll hand it back to Joey.
Yeah, And so, Mr Chairman, I
just go back to you know Simon's
comments on some of the
differences in health and human
services areas. Uh, as I said at
the beginning of my comments,
health and human services was a
major focus of the Government
Accountability Trust programs,
letting agencies build those
programs building in an
evaluation component into there
and, um
Coming back before adding that
to the operating budget so
again, we'll see them again down
the list. But there are, um,
recommendations for a lot of
these agencies in the Government
Accountability Trust.
And Mr Chair turning to the next
page page 11
some of the biggest. This is
still health and human services
and some of the biggest
differences here are executive
has 5 million for the Kiki
Survey, address. Senior Dignity
Dignity fund online, 98.
The executive also has
5 million for emergency
assistance to food banks. That's
line 102.
And the executive has, uh, 17
million online 106.
Um
For enhancements to, uh
The automated systems capacity
for Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance program initiatives,
and that's a big difference.
There's a $17 million
recommendation from the
executive
Um and line 105 $2 million for
the Healthcare Receivership
fund.
Julie.
Line 106 was that the
prescription vegetables
Uh, changed.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Um, no. The
prescription vegetables is of,
uh, that's not what it's called.
It's uhh close to that. That's
what you guys called it. Ohh!
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Um, no. The
prescription vegetables is of,
uh, that's not what it's called.
It's uhh close to that. That's
what you guys called it. Ohh.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Um, no. The
prescription vegetables is of,
uh, that's not what it's called.
It's uhh close to that. That's
what you guys called it. Ohh!
You'll see it online. Um 1 16 1
16. That's a $500,000
recommendation from the
executive, Um
So a different different item.
So what is this one Do
And you may not know but
Um, Mr Chair? Uh,
Yeah, I apologize. I wish I
knew. Um, but I would defer to
someone from the agency that's
here.
Um
Prescriptions movie.
Really 106.
No, no. Six.
Yes. So this is for real time
Eligibility for supplemental
Nutrition Assistance program.
So what That means is people can
apply.
And they can get their benefits
immediately without a person
having to touch it. So we would
use all our interfaces and
whatnot in order to determine
their eligibility Instant and is
that program already in place?
It's in place for Medicaid, but
not for snap.
Michaela.
To answer that, instead of
whispering in his ear, Mr Chair
I was just gonna Joey was asking
me if this should have been a C
two or an appropriation, And
it's for Aspen, which is an
existing system that
Does all the eligibility for
Medicaid snap things like most
of the income support programs,
So it's an existing system. I
just needed some modifications
in the executives view.
There's Steinberg, You have a
question. You see, Same page Oh,
I'm sweet Page nine that we are
right back. Page nine. Thank
you. Mr Chair. Page nine. Is
there Is there anyone here from
M Nerd? I know Toby's here and
I'm sorry to put you on the
spot, Toby.
Deputies right there. Yeah,
about the Rio Grande Trail
Commission office. So, you know,
I'm a huge proponent of creating
the real grand trail. I think it
would be just one of the most
amazing popular catalytic things
in the state were to do it. But,
um, hasn't had a lot of success.
The commission and the Energy
Minerals Department. We had a
bill to move it to economic
development in the outdoor
division, which we're excited.
Bill got vetoed.
So I'm just wondering, you know,
Now we're proposing to create a
real Grand Trail Commission
office at M Nerd, and I just am
curious. What are we going to
do? Different if we give this
money to you all to do this? We
haven't been successful with the
money we've already been given
to you thus far every year, Um
Mr Chair. Uh,
Senator on on that particular
item. That proposal was not
actually in the in in the table,
and the proposal was not to
create an office but provide
some funding to support the work
of the commission funding. That
wasn't wasn't dissipated by the
outdoor rec office if the
transition had occurred in sort
of other components to do to
continue and for eminent to take
on
Some of the work that outdoor
rec has been supporting related
to trail segment delineation
designation and and and other
components like that.
Hey, Mr Chair. I'm sorry. That
doesn't answer that answers it,
But just not sufficiently. I
mean, we give 100,000 recurring
money to the outdoor division
right now to actually plan and
do the boots on the ground work
to stitch together segments,
which, um, and they're actually
doing the work because M nerd
wasn't
We already give 75,000 year and
half for years since the
beginning to the commission, and
we can't even successfully call
a meeting. So I guess if you
give more money
To just support the commission,
which is not being functioned.
That doesn't cut it, and we
don't need to duplicate outdoor
Iraq is doing because we're
giving them $100,000 a year in
recurring money. They currently
have a contract with someone
doing excellent work, So I want
to hear how this is additive,
and this is going to actually
move this project forward.
Um
So two items chair and Senator
the 75,000 was taken out of HB
two last year. It's not
recurring money, that's that's
coming in for it and to
implement and execute better. We
need to provide some more
dedicated staffing to the Rio
Grande Trail Commission. It was
it was attached to em Nerd, but
there was not
You know, staffing associated
with it to build to build on the
the progress that's being made,
and I think we are in a position
to more formally designate some
segments in the coming year.
Okay, so, Mr Chair and the last
question then so
Is it the intent then to hire
dedicated staff for this
project, who will not just work
on organizing a quarterly
meeting but actually move the
project forward.
And define new segments and do
boots on the ground and be
proactive that the intent if we
give this funding, Mr Chairs,
Senator Yes, that is the intent.
Okay, We all heard it. All
right. Thank you, Mr Mr Chair
and senator. But just to
clarify, we're not creating a
new office at M nerd, but rather
to to support the work. Thank
you. Mr Yanar. Language actually
says office to develop the Real
grandchildren Commission office.
Santa kind of
What, like, but anyway, all
right, Fair enough. You're gonna
end up in the trail war.
But the story has changed from
the commission to the trail. So
keep going Joey or Simon, who's
going next year if I may if I
may on that exact point when we
talk about duplicating services
for
In government. What? What
answers we just heard is exactly
that we have created an outdoor
recreation division that already
exists, And I know that because
Sierra County and and Sakura
have taken, you know great
opportunities to to, um, you
know, access to funds and use
those people. Why in the world
would we would we put a trail
office?
In Energy Department when we
have an outdoor wrecked
department that already exists
that promotes trails. This is
where we're talking about
duplicating services. You're
going to have to go far higher
staff we've are. This committee
has already made the investments
and economic development and
we're growing that office. Why
would you want this? I guess
it's my first question.
If I remember correctly, and you
can correct me there was a
problem with easements and other
things associated when it came
up last year, Didn't they
testified to that, and that's
why I m nerd needed authority
and some money in there. My
correct in that pretty close to
that statement. Yes, Mr Chair,
and, uh
Senator as to your question when
the Rio Grande Trail Commission
was established, it was
administratively attached to em.
Nerd and the state parks. Um,
Division. Um, And as Senator
Stein, born noted, there was an
effort to shifted over but at
the moment, M nerd has
jurisdictional responsibility
for the trail, Commit Trail
Commission and other components.
The eminent secretary does also
have authority for officially
designating trail segments under
the State Trails Act, so that
that was part of the assessment.
I think
Moving it to R D could
potentially reduce some of the
duplicate duplication. But while
it is jurisdictional attached
for em, nerd, uh the agency
needs to make some provision to
support that work in that body.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'd love to
see the trail continued. I think
it provides great economic
development for rural from
Mexico, but I think that instead
of investing
Where it doesn't belong, and it
less of that money actually gets
on the ground. We're paying for
staffing and creation of yours
would love to see that over at
economic development where it
belongs. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Joey Simon, who's taking us
So, Mr Chair. I think we were on
page 12.
And with the Healthcare
Authority department, and I'll
just note um, real quickly on
line 109. So there's $100
million in the executive
recommendation and $120 million
in the LFC recommendation for to
defray operating losses at rural
regional hospitals and
So that that made it into both
recommendations. But there is,
um
There's a small difference in
the amount of funding.
Additionally, in the LFC
recommendation.
There is $58 million for
Medicaid, health and behavior.
Health services expansion to
expand those programs.
And Simon, did you have anything
else on the healthcare
Authority? Uh, Mr Chair? No, no
more. No additional comments on
that page so we can go to
Page 13.
Um, which page 13. There aren't
very many differences there as
well. So I'm happy to move to
page 14 and less. Um Joey has
any comments on page 13?
Mr Mr Chairman? No, unless there
were any questions from
committee
On item 119.
How can we pay for debt service?
That should that have been a
question? Supplementals 119
you're talking about 1 15 1 15.
I'm sorry. Okay? Let me put my
glasses on.
Mr Chairman. That's to retire
some bonds that the minus
hospital has early and then that
will free up. Um, those bond
payments to go into their
operations.
That's it. Keep going. Okay.
Page 14 line 140. You'll see
recommendation there from the
executive for, uh, $7 million
for law enforcement vehicles.
Um, there's nothing here from
the LFC, but perhaps it's in
capital. Um, show if you know if
Will move to the next one. So,
um, yeah, Mr Chairman. I don't
know if the top of my head if
that's in capital or not, I
would. I think that this is
another one that was an
executive recommendation ad that
wasn't an agency requested. If
I'm correct on that.
Okay, line 141. This is a $5
million recommendation from the
executive, Um, for the newly
revived organized Crime
Commission, which had been
dormant for quite some time.
Um, the focus of the commission
is to combat human trafficking,
drug trafficking and illegal gun
access. Um, the executive
included a $5 million special
appropriation for the work of
the commission.
Anything else on page 14, Joey
Mr. Chair Joey on online 141. I
don't want the DPS handling that
money. They made a
Request that we're gonna have to
transfer that operating budget
two DF, okay?
Okay, Mr. Chair, Um, moving on
to page 15.
Um
Line.
1, 43, 1, 44 and 145. Those are
recommendations. Uh,
For the Department of
Transportation for Road
Projects. Um, the executive has,
uh
$240 million there to
As a general fund, you know, in
addition to their $1.2 billion
operating budget, the LFC
recommendation there's 40
million
So that's one of the biggest
differences.
Um, in the document.
Then moving to line 147 before
we go into public. Sorry, just
on the on the Department of
Transportation, Mr Chairman, So
there is $40 million for major
road projects in the LFC
recommendation and just
highlight highlight for the
committee. Uh, an additional,
uh so actually, I should say
reduction in the amount that the
department's going to have to
pay for their debt service next
year about $80 million, which
opens up some funds that can be
Re allocated in the operating
budget. That's not a special
appropriation bus operating
budget items.
I'll also just say on line 145.
There is a recommendation for
$50 million in the capital
Outlay framework for wildlife
corridors.
In that framework, so a little
bit a little bit. That's not on
the sheet.
Before we go into public Ed
because it's quite a lot. Do we
have any questions? Mr Chairman?
Have fun. Joey, a
Um, I'll let Simon start Mr.
Chair moving to public
education, you'll see online
147 $11 million in LFC
recommendation for career
technical education. Um it with
public education. There's
Funding in recurring funding and
non recurring funding in
different non recurring
appropriation so it can get a
little complicated, but overall,
the executive recommendation for
career technical education is at
40 million, which is flat to the
current year appropriation.
And then when you include all of
the different areas for career
technical education within the
public school support budget,
the lfc, uh, comes out to about
between 14 and 24 Million for
career technical education, so
the executive recommendations 20
to 25 million higher for career
technical education. I just
wanted to bring that to your
attention, because, uh, this is
this line right here is only one
of many different spots for
career technical education
within the budget.
Uh um.
Then moving on to the next page.
Uh, um, line number 154.
Again. This is, uh I another
area where
There's money in different areas
of the budget, so you'll see
here $16 million from the
executive for salary
differentials for, uh, public
school positions that are hard
to fill, which in many districts
includes special education
teachers and assistants. Um, the
LFC recommendation.
They actually, uh have 60
million from the proposed gate
fund.
And
That's 60 million is over four
years, so divide by 4 $15
million a year for that same
purpose. So the
Executive recommendation is
pretty close to the LFC
recommendation for that same
purpose. It's just the LFC is
spread over four years at $15
million.
Uh um.
Then online 160. There's a
recommendation from the
executive for the Learning
Management System. Uh, everyone
knows his canvas. Um
The LFC recommendation doesn't
have any funding for that. So I
just wanted to point that out.
Um
Any on that page. Joe here was
good for the next one. I think
you got you covered the major
one, Okay?
Then.
On page 17.
On line 167, you'll see a pretty
big difference there for
structured literacy. Um
And again broken record, but
there are different areas of the
budget with structured literacy.
So the executive recommendation
has, uh, 23 million in
recurring.
Plus this 30 million here.
Plus another 5.1 million in a
different non recurring
appropriation. So that comes out
to 58.1 million total.
For
Structured literacy.
Uh, the LFC recommendation is
Between 25 and 30 million
overall. So the 3 million you
see here for in the LFC is just
one portion of the
recommendation, but overall, the
executive recommendation is
30 about $30 million higher in
total for structured literacy.
Uh um.
Then.
Line 172.
You'll see a recommendation from
the executive for, uh, educator
felt the educator fellow program
so that program was started with
federal funds. A couple of years
ago, Those federal funds are
drying up. So the record for the
executive, uh, wants to move
that to state funding to
continue the program.
The recommendation is at $23
million. The LFC recommendation
does have some funding from the
gate for, uh, educator, clinical
practice. Um, that amount
It doesn't It's not as much as
the executive recommendation. Um
But there is some funding there
for that program to continue,
but but at a much smaller scale
than, uh, what it is currently
Join me again? Yeah, I just
wanted to point out for the
educator, clinical practice
programs that Simon was just
mentioning Total of $80 million
again. That's spread over four
years. So, uh, a smaller amount.
Let me ask him 171, and I don't
know if anybody's here from P d.
I guess we're going back to
teacher evaluations.
Um
Mr Chair. Uh, members of the
committee. Um, uh, I don't know
the details, but I know that
there's been funding for the
development of an educator
evaluation system. The last
couple of years. Um and I
apologize. I don't I don't have
any more information so
Sunny You want to answer that?
Excuse me, Mr. Chair, the
educator evaluation is still in
statute, so PD is still required
to administer and evaluation
system.
The executive has this in the
Section five appropriation.
I would also add the learning
management system that Simon
mentioned earlier. That's
canvas. That's currently where
the evaluation system is housed.
So do we need to draft a statute
to get rid of teacher evaluation
rather than just waste 2 million
a year to
Nobody's using it. Correct. Mr
Chairman, the
System is still in place.
Teachers are still getting
observed, but there is no longer
A student test score that's
associated with that evaluation.
so the previous evaluation
system can't be compared to the
current one.
Being operated need to get rid
of it and statute, then, Mr
Chair. If you did remove it from
statute, there would no longer
be a appropriation requirement
for that system because we're
paying $2 million for something
we're not using.
Mr Chair principles are still
required to submit through their
online canvas system
observations of their teachers
in compliance with the existing
evaluation system. That's
canvas. This is a different
evaluation system. This is the
old system, correct, Mr Chair.
Canvases the platform, but the
evaluation system canvas is the
evaluation is where the
evaluation system runs,
essentially, but it's an
operating as an online platform.
Where educators can put in their
data into the system.
And report their scores to the
department and there's school
districts. So one question are
they using it or not?
Mr Chair. Yes, it's currently in
use.
Simon keep growing.
Mr Chair members of the
committee page 18.
Line 174. You'll see a
recommendation for 25 million
for, um out of school learning
opportunities. Um, I believe the
executive language included
Summer enrichment and tutoring
as well. So a broader use of
that 25 million there than the
language you see in front of
you.
Uh um.
Then on line 181, you'll see. Ah
Recommendation. Um, of 10
million and the language there.
Didn't get updated and
I apologize will follow up with
you that with the updated
language, but that funding there
is for the departments, um,
differentiated system of
support. So basically, uh, they
also call it school
transformation, but, uh, that
money is for evidence based
academic interventions at some
of New Mexico's
Lowest performing schools. So
the funding goes to, uh
Or the the schools that are
required to participate, um, are
from chosen from P E D s new,
uh, performance database called
NM vistas, and, uh, that gives
every school a designation based
on a variety of student outcome
indicators. So that's where the
money is targeted at the schools
that are the lowest performing
And this initiative right now is
another one of those that's
funded by, uh, Arpaio s r funds,
and those funds are going to
expire for next school year and
so the executive recommendation
has, uh, 10 million in state
funding to continue those
interventions.
Uh um.
Then, Joe. Anything else there?
Okay, So moving to the next
page. Um
And as you can see, there are
quite a few, uh, non recurring
appropriations that are in the
executive recommendation that,
um, are not in the LFC
recommendation. Uh, so I'm sure
the department will discuss
those with you when, um, their
budget hearing comes up.
Um
Online 191, you'll see, Uh,
recommendation of $8 million for
summer internships with, uh,
Those are with local and tribal
governments the amount in the
current year for those
internships is about 9 million.
Some of it is federal. Some of
it is state.
Ah, so the executive includes
8 million to continue that for
the next fiscal year.
Um
On line.
197. You'll see a recommendation
of 14 million from the executive
for standards based assessments
that's funded at 10 Million by
the LFC not right here, but in a
different part of the budget.
Um, then on
Line I get, I guess that'll do
it for this page. Mr. Chair, um,
turning back to Joey.
Mr Chairman. I,
uh, Mr. Chairman of I just felt
basically a comment and maybe a
question for sunny uh so
There's a lot of funding that's
going into public Education
department head
And have they increased their
realm. FTE s
Unable to manage all these
funding that's going into
Mr Chair and Senator, the public
education empowerment currently
is at about a 270 ft.
It's about a 20% vacancy rate.
They've hovered around 242 250
in the past few years, so they
have recently increased.
About 20 ft over the last year
or so.
A Mr Chairman.
I think this is very important
because there's a lot of funding
going into always
Line items that we have here.
And then if you look at all just
within the last going to say to
the last 3 to 5 years
The funding has gone up by like
$2 billion
Into public Education
department.
And, uh, in order to
Manage that, you know, I think
that they really have to be on
top of that.
Yes, Mr Chair. You're right.
It's been about 100 1.3 billion
in recurring since the Martinez
Yossi lawsuit, and the
department is required to
administer and oversee those
fun. Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you chair and thank you to
the presenters. Um so before we
get off of PD, um there's two
more lines related to P d on
page 27 to 76 to 77. I want to
draw the committee's attention
and the presenters attention to
line 277.
And that's a 19.4 million. Um,
executive request on for
budgetary shortfall in providing
having to reuse these glasses
Now, Mr Chairman for a budgetary
shortfall in providing universal
free school meals pursuant to
the Healthy Hunger Free Students
Bill of Rights Act.
So it's a bill that I got passed
last year early last year. We
did, um, change the
implementation timeline from one
year to two years, but I see
that 19 million there. We did
say that you know, these
districts are going to need
dollars to to re equipped
kitchens to do some scratch,
cooking and things of that
nature, and then there's a few
other items in there as well.
This program is just going
gangbusters all over the state.
It's going very, very well and
something that we agreed to do
as a legislature and we enacted.
I think there was a single no
vote. I don't think there was we
went through the entire process
there last year in the
Legislature, so there's nothing
for the LFC recommendation here,
So I want to. You want to speak
on this at all? I mean, we're
what's happening here.
Mr Chair and Senator. So the L C
recommendation was 21 million in
recurring, and that was flat
with the prayer appropriation.
There is concern concerns during
the session. As you're probably
aware that
The
Estimated projection for the
cost was about 30 million, even
though the appropriation was 20
million.
Uh, when the budget was
submitted in December, the
shortfall was estimated at about
14 million.
And now the executive
recommendation is up to 20
million. So I think we're still
trying to sharpen our pencils on
the the full supplemental costs
for this fiscal year.
Well, thank you, Mr Chairman.
And I appreciate that sunny. So,
Yeah. I just want to make sure
that we're paying close
attention to this. This is one
of the issues that just
dramatically positively impacts
closing the achievement gap
because of the students are
hungry. The last thing they're
going to hear is what the
teacher is trying to say to
them. You know, we just can't
pretend like this doesn't exist.
This this hunger is real and and
and, you know, Think about it
yourself, and I know when I'm
hungry in the middle of the day,
I might hear one of that out of
everything three things, the
chairman says.
Try to listen to all of them and
I write them down. Just make
sure I'm paying attention, but,
um, but but it feels like it
sometimes. And so, uh, so as a
result, I just want to make sure
that we're investing the time
going through this and making
sure that it is what it needs to
be, Uh, these requests. I don't
think they're going to be this
large. Once. You know, the
school districts are right sized
with the equipment and the
different things that they need.
So we knew that there would be
an initial investment to get
this program fully operational,
so I just wanted to draw the
committee's attention to that
and how important it is to
positively impacting childhood
hunger in our state, and this is
one of the biggest things we've
done in a really long time.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
From 147 to 197. It all has to
do with public education.
And this is these. From what?
I'm understanding. This is one
time money and so this all goes
into the public Education
department, and it is applied
for by school districts. I mean,
generally
I know it's lots of different
stuff here.
So this is generally
Grants or or something that is
applied for by school districts
to get this money.
Above there.
Their funding formula money.
Mr Chair, Senator.
Ah!
Yes, some of some of these
recommendations.
Are for distribution for various
programs at schools.
Some of them are
For the department. Uh,
For their own projects or
initiatives. So, um, I don't
know the exact split, but but
you're right. A lot of them, um,
are are programmatic dollars
that go out to the schools. And
when you start mr Chair when you
start talking about for their
own
Use their own projects or
initiatives. Um
Is that to better their
department to better their
staff.
Ah!
Uh, I don't quite get that part.
I look at at at the Public
Education Department as a
supporting institution for
public education.
So, Mr Chair, Senator? Yes. Ah!
It's a lot of it is is for
Projects or initiatives that
they have to do like standards
based assessments. Administering
assessments to the students
statewide. You know, that's
That's a department items so
that money is with the
department.
Um
Uh huh.
Yeah, well, what I'm getting at
You know, we're always highly
critical of her or school
districts were saying, you know,
they're having a hard time.
Uh, getting our students up to
level
If we just gathered this money
and gave to the school
districts, they might be a lot
more efficient and using it. Lot
of this is what we call below
the line. Is that right?
And it's It's it's not above the
line.
Money is that they can pretty
well spend for salaries and do
things with these are very
specific.
Strings tied to them that they
have to do a specific thing.
For this money.
Mr. Chair, Senator. That's
correct. The these are
restricted appropriations and
not the formula.
Funding familiar appropriations
that you allocate to schools
directly through SCG.
Just off the top of your head.
We talked about a lot of this
was federal stuff.
That we applied to get from from
From federal monies and and
those monies are being pulled
back. So there are strings to
that money that
We have to keep this maintenance
of effort going
So we have to keep funding that
or or
Am I wrong about that? Mr Chair?
Senator, If you're referring to
the federal, um emergency
pandemic aid that was about 1.5
billion, and she just schools
There was not a maintenance of
effort requirement for those.
Those are one time funds. There
was a maintenance of equity
provisions on making sure that
the allocations were fairly
distributed.
But schools will not have to
basically backfill that, um, it
was meant to address pandemic
related closures and cleaning
and
Um, upgrades, the ventilation
systems and
Planning. Well, I guess my my
thought is still is
Why don't we just put this money
into the formula?
Instead of trying to
Second guess the deal.
And I'm not an educator.
So
I'm not you guys. Thank you, Mr
Chair, Senator Bentley.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I had a
couple of questions. Let's go
back to 174. It seems
It is concerning that on a
tourism line items we would be
so specific, saying we're going
to spend $15 million and they
would specifically mentioned
those Oprah and route 66. But
then we have a $25 million
suggestion and that is so vague
for out of school learning
opportunities when we've had two
pages of what could qualify,
arguably is
Out of school learning
opportunities. Can you provide
us a detailed explanation as to
what? What? What that would be.
Um
Mr Chair, Senator, Um
The executive language says for
out of school learning
opportunities, tutoring in
summer enrichment. Um I could
get you a breakdown from the
department of how funds were
distributed from this similar
appropriation last year. If if
that would be that would be
helpful to compare it to see if
we're also duplicating it on
other line items, And then Mr
Chairman, My next question would
be on line 183.
We're asking for $2.9 million to
increase transportation cost to
meet that 180 days of
instructional days, which
alarming on this is
The executive makes a rule.
That circumvents the legislator
that already passed statute says
they couldn't do it and then
comes to us and asked us to fund
the rules that the legislator
said shouldn't happen. Is this
what I understand?
And how is it spent? Um, Mr
Chair, Senator. Um, yes. This
This 2.9 million would be, uh
Uh, would only be necessary if
the rule goes into place. But
yes, that's the purpose of this
2.9 million is because of the
180 day. Uh, proposed rule.
Thank you that that's that's
like my teenage daughter asking
me if she can go to the movies.
I say no, but then handed 10
bucks anyway.
Like like that. That's so
confusing to me that they Mr.
Chair, you're going to have to
provide some advice on that. So
so
By rules or trying to make
change that the statute can't
do.
But then they can come and ask
us to fund it. I guess I could
ask us for anything.
That seems very bold. My guess
is all like my comment would be
on that one.
And I think as far as
Ped. There's my only questions,
Mr Chair.
That's where they can go too
much. Simon, we have any more or
we're finished with PD, Mr.
Chair, uh, finished with ped.
Sit right there and remind me in
room one where Charles went that
remind us. I want a legal
opinion on when PD has to turn
in their budget.
And maybe we get it from the
attorney general and put a
deadline because he did not turn
in their budget killed. But
November 30th
December
Mr Chair. They did turn it in on
November 30th, which was two
weeks before their hearing, and
the statutory requirement is
September correct for everybody
else in the room at September,
Mr Chair. The statute says that
all agencies will Smith their
budgets on September 1st. There
is a provision that says
PD shall submit their
recommendations to the
executive on November 30th, but
makes no mention to the
Legislature. So do we need to
draft and change that statute?
To clarify it, Mr Chair that
that is within your prerogative.
You're not saying yes or no? You
wanna You wanna shorter time
period of work, or you want a
longer time period.
Mr Chairman, I think there would
be value in getting more time to
evaluate some of these requests,
okay?
Let's get an attorney general's
opinion and see exactly what
they say.
Because this put us in a binding
lfc, right?
Getting it and then meeting what
10 days later and trying to get
PDS requesting and not we did
not have their supplementals
correct.
And there's four What's the
total number of supplemental
assignments are Joey, or money
for just for PD 273 Million
specials are so we've got Mr
Chair. Uh,
There were 65 non recurring
requests The executive funds 54
items, The LFC funds.
About about 20.
Non recurring items, right?
It's about 15, Mr Chair.
On top of the exact record for
11% increase for speeding.
Mr Chair. That's just the number
of specialists specials that the
LFC recommendation recommends
that these are considered below
the line specials. Correct, Mr
Chair. Yes, that's correct. And
they have no they're below the
line. They have no legislative
legislative authority is the
exactly spend below the line
anyway. See fit.
Mr Chair For the vast majority
of these. There is no statutory
parameters on the
appropriations Remember a few
years ago, and Susanna Martinez
trying to boost up below the
line, and it was
Bloody war.
And now this is the largest
number I've ever seen below the
line.
Now I know why they came up with
34% reserves. They didn't book
anything into
General fund for PD, and they
did it all for supplementals.
which reminds me, you'll be
coming back next year for
another supplemental because
these are only one year correct.
Joey.
I have to look, Mr Chairman to
see if there are there any
examples of multi year
appropriations in here on this
on this, Simon knows
Top of his head.
Mr Chair. You're correct. Most
of these are
Would be good through the end of
FY 25.
That's why I don't think there's
anybody from P. Do you hear? But
everybody complains how they can
get money out within a year. How
is PD gonna get money out within
a year? When we hear all these
complaints about PD can't get
any money out?
School districts on
reimbursements.
I think there
Everybody in D f a shaking their
heads. Yes. So
I know I'm right.
So, uh, I'm just this is just a
cautionary tale for this
committee. I have never seen
this amount of slush funds in
supplementals since I've been
here.
I mean, there's no parameters.
There was no statutes. There's
no guidelines. There's not a lot
in here that
Sets parameters where the
Legislature really should
clearly appropriate this money.
I mean,
We know what happens when
The Legislature doesn't
appropriate money in in
statutory guidelines that they
do whatever they want with it,
they violate policies, whether
it's whatever agency it could be
D O t violating policies, PD
veiling policies.
GSD. It could be anybody vital
in those policies and
I mean,
I don't think I'm willing to do
that.
This year, so
I'd suggest that PD and I
suggested to the secretary
earlier, he should go back and
start from scratch.
So what are we going to next?
Actually, before we move on from
P A. D. I did want to just
highlight one item in the LFC
recommendation here on page 19.
Line 196. There's 50. There's a
$50 million recommendation for a
tribal education trust fund, and
that would be contingent on
legislation passed in the
upcoming sessions, setting up
that fund and providing the
parameters for that. And so that
one item that was not requested
by the agency But is in the LFC
recommendation, Okay?
Going to higher ed moving on to
higher, Ed. Mr Chairman, Um so I
just a couple of items here, Um
Simon might go back a little bit
to talk about some of these, but
if we begin on page 20 line,
205, there's 32.5 million of for
building renewal and replacement
for higher education
institutions and $5 million for
equipment, renewal and
replacement.
Uh, in their, uh then moving on
to
Page 21.
Line 208.
Uh, so we've there's a $10
million appropriation for
graduate students who are in US
Uh, so we've there's a $10
million appropriation for
graduate students who are in
stem fields.
Ah, for, um
Award amounts for those graduate
students.
There's $10 million for research
at universities related to, um
Agriculture and biotechnology
and a lot of other sort of tech
areas in that and then finally
on line. 210 $10 million for
endowed faculty teaching
positions related to social work
And again, Mr Chairman, we'll,
We'll see it down below, but
these items are all in addition
to some
The bricks, some pretty
substantial workforce
development item in the
Government Accountability Trust
for higher education. Simon, did
you want to have it in? Are you
ready? Um, Mr Chair members of
the committee just real quickly
line 202.
The Teacher Loan repayment
program. The executive is about
$10 million higher there, uh,
$15 million infusion would
sustain the program through
roughly FY 27 application rates
remain the same, Um, then also
line 204. There's 10 Million to
expand nursing programs and so
Mr Chair. I'll go. Turn it back
to Joey, just real quick on the
Teacher Loan repayment program.
Simon's right. The executive
recommendations sort of infuses
funds for multi year where as
the LFC recommendations only is
looking at a shorter term for
that particular line item.
But Joey, shouldn't we see a
phase out and that with
opportunity?
In free tuition between lottery
and opportunity. We should not
have to see any teacher long
repayment programs.
So, um, Mr Mr Chairman, I think
I don't have a good answer for
you. So I'm gonna I'm gonna
differ and get Connor to follow
up with you on that, but I mean,
there would be a phase out that
might Yeah, I do think the
teacher loan repayment would
apply to, um, maybe people who
went to Uni University and
another state and had had an
existing loan? Um so obviously
Opportunity wouldn't cover out
of state students. But, um,
we'll follow up on that and see.
Sam Padilla.
Thank you Chair and thanks,
guys. Thank you. Presenters. So
when the um health sciences
executive VP and CEO of the
hospital was in front of us last
month, there was a slide on
their supplementals. One item
that was there was on the
teacher residency. I'm sorry.
the the residents there to bring
their salaries up approximately
77.5% to bring them in very
close to the or about just above
the 50th percentile.
For residents in our region of
the country. I don't see that
anywhere in here is that is that
baked in somewhere here? Because
they did present on it. They did
make that request. It does not
appear anywhere here that I see
it.
Uh, words just higher end you
pirate. Um, Mr Chairman. Um,
I'll have to follow up with you
on that with our higher
education analyst. I don't have
an answer for you on if it's if
it's anywhere else in the
budget, and Mr Chairman, the
Madam secretary is here. I don't
know if you'd be willing to let
her few words on it.
I'm kind of mad at her. She
didn't name her new baby
Georgia, but it was a girl,
Mr. Chair. Maybe I'll consider
Georgina next time. Um, but we
did not receive any requests
from the Health Sciences center
prior to the legislative session
as it pertains to residents,
Chairman and presenters they and
secretary
They? They sat in front of us
here. They made not. I guess
they didn't present it to you.
But
We gotta find out where that is,
because that's a pretty big
issue there for that entire
operation and Mr Chair, Senator.
the first time we heard about it
was when they presented to you
as well. Our budget is due to
you all by November 1st, and
that includes our specials,
which are due in September,
October to the Department of
Finance and Administration,
which is likely where we would
have put that recommendation.
All right. Thank you. I'll
follow up with them myself. You,
Senator Stein born? Thank you,
Mr Chair. I'm not sure who to
ask this question. But with our
university fundings, I see we
have a line on him here. 35
million for some, um, building
infrastructure.
Do we included in the cost of
renewable energy when we fund
our new schools?
Do you know?
So, Mr Chairman, Senator, I
think what we'll have to follow
up on that I think will follow
up and get you an answer on
whether or not renewable energy
costs are included in that we
should, because I mean these
systems pay for themselves,
especially with a school that
has a 50 year shelf life or
whatever it is, um
These systems will pay for
themselves 1520 years so
Um, we should be, including that
in my opinion in the cost, and
what's happening at schools are
now trying to figure out where
to raise money for this, and
they're kind of on their own
trying to figure it out. So I
would hope that we'd be building
this in on the front end.
Where we're at.
Society. So anyway, I see that
we have a $35 million
appropriations. So I'm wondering
if not specific item that, um
Budget issues included probably
isn't but you can let me know
And just as a policy matter, I'm
curious if we are now, including
that in our budgeting, Mr Chair,
Senator, we'll find out. Okay.
Thank you. Center Brentley.
Thank you, Mr Chairman again
with just being so basic
literally on this one line.
211 higher EDS. Asking for $2
million for basic college basic
needs is that $2 million in
ramen noodles or do they want to
break that down on what in the
world with
Generally, you know being so
general and something like that.
And college basic needs and then
right under it. We have 500,000
for mental health initiatives,
which I think we could all get
behind and support. But But if
we summarize all this aren't all
of their asked for college basic
needs.
Mr Chairs, Senator. Um, let me
follow up with our higher ed
analysts and we'll get you more
detail on those recommendations.
Okay. Thank you.
You know, Senator Padilla just
to go back to that conversation
agencies don't submit it in
their budget request to higher
Ed, which there's our do even
earlier than November for the
For the university quest to
higher ed. And then they come in
front of us, and they request
something that secretary of the
department has never heard of.
Then it becomes, we don't even
know it exists until we hear
that day.
In so
There's been quite a bit of that
This year. There's been even
people agencies come in front
and request money.
That they already had money for
that they didn't know they got
money for and so
If the agencies aren't watching
what we're funding or they're
making requests, and they're not
making the request to hire, add
or P D for their budgets or
whoever.
And there's no way for lfc to
reconcile that any point in
time, so
Senators. Can I comment?
Yeah, I'm just telling you what
happened. Thank you Chair and I
hear you loud and clear, And I
think this is just a resounding
kind of alarm bell for anybody
that wants to get on this
supplementals list or whatever,
but have we never added an
additional supplemental or
special after the deadline? I'm
just curious is that never
happened in the state's history.
I'm just because they did
present this to us over a month
ago.
We did talk to everybody that
was involved in this. So we've
never done that before.
That would have been a recurring
budget request for that that
would have been a special or
supplemental because that's a
one year funding. If you're
looking at funding, those that
would have been in the
reoccurring appropriation in
that request would have made and
made us. I mean, if there's
adjustments to be made, but I
mean, I imagine I can go into
health sciences in a $3 billion
budget and find about $5 million
to pay for that, and I agree, Mr
Chairman, and Charles, the
director of Lfc s.
So that to me, and we've talked
a little bit about that. I'm
just so even if it's a
recurring, have we never gone in
and made an adjustment.
In the state's history after the
deadline is coming.
Well, I don't think that you're
asking the question correctly.
We're gonna This is just an
evaluation. We're just looking
at specials and supplementals.
today you're saying where's the
requested doesn't exist because
it wasn't asked for. Okay. Well,
I mean, when we go into such a a
doctor shortage in New Mexico
just trying to do everything I
can Mr chairman to try to help
that out, and that's what this
initiative was about. Thank you
should have put it in their
budget request to higher end and
then we could carry that message
to them directly.
Charles, You have some dad the
only thing to add Mr Chairman is
in hs D s budget They've
included and they would have to
come into an agreement with you
and M about this their latest
budget projection shows that
they're expecting it to get a
transfer from You and M Health
Sciences Center to the tune of
100 and $48 Million that would
then be matched with
Federal Medicaid funds, so it
Does raise some questions for
for us and why 4 million is
unaffordable for raises for
residents, but
When you put the matching rates
on 148 million if that's
intended to go back for graduate
medical expenses, why that can't
be so and I know we're gonna
move on to something else.
Where's the next topic, But the
school has actually they said
they want to do this, so I think
this is great information. I'm
gonna sit down with them. We've
We've talked about this. I'm
really surprised. We're having
this conversation now. I just
assumed this had been, you know,
ironed out.
A month ago when we had this
conversation, and it's not I
agree that it's not a
supplemental or a special, but
we've just got to make sure this
thing gets done so I may be a
heavier hand from lfc with the
school to say, Do you really
want this or not? Because if you
don't even though you stood, you
sat in front of this committee
or lfc and said You wanted it,
You know, why aren't you acting
on it? Even though there's these
options to get it done so.
We've got to have more doctors
in New Mexico. We have such a
shortage, and this is one of the
ways to retain these highly
trained individuals.
Yeah. So, um, Mr Chairman, um,
The final item in Section five
is just online to 23 of the, um
page 23.
And that's the annual transfer
to the Computer System
Enhancement Fund. That's for I T
projects that various
departments across the state. I
believe you, um, have another
packet with all of those items.
um, that this is just the
transfer from the general fund,
to that fund for those programs.
Um, And with that, Mr Chairman,
we were ready to move on to
Section six. That's the
supplemental and efficiency
recommendations.
Go ahead, okay? And so, um
Uh, a lot. A lot of these are
pretty similar. Um, there are
some. There are a lot of them
that are recommended, but maybe
at different amounts. I think
some of some of that is because
Um, you know, in in certain
examples, executive
recommendation had sort of
updated numbers, whereas the LFC
recommendations were based on an
initial agency request.
So I just highlight a couple of
big ones here so online to 33.
you can see for the General
Services Department 6 $69.8
million recommendation from LFC
and a $60.7 million
recommendation from the
executive for shortfalls in the
Employee Group Health Benefits
Program.
Again. This is one of those
areas where the executive
recommendation was based on, uh,
updated information. Um and and
that's why those items are
different.
Um, on line 236 also GST. You'll
see, um you'll see a difference.
Part of that is related to one
of the items I discussed before
you remember there was a section
five appropriation for, um, for
health care costs. So, um, the
LFC recommendation is lower
because of that of that special.
But even when you combine those
the DFS recommendations a little
bit lower, and that's based on
updated information from the
General Services Department
about current year spending
levels in that fund, and, uh I
thought that perhaps things
weren't as bad as initially
anticipated.
I also highlight a big
difference here online to 37.
So the general, uh the executive
recommendation includes 24.8
million to the General Services
Department for the public
Liability Fund to build balances
back up of that fund. Um, as
we've discussed every we
discussed several times during
lfc, Mr Chairman, there has been
a number of large liability
payments from that fun and the
agency is looking
For director general fund
appropriations to sort of
backfill that fund typically,
uh, that fund is entirely other
state funds. They receive
premium payments from agencies
based on their exposure and
experience. This would provide a
director General fund infusion
for that program.
Ah!
With that. I'll just ask if
Simon has any comments on any of
the items on Page 23 of the
General Services Department, Mr
Chair, no additional comments.
Joey covered those well.
But let me ask on this, and then
it's in the woods.
Um Hmm. So we need 100 and 50
million
To to fill the deficit is
How are we getting there?
Joey? Yeah, Mr Chairman. Uh, the
lfc recommendation was for 150
million across different parts
of the executive recommendations
a bit lower. Like I said, Based
on that updated information on
current year revenue and
expenditures, the thought being
that things
Things weren't as bad as
initially anticipated by the
department. They could perhaps
pull that back a little bit. I'm
if Simon has any comments on
some of the changes that were
made between the request and the
executive right
Um, Mr Chair. The LFC
recommendation has 55 million is
a special
Then.
69.8 million here and then 25.4
And I think that gets to the
150. Correct? Yes, Executive
recommendation has 60.7 million
as the to shore up the shortfall
from the prior fiscal year. Uh,
and that, like Joey said that
number. Um our recommendation
comes in a little bit. We can
finish it a little bit later.
And so that was the audited
amount. So that's why it's lower
than
Uh um.
It's 9 million lower than the
initial projection, which is
what's in the LFC
recommendation. 69 versus 60.
And then the executive
recommendation has 65 million.
So between those two it's about
125 million in the executive
recommendation for the Health
benefits fund.
But 150 million is within the
range of outcomes. Um
All depending on how claims come
in for the rest of the year.
Where's the GSD secretary?
But, Mr Chairman,
I don't believe the GST
secretary is here. But Sicily is
the DNA analyst for that. So we
covered this all summer long and
this is one that's going to just
jerk my chain right here, right?
We asked because you guys want
to make the healthcare authority
transfer and it has to transfer
at a negative balance.
And all year long we bounced
between 120 116 180 Finalize
that 150 million
And so if you want the
healthcare authority to transfer
into deficit
Is that the exact
recommendation? Mr. Mr Chair.
Oh, sorry to cut you off your
good Mr Chair.
The intention is to shore up the
fund. This is the best
projection that we've got. 125
million could be a little less
than that could be a little more
than that claims. Expenditures
are are variable. I'm not
talking about the risk fund. I'm
talking about the transfer of
the healthcare authority.
The GST Healthcare benefits.
Yeah. So I think, Mr Chairman, I
think what Simon was saying is
that fund pays medical claims
and it's not a standard amount.
The risk fund I'm talking. I'm
talking about the health
benefits from Mr Chairman. Um,
the payments from
Or the requests from our vendors
for payments from the health
benefits fund very based on
usage, right And so
It's it's somewhat difficult for
the agency to pinpoint and the
exact amount of of what
The the balance is going to be
at the end of the year. Um, as I
said the LFC recommendation was
based on the best information we
had early in the year. Um the,
uh, the executive recommendation
is a little lower because
Claims came in a little lower
than than maybe the agency had
initially thought.
Um, I think
To to to your point or to that
point, Mr Chairman. This is why
it's imperative that the Health
benefit fund have a positive
fund balance because it allows
the agency to manage those
fluctuations and payments.
Right. And so, um
You know, getting back to where
we're not spending in the
negative and that there's a
balance in that fund for the
healthcare authority is really
critical. Um
But the
Both of the intent of both the
executive and the LFC wreck was
to eliminate the negative
balance in that fund at the end
of the current fiscal year.
The Legislature is not the one
that violated the statue.
Hmm. Mr Mr Chairman that is
correct. And and so
I mean, you're talking about
what is it? 200 million to make
the transfer of the healthcare
authority.
Hmm. And we're going to risk
A transfer for 25 million and
the problem is Los Cruces,
Albuquerque.
Wherever who didn't get their
premium increases over the
years. Now the state is picking
up this $150 million difference
to make this transfer.
I mean,
And we're gonna put 200 Charles
with 218 million
For the healthcare authority
transfer.
Over 200 million
gentlemen.
Um, yeah, Mr. Chairman, Charles
says that's in total revenue and
spending.
And in
I mean, if they're willing to
risk that, I mean
That's up to the executive
because that thing will collapse
from the beginning. It will run
in the negative and it will
stand the negative from here to
eternity. Because
Statute was violated. So I
suggested D F a that they go
back upstairs and get the
correct number because
Not. You're just you're
jeopardizing that Healthcare
Authority fund immediately and
then on the risk money, there's
still $50 million as of
November, 2023. Do we know what
the annual risk numbers have
went up to? Ah, so, Mr Chairman,
I have that number, but it's
gonna take me a minute to look
it up.
Okay?
Simon.
On the next page. While he's
looking
Mr. Mr Chairman, if I had volume
three with me again a week,
Charles talked yesterday about,
uh, some of those. Yes, those
convenient things. I'm going to
give you a page number here in a
second. As soon as I look it up,
there's a chart. There's a table
on this in LFC is Volume three.
Ah!
It's here we go.
Ah, so
Hey, Judge Page 38, Mr Chair.
Yeah.
So the public liability fund is
the second line on this and you
can see a history of that going
back. So, uh as of the end of FY
23, there was $42.9 million in
assets and $104.9 million in
projected liabilities for
negative fund balance of $62
million.
You're correct, Mr Chairman that
the cash in the fund What is 54
Million? Um
Uh, but those are the projected
liabilities that the agency is
projecting that they have
And then so I mean, how did you
come up with that number to
project the rest of the
shortfalls? So, Mr Chairman and
Mr Chairman, I didn't project
that number GST s actuaries did
Okay?
Let's keep going, I guess.
Ah!
Oh, I'm sorry, Cindy, would they
That thought a risk management
is way off on this or we would
be assessing premiums for this
and again just like the one
right before the health
insurance.
We're not assessing and the
premiums
So on the second one, we beat
the first one to death on the
second one.
On on 237.
When are we going to raise the
premiums enough to cover
The expected shortfalls and
there's I'm not sure that
I said in the meeting the other
day.
Thank you for allowing that.
I got a real education with the
General Services Department.
On
A lot of their phones, their
workers comp in different funds,
and it's amazing how many of
these funds you look at the
negative balances here?
We have to increase.
Premiums.
To cover it to really get the
true idea of what's going on.
It's not the fact that well,
it's just the balance and taking
it out of general funds instead
Out of someone's budget. Yeah,
right. It's all General fund
Monies. Maybe, but how do you
Bring the agencies up to their
actual risk.
The things that they're doing is
risky.
How do we want to try to change
at risk? And why bring this up?
Mr Chairman, and I don't mean to
be preaching here.
But the reason I bring this up
is because of businessman is in
the same position. These guys
are
And it's getting very hard to
get insurance in the state.
It's getting hard to get
liability insurance.
Uh, many of these doctors
Have a hell of a time. Wonder
why we don't have private
doctors anymore.
Why are all of them working for
organizations?
It's the same thing that's
Are risks that we're putting on
our liability.
Risk is huge in the state.
We have to
Assess premiums necessary to
cover those risks. Sorry for the
preaching.
I Mr Chairman and Senator would
I just wanted to? You know, I'm
on the right setting issue. I
think you're right. And one of
the
One of the issues you might
recall from this summer when the
LFC program Evaluation unit did
a did a review of this? They
noted that increases in agency
Um, premiums are capped by
agency rule to where if sort of
the data says it should go up by
a certain amount, they won't go
up over a certain threshold. I
don't recall what that threshold
is of throughout my head.
But basically caps those those
premium increases, you know, uh,
the evaluation recommended
relooking at that cap and
potentially raising it. Another
issue that the, um that the
evaluation raised was coverage
limits, Right. So right, So
right now risk management is
covering essentially unlimited
amounts.
And the the evaluation
recommended covering agencies up
to the limits of the Tort Claims
Act.
And putting it on the agency to
come to you all when they have a
large claim, saying
We have this large claim.
We need an appropriation for
that, which gives you all the
ability to oversee that agency
or entity and say, Have you made
those reforms that are necessary
to prevent those kinds of claims
in the future? So there are, um
There are some options. Some of
them would require statutory
change, but that program
evaluation addresses a number of
those issues related to rate
setting within
The risk management program.
Well.
That's perfect thing to do.
Is to change statue to take care
of that problem.
But they're not seem to be any
These are to do that.
And to change the statute of
liability.
Caps.
Is pretty damn hard in this
state.
I'd be happy to carry that.
Building anybody wants to
drafted up?
They're upstairs, then.
Joey.
So, yes, Mr Chairman. We do have
some more supplemental and
deficiency appropriations on
page 24.
Did you wanna talk about any of
these Simon?
Sorry. No, I think. Yeah, So
there's as I said, there's a lot
of overlap One of the areas um,
where there's a There's a pretty
significant differences in the
regulation and licensing
department. So, um
Uh, the agencies requesting some
general fund, uh, supplemental
and deficiency appropriations
for what had been
For programs that had initially
been appropriated with other
state funds. Um, executive
recommendation includes those
items.
Um, online to 48. You can see
Simon mentioned this earlier
with the office of
Superintendent of Insurance for
the risk of focused financial
analysis service related to
keeping their accreditation.
Um, And then on, uh
On page 25.
Ah, some additional items most
of, uh most of these are
supplemental appropriations.
Where you see, uh
Uh, sort of agreement in the
requests are in the Department
of Health deficiency
appropriations. Um, was the lfc
recommendation did not recommend
the supplemental appropriations
that the executive recommend.
Executive recommendation
included
And with that, Mr chairman, I'll
just stand for any questions on
supplemental and deficiency
appropriations.
Senator Sheer
Um, thank you, Mr Chair. I know
that lfc recommendation doesn't
include this but on line 253 for
contractual staff support
related to health emergencies.
If we define what a health
emergency is yet, or we still
thinking that it can be
anything.
Um so $105 million
Mr Chair, Senator. Let me speak
with our analysts for human
services. And and we'll get you
an answer. I don't I don't know
the answer to that. So I
apologize. Okay. $105 million is
something that will
Somebody ought to know something
about Mr Chairman. My
recollection was, I believe, um
This particular item was related
to the unwinding of the, um
Uh, the additional, uh,
eligibility for Medicaid.
Um and and and snappers,
Medicaid and stuff.
So, so, Basically this. This is
related to the ability of the
Human services department to
keep people on Medicaid and and
benefits longer, and they're
looking for additional staffing
to sort of support people who
are who are applying for those
benefits.
I'm sorry. I'm not. I'm not as
you as you know, that's not in
the lfc recommendation. I'm
doing my best to remember from
from when I we looked at this.
And Mr Chad like to have some
idea on what? What The executive
is thinking that 105 Million is
for Mr Chair, Senator.
Absolutely. It's a big number,
and we'll definitely get you
detailed information. I
apologize.
Oh, Here you go.
Uh, chair Senator. Thank you for
your question.
Um you know, the public health
and whining presented an
unprecedented challenge and the
customer service demands and we
wanted to make sure
That we can respond to our
Medicaid and snap customers as
timely as we can. And so we've
hired more than 1000 contracts
staff to help supplement our
staff. Who are, you know,
working with customers every
day?
To meet that demand, and we've
had to tap into funding that is
otherwise designated for
required federal mailings to do
that, so if we don't get the
funding that is listed here in
the supplemental will have a $4
million deficit and sending out
Federally required mailings to
our customers can be mailings
about an update about their snap
or Medicaid eligibility. Um
Yeah, it can contain their
application for re enrollment.
So we've we've We've tried to be
very creative and, you know,
tapping into other funding
sources this fiscal year to help
me that gap, but without this
funny request will have that $4
million deficit in these
federally required may links.
I hope that answers your
question.
So, Mr Chair, maybe maybe so we
have to send out $105 million
Worth of
Mailing to people.
And and hire 1000 people to do
the mailings.
Now the 1000 contracts staff
that we've hired are working
with Medicaid and snap customers
right now as they renew their
applications for Medicaid and
snap during the public health
emergency unwinding, Um, the
supplemental
Um
Is a sort of recognition of that
funding that we've had a tap to
tap into to address that
contracting need. If it's not if
the supplemental is not funded
for the department, then we
won't have the funding that we
need to do other important
business at the department
contacting our customers.
Okay. All right, Mr Chair.
I have one other question. Mr
Chair, which is going to be just
as fun as that one on to 40
I have one other question, Mr
Chair, which is going to be just
as fun as that one on to $40
million to
For the secretary of state to
suppress freedom of speech is
what that
That lawsuits all about do we
want to suppress freedom of
speech for a million dollars?
So I'm Mr Chairman and Senator,
I believe that particular
appropriation is a is a judgment
that has been injured by the
court and and so that has to be
paid by the secretary of State's
office. Thank you, Mr
I mean to go to back to the snap
benefits. I mean that that's an
agency problem that we didn't
create in the Legislature.
I mean, if they're not gonna get
snapped
Out quick enough, like the
federal like the federal
aviation requires. Why does the
Legislature have to pick up the
agency's mistakes?
I mean getting to the
Pointed deficiencies here, and
I'm correct in saying that
right?
Agency didn't get the snap
benefits out in time and
And so now we got to spend all
this extra money to meet the
federal mandates because the
agency didn't do their job.
Um So, Mr Mr Chairman, I don't
know the answer to your
question, but we can follow up
with our analyst on some more
detailed analysis of that item.
Okay, let's keep going.
Um so we actually with with
that, Mr chairman, unless there
were any other, uh, questions
about some of the supplemental
and deficiency appropriations.
Um, I think we are ready to move
on.
I think to 60 Are you gonna move
on to where? Beginning on line
284 with the Government
Accountability Trust.
But if there any questions on
On the supplemental information
online to 69 for the 20 Million
Settlements for C Y F. D.
Was that one person two persons
how many people were in the 20
million
And before we move on to that, I
mean
I guess the question is
Joey and I guess how do I don't
know how we answer answer this,
but
When you run a deficiency
basically overspend your agency
and statutorily there. You are
not allowed to do that. Uh So,
um, Mr Chairman. My
understanding is that agencies
are not allowed to do that on
purpose. Um, I think you know
you're going to hear from the
auditor here. Hopefully, in just
a few moments about
What needs to be done at
agencies to maintain those
financial controls so that
They're not, uh, overspending
their budget.
So it is. I don't I don't Maybe
what I asked him and maybe the
attorney general. I mean, when
they get to a certain level,
they should just be cut out of
the share system when they have
over spent their budget.
And and then they'll come back
and they'll do a bar.
For something else and
transferred instead of FTE s use
the transfer from FTS and then
transferred to an operating
budget right and still created
the efficiency.
And so they have the opportunity
to fix their deficiency with a
bar, but they don't do it that
way. They
Manage. Just spend it in other
places. It's getting frustrating
for me.
I mean, members look at the 78
million overspending that those
are all bounced checks that
agencies should be required for
it. The 215 million in
supplementals is where agencies
Overspend but didn't
Allowed to backfield. The
division sees is the bigger
problem. That's almost 3
300,000,305 million.
In general fund money that we
gotta backfilled because
They didn't plan right and then
they come in and ask for
50 million more for this. I
mean, I may use the food program
the free lunches as an example.
Give us the correct number and
then you come back and you ask
for a $19 million deficiency in
the food program when we should
we should have been prepared for
that. But these deficiencies
getting to $300 million. That's
that's a 3% budget spend and
some of these are reoccurring.
That's $300 million in
reoccurring money that we're
supplementing through one time
deficiencies.
Because agencies overspend,
they're gonna have to get some
fiscal controls and maybe
they're staying auditor or get a
really big bump in his bonus in,
uh, we'll get a lot of red flags
on a lot of audits instead of
everybody missed being so happy
and clean to go through there.
Joey. Yeah. So, Miss Mr
Chairman, Um, we did have as I
was saying, beginning on page 27
9 to 80 for a number of these,
uh, these programs from the
Government Accountability Trust
I had already spoken broadly
about about some of those in the
areas of, um
You know, improving workforce
and educational opportunity as
well as health outcomes. Um, and
so I already went over most of
these. At the beginning of my
comments. I won't repeat myself,
but, uh, if there were any
questions with stand for
questions unless Simon had any
comments, um, Mr Chair members
of the committee
Final thing is page 29 line to
99. Both recommendations have a
pretty substantial, uh
Appropriation recommendation to
the Conservation Legacy
Permanent Fund. The executive is
250 million in the LFC
recommendation is 300 million,
So I just wanted to bring that
to your attention. So thank you.
So you're bringing the turkey
tension in the Legislature?
Legislature is doing it right
and not under funding. The
program, Mr Chair, I'm bringing
it to your attention that those
are appreciate
six pack of beer beer beginning?
Yeah, just one time. But I
appreciate you, Simon, because
You sit up there and you try to
explain stuff that we have no
idea in it falls into place.
So, Mr Chairman, just continuing
on those funds transfer
appropriations. You can see some
of those listed there. There's
$25 million each for the
Behavioral Health Capital Fund
and the primary Care Capital
Fund.
On 1 302. There's $100 million
for the Water Trust fund.
And turning the page two line.
30 reference this before we were
talking about some of the
recommendations.
For housing. There is a $50
million appropriation here to
the Affordable Housing Trust
fund.
Um and then lines three and four
and 305 were the transfers into
the Government Accountability
Program, Funding the and the
Government Accountability Trust
Fund. Excuse me.
Um
And that that pretty much does
it for fund transfers, Mr
Chairman unless there were any
questions
They weren't fun fund. I'll work
on my enunciation, Mr Chairman,
funded transfers. Thank you
guys. Simon, you everything
there yet? Mr Chair. Just one
more. Uh, quick thing. I believe
they're 52 Million, or maybe 54
million of un appropriated, Uh,
Arpaio dollars and the executive
recommendation.
Um, you'll see the
recommendation for those dollars
in lines 309 through 313.
So I don't think that the
executive I think that was
settled in court.
Miss. Mr Chair has authority to
appropriate that those
recommendations but I just want
to remind the the those that
that problem is settled in
court. Yes, Mr Chair. These are
these are recommendations. So,
um
Do with them What you will
Thank you.
And with that, Mr Chairman, if
there are any final questions or
will wrap up
Are we? Are we doing that now?
Our ill, So we're gonna go to
the, uh, State Auditor.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank
you. Thank you guys from the
FAA.
Tough gigs.
Credit Mr Order would never do
you have your presentation
electronically. Yes, we do.
Okay?
We'll follow you along. But we
have. Okay. We have new
technology. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. It's a honor to be
here. Happy New Year. Um It's
always, uh,
Relished opportunity to really
describe what the office of the
state auditor does. And
Ah, in the context of today's
presentation, the subject is
What is our office Do with
respect to reviewing internal
controls?
Ah, and the request was agencies
And so we did query staff and
they clarified that this is
limited to state agencies. So
this presentation is limited to
state agencies and the data that
we have regarding findings that
involve internal controls are
from fiscal year 22.
And the reason why is because we
don't quite have all the audits
for state agencies that have
been released to the public.
And we didn't want to present
piecemeal data.
Ah to you for FY 23.
And we are happy to come back or
provide information related to
internal controls. On related
findings of state agencies in FY
23.
So with that, Let's go, Um
Let's go over to slide number
two.
And again. This is, um the
subject is the state auditor's
role.
In reviewing agency internal
controls. So what our internal
controls? Uh, really internal
controls are processes by which
agencies management achieves its
objectives.
Uh, but kind of the
The primary elements or
components of internal controls.
And this we're on slide, too. By
the way is the control
environment. The controlled
environment is really, um the
tone at the top by management.
Uh, what are the management's
ethics values? The support for
internal controls prioritizing
long term success over short
term results.
Ah, element to is the risk
assessment How management
determines what's keeping it
from accomplishing its
objectives in this risk
assessment.
Would include you know reviews
by management, identifying high
risk areas identifying areas for
training.
And so the third element of
internal controls is control
activities. It's actual policies
and procedures agencies used to
accomplish.
Their objectives and reviewing
policies and procedures in the
context of an annual financial
compliance on it is one of the
primary activities that the
independent public accounting
firms that represent my office
that they look for when the
audit state agencies
The fourth element is
information and communication.
These are written policies and
procedures and records of
transactions of the agency
agencies activities. In other
words, How is this communicated
to the employees? Because this
is a message that has to be
cascaded down from top
management.
And the fifth and final element
of internal controls is
monitoring. You know how
agencies ensure that they're
operating efficiently and
whether or not their control
activities are working.
And I want to emphasize that
really the responsibility. Um
For owning and you know,
developing, maintaining and
correcting any control
activities. It's it's a It's a
primary responsibility of state
agency management.
And Madam chair members of the
committee. We're gonna do a
little tag team. I'm going to
cover the initial slides. I
wanted to introduce some of my
team members. I have my deputy
state auditor here, Ricky
Bereano.
And I have our new acquisition.
Our director of Government
Accountability Office and then
we also have my budget finance
director Laura Montoya.
The other, Laura Montoya.
Okay, so please turn to slide.
Three. What's the state
auditor's role in agency
internal controls so
As I mentioned, we have, um
A network of independent public
accounting firms that are
basically agents of my office.
Every year. We vet them, and
then we approve them. And once
we approve them, uh, that that
is the green light for them to
go and contract with public
entities to perform annual
financial compliance audits
right now we have 54.
Uh, approved independent public
accounting firms. We call them
I PS. We're not talking beer.
We're talking about accounting
firms. So, um
And I cannot, uh, decide how to
test an agency's financial
objectives without knowing what
management wants to do to
accomplish those objectives.
And that really is what internal
controls are.
Um as the I ps fine controls
that are strong, they'll
instinctively reduced field
work. But if the controls are
weak, then more field work and
testing is performed.
Um and I p a s or independent
public accountants identify
weaknesses and deficiencies in
internal controls.
An audit report findings to
inform management.
And oversight entities.
oversight entities like the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
So as I mentioned at the outset
of the presentation, Madam chair
members of the committee, um,
the scope of this presentation
just includes findings that are
related to internal controls in
fiscal year 22 audit reports of
state agencies only so I'm gonna
hand it over to David Craig.
He did the deep dive.
Thank you, state auditor and
Madam chair and members of the
committee when preparing this
presentation for you and our
analysis, audit findings. We
really wanted to focus on those
audit findings as auditor said
that had mentioned specifically
internal controls, but in one
sense
Any audit finding that an agency
has is a deficiency in internal
controls in some way and
developing it, implementing it
or overseeing or monitoring its
framework. And so what we did
was actually focusing on those
ones that the MPs say this is a
defensive directly, a result of
a deficiency of internal
controls.
And so the major one that we see
with three audit findings as a
lack of policies and procedures
really going back to that
element that the state auditor
talked about having to do with a
lack of information and
communication. Okay, written
policies and procedures for how
you do your activities.
We saw that around opening and
closing the fiscal year.
Uh, vendor frauds failing to
notify us of frauds. Um, those
are the main areas where we were
seeing those elements happen,
okay?
The second. Most frequent was
financial reporting.
Um, weaknesses and again closing
the year developing standards
and developing their financial
statements.
Um, the next one is Grant
compliance. We had multiple
findings relating to not
returning documentation to
support financial activities in
Um, the next one is Grant
compliance. We had multiple
findings relating to not
returning documentation to
support financial activities and
an agency accurate or complete
reporting on the use of grants.
Um, most often federal grants as
part of the single audit, Um,
the next one I want to talk
about is information technology.
We had a cyber attack at a small
board and commission and we also
had one agency that was not
removing access to users that
had expired or left the agency.
We also see audit findings
around procurement specifically
over expending budget authority
or purchase orders and
encumbrances and then also
failure to report to oversight
entities, including awful FC and
the state Purchasing office
regarding emergency procurement.
And then we see multiple
findings related to internal
controls around things like
capital assets, subsidiary
ledgers, cash and investments,
including petty cash at those
agencies that collect petty
cash as we all know, in the
audit world Cash is King. Um,
failure to maintain
documentation supporting
expenditures, and we had one
auditor that said that there
was, um
A late audit that was directly
related to the lack of internal
controls specifically the
control and fired mint and
oversight to ensure that you
don't submit a late audit.
So that's what we saw when we
started looking for a keyword
search on all FY 22 audit
findings for internal controls.
Now there were many, many, many
more audit findings for state
agencies that did not
specifically mentioned internal
controls. Those agencies
probably shouldn't be off the
hook. They probably need to also
review their internal control
framework and be looking at what
they can do to improve outcomes
for their agency.
And and improve the control
environment. So, but this is
what we saw for Fy 22, as the
auditor said, as we get more
information for the state fiscal
year, 23 and more agency audits
released will be happy to come
back and provide additional
information.
Thank you, manager. Now I'd like
to turn it over to our deputy
state Auditor, Ricky Karen.
Thank you, manager Now, I'd like
to turn it over to our deputy
state Auditor, Ricky,
Thank you. Just before Ricky
starts, though, we we opted not
to name or call out agencies
even though their fiscal year 22
audit reports are public, but we
did create a summary table with
findings of certain state
agencies for FY 22 that's
related to internal controls.
We're happy to provide that to
the committee if you'd like. So
with that, go ahead, Ricky.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. If I may, I'd
like to begin by stating
something that's not on our
bullets, but that's very
important to be emphasized, And
that's that the responsibility
for internal controls, both
writing those policies and
procedures, implementing them,
and maintaining them is on the
agency's
It's on management. They're
fully responsible. A number of
agencies that appear sometimes
wait until their audits so that
they can find out where they're
failing.
And that's essentially an
experienced problem. It's a
matter of qualifications and
whatnot, so every agency should
be striving to hire people that
are versed in not just
accounting, but also even the
auditing side to see what the
expectations are.
And we're seeing because of the
possibility of accountants.
We're seeing that diminish more
and more.
So what can agencies do to
improve internal controls? First
step I would say is take
responsibility for your own
internal control structure, uh
and not waver.
Number of times that you know,
I've had
Executives asked me why does it
take six people to pay a bill?
Well, because it's not our
money.
And I think if we have that
attitude this is this is a
trust. We hold the public's
trust. This money is not our
money to spend anyway. Which way
that we want Once it's
appropriated, and it's been
budgeted at the agency level.
It's the agency's responsibility
to ensure that you don't waver
from that intent, the way that
it was appropriated and
budgeted, Um
Reviewing your own segregation
of duties is critical.
That's why sometimes it can take
up to six signatures to get one
transaction through because from
a transparency perspective.
You want everybody to know
exactly what happened, how it
happened when it happened, and
who approved it all the way up
the line.
Conducting periodic risk
assessments.
Inherent risk is essentially by
auditing standards. It's the
risk that exists. The highest
risk you have, of course, is
with cash.
Cash can disappear in a minute
without any knowledge of
management. It's the highest
risk you have. You have less and
less risk. Let's say with a
large piece of equipment because
they can't walk off the way cash
can so we measure inherent
risks. That's part of the audit
process that agencies need to do
that as well.
It's almost a common sense
thing.
Um, conducting your own internal
control reviews.
Some agencies have internal
auditors. Some have inspectors
general
These positions should be
reviewing those
Transactions and making sure
that you don't wait until the
end of the year when the auditor
comes along.
And identifying corrective
actions that can be taken once
the audit is done following
through on those corrective
actions. The unfortunate thing
with us is by the time the
audit's done the years,
sometimes halfway down the road,
most agencies audits are due
November 1st. You've already had
54 or five months that have gone
by
Before the audits released, so
it's really hard to turn back
and really just, uh policies and
procedures, but it needs to be
done.
What can the state auditor do? I
think this is a good time to
point out that
We have no operational
authority.
What we do is we go out. We
audit.
We write up the audit report,
and then we inform
Oversight agencies.
Such as the FAA or at D. We tell
them what we found and we give
something certain emphasis.
But we can't implement the
procedures for them because of
auditor independence were
required a CPS to maintain
independence. That means
We don't get involved and
participating with management
and operations.
We essentially were the tattle
tales of the state.
And we bring that to the
oversight agencies.
Um
The USA can expand audit
fieldwork.
We couldn't require I PS to
expand certain areas we've done
that.
With a couple of programs.
We can designate designate
agencies for special audit.
And by the way, all this is that
the agency's expense so it comes
out of their budgets.
Ah, through the findings the
report provides information and
oversight to
You the Legislature as well as
the FA another oversight
agencies.
And we can perform stakeholder
outreach.
To communicate with agency
management about their role.
Currently we meet once a month
with D F A and lfc.
Then we have discussions around
some of these issues.
So with that, I'll turn it back
over to the auditor.
That's the extent of our
presentation. Mr Chairman,
members of the committee we We
stand for any questions.
Senator Stein born But when you
start that, I think we
celebrated 100 years right in in
this month.
Anything 100. Years later, we'd
have internal controls Senator
Stein born. Thank you, Mr Chair,
Mr Otter. I just want to thank
you for your good work and hit
the ground running in your new
in this new role, and I
appreciate your transparency and
I think every time it's it's
tough, it takes courage in these
jobs to sometimes call things
out.
And, uh,
You know, deal with powerful
people, but but I always
I think we're always served when
we see it in these transparency,
type of roles or like the
attorney general's office and
when we see the public interest
being put first, So I thank you
for that. I appreciate it. And I
guess one of your questions here
that you pose that I'll ask is
Mister Barone on you Talked
about a little bit as people
sometimes.
I don't understand. On the right
side of the line. They have to
walk and their latitudes they
have and don't have
So clearly with you and your
experience, like what is
What are you doing? What do you
view your role as far as working
with state agencies to teach
them?
You know, proper procedures and
deadlines and
You might have already said this
part in your presentation, but
That's kind of a takeaway from
your presentation. Mr Chairman,
Senator Steinberg. Our role is
to essentially audit we go out.
We examined
We investigate. We conduct
certain audit procedures that
are in accordance with the
standards with Gatsby standards.
Government Accounting standards
Board standards.
With. Um There are a number of
standards that we have to
follow, and we have to stay
within it because that I'm glad
you mentioned the bright line
because our role is not to come
in and write procedures for you,
but we can produce examples of
where things are being done
right and work with agencies.
I'm not aware of any other time
when the state auditor, for
example, initiated meeting with
D, F A and LFC to try to close
the gaps on the number of these
issues, that's that's a big part
of what we do, do you? Thank
you, Mr. But do you proactively
work with agencies to just put
on trainings for him or
Just remind them of their
deadlines. And you're where you
then come into enforce broken
deadlines and
I
Yeah, I know that. You know, we
we I think we want to prevent
fraud, waste and abuse. But the
problem is, is there some very
strict guidelines, uh, on my
office to ensure that our
independence is not impaired in
any way.
And if we begin advising any
public entity that we audit,
then that would impair our
independence because we're
participating in management.
It's considered management
participation. So really, the
extent of I think training and
capacity building with public
entities is
Really training them in the
audit rule. We that is really
what guides what we do, Um, it
addresses all the appropriate
standards and whenever we do,
amend the audit rule through the
administrative rulemaking
process, we make it a point to
provide adequate training in the
audit rule.
But in terms of any other kinds
of training, it's it's a
slippery slope for our office to
do that.
Mr Chair, An auditor who who
does train then?
The accounting people in these
departments about their
Legal authority. I mean, is that
Is there any entity in state
government? That kind of has
that role that trains these
people when they come into state
government?
Yes, Mr Chairman. Uh, Senator
Stein, Born
I know a lot of extensive
training training that's done
by, for example, D F A
They hold yearly seminars. Their
local government division of
I think, since we've been in
office
I think we I know of three.
Extensive training that they've
done.
So it's generally
It starts with the oversight
agencies but then within the
agency itself
That they need to come up with
some training methodology that
works and it has to be
consistent and it has to be
repetitive because things change
from year to year. Um, but I
can't emphasize enough
What, and and this is. I don't
want this to sound like a bash.
But
A competency level has to be
there.
You can't train if you don't
know yourself.
Um, CFO is that agencies should
not be on the job training they
should come in ready to hit the
ground running, and
unfortunately we do see that
sometimes
Um and I think I'll stop there
before somebody shoots me.
Let me just add to that, Mr.
Chairman, um
One thing that we're also doing
is you know it whenever you look
at any kind of rule issued by a
state agency, I mean God, I
mean, after reviewing one page
of it, your eyes will roll back.
So my office
To really better understand and
provide understandable guidance
to entities that have to comply
with our audit rule. We're
developing a guide and the other
thing to that.
The office of Government
Accountability within my office
We issue advisories. Um
For example, you know, we've
issued several advisories on
opioid settlement funds. My
office has a role in the proper
appropriation and use of opioid
funds. And so we issued an
advisory and we inform not just
the independent public
accounting firms that are
extensions in my office. But all
the entities, especially those
that are receiving allocations
of opioid settlement funds, so
we issue alerts. We issue
advisories.
Sometimes will partner with the
state treasurer. Uh there was a
situation where banks were
identifying multiple custodians
to manage those funds as a means
to maximize their F D I C
coverage and that's not provided
for and
In statute, and so we worked
with the state treasurer. She
admonished the banks that we're
doing that and we admonished the
local governments that were
allowing the designation of
multiple custodians.
And we issued a joint alert. So
there's a lot of things that we
put out there to help. You know,
public entities understand some
of these issues. Let me just ask
one final quick question, Mr.
Auditor, do you miss charity?
You put a lot of these things
online. Do you put all these
resources on our audit rule
requires us to post them on our
website? That's great.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you Any other questions?
I'm sorry, Senator.
Brantley.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. We just
went through a long package of
agencies that are requiring
funding to make meat shortfalls.
And so I guess I just basically
want to go back to the
beginning. How can an agency
overspend? How can they
overspend in the first in the
first place if it's illegal?
Yeah. I mean, I think we had a
lengthy discussion regarding the
health premiums when we brought
to light, a finding and GSD s
audit report that they had over
spent the Health benefits fund.
We also notified the L F C and D
F A of this. It is a state
compliance violation in their
audit.
So, Yeah, it's it's not legal.
And, um, you know, we we are not
an enforcement.
Agency. We have an obligation to
inform and notify.
Agencies like D F a, You know,
can
Can enforce and level
progressive penalties on
agencies that
You know, have irregularities in
their audit, or they have
persistent late audits, but we
just only can inform and
notified, But but you're right,
and we sat through the whole
thing, Senator, So we see that
some of this is still occurring,
and it's probably if it's going
to be a parent in the FY 23
audits. You all are going to
know about it.
I guess, Mr Chairman, I mean,
very specifically how
Not not that they're doing it
like how can they do this? You
know, meaning. It's a shame that
they're doing this. How does the
agency actually do it? How do
they write a check? Why are
they? Why do they have the
ability to write a check when
the funds aren't in the account?
If I may, Mr Chairman, Senator
Brantley.
Um, it has to do with the fun
structure and what how the funds
are set up for budgetary
purposes.
There are funds within share,
for example, which is the state
CRP.
That don't require budgeting.
So, um one
The most common example is when
you receive federal funding and
you're on a reimbursement basis.
You have to spend those funds.
Before you can drum down from
the feds.
That's the requirement, so
that's one legitimate way that
that's done. And, yes, you are
essentially borrowing from the
Treasury, but it's important to
recoup that money and drive from
the feds as quickly as possible.
That's a more legitimate way
that it happens. But there are
funds out there and I believe
some of the funds we've
discussed today.
That don't require that they be
budgeted there either Special
revenue funds or their what we
refer to as custodial funds. In
the old days, we used to refer
to them as agency funds, and
those are supposed to be in and
out funds. So you bring the
money and then you direct it
where it's supposed to go.
But it shouldn't you shouldn't
be putting out more than what
came in.
Thank you should be the control
or the majority of these
agencies that are overspending
using those funds that don't
require budgeting. And if so,
that seems like that could be a
legislative backstop is to
change the requirements and
those those particular funds.
that's as specific as the
agencies themselves, so we'd
have to go agency by agency, but
there is also
There are overrides that can be
done.
So that that's probably
We need more control over
overriding
Budgets within the entire
structure.
But yes, Uh,
I've always believed that when I
was in the comptroller's office
We've got to tighten that up
because that's the way it
happened. Mr. Chairman, stir
audit. Are you mentioned that
you report that So? When? When?
When you were Stephen I P. A.
That comes that comes to you.
And that audit is showing that
the entity has a has
overspending their budget.
Where do you take that
information? Do you immediately
report that to the executive Do
you immediately reported to the
legislator so that we don't get
to the point where they're, you
know. $20 million over budget?
Yes, And in the case of GSD,
because I believe in that
particular instance it was about
120 million in a carry over of a
deficit, And so we immediately
form and formally notified.
LF C and D f A and I believe I
don't know. Do we notify the
treasurer as well?
And one thing that we're also
doing, Senator Madam Chair is
were calling for an audit of the
share system. You know the
statewide
Um, financial system.
And we we want to make sure that
there is a proper internal
controls in terms of the folks
that have access to it.
Um And so this is something
that's developing. We're working
very closely with D F A and, mm
do it because they're in
transition, As you know, share
was under the responsibility of
and then do it, and now it's
being transferred to D F a
And so we're working. We have a
working group with my office and
with D F a
Ah, to really do this. This
audit. Uh, it's it's called a
service organization control.
Service organization control on
it, and it would be the first
time that share would be
subjected to
This kind of rigorous,
specialized audit, And so, um
It's kind of part and parcel
with making sure that
That we that we maintain the
integrity of the share system
and who has access to it by
doing this audit, and there's
different types of audits. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I think what I'd
appreciate from your office
coming here is to come with
suggestions on how we prevent
this from happening any longer.
And so if that is to we need to
pass statutes that certain funds
Um, can run an audit that they
can still at. I mean, can't run
into deficit that they can.
Still they're still allowed to
access those funds. Then let's
put tighter guardrails on that.
Yes. Um, if we need to hear much
sooner, you're saying that you
are immediately report as soon
as it's on your radar that an
agency would be operating in the
negative that you report that to
lfc. Maybe we'll just get more
timely reports, but it would be
helpful for us since you were
the guardian really of this to
come to us with suggestions on
how we learn about these
deficits much
Much earlier before. It's just a
major problem. Thank you guys
for being here today in your
work. Thank you, Senator
Brantley Center Woods.
Um
The senator Diamond.
I actually met
The state comptroller.
He's actually the guy.
That okay on account to be paid.
I had to shake his hand because
A lot of money goes through that
hand, and he's the one that
actually decides to pay a check
or when not to. And if the fund
doesn't have money he had he has
the ability to pay that account,
even if it doesn't have money.
And we think of that, as the
state treasurer.
As being the guy that's a
backstop.
What is the state comptroller?
Working at D F a
That is that backstop.
So I I learned things this year
that I found very interesting.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you for that question.
Yeah.
Um, let me just
I mean, I understand how they
can get a check out the system,
right? But Ricky and Mr Otter at
what point when they say we
didn't have the money in there.
Do they say okay?
We're gonna stop.
After the issue. I mean, is
there is there catch
System. I mean, you have a
balance sheet, whether you're
drawing okay, I'm gonna drive
down my funds to get federal
funds, right?
And you have a balance sheet in
there that says
Here's what I'm drawing from
from and here's my balances.
At what point did they say?
Okay. You don't really have the
money in there.
The controller. Who does that?
Who's doing that balance system
in their teaching agency, or
former state comptroller. Mr
Chairman That's at the
controller level. Um, when I was
in that office, we had one
agency that had overrun
Of course, they're federal
payouts. They were paying off
for federal funding, but they
weren't drawing money.
So my understanding it was
unprecedented. We stopped
accepting their vouchers for
federal funds until they caught
up that $60 million.
And that went all the way it was
during Governor Martinez is
administration remember that and
they ratted me out to her. And I
will say, though, when she
wanted to understand
Okay. How did this happen? Why
aren't you paying these bills?
Well, because there's no money
in there.
And she said.
Oh,
Okay? And then she said to the
Cabinet secretary, Well,
Why would you expect this debate
be paid. If I write a check that
bounces there are consequences.
So there was a lot of support,
but it starts at that level,
Unfortunately, but the FAA has
to have the
They already have the authority,
but they also have to have the
support.
To be able to say no, We're not
accepting these vouchers because
there's no money there and,
incidentally, it's It's not just
the controller, the DFA
secretary, but it also involves
the treasurer's office.
The Treasury office under
statute should not pay out of a
fund. If
If the money is not there for
what that was designated.
There could be $100 million in
that fund. But if that 100 part
of that 100 million wasn't
designated for that specific
Check that That's for lack of a
better way to put it, then that
should not be paid.
And so it's it's it's a
combination, and it involves the
Treasury as well.
It's it's a It's a check and
balance that evidently is not
happening. Well, it's going to
have to happen, right?
Mr. I mean, I remember that I
mean,
And I will say this treasure I
kinberg.
Made sure that state employees
got paid right.
When he probably should have
been wearing orange and jail
because we didn't have money And
I mean this is a true statement
of al right, but he was going to
take the political hit so state
employees were going to get
paid.
So that wouldn't stop. There was
no money in our accounts.
And I mean, we're all at zero. I
mean, remember that Mr Chairman,
you know there's a rat in the
house, but I well, Mr Chairman,
you can overrun of, uh
Particular fund.
As long as there's
Other
Money there to support it.
But right now we're seeing
unprecedented high times of
where there's this huge infusion
of cast, but I think
At least I'm old enough where
I've seen it hit rock bottom,
and then all of a sudden Oh, how
did this happen? And what not
Well, this is the way it
happens, and I think as a state
we have to be prepared for when
we hit rock bottom again Because
it it will happen. Everything
that goes up comes down, and
unfortunately, it usually comes
down as fast as it went up.
Um
So let me ask you so Yeah, in
this amount of money in this
era, there's nobody that should
be over spending their budgets.
I mean, if they don't have the
controls, tell me how we get him
The controls Ricky, you got more
history here than anybody.
Mr Chairman.
I may regret saying this
someday, but
Depending on where I'm at at the
time because I think I'm going
to work till I die, but, uh
You take away the button.
You. You take away that access
to be able to override without
that should be as documented as
an exception as anything else.
If, for example,
If we don't pay our insurance
premiums than thousands of
employees lose their
Interests. But when we do it, we
need to do it knowingly.
The way we found out about this
was after it was all done and we
were over $60 million of the
whole.
Um it needs to be transparent.
There has to be discussion
around it if we're going to push
the button to override
something.
It should take more than just
one person. You can't
Dump that on the back of the
controller.
Because he's looking at people
not getting paid or or people
losing their insurance and those
types of issues.
There has to be a system in
place. Where if you do some type
of over, I'd like that.
It involves all of us, not just
one person. So is it Who can
stop overrides that statutorily?
Or is that
Back of the Bill House to
language
Overrides aren't allowed unless
The treasurer, state auditor in
Mr Mr Chairman, probably all of
the above.
But and statutorily changed
where the override who gives
them authority for the override.
Charles. Do we know that we know
who gives you authority? Mr.
Chairman. I'm not aware that we
have authority for override
except for federal funds.
And that's on the condition that
there's a receivable there.
That's expected to come in to
cover it pretty close to
immediately.
Um one of them is
Ah!
One perspective, I guess I have
is that in the old days, you
actually had to write out a
check and it was manual and
everybody understood what was
going on.
Right now, In the advent of the
RPS, this is one of the big
issue. It's not just with New
Mexico. It's across the whole
country, and it's not just
government. It's across across
private industry. Things have
gotten to automated. It's too
easy to push the button, and
that's what I mean. When I say
we've got to take away the
button to some degree.
So
Who knows the answer to that
question. How do we take
Override authority away.
Charles. I mean, do who gives
them the authority if they don't
have the authority?
And they can't override
Mr Chairman. There's not
authority to overrun a fund to
begin with accepting the federal
funds situation. Yeah, I get
that. But
I'm kind of just puzzled about
if there's no authority.
And you don't have the balances
in federal funds coming back to
support that.
Change, then they're just
writing checks on their own,
doing whatever they want.
I mean, there is a statutory
restriction that exist today.
So it is a statewide compliance
violation if you overspend
So how many audits on those
overspending? Have you? Have you
said you violated statute and
you should probably go to jail.
Besides GSD
I'm excited. We can take a look
at the back to him. Yeah, we we
can. We can look at that. And
look at the FY 23 data.
Audit data on that, So can we
build something into share where
it says.
You've been appropriated $1
million and you spent
$1 million. You cannot write
another check.
Well, that's why I mentioned the
this audit of share.
Two.
Maybe ensure that there aren't
these
Opportunities to override
The system as as Ricky
mentioned.
So
I think he's right. It's this
this automation this enterprise
resource program that we call
share that
Probably presents opportunities
for for overriding, Um and so we
feel that decided is gonna
highlight that
And hopefully the outcome of the
audit will will make it.
Make it better. I mean, you can
audit everybody and say you
violated statute.
But until they somebody
Kids plucked in
Although off in the backseat of
a car for violating statute,
there's no recourse in Ricky's
sitting there. I mean, how many
times has this happened? I mean,
you can see it in every agency.
Oh, I'm going to move federal
funds over here and do this and
in the exact and then it's not
just this exactly. It's all the
exact before they'll just move
funds wherever they want and
violate statute. And if somebody
catches him, but he catches
them, But they don't catch them.
They don't get them.
But at some point if you're
violating statute
Who's going to jail.
I mean, if I went and wrote a
million dollar check and bounced
it guarantee the Santa Fe police
would be picking me up in the
parking garage tonight, right?
But in state government, we can
write a million dollars check
and not bounce it and not have
the funds and there's no
recourse There's there should be
recourse.
100 years of statehood or 112,
right?
Well, remember how many this
year and we can't get in hell,
they would have thrown you in
jail in the 1912 and on you from
a banister for for taking money
out of the till right?
Well, one thing that one thing
that we did is we looked at the
statute that that kind of
enumerates all the progressive
Uh, optional sanctions that DFA
can levy on public entities if
they have any audit
irregularities and late audits,
But
They're really unreasonable, so
I really think we need to look
at the whole batch of statutes
that are antiquated, for
example, that one statute
authorizes DFA to withhold
allocations to public entities
that are laid on their audits
and not current, and they can
even divert gross receipts tax
revenues. But as you know,
You know, A lot of these G r T
increments are tied up in bonds
or intercepts. And so we look at
that statue. It's not even
enforceable, so I mean, we can
have this conversation to them
Blue in the face, But I mean,
you look at the city of Santa Fe
and what the executive to them
right and just said Okay, we'll
just manage your money from you.
You can't do that.
Do you have a cannot be writing
checks right for the city of
Santa Fe and taking their
capital outlay and expending
their Kapali.
That's an override button there
too. I mean, so who is going to
get the audit finding
Is in this situation. Is it
going to be d f a
The city of Santa Fe or
And and who else is going to be
on the audit finding because
they're violating the statute?
Well, I mean, definitely me.
It's definitely the city of
Santa Fe and well, but the
executives also violating that
by appropriating capital outlay
through a state agency with no
authority to do that.
And that's why we feel that
executive order that enforces
that withholding of capital
outlay, even capital outlay.
It's already been awarded.
If an audit is late, Um we feel
that that should be law and
we're supporting the legislative
effort to codify Executive
order 2013 006 because the
legality of that executive order
has been called into question.
It's never been challenged in
court, and so we feel the remedy
is to streamline it. Improve it.
And make it statute.
I mean,
I guess. Let's use this example.
State funds are used in Santa Fe
to fill potholes and pave roads
right and D O T funds that
weren't appropriated through the
Legislature.
And so is D O t gonna have an
audit finding
For misappropriating money
because the Legislature didn't
appropriate that money.
To do that.
There's some violation there. I
don't I mean, I'm just telling
you, it's possible. Mr Chairman
is with everything else. I have
plenty of thoughts. But those I
can't express because the city
of down here Charles had to come
There is there is a definite
independence issue that I can't
violate.
So that's why I'm I mean, it's
kind of listening. I mean and
Ricky, you know this right if we
don't get control now.
And we get in a funding scenario
where we're
Making checks and balances and
trying to get everything to work
like in 16 and 10 and 11. Let's
see seven and you were there,
right? I mean, if we don't get
ahold of these controls right
now.
Can we imagine what could happen
in the future? I mean, we look
come back, and we look at
Specials and supplementals of
305 million that they spent
automatically without any
controls.
305 million. Mr Chairman. I
think that's exactly the point.
It's get during the high times
And when you have the money to
put all these controls in place,
Because when we don't have the
money, it's too late. That's my
point I'm getting at. So I mean,
do you, I guess
Get a statutorily fixed and you
don't want to do the less audit.
You are happier your bosses
because he said, everything
everybody's working. I don't
have to work as hard right and
and I don't have to negotiate
these audits. So you know
they're negotiated. If you have
a finding, and
And
But I mean
I know it's not your
responsibility but whose
responsibility would be for
changing the statute. Is it the
legislative responsibility
because they're spending money
without appropriations.
What I would suggest is again.
we're just one element where the
notifying and reporting
You know element of this, but
it's the enforcement agencies. I
think that we need to gather
with look at the existing
enforcement mechanisms through
state statute and then decide
how we can tighten these up and
prevent these overrides. You
know, that could be the treasure
D F a my office and so we're
happy to have this separate
discussion about
You know, perhaps you know,
having these appropriate
agencies getting one room and
talking about how we can tighten
up these internal controls
because, you know, he mentioned
the lag that exists. You know,
we bring information at the end
of the fiscal year and so it's
we don't have that ability to
report real time because we
can't even discussing at it
until it's public.
And that's already well past the
end of that particular fiscal
years. So which despite but you
know, by the way, we're just not
nimble, we're not nimble enough
checks and balances and
controllers has got too much on
his plate in the whoever the
financial officer is at the
agency, right?
They're the ones that should
probably go to jail because
they're allowing that to happen
in their budgets because they
should be tracking.
Every dollar that moves in and
moves out right to legislate
Appropriates a million and I
spend 1 million. There's no more
money to spend in. So they're
just saying Hit the button,
right right to check in and hit
the button, and we'll get it
back filled in supplementals and
division sees and the
Legislature will have no choice
but to do that.
I mean, other than if we don't
if we don't
Do supplementals and
deficiencies. You just heard in
the snap program right? And
they'll have to cut other ways
will as part of that, just
because the agency doesn't work
that well, they didn't do their
job and snap benefits.
But I mean
To me, Charles.
Charles figure that out for us
who? Who do we take that control
away from
Because if I mean if they're
they're spending money that's
not appropriated.
I mean, do I call state police?
Do I call?
People that are l. D for five
for FICA for investments, and
and what agency? Do we make the
call to to put him in handcuffs?
Mr Chairman. I think that's why
It's fundamentally appropriate
that if we're seeing this
These large supplemental request
in the very large deficiency
request outside of what we
already know.
With, um
G S D is for either the
independent auditors that are
doing the financial statement,
auditor or special audits from
this office.
The detailed functionally just
how this is occurring
internally where? Where is the
breakdown is the breakdown that
an agency wasn't bringing in as
much revenue as they thought,
but they still have spending
authority.
And then at the end of the year
when they closed the books, the
revenue didn't come in.
By law with House Bill two. If
revenue's not coming in, they're
supposed to reduce their their
budget so that they don't
overspend. Is that what's
driving some of these and other
situations share? Shouldn't let
you, um, enter a contract or
inter a P O if you don't have
sufficient budget authority is
that same control in place for
Hiring more people or paying
them more than what you're 200
category can support and if it
is, if it is allowing you to do
that, and then that's the way
that you're overspending. I
But he want to come to a
legislative budget hearing
knowing they have the authority
to override spending.
Why would they? I mean, if I was
a Cabinet secretary, I just sit
there in my office and see I got
a button. I don't really care
what you do, because I'm gonna
come back at the end of the
year. Say back fill me with with
deficiencies and supplementals.
And
I mean, those are
Dollars that
We are supposed to manage and
tax dollars.
And we're letting people run
wild to the tune of $300 million
with it.
I
But I mean, they're Cabinet
secretaries do not have the
authority to overspend their
their budget.
I mean,
I mean, I'm just telling you
why Why pay my taxes? Well, you
because you're gonna come after
me. Oh, but that's right Tax and
road can just push a button.
Spend more money.
I mean,
It's total bullshit.
That people in taxpayers and new
Mexico cannot.
And hold us accountable for what
they're doing as legislators and
go back and say.
Oh, you let him spend 300 so
much million with no recourse. I
mean,
I mean, how do you face a voter
When you say you know, I got
mental health needs? I got
domestic violent needs domestic
violence needs. I got
Alcoholism needs.
And
Secretaries of departments are
just
Spending money. However, they
want
I'm going to shut up before I
start cussing Nancy takeover.
Thank you. For that. I my voice
is a little shot. I was trying
to get a moment here to say
something just quickly. Thank
you, Mr Auditor and others to,
um I just wanted to mention
that thank you for a senator
Comments. But anyway, um
Let me just ask a quick question
before we end here and before I
move on to members, um, we had
authorized and thank you to
Senator Gonzalez, who had
sponsored and I was one of the
co sponsors on that He took the
lead. I have to say thank you,
senator on a bill that
authorized the study for to do a
state internal. The make your
audits.
Statewide, basically, not just
having to piecemeal and as we do
now, kind of trying to save time
and money at your request. Thank
you, Mr Auditor. Can you briefly
tell me where that is? Sure,
Just madam chair members of the
committee. Um, we're I think the
only state in the country that
does not have a singular audit.
What does it singular audit?
It's it's a consolidated audit
of all state agencies. Instead,
we have
But 100 plus separate audits.
And I've heard stories of
federal funding programs that
are allocated to separate
agencies in their individual
audits. Don't reconcile the
fund.
So we feel like it's time for
New Mexico to join the rest of
the country.
And usher in a singular audit a
combined audit of all state
agencies. We feel that
That the bonding market would
look favorably on this that the
state would realize lower
interest rates. And I have no
doubt that the federal agencies
that fund
Our state would be very happy to
see. Um
You know how their their federal
funding programs are being
managed in one single document,
so we requested an appropriation
in the 23 session.
Hmm. For 100,000 in the scope
was to study the pros and cons
of a singular audit.
Well, we issued an initial RFP
and the response um
Was astounding because the the
cost proposal was five times.
The legislative appropriation,
So we did not award the contract
because it just busted our
budget. We still have the
appropriation, but we've limited
the scope.
Further of this to just to take
several steps until you at least
researching what other states
are doing. What are the benefits
of having a singular audit? Uh
and so
We had a setback in that we had
a proposal that just blew the
budget. So with reissued the RFP
With a reduced scope and
hopefully it'll come in within
the ballpark of our $100,000
appropriation. Thank you. Good
use of that When you don't have
enough. You do it in phases,
right? And that's really what
you're doing. Yes. Thank you so
much. Thank you. Okay. Now, do
we have any questions from
committee? Senator Woods? You're
not anyone else here? Yeah, I
would.
I would like to, maybe follow up
a little bit because witness
self insurance fund was brought
to our attention.
We? We wrote you a letter.
Yeah, Representative Chatfield
and I wrote a letter to the
state auditor, and he said that
we just notified
We're not a policing agency
essentially.
And so we decided to go to DFA
and we wrote a letter to D F a
And
They're essentially never
entered this.
And so we could. We sent a
letter to the state treasure
because we knew this fund was
being over spent and the state
Treasury essentially says I
received
A warrant.
To pay these insurance
companies.
From D F a
And the state comptroller says
that you need to pay
These
These bills.
And so
The treasure says.
Well.
I got it from D F a
I have to pay the bills.
And says What?
He didn't You know those
accounts?
We're not
We're not
Didn't have money in them.
And he essentially told us that
no, we didn't know that.
And so
We sent a letter following the
chairman's line of thought. We
sent a letter to the attorney
general.
And we says
Auditor says these funds are
over spent.
D s a
Says that they have the fire to
spend it, and they're not
appropriators.
So
We would like for you to take
action on this.
He sent a letter back and says.
I will put that under
investigation.
I will put that under
investigation.
So
There you go.
Senators.
That's how it's done, and it's
it's a
Funny way to do business. I
agree with the chairman. It's a
funny way to do business when
The legislature supposed to
appropriate money.
And you got a free free ride to
spend it.
So anyway, that was the rest of
the story. Madam chairman of my
letter writing time.
And I appreciate you, uh,
entering my letter truthfully.
And it is funny.
How
This could happen.
And I'd be anxious to see what
the whole audit would see on how
many times this does happen with
different agencies, and I can
see why I controller would be
able to to on on re federal
monies. That has to be, uh
A lag in their school districts
do it all the time.
Because
That's why they have reserves in
many times we talk about all the
extra money at school district
has surplus but those federal
program just the same thing they
have to do. They have to pay the
money and then they get
reimbursed.
So
It's a
State.
Not everybody is qualified to do
these audits.
Government audits is a very
Specialized field, so I know
From what? I've talked to those
auditors so
I appreciate your time today and
I agree that that your job is to
Bring these out to the light.
But
It's hard to find who's supposed
to be the guy.
That actually supposed to
Thank someone to task and say,
Don't do this again.
So I'm waiting for the attorney
general to get back to me as to
what the investigation brought
up. I think the facts are in
front of him.
But
Maybe.
Maybe it's not politically good
time to do that. I don't know if
I may Mr Chair, Senator Woods
and I know you. You were very
concerned about
The retroactive assessments to
local governments to offset the
carry over deficit in the health
fund. And if you recall in my
letter, we
Basically asked the attorney
general for an opinion regarding
regarding the legality of it, so
we didn't move on your concern
regarding the retroactive
assessment.
To to make the health fund hole
as well. And what was his reply?
Um
No reply, Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair.
He hit the button. You're not
reply.
Senator Brantley. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. You. Actually Mr
Chairman may be able to answer
this.
We have a list on here, and I
guess I should begin by saying
this has taken such a serious
You know, tone here because
essentially what we're saying is
our our state agencies are
stealing from taxpayers right in
front of us without legislators
permission And so how do we
create these backstops on here?
It says that as late as last
week, we have some of our
largest agencies that still have
not.
Submitted an audience. We you
still have not posted those
audits some of our largest one,
including peds on here, See why
f d d O h. My question is if we
don't have current audits or if,
if
An entity is noncompliant
anyway. Are they are they still
eligible for capital outlet that
doesn't threaten their They can
still come and ask us for more.
No, they're not eligible for
capital because their audits are
not complete, right?
And so the governor can do the
same thing and move it to D f A
and tell the FAA to expand the
capital.
But they're the agency will not
be allowed to expend the
capital.
Mr Chairman, Senator Brantley
for clarification.
Some of those audits are
currently in review.
Uh, but they were submitted on
time.
So they could have been
submitted on time, but there is
still subject to review
Currently, I think we have a
list of 196 site. It's that
we're still reviewing the
reports.
So the agency might have in all
fairness agency could have
submitted on time. There's still
pending our review and the
larger the audit and more
intense the report review. I
think that Mr Chairman, I can
understand that. I think that if
we could get that information
and timely factor then when they
come asking for more money, it
sure helpful for the legislator
to see. Do we even are they even
noncompliance?
And and some of their audits. I
asked that question because I
have a I have the city of Demi
who hasn't had their audit come
back.
And because of that, they're
threatened. It's cost them and a
number of money, not number of
dollars, not just because
they're concerned about capital
outlay, but it's already cost
him a lot of money. Some of my
non profits in the community
used the city of gender as their
fiscal agent who didn't have a
current audit. And so our
museum we have domestic violence
shelter have gone with missing
money. Because of these this
audit that hasn't been
Produced by your office. So how
How do we make sure these
agencies feel the pain if are
far smaller Municipalities are
having to do it every time
they've done something wrong. I
was thumbing through this during
conversation. It looks right
here. That H s D had an audit
finding on here that they didn't
submit 31 $31.1 million in FY 23
years of finding back to the
General fund.
So instead, my question would be
when we're when we're talking
about creating backstops. That's
the audit finds. You owe the
General fund $31 million audit.
The recommendation from the
auditors was just this is a
quote to ensure adequate
oversight and controls are in
place, but nowhere there was a
failure on the part of the
auditor by saying
And insists that the money be
reverted.
And so I guess I'm throwing that
back in your court to say, where
do we stop and say Enough is
enough and fix the problem.
How do you How do we ensure that
that they follow through on
that?
There was a finding and they're
not. They're not held
responsible.
Why would your office not insist
that that money hadn't been
immediately reverted back?
Well, if it is a finding, we
want to make sure that it's not
repeated. And so that is also a
finding if a subsequent audit
Uh, uncovers the same, finding
its repeated
And that that is not good. So we
do make it a point to ensure
that and every single entity
that's audited, they have an
opportunity to respond to the
audit finding with the plan to
mitigate the situation.
And so
It's not so much what the
auditor said. It's what the
entity's management said in
response to the finding.
And that's where the real
accountability as we mentioned
at the outset of our
presentation, internal controls
falls on the management of these
entities and let me ask my
deputy, Do you have anything to
add on that it? Mr Chairman,
Senator Brentley.
It goes back to in enforcement.
We don't have enforcement
authority that's at the
oversight agency.
And and that agency itself to
return that money. We've been
asked to look into that.
Amount of money.
I actually might Makayla lfc to
see why it hasn't been returned.
We can do that, and we are
looking into that.
But at that point, then we just
inform
Read. It's then up to the
oversight agency to
To implement something that
forces the issue.
You gotta say who you are,
Because my room I may met you,
but you gotta remind me
Mr Chairman, Senator Diamond
Diamond, Brantley, Caroli,
Grandma and the CFO for the
Human Services Department. Let
me just clarify a little bit on
that finding at the point that
the
Reversion notifications are due
to D F a
We were still in the middle of
completing our financials or
child balances and the two major
funds that we have that you know
of, or the Medicaid program and
are operating fund.
So
At that point in time when the
rivers and notifications were do
we did not know what are
reversion amounts. We're going
to be at that point in time, and
we didn't know what there was
going to be to revert. So we
elected to take that finding, um
as not ready to submit the
reversion for that, because we
just didn't know what they were.
Until we completed
Our financial analysis and our
child balances.
At the point that our audit was
complete. It was submitted
timely. It's been completed and
reviewed by the state auditor's
office and released that
Reversion amount has been
reverted back to the General
front. I'm sorry, Mr Chairman.
The entire 31 million because we
have record that only 135,000
been reverted. But just to
clarify you're saying the entire
30 millions of the entire FY 23
reversion amount has been fully
Um, reverted back. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I think my intent on
kind of picking on you is
there's a lot of findings is
actually is actually to ask the
auditor when there's something
like that happened. Why? Why the
auditor isn't coming in and
insisting with that money be
Senator Bentley, though, but
they selected to have that audit
finding and this made. This is
probably correct Decision for
HST.
They selected to have the audit
finding because they didn't know
what a true fund balance was
going to be. So they said, Give
me the audit finding till I
threw up my fun balance. And
then if I have the money, then
I'll revert the balance,
whichever have euros calculated,
So that was you took the hit for
that is correct. As you know,
the Medicaid program, the
Medicaid fund. It's It's
complex, right? That's millions
of dollars.
And if we are shooting from the
hip and trying to think about
what that reversion amount is,
we could potentially over
Revert. Yes, there's an ability
to get that money back, but just
not knowing itself. Solidifying
with that dollar amount was we
did elect to say we are not
going to revert until we
actually know what we need to
keep. I see. I see it in that
case.
That would be one of the few
examples of why didn't
immediately tell him to revert
the money.
At what point at what point do
you come in? And? And I guess I
should just say, Mr Chairman,
we're talking about this. I
don't want to pick on just HST.
There's lots of them when you
talk about there has to be
enforcement of this. What are
the suggested enforcements? We
can't just let him walk away and
then say, Well, that is a shame
that we can enforce it. And And
at some point will we have
statute that that is saying they
can't do it, how they're
breaking the law.
How do you suggest we follow
through here?
I had, as I suggested earlier is
to look at the laws on the books
because again my offices looked
at him and we conclude that
they're really not enforceable
and their outdated so I I
suggest we we look at the entire
framework of enforcement and
access roles and
responsibilities by appropriate
agencies.
And then we approach it like
that to see. Okay, what laws
need to be on the books Who's
accountable for for enforcing
those laws? Um
I think it's just it's it's
regulation in general, I think
in the state of New Mexico, I
mean
Ah!
Regulatory agencies, in my
opinion are underfunded, like
ours, You know, we regulate I
ps.
Uh, but there's other issues
with agencies that that Kerry
enforcement you know,
responsibilities, but they're
stuck with a statute. That's
just it's it's. It's not
enforceable. It's not realistic.
It doesn't reflect the current
environment that that were in
the autumn ization of
These like share of these
financial systems and getting
away from paper checks. So this
is a big, big issue that we're
facing.
And I think the chairman's
right. You know when when we
start heading into more austere
times, we want to make sure
everybody is operating in an at
an optimal level with respect to
integrity and transparency in
the way they manage their public
finances. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I guess we stand ready
to help you. So if you bring us
that legislation that we can
help you
Really kind of get the teeth and
what you need. So you're not
just all bark like so that
there's some follow through
whether it's your agency or
another one start bringing up
that proposed legislation.
And we'll be back. I mean, I
couldn't help but notice the
incredible amounts of money in
the supplementals and I just I
have to say, and I made comments
when I presented our FY 25
budget. Uh, we're stuck with
some legislative mandates that
Have forced us to remove
positions from our financial
audit division.
When when we when we receive all
these audit reports in the fall,
and there's they're staggered,
but when we receive all these
audit reports to review we have
to draw from resources and other
divisions, and that's just not
the way an agency like mine
should operate and and
I mean, I can't tell you enough
that
If we don't address this
problem, then we're all kind of
a party to enabling fraud, waste
and abuse in the state of New
Mexico, and I hate to say that,
but
That's the truth. And so, um,
there's other broader issues as
well. Senator Woods, You know he
he left, but we're seeing a
troubling contraction in the
public accounting industry. The
number of CPS is going down.
We've seen a 30% reduction over
the last five years of CPAs in
New Mexico.
Ah, in the number of firms that
we approve every year to
contract with public entities.
We've seen almost a 40%
reduction over the last 10
years.
This is alarming. I know you
guys are adding incentives for
nurses and specialized
wastewater operators. But the
time is its past to look at. How
can the state of New Mexico
Reverse this trend of a
reduction in C P. A s a
reduction of accounting majors
that higher Ed. How can we? How
can we stimulate interest in the
accounting industry? Because
It's a problem and I'm telling
you from my perspective.
It's it's I consider it a crisis
and I've called it a crisis. And
so I know I'm getting off topic.
Senator Bradley and Mr Chairman,
but, uh there's also some
greater issues at play that kind
of feed into what we're talking
about.
Well.
Mr Steve daughter. You want me
to let you in on a little
secret? Just hit the override
button. Nobody holds you
accountable for it.
It's a simple system to do
whatever you want in state
government just spend, however
you want but seriously, I mean,
when we consider these statutes
and and you look back at past
history
And 090 10 and everything else,
Ricky I mean, do you really want
our prior state treasure? Who
would have went to jail going to
jail Because 25,000 state
employees would have been
getting their checks.
Hmm. We had to figure it out in
the end, right?
Are you put these statues in
there and you really think
about you know there's Ricky,
sir, not get a check. Does
Wesley not get a check Those who
Joey doesn't get a check who
gets a check? And who doesn't
get a check?
And when we get in these
troubled times and
Hopefully we we've righted the
ship enough where we have enough
funds and balances all over the
place to hold us above that.
Recessionary pressures or
depression, depression.
Pressures, but I mean
I mean, maybe get mad and angry,
But I mean in the realistic
thinking is it really want
someone going to jail because he
cut off 25,000 people?
I mean,
I want a one way but I wanted
the other way too. And and maybe
But it's gotta fix I mean,
agencies, agencies just cannot
continue to do this. I mean,
you're you're a program money
without
Legislative approval and
expanding it.
And then you got the balance of
if we get in that situation
again.
I'm not making a decision that
some young mother that's a
schoolteacher with kids is going
to get cut off because we don't
have the money in the bank.
I mean, you got to really think
about those elected positions,
right? Remains scream a little
bit, but I think you know, I
guess we'll be talking about
supplementals and how you move
forward. But I mean, maybe this
was a little bit of awakening
for the Legislature scene.
The necessary legislation. You
know, I mean, it's a true fact.
Mr ordered, you could go back
and you could hire 15 employees
and we're gonna come back and
we're going to back fill you
with a deficiency.
And everybody's gonna say Oh, he
got 15 more employees. There's
No recourse.
How about it? I got no look, I
got nothing to
mean. How about it? There's
there's no law gonna stop you.
There's nothing going to stop
you from hitting that button.
But Mr Chair if I just could
recap. I have a little to do
list from you all. Um one is to
look at the FY 23 audit findings
by state agencies to see who's
overspending.
Um, also, uh Charles Celia's
called Us to discuss
Agencies that have been
deficiency spending. We can have
a discussion to see if we can
give directions to
The accounting firms that
represent my office that audit
state agencies and maybe have
them doing more targeted review.
You know of this of this issue.
Ah, Did I miss anything else Did
I miss anything? I want to add
one thing. So okay when HST was
in that situation, right, and
they had to make a determination
on a fund balance.
And and they had to to balance
the fun balance right before
they can make the correct
transfer.
Is there leeway for that not to
be an audit finding or referred
to be removed later because
Your train up numbers, right?
Mr Chairman. The Medicaid fund
is one that has always been
understood is is going to be in
arrears.
Until they can balance it out at
year end and that's when it
happens. I think the problem is
that an audit finding Ricky then
I would have to look at the eye.
I'd have to look to see but the
The problematic ones are where
There's an override to allow an
agency to keep spending money
and there is not anything coming
through. We know with Medicaid
funding it will come through,
and that's why I had the federal
federal funds in general.
You. You're always going to be
at a deficit and it's
understood. You just have to
make sure that there's going to
be enough money to draw
The only time it becomes
problematic is when the draws
aren't made.
But there's always going to be a
true in up at some point, yes.
And that's when they Trude up
their numbers, and then they
chose to take the audit finding,
But in all actuality, there
should be saying this fund is
not gonna be true until
September 27th and another Mr
Chairman, not in defense of
auditors or whatever, but it
could have been a timing issue.
It could have been
Uh, okay. It could have been a
number of things I'd have to
look at the finding. I mean, you
got to work with them a little
bit so they can
Okay. We're not going to hear
the art. Thank you guys for
today and appreciate it and
sorry from we're not going to
hear the RP funds. Today. It's
already five o'clock and
there's probably a whole bunch
more money that's misspent
there
Appreciate you guys this time.
Thank you guys. Others only 1
