Uh, and that was the purpose.
Second, that motion, any
objection they're coming out of
the executive.
To none, I guess we can tell the
sergeant in arms to let him in.
There's none in the room, so
you're gonna have to do
yourself.
understand that while we're
waiting.
We called up on the Capitol.
And they were still trying to
address issues in the Rioth
bill.
And
And we told him to cut him off.
And with that bill is now here.
So we may try to get that one
done real quick.
So maybe
After they're done.
Charles Texs Kelly and tell her
to come over.
And we'll try to do the capital
reauth, right?
Senator Wars protected your
purses.
chair.
When you said um we cut them
off, does that mean, what does
that mean? Does that mean some
projects didn't get riots that
would have no, they kept
changing the bill and so we're
at the point where it has to get
done.
And so they were, they kept
doing technical changes and we
told them that we can't wait any
longer for the projects that
didn't get reauthorized. I have
no idea. We, we didn't ask. We
didn't.
Comment, they brought me a sheet
yesterday or day before that
they were still cleaning up and
But those bills have to get
introduced in.
OK, we're back in session, we're
up on Zoom, right?
OK, uh,
We went into
Oh yeah we can.
We, we went into executive
session to talk about the
general appropriations Act on
language and cleanup in Charles.
It's now
I want to go over that real
quick in public.
Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. So,
On Saturday
adopted drafting instructions
for LFC staff to go and bring
you back an amendment.
Uh, there were some adjustments
made to those drafting, uh.
Instructions and those are
before you today, um.
To make sure that House Bill 2
conforms to the, the way that
you want it. Uh, the, the first
item is there's um a number of
different bills that are
contingent upon enactment of
legislation in order for you to,
to balance the books. There was
one that that did not pass that
was.
In the budget, uh, that is being
removed, uh, that helps you get
to your reserve target.
Uh, there's some technical
cleanup um for some language.
Uh, to make sure that conforms
and, and works in the way that
you uh desired.
We're just showing you uh there
was a um.
Transfers
To the
Appropriation contingency fund
that we're showing this in, in
the proper way that's a little
bit different than what you saw
on Saturday.
There's a 150 million that's
being transferred to the
appropriation contingency fund,
if there's another piece of
legislation that sets up a lone
disaster recovery fund, then
you're making an appropriation
from the appropriation
contingency fund, um, for that
item. So that's showing that in
the proper way. Uh, there was
some concern, uh, about a, a
another swap.
Uh, that may not, um,
materialize and so you're
unwinding those items.
Um, as well as there was a.
An item where you're
reauthorizing funds for specific
purposes in transportation, uh,
when we did additional research,
we found that those had already
been expended, uh, and so
you're, you're actually just
funding those on the next page,
um, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, one is just technical
cleanup and clarifying the
contingency language for the,
the hospital pay for
performance.
Um, as well as uh how CYFD can
access funding uh necessary for
its uh supplemental and
deficiency needs, uh, it's gonna
need to go through a, a very
rigorous process with DFA
approval, uh, to show that they
can't access federal funds
before they get access to this
money.
There was a request by the
executive to move the strategic
water.
Uh, reserve appropriation that
was in section 5 into a fund
transfer.
Um, so that change has been
made.
Uh, as well as, uh,
Part of the money that will go
out to schools as part of the
funding formula reforms can be
available for uh hold harmless
if there's uh any negative
impact as a result of the
funding formula. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I'd be happy to answer
any questions about these
questions do we cut the economic
developments budget by 50
million. I hope so, but he's
only secretary in the room. I
want to see if I can get a rise
out of him.
But they did get cut, um.
Questions from committee members
see none can have a motion to a
doctor.
A motion by Senator Gonzalez,
seconded by Senator Tobiasson.
Any objection to the
Adoption of the tech.
No
Adopted.
Probably start getting that
ready for this afternoon, get
house built to um.
Senator, what's, what's the
Senator Woods, what do you tell
him?
Yeah
Uh, uh, is Kelly on her way
over.
OK, let's jump to uh Senate Bill
197, we'll do that one real
quick before we jump around on
that.
Representing Garrett.
She's back.
No, no, no, I, I'm just, you
didn't bring any flowers.
What I told you to bring Senator
Trujil flowers, and you didn't
listen.
Senator Compos, you're gonna
present this bill.
Could you tell me who that
expert witness is?
In his past history.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair and members of the Senate
Finance Committee in a few
minutes I'm gonna I'll let him
introduce himself. He, uh,
He looks like he's been really
uh offensive over real quick and
also with me, of course, so, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, Senate Bill
197, the EMS System Improvement
Projects fund, uh, basically
what it does, uh, it, uh, goes
ahead and it allows
municipalities and counties to
pledge, um, emergency medical
services, uh, and it, uh,
through a fund distribution to
the New Mexico Finance
Authority, but more than that,
what it does in this is just
basically allows
Uh, through a bonding process to
go ahead and allow uh
EMS to go over the growing needs
of our medical uh uh services
and so with that, Mr. Chair, if
I may just very quick, I'm gonna
go ahead and defer to uh our
expert and then representative
uh Vincent just to to wrap.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Tim
Johnson, um,
Public safety director for the
municipal League, uh, as the
chair was mentioning my former
job, I was, uh,
A bodyguard for Senator George
Munoz.
Um, we appreciate you all, uh,
scheduling this bill today on on
short notice and very important
to our, particularly our rural
fire departments and EMS
departments. So thank you for
putting it on the schedule.
Somebody must have got fired.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you members of the committee and
what this does is just kind of
aligns everything fire
departments can do it now. They
just can't do it. EMS can't do
it with ambulances and
ambulances are just getting more
and more expensive.
time, so this is lines it up
with that you're trying to kill
the bill for the man go to the
audience, everybody in support.
We got one
Firefighter, you're good. You
wanna talk?
OK.
Anybody in opposition?
Anybody on Zoom?
A good question from committee
members, Senator trio.
Motion for due pass and a second
by Senator Padilla.
I better call the road.
learn how to count.
Yes.
Senator Brant votes yes, Senator
Campos. Senator Campos votesia,
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes, Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes, Senator
Padilla. Senator Padillasia,
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasson.
Senator Tobias and Botsia,
Senator Trujillo, Senator
Trujillos, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes, yes,
Senator Chando.
Oh yes.
Yes, Senator Munoz.
Yes.
And when sports.
Senator Woods, what do you tell
him?
Mhm
Uh house Bill 128.
And they hear
Not here.
54321.
House Bill 56, Senator, sit down
right there.
We're on House Bill 56 as
amended.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, 40% in New Mexico's counties
are considered a maternal health
desert.
Since 2015, birth centers have
played it, have been licensed
and reimbursed by Medicaid.
They play an important role in
providing prenatal labor and
delivery, newborn and postnatal
care to low-risk for people who
lack access to a birthing
centers to thrive, we must
ensure that they receive
adequate reimbursements from
Medicaid and which, what has the
5056 is doing.
Is requiring that the healthcare
authority adopt rules to ensure
Medicaid facility fee payments
made to birth centers for
non-complicated births and
newborns are comparable to those
facility fees made to a
hospital.
And I have my expert here also.
I'm not sure if you need to add
anything. Anybody in the
audience in support somebody
want to speak?
It's not a requirement in this
committee.
Do we have anybody on Zoom?
Right.
Mm
Good morning, Chaos and members
of the committee. My name is
Jennifer Rafael Goetz, and I'm
the director of the New Mexico
Commission on the Status of
Women.
I'm here to speak in support of
HB 56. When we host our regional
events and speak with women
around the state, one of the
most important issues they
raised for us is the lack of
birth workers in their own
communities, birth centers are
culturally and medically
significant in these
communities, they are trusted
options for families choosing to
have their babies outside the
hospital setting because they
want to or have to find
alternative options. It's time
to recognize and reward the
importance of birth centers and
fund them appropriately so we
can continue to provide birthing
options to women around New
Mexico. I asked.
you to stand with the commission
on the Status of Women and
supporting HB 56. Thank you.
Thank you, I already think I
already did this but in
opposition. Zoom, nobody on.
Question from committee members.
That
Emotion for a Senator Tobison
has a question first. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I actually don't, I,
I've been waiting. You just have
to look to the bright side of
things. Um,
Really more of a statement and
thank you, Senator for bringing
this forward um as a mom myself,
it
astounds me that in this time,
this day and age that we have
women all across New Mexico that
really don't have access, number
one, to an OBGYN. They can't
deliver in their own towns in
their rural hospitals, and I
think that this is vital for
women's um health and safety as
far as their access to be able
to deliver with certified um
workers in the medical field to
help them through delivery, so
they're not driving hours or
having to plan to be induced.
So they can get to a larger city
with a hospital. It's just not
acceptable to me, so thank you
so much for bringing this
forward, and I definitely stand
um.
And
I'm losing my vocabulary anyway,
I like this film. Thank you.
We're on a new past motion from
Senator Trujil.
Second by Sinner Tobiasson.
We call the room.
Senator Brandt.
Yes. Senator Brown votes yes,
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalezia, Senator Linier. Yes.
Senator Lanier Boia, Senator
Padilla. Senator Padilla Boia,
Senator Steinborn, Senator
Steinborn votes yes. Senator
Tobiasin.
Tobias and Boia, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillos, yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes,
Senator Sendo.
Senator Sheen pass motions, you
want to jump in that chair?
House Bill 120 as amended
the local solar access fund.
Um, which allows, uh, local
governments, tribes, school
districts, land grants, um, to
access funding for local public
buildings, um, and there's
funding in House Bill 2 for
this, uh, and the program would
be established uh through Thomas
Gray from Positive Energy Solar.
Thank you, anybody in the
audience and support.
When I hear 1 or 2, there's
about 4 behind you.
Jump up there. Anybody in
opposition in the audience.
On Zoom.
When in support, OK.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Alison
Nichols with the New Mexico
Municipal League and the
municipal League supports HB
128, and we thank the sponsors,
um, as you know, uh, solar, uh,
systems and battery backup can
provide critical resilience for
local governments in case of
emergency or natural disasters,
um, when even short
interruptions to critical
services can be
life-threatening. So we
appreciate that this fund can
help, especially our smaller
municipalities who may not have
the resources to access, uh,
this infrastructure on their
own.
Thank you.
I stand in support of.
What am I missing you Mr. Chair,
uh, I just want to add a little
more to that, um.
You know, we think the sponsor
and the um
In the organizations for working
on HB 128. I know that they uh
did extensive outreach on the
community levels. PNM supports
uh HB 128 as it may help support
local, tribal and educational
entities cover costs for their
solar systems. Over the past few
years, PNM has worked with
education, local governments,
and tribal partners such as the
city of Albuquerque, Bertollo
County, Grant County, Deming
schools, Hickory Apache Nation,
and Santa Fe County on clean
energy systems, HB 128 may help.
What similar entities and their
efforts going into the future.
Thank you.
We'll take the one on Zoom.
It is representative Kate's out
there. Oh, I didn't see you.
They
Good morning, Mr.
Yes, good morning, Mr. Chairman,
council members, uh, Lynne
Crawford, mayor of the village
of Ruidoso, just want to speak
in support of House Bill 128.
Uh, small communities like ours,
we found out during our recent
crisis that without power, you
know, we lose power at our
wastewater treatment plant.
We've been working for years to
be able to get solar. It's
expensive. The um feasibility
studies that go along with it to
find out on your ROI are
expensive, and for small
communities like mine and even
smaller ones, this is
imperative. So I appreciate the
support on, on this bill. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
See done. Senator what you got
one?
Yeah
Are we?
Oh
I understand those next.
I uh
I have a little problem with
this one, Mr. Chair, I just
We, we have a dream.
Of, of free electricity.
And I have a problem with the
thought that someone has to pay
for everything.
And
With a bill like this.
We're going to make
Certainly
A, a grant of the way I
understand it, a grant to
Have a fun
To buy things.
So mister
Mr. Chair and and
representative.
Explain this to me a little
more.
How is this gonna work? How is
this, how's this fun gonna be? I
know how it's gonna be set up.
Tell me.
What it's going to provide for
and what skin in the game does,
does the travel or local
entities have.
So that they can keep these
things operating. I have seen
these things operating.
And all of a sudden
A hail storm comes by, they'll
be sober on top of a roof. A
hail storm comes by. It gets
destroyed.
And then when they replaced the
roof it cost extra money to get
the roof off and replaced and,
and usually the solar systems
don't get put back on.
So, give me some kind of, of
assurance.
On how this is going to work and
how this is going to work long
term.
Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Woods, um, so, uh.
One of the pieces here is that
there needs to be a proposal
that is for the long term, which
has a bonding requirement as
well for the long term, um, and
We're all of these projects, um,
will have to be planned and
available for, you know, very
specific needs, so whether it's
a school building or a community
center, um, that is proposing to
have a resiliency component so
that they have storage.
In case of emergency, all of
those products.
So with that you you're telling
me, Miss Charon and
Representative of that we're
gonna be required that they have
bad rest storage here.
With these, each one of these
projects
and Senator No, not all of the,
uh, that is an option. It is one
of the types of projects that
could be funded. It could be
simply solar panels. It could
also be solar and storage
together.
And why I'm asking these
questions because there was a
big solar project that was
supposed to put in right outside
the Santa Fe here and they had
a a huge.
Protest and I think they stopped
that because they were afraid of
the battery storage and
do you remember that project in
particular and what the problems
that the community had with
that, and do you anticipate that
in with this, Mister Chair and
Representative.
Um, these kinds of storage
projects are simply the amount
of energy needed for one
building, um, that.
Project was much larger, um,
that these are much smaller
scale, so these are local
specific buildings owned by
local governments, um, and the
projects that we would
anticipate would be just for
each individual building.
I'm not gonna ask any more
questions. I'm not going to
support them.
The fun, but
For these reasons, if the
community thought it was bad
outside of Santa Fe. I can't see
how the communities are going
to, to buy into it somewhere
else, so that's my reasoning,
Mr. Chair. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, I had a, had a question, but
I think it was partially
answered. So what is the largest
scale?
Or something like this, and I
think it's attached to building
it as opposed to like a
community solar scale is that?
Right?
Uh, yes, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, um,
If you for individual buildings.
Appreciate it. OK.
Senator Truhi.
Most people do pass, seconded by
Senator uh Padilla.
Colderro
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes no. Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Linier. Senator Lanier votes no.
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes yes. Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasson, no. Tobias
and votes no, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillosa, Senator
Woods, Senator Woods votes no.
Senator Schendo yes Senator Sheo
votes yes.
So you put ship.
Senator Munoz.
Yes. Ceremonial sports, yes,
they have a do pass 6 in the
affirmative, 4 in the negative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, representatives.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members, um, I am here to
present HP 41. This is a bill
that we bring to you every year.
It is New Mexico Finance
Authority's public project
revolving fund Appropriations
bill. I'm carrying this
legislation on behalf of NMFA uh
Legislative Oversight Committee,
which voted unanimously to
endorse the bill and the bill
appropriates a total of 13.25
million from the PPRF to the
three identified on.
which is 6.2 million for
drinking water state revolving
fund 2 million for the local
government planning fund and 5
million for the cultural affairs
facilities, uh, none of this
funding is part of the state's
general fund and my expert
witness is a Marquita Russell.
Thank you.
Or anything that.
the sort of
Anybody in support.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody on Zoom?
Questions from committee
members.
Question and no, it's gonna make
a mussen Wood's question, uh,
the, the only question I have is
any of these funds at risk from
federal cuts.
Mr. Chairman, there's an
appropriation to the drinking
water State Revolving Fund to
serve as the state match for the
federal grant that we get, we do
not believe that that is um in
jeopardy at all.
OK. Thank you.
What we do pass a motion for the
past second by.
Senator Trujillo.
Mother.
Senator Brandt.
Yes. Senator Brandt votes yes.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez Senator Linier.
Senator Lanier votes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Padillas Senator
Steinborn.
Inner Steinborne Botia, Senator
Tobiasin, Tobias and Botia,
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Sendo.
Yes.
I understand, yes, Senator Munoz
and Munoz votes, yes. Thank you.
You have a due past 10 to 0.
Representative Garrett.
We do have an amendment for your
bill.
You knew about the one
yesterday, he just didn't know
till you sat down.
Uh,
the Vienna.
Tell us about your bill and then
we're gonna put the amendment
on.
You want her to help you explain
the amendment.
She can, it's actually quite
simple.
She's a teacher.
Tell us about the bill, so then
we can, 157 as amended its new
school licenses.
In line school leader
preparation programs with the
best practices around the
country. It makes separate
licenses for principals and
superintendents, so there's
increased training that
differentiates for those roles.
Um, it requires the principal
preparation programs to
implement.
Um, and more professional
development and mentoring.
As many people who are teachers
know, one of the reasons people
teachers leave schools is
because of the leadership.
Do we really want to improve
leadership. We had a 2/3
turnover of superintendents in
the last couple of years around
New Mexico, it's hard to raise
student results if we have.
Leaders that aren't there for
very long.
And so this will, will, will
really increase the quality of
school leadership.
reduced turnover.
And um with that, I do have the
amendment which um we agreed
with several days ago that um.
OK, we know about the bill. Can
I have a motion to
Uh, move them in for discussion
purposes.
Motion by Senator Steinborn, 2
by Senator Lanier.
tell us what the amendment does.
Uh, yes, uh, the amendment
simply acknowledges that.
Currently everybody who gets
administrative administrative
licensure gets a 3B license.
Originally the bill
grandfathered current
superintendents into a
superintendent license and
everybody else into a site.
Uh, professional site
administrator license at the
hard work of analysts VD Diana
and others.
We realized we couldn't do that
because of property licenses. So
now the amendment as of July
1st, 2029.
Everybody with a 3B license gets
both a site administrator
license and superintendent
license when they go to renew
it, they have to qualify for the
super, excuse me, the
superintendent license by taking
the proper training as outlined
in the bill.
think she caught that.
Another house bill we have to
fix over here.
different opinions from
different parties charging out
the budget to fix house bills
over here, $3 billion worth of
fixes that we had to do in the
last couple of days, uh.
Can have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
And motion by Senator Tobias and
second by Senator Padilla.
OK. Anybody in the audience in
support. Eman, you want to talk
or?
Up to you. Do you have anybody
on Zoom?
One
Anybody in opposition in the
room?
Nobody, anybody in Zoom in
opposition.
album.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for uh
giving me a couple of minutes,
um, uh, as you all know, I work
for the Lano Foundation. We
stand in strong support of House
Bill 157, uh, as the sponsors
mentioned, um, strong school
leadership is essential for
student achievement. In fact,
um, second to teachers, school
leadership has the next biggest
effect on student outcomes, um,
for the past couple of years,
um, there have been groups that
have been meeting including a
task force that missed this past
summer that consisted of current
and previous superintendents.
Educator prep representatives,
union representatives, charter
schools, tribally controlled
schools, PED LFC, LESC, um, and,
uh, chambers of commerce, um,
all the stakeholders you would
want to get involved in
something and this bill is the
product of those folks
collaborating. So, uh, we
appreciate that House Bill 157
establishes clear support for
aspiring school leaders and
modernizes our licensure system,
um, we do appreciate the efforts
to amend this bill so it could
be heard today, and we thank the
sponsor very much and we.
urge a do pass. Thank you. Thank
you. Give us one on Zoom.
You pick.
Mandy got about a minute.
Good morning, members of the
committee. My name is Mandy
Torres, Education reform
director for I think New Mexico
and the 2020 New Mexico Teacher
of the Year, uh, while paying
teacher working conditions most
often top the list of why
teachers leave the profession.
Also regularly influencing that
decision is a lack of stable,
effective leadership in schools
and at the district level. We
fully support 157 and a new
administration licensure system
and believe that the
preparation, training, and
mentorship for that licenser are
the most important pieces to
this bill, allowing candidates
to focus solely on
learning how to become an
administrator. As Rep Garrett
mentioned, we hope it will help
improve the turnover in
superintendents and principals
because the instability we see
across the state at the local
level can negatively impact
schools, leading to decreased
student achievement, higher
teacher turnover, and a
destabilized school climate. We
think the sponsors and all who
have worked on this issue, and
we urge to do pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members.
Shindo. Oh, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh
What's gonna guarantee that the
superintendent is gonna stay at
these schools.
Repeat your question for
Senator. I, I was just wondering
if it's gonna be stabilize our
schools, but the school boards
hire superintendents and we've
had good superintendents in our
school.
That are that go so.
What's going to guarantee that
the superintendents, good
superintendents remain in our
schools when they have no
control over their own. Mr.
Chair and Senator, thank you for
that question.
It's an ecosystem. You need
school boards, you need
leadership, you need teachers,
you need all the support staff
is increased training and
expectation will be a step
further in guaranteeing that
superintendents have much more
in-depth training for their
expanded responsibilities.
And school boards.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, we
did a bill last session, I
believe that increased training
for school boards.
Yeah.
Thank you.
other questions. I have one
quick question, so, and I think
they'll be able to explain this
to me, so.
You pretty much have to grow
your own nowadays, right? From a
teacher to principal to.
Administration this allows that
flexibility along
Thank you, General intation in a
motion for due pass.
And most of my Senator Gonzalez
2 by Senator Woods.
Cara.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator, Senator
Campos Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalezia, Senator
Linier, Senator Linier votes,
yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padillas, yes, Senator
Steinborn.
Steinborg votesia, Senator
Tobiasin, Senator Tobias
Sibosia, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillos, Senator
Woods, Senator Woods votes yes,
Senator Schendo. Senator Sendos,
yes, Senator Munoz,
what do you tell them?
You
Uh
Are you gonna do representative
Armstrong's.
There was
You have an expert witness.
Might have 2 of them.
Yeah
But the lobbyist bill we passed
last night, now they're gonna
have to sign up.
I need both of them, I think.
This, this is house built.
174.
Uh, it ensures fair and.
Sustainable reimbursement for
less than 60 community-based
pharmacies in New Mexico.
This legislation is required
that health care insurance plan
under the Healthcare Purchasing
Act reimbursed those pharmacies
for the cost of prescription
drugs along with professional
disensing fee that is no less
than what Medicaid provides.
HB 147 supports the financial
viability of local pharmacies
enhances the basic.
Access to essential medications
and strengthen the healthcare
infrastructure for our
communities. This bill
prioritizes fairness,
transparency, and well-being of
patients who rely on their
trusted local pharmacies for
quality care, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience in support.
And money on Zoom.
will take one.
Why did you roll your eyes?
You want 2? OK, we'll take the
other one. Come on up.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
My name is Jason Thompson. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the, the
Mexico pharmacy Business Council
and also representing American
pharmacies who represent the
independently owned
community-based pharmacies. We
really appreciate sponsors work
um on this both houses, so I'll
keep it brief.
Primarily this bill is intended
to relieve the financial
pressures and burdens that
community-based pharmacies,
independent pharmacies face to
operate their business,
especially in this healthcare
environment and especially in
rural New Mexico. So this is
just designed to help them in
the long term keep their doors
open, keep the access open and
keep them, uh, with the ability
to be able to serve the
community, especially again in
rural New Mexico. So we really
appreciate.
How the sponsors work and
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
my name's Kirk Irby. I own
Lowell's Pharmacy in Artesia,
New Mexico, um, and that is uh
an independent pharmacy and it's
out of Arishia Rossell Carlsbad,
there's only like there's, I
believe, 4 total.
community we've had an attrition
of of independently owned
pharmacy.
I'm appreciative of the support
from from this bill and worked
at both chambers have done on
this. Thank you.
Questions from committee Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning.
Um, who's your expert witness?
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Thank
you very much. My name is Doctor
Ashley Sebart. I'm the owner of
Care Drug in Aztec and
Bloomfield, New Mexico. So one
of the uh directed towards me
here. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chair, thank you, Ashley for
driving down this morning and,
and coming to testify. I
appreciate it. She is a uh
A great person in our community.
She does run two different
pharmacies and she um volunteers
for about anything in the world.
I was in DC and ran into her in
an airport and.
She's down there advocating for
all pharmacies, not just the
small ones, but all of them, so
I just appreciate you coming
down. Thank you.
Yeah
She would talk about
does
Any other questions from
committee members.
See them run do pass motions, do
pass motion from center trail,
second by center Tobias and.
All the room.
Senator Brent.
Yes. Senator Brants, yes,
Senator Campos. Senator
Camposia, Senator Gonzalez
Gonzalez, Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator
Padillas, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson.
Center to bias and Bosia,
Senator Trujillo.
Trujillos, yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes, yes,
Senator Shendo,
Senator Shedosia Senator Munoz,
Senator Senator Woods, what do
you say?
Let's get out of here.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
No, not till probably this
afternoon.
We got to do house build too.
OK, Mr. Chair member of the
committee, what's your name?
Mhm
Do we know you, vice chairman.
Oh, OK. Uh, that's where.
Uh, finally, we have the uh
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 425.
Uh, this is the reauthorization
bill. Uh, it has 421.
Capital projects authorized in
previous years from the various
funds.
estimated estimated balance on
the projects including this bill
as of January, it's about 262.5
million.
So
You have a
To be handed the uh
If IR as well, all the uh
projects listed by county, and
of course the bill itself so.
Witness is Kelly, so if you have
any questions.
Wesley, you have anything to
add?
Sure.
Gonna earn that pay increase.
We have a table in motion.
And emotion nondebatable.
Uh, uh, any other, I guess, give
us a minute to digest this, but
I mean,
Mhm
I don't know when we're gonna
learn.
Where our own worst enemies.
The incompletely fund projects.
The Rio projects for another
project.
We don't ever complete the
projects we're gonna hit 6.3
billion this year, Kelly.
Um,
Your chair, yeah, I expect at
least in the 1st quarter with
the new, when the new
appropriations come online, um,
will be over 6.
I, I mean, I don't know how we
teach ourselves this lesson, but
we.
We lead people on that we can
help them.
And we're not really helping
them.
We're not helping them complete
projects.
Um
We're not helping some of these
are 2021.
I mean, every year I say this
and I shouldn't have done it
this year, but I did.
Uh
People need to know that the
reauth bill is not gonna be what
they're
They're gonna reauthor another
project.
It's not gonna come back or I'm
not gonna hear it.
It's time to dig. Somebody's got
to play the adult in the room
and.
And say capital outlay is not
gonna happen like this anymore.
6.3 billion 6 times 5 is.
30, so I could, I create $300
million worth.
The money sending capital
outlay.
And not have to
You stuff in there.
minor.
Questions from center compos.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, uh, um, Mr.
Chairman also as we move forward
and uh Kelly, if you can uh
briefly describe, if you will,
this whole process with the
Rios, uh, and again in brevity,
uh, in what people are going
through and uh are you seeing
improvements, uh, to the process
or we continuously uh making, if
you will, the, the same errors
as as I would make.
Uh, note that. And then along
with that, uh, are we finding
out that entities just just
can't get the dollars out the
door that we would expect him to
to uh get to take care of their
projects. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos,
so briefly on the process, um,
local entities requests or the
projects.
And the legislative sign off on
it.
Um, statewide, state agency
projects, request
reauthorization through DFA, um,
DFA reviews the disapproves of
those requests. So all of those
that are approved either by the
executive or legislator as well.
Um, if you look at your draft
FIR on the committee substitute,
which should have been provided
to you in, um, if you look at
page 2 of that, you can see that
this bill includes, um, more
than 4. This is a dramatic
increase over the last couple of
years where
dramatic increase over the
previous years. So, um, in 23
and 24, we saw 299.
So, um,
You know, given that we just
received this bill, I can't tell
you exactly why that number
increased so much, it would
indicate that, uh, the problems
underlying the need for
reauthorization. Um, it could be
partly a function of the fact
that, um, we're now sort of
reauthorizing projects in bills
when revenues for the capital
program started to increase a
lot and where there were kind of
more, there's more more money.
So that might be partly what
we're seeing.
here.
Um, you know, this committee has
had some discussion about
putting some reasonable
boundaries around
reauthorizations, um, for
example, you can see in the
chart on page 2 here as well,
that the vast majority of these
requests are to extend time.
Um, and so one thing you all
have discussed is potentially
reducing the allowed time
extension from the standard 2
years to 1 year and only
allowing um a single
reauthorization. So as it stands
now, um, entities can come back
and ask for reauthorizations.
Last year in the bill, I think
the oldest project was
originated in 2012. Um, that
issue actually got significantly
better in this bill, um, my
hypothesis.
that's because, uh, the governor
last year vetoed a bunch of
projects that were older than.
2018.
Um, and had been reauthorized
multiple times. So the oldest
project in here is from 2018.
There's only one of them, um,
the rest are the oldest. That is
a significant improvement, at
least.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
I could go on and on and on, but
I'm not going to today again,
uh, what we run into is a
situation where we not only have
the projects that continued to
build. We also have the
resources that as you indicate,
Mr. Chairman, uh, if they were
out there, they would stimulate
the economy, we would find our
state in so many areas with the
improvements that are necessary,
but again, uh, hopefully we'll
be able to find resolve to this,
this whole process, not only
with the riots, but with the
capital project.
as we deal with it. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Center to bison. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Billy, can you tell me,
is there any kind of oversight
on maybe like a quarterly basis
for these projects or are we
just hearing about them every
year when we're hearing session.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, so yes, we, um, all
grantees of Capital Outlay
Appropriations are required to
report on a quarterly basis.
Um, and, uh, legislative Finance
Committee staff produced a
report for the LFC every quarter
on the status of all projects
funded for more than a million
dollars. And then we also
provide every single legislator
with a quarterly, uh,
appropriations that they
sponsored.
Um, I will tell you that this is
a problem, um, Wesley and his
team are working
reauthorizations in particular
become very difficult to track
in the system we have.
Um, so, uh, you'll often see in
those reports that we basically
flag your sponsored projects
that have been reauthorized, but
it's kind of difficult for us to
link them in them. Although any
of those that you do want
information on, you can contact
them.
OK, thank you, and I, I'm just
thinking.
Obviously, it's not working,
right? And so I know there was
one instance.
Well the same. So the, the
jails, um, they were using,
they, they had money to use some
kind of drug to help um inmates
as they come in who are
addicted, um, and I guess the
inmates weren't wanting that
drug or I don't know what the,
the situation was, but
They were wanting a reoff of
that money.
And we made a phone call to find
out that they've just started
using it because there's a new
drug, I guess it's more
effective or something, and now
they're utilizing it, but
If, if it sounds like part of
the burden is on us as the
legislator to track our own
projects and, and look at where
they are and really get the
details, so is the reporting
obviously as a freshman, I
haven't seen that other than
what I'm seeing here in session,
but how detailed is that
reporting? Are we getting like
true responses from these
entities.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, so the reporting is,
um, a portion of it is really
dependent on what the grantees
report. So the information you
get is only a, um, you know, the
chair mentioned the
I outstanding balances we have
in the capital program overall.
I think we have near 5000 active
projects out there in the state
right now. So we don't have the
capacity to sort of go out and
Make 5000 phone calls every
quarter. So it really dependent
on them doing the reporting and
Reporting good. Um, I will say
that we, oh, and sorry, then the
other portion of it that tracks
expenditures, which are kind of
an imperfect but proxy we have
for whether things are moving
along.
Um, those come from the state's
financial system. So they're
basically telling you where the,
whether the committee is
expanding the fund, the
community is expanding the funds
and requesting reimbursement
from the state.
Um
So, one thing we started working
on last year and that we will
continue early this interim, um,
is training, uh, the new
district staff that every
legislator will have in using
those reports to help support
you in kind of doing follow up
cause, you know, essentially our
intention is to provide you the
reporting we have, um, we kind
of give it a color code rating
based on the expenditures to
give you sort of a quick and
dirty flag of like, does it look
like this project is
progressing?
Singer or not. And then you'll
also be able to see, well, is
the community, um, providing any
reporting in terms of like
giving you qualitative info. Um,
so the goal is, you know, this
is an area where you DLAs can
really help you out and, um,
provide individual legislators
with capacity to track those
projects that you haven't really
had in the past. Um, so our goal
is, you know, to make sure they
know how to use them, uh, for
you.
Mr. Chair, um, Kelly, thank you
because I think that's a
phenomenal idea and it almost
sounds as a committee like we
should put um all these agencies
on notice that if they're not
going to provide real, uh,
timely and detailed information,
they may be looking at a very
different scenario.
Down the road.
Um, because
This is just such a massive
amount of money and
It's definitely not efficient,
even some of the answers I know
we've, we've heard here during
this session. Um,
It baffles the mind how many
millions of dollars are sitting
in agencies where we could be
actively using that for the
better good of the citizens, um,
and every dollar that sits in an
account unused is shrinking.
In today's world, especially
when it comes to construction in
particular. So, um, thank you
for that information and thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Sinner.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So I'm trying to figure
out um where it says citation
under that column, it's got the
date like 2018, 2021. Is that
the first time it was
authorized, or is that the last
time it was reauthorized.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
uh, we believe that's the first
time.
OK. So, um, on
And, and then I don't see the
dollar amounts here, Mr. Chair,
Senator Trujillo, no, you do not
see the dollar amounts. The
dollar amounts do not appear in
the bill, um, they're basically
a moving target and essentially,
when the reauthorization is
made, it kind of stops the
project.
There's a whole new
administrative reissue grant
agreements, and they determine
at that time where they're sort
of reissuing the agreement, um,
what the, so, um, we essentially
use the appropriation IDs and
the estimated balance based on
the last time we
the data. OK, um, Mr. Chair, so
on, I, I just wanna ask about on
page.
34 of 41 at the bottom.
the next page, there's 3 Agua
Fria community water projects.
One is dated 2018 and the other
2 2021.
for the exact same thing that's.
Not a duplicate.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
no. So those were likely
multiple appropriations made
over consecutive years for a
similar project that the
community is asking for them all
like they're all timing.
So like 2027.
Yeah, OK, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and then on page
36 and 41 at the very bottom.
Um, it's the Santa Fe Southside
Teen Center, that's already
built.
And so I'm wondering, uh, I
don't see, it says to plan,
design, construct, furnish, and
equip.
It's already built, and it's
already been functioning for
quite some time now, so I'm
wondering.
What, what can they use that
for? We're not going to build
another teen center.
And I know they asked for
reauthorization, and I thought
that they had asked for the
language to be changed. I I
don't know what they're gonna do
with it now. They can't build
another teen center.
Pretty restrict
Uh
on that point.
And the woods
When I was asked to reauthorize.
I had my, my district staff.
Check it out.
There were many of them that was
already complete, that had
already been reimbursed, but
somewhere in the paperwork
between the two.
They, they didn't show that in
this report.
And we actually searched that
out and found out and we didn't
reauthorize those.
But it was, it was something
that we had to do. I don't know
where the breakdown is is is one
that communication between the
Department of Finance.
In this list.
But one of them but one was done
and I had one rear.
That had to do with the chass
over a trash truck.
So many of these may already be
done.
But they weren't checked out and
that's what each legislature
must
Start doing
Just as you described.
And, and get these written off
because some of them are
complete.
Mr. Cha, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Senator you can
do that.
But it's up to the to whoever
got the money.
Send the documents to
Wesley, what's your new, are you
handling all the documentations
coming in to check off Kala or
is that still be a?
So, you can check all the boxes
you want. You can go over there
and see the building's done with
the city and the counties
haven't applied for
reimbursements and sent their
receipts in there's no way for
you to do that because you're
gonna, you could hand walk Santa
Fe's in, but I'm not walking
mine in from Gallopless than
your dying to say something, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
so what we will do is once this
bill is passed, we will go
through all of the um projects
in this bill and see which ones
are, are complete and don't have
any funding left over and we'll
just veto them. So
Um, that's one thing that we can
do with it. We can't do it on
the front end, all of the
legislative requests come
through council services, so we
don't know um what's in this
bill until we get the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
Senator, if they, and I, and I
know they haven't asked for
reimbursement cause it's a
little bit of a, of a, of a
trigger because it has been
built, so can, if we reauthorize
that, can they now ask for
reimbursement for something
that's been built and function.
Mr. Chairman, um, Senator
Trujillo, yes, um, what we would
do is we would make sure that if
they had any expenditures prior
to the bill signing date that
they would get reimbursed for
all of those and then the new
project which is not um be
budgeted is what would happen in
that case. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So would you have anything else?
Here's your YouTube video.
Next year, I'm not gonna do
reauth bill.
If it's unless it's for one
year's worth of reoff.
No more 3 years extension.
No more
Piecemealing stuff together and
it's tough love, but it's time.
We can't manage how many total
projects are we gonna have now,
Kelly, we had 6000 last year.
How many we're gonna have to
manage this year.
It'll probably be over 6000. I,
I think there's about 100 new
projects in the Capitol bill,
um, 400 projects to manage and
how many staff do you have,
Wesley?
Mr. Chair, um, my staffing is
around 18, um, they're not all
overseeing capital projects
directly though, um, they're
trying to help with funding and
finding additional funding. How
many oversee overseas capital we
have 2 in the budget and then
there's 5 in local government
division.
So 7 in total.
Divide that by 7400, that's 0.
Is that manageable?
Mr. Chairman, not to do it
effectively, no.
In woods, are you on that point
again on that point too.
The most recent capital
authorizations that was done by
the legislators.
Maybe not in this room.
But some moment only authorized
3% of the project to be
financed.
They was divide their money out
to cover everybody that ever
asked anything from them.
And if you only authorize 3% of
the project we start a project
now.
And then sooner or later it ends
up on a list like this.
We've got to make guidelines on
that, Mr. Chair.
To make these legislators fund
the majority of the project, a
big majority.
Mr. President, a mystery.
in her compost on that point.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chair and members of the Senate
Finance Committee on that point
with the uh parameters as we
deal with it. It's very
important and one of the other
items I would hope they would be
able to further take a look at
would be those communities uh
any of any of these uh places
where they're not up to speed
with their their audits. I know
that's a real big issue, so I
appreciate you calling on me for
a second time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairenator Tobiasson. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I was just gonna
say on this point,
someone who just went through
this process for the first time,
you know, I, I spoke with a lot
of other senators who said that
they were funding specific
projects and when I, I actually
loaded all of mine on that live
spreadsheet.
But there were the majority of
senators who did not load theirs
on that spreadsheet and once I
turned mine in, I had no idea
what percentage it was really
funded.
And, and I think that's, that's
a, a gap in the process for sure
that we should sure up like
maybe what we do is we say, OK,
today at noon, everyone has to
have their allocations on that
spreadsheet.
And then once we get all that,
now we have 24 hours to go back.
And say, do we need to shuffle
or talk to different people that
said they were funding things
and our representatives that
weren't funding things and, and
pull money or move it around,
because I think as legislators,
we can do that if we had 24, 48
hours buffer to look at that
spreadsheet and see what people
really did.
Um, because I know for some of
my projects, some people that
said they were putting money
into a certain projects.
Didn't
And I would have moved my money
somewhere else had I known that.
Because I'm sure I have projects
that were maybe 3% funded and
had I known it was going to end
up that way, I would have
earmarked money towards another
project, for sure. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Center Padilla.
Uh thank you, Chair, and so on
Senator Tobias and just I will
let you know that um I'm not
sure if you were pulled into a
meeting for Berlio County by any
chance? Yeah, so we built our
own sort of
Here's what's in, here's what's
out and everything. We're trying
to pull everybody in, so I'm not
quite sure why that didn't
happen with you, but um.
Senator Padilla I would just
say, Mr. Chair, that, um, I'm
the only Republican in
Bernalillo County, and I'm not
pointing fingers, I'm just
saying that could be an honest
oversight work well with
everybody. I, I don't care if
you're Republican or Democrat. I
just want the projects done as
well. So that's what we'll do
with the fact that you're a
Republican. I'm not saying that.
I'm just saying because you all
are working in more of a caucus
setting is probably why I wasn't
pulled into that I don't know it
was
anyway we tried to work with
everybody, so, um, but
Making a comment here that's all
I mean I was called out on we
didn't we involve a Republican,
which is completely opposite of
how I work. I think you know
that. Uh, first of all, second,
uh, is there anything
constitutionally or anything in
law that would prevent us from
just putting like some rules in
place. I mean, where I'm going
with this is, you know, if, if
you get like my first year here,
I want to say it was like $1.1
million. We've got 4.1 now. Is
there anything, you know, that
where we could enact something
along the lines of 50% of your
dollars have to go to
One big project and then the
other 50% could
Be no less than whatever, or 25%
of the remaining 25% could be
less than whatever. I just feel
like we, we would see a lot more
get done if we just put larger
amounts into
To working together and getting
these things much like what
Senator Tobiasson was talking
about. I mean, that spreadsheet
was, it was envisioned that
everybody in Berlio County would
come together and fund maybe 10
large projects.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
um, so there's nothing in law
now, but of course, you all
could.
Pursue some boundaries around
some of this.
Um, you know,
So the chairs Point earlier
reiterate why the
reauthorization affects
everything else. So, you know,
in looking at casiers at LFC we
have seen that there are common
problems that lead to reauthor
and lack of capacity at the
local level, um, piecemeal
funding, you know, only getting
3% and having to come back year
over year when you don't have,
um, I think the reauthor need to
essentially provides no
incentive to do any of that
front end stuff.
first place. So, you know,
something like you all have
discussed of reducing the time
extension to one year and only
being, being able to do it once.
For any given project, you know.
Could provide quite a strong
incentive relative, um, to make
sure, you know, ducks are in a
row on these projects, um, Thank
you.
Thank you. Thank you,
Ellie. um, so I'll just stop
with this one then, chair. I and
I think you've sort of done this
before, but I wonder if maybe we
should just throw a small little
subcommittee in the interim to
just really hash through all of
these things. There have been
some great suggestions, I think
along the way, we just haven't
really enacted any of them. And
I think that's why we sort of
end up at the end of the session
like, well, gosh, we really need
to be doing all this or that or
whatever to get more of these
things done.
But maybe we could come back
with a recommendation that uh
turns into a piece of
legislation that provides those
guides on, on 50% goes here, it
has to be something that's
within a year, that there's a
lot of great stuff we've talked
about. We just haven't enacted
it.
Let, let me answer some
centerator Patilia's questions
before.
We did in LFC doing interim in
the subcommittee, to try to
start cleaning some of this up
and, and it's hard because you
need the message this now today.
For next year.
And so as we move down that
path, we could do, we thought
about introducing statutorily
changes, right?
But they probably get killed.
Because legislators won't bear
the brunt of fixing the problem
that's gonna stay.
And so that was done.
Capital was requested by the
Governor Dubai.
November, December.
In December
council requested their request
due by first of January right
in.
Right when it came to session 1
or 2 days in session December
mid December.
That's the earliest anybody's
ever had that done.
And look today.
Today we had to call the
council.
To get this bill down.
Because they were still working
on it.
But we started 2 months earlier
than we've ever started before.
And we're in the same place
where we.
I mean, we spend a lot of time,
Senator Woods on that
subcommittee, and we had good
ideas and I think in the capital
bill, some of those are coming
to fruition.
But this is the Rio bill.
And so
This is the point and I'm gonna
that give the lecture.
What not to do and what's not
gonna happen again.
Senator Gonzalez.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, that's fine.
Mhm
Uh, I mean, OK, so I'm gonna go
to page 43.
And how can you not buy a trash
truck.
Since 2023.
Then
I'm just gonna, you don't have
to look at these.
And then I'm gonna go to page
77. The Navajo Nation Code
Talkers Museum. The land was
given to him.
Chevron.
On an old mining site, and now
they come and they reauthor
acquisition of land.
Chevron gave them like 140
acres.
Uh, of the code talkers museum.
Why are you acting that?
To to acquire property when it
was given as a gift.
And then I'm gonna go to
These are just a couple of them.
Sure.
And I'm not just picking on
anybody, but I mean, in, in this
page.
I did a rough.
Rough number of pages, not
dollars, right?
There's what, 41 pages in here,
I think.
41 pages, right?
7 of these pages are Navajo
Nation total pages, so that's.
3rd.
recorder.
One quarter.
Less than that.
18
7 pages are just Navajo Nation
projects.
The Navajo Nation, they're, I
mean.
I love him, God bless him, but
you know what? If you're not
gonna get your
But together
We're not doing this anymore.
UNM PED that's the other thing
PED cannot buy buses since 2021.
State agencies cannot buy buses
on Wesley and.
You got something to say about
the PD buses.
Mr. Chair, we've um been asked
by public education department
for the last couple of years now
to extend um the, the actual
capital bill to allow them to
buy buses, um, in 3 years
instead of 2 years, it is hard
for them to buy buses within the
two-year time frame that's in
the bill according to public
education department.
Well, I mean, all they have to
do is put in an order, and once
they put in an order, they get
appeal from the state or state
agency, they can get appeal and
then once they have the, they
built that timeline now.
They can't use that excuse
anymore.
This capital that they're
reacting.
If they had ordered buses in the
very first year and then got
capital the next year and the
very next year, they have, they
have the ability to do that.
Whoever was running the bussing
system over there, it needs to
be fired probably.
I mean, at some point.
I mean
We all want to go to every
groundbreaking we can can,
Senator Schindo loves to get the
golden shovel when he leaves
there, and we leave with the
golden shovel and, and come back
and there's nothing there.
A nice headline in the paper and
there's nothing there or the
store shut down.
Yeah, and then.
Uh, there was one in Gallum
McKinley County that completely
changed the reauth and then I
can't remember what it was. I'm
gonna look for it here real
quick, Wesley. You, you have a
spreadsheet of what these might
be.
completely changed what it was,
and I don't know whose money it
was.
But it completely changed the
purpose.
Uh, it's on page 65, section
179.
Gallup Children's and family
facility renovation expand
purpose general fund.
Uh, if you can look that up real
quick.
Include purchasing of land and
buildings in McKinley County. I,
I had never seen that on any
Taobao Alit before.
I don't know what the dollar
amount, it completely changed
that if this is the domestic
violence.
And
I, I do not want the county
handling that.
So then you make that very
clear, they have a no-bid
contract with people.
Uh, they never bid their
contracts.
Uh, they have a sole source
contract, which is highly
illegal.
The Navajo Nation and people are
asking the county in McKinley
County to help.
And they're telling him they're
gonna charge him 30, 30% of the
capital project to buy a
vehicle.
Doesn't buy the vehicle.
And, and that's not gonna work
and so.
I I think I asked for this,
Kelly. I asked for this and I
don't know if I told you I've
told Charles. I asked for this
when we first got to session.
On uh domestic violence center
project in Gallup.
And I asked for 5 times a
session and I never got the
answer to that question. I want
the answer.
To that question.
But
My word of caution is.
Let me ask you this. Are any of
these STDs?
Um. And how many years on the
STBs before you start paying the
feds a premium for
Not authorizing the projects.
Because if there's STBs in here
that are at the six-year limit,
we're not going to pass this
bill, you're gonna go up, I'm
not gonna pay federal penalties
because people didn't spend
their
Do we know that Wesley, or do we
need to, I don't know the exact
answer. I can get that for you
and we can, we can definitely
look through this bill and see
which ones of those projects um
are, are gonna not meet the
arbitrage, um, and, and try to
maybe possibly veto those.
Or you want the exact to be
done.
You don't wanna fix it right
down here. Mr. Chair, we could,
um, it depends on how long it
will take us to get that.
Well, they we've had since
December.
In January.
Mr. Chair, we didn't have the
full list until just recently.
I don't know.
Next year, don't bring me a reo
Bill.
Unless they, it's reauthored it
for one year only.
No more time extensions.
Tough love is hard, but.
If you bring a Rio bill that has
more than a one year extension.
I'm not gonna hear it.
Question from committee members.
See them or
No, you pass motion consider uh
we need to move the committees
up.
that
committee.
And motion by center and Brand
on the committee sub Second
Center in Gonzalez.
We call the role.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brown
votes yes. Senator Compos.
Senator Campos votes yes,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator votes yes, Senator
Linnier, Senator Liar votes,
yes, Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla votes yes. Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Tobiasson votes yes,
Senator Trujillo.
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes.
Senator Sendo. Yes. Senator
Sendo votes yes, Senator Munoz.
Yes. 10 to 0. All right. Thank
you. Before we leave the room,
make sure you leave your, all
your blue sheets and House Bill
2 on the desk.
Because we're gonna come back up
and, and probably wrap up house
Bill too, so that way they're
here.
Unless you can promise to bring
him back. You sure?
Are we gonna hear bills this
afternoon, Wilson? Yes, we will,
OK.
I think so. Uh, let's see how
long the house takes us.
You think you'll put 71. House
Bill 71, will that be on the
list?
Uh house Bill 71 is gonna go in
line with with House Bill 71 and
House Bill 145 will go in line
with House Bill 2.
OK
So depending on time, those
bills need to go tied to house
bill too.
And we're not we're.
