It was a big issue yesterday, so
we'll just start off today where
we get the house built to force
Mr Chair members of the
committee.
So the Environment department
came to us on Thursday, February
8th with wine to reallocate the
2.652 million that SFC was
appropriating to the agency to
address their agreements and
leases.
They came to us, and we have an
email from
Their director of strategic
initiatives with the environment
Secretary CC'd on it.
And I will read it verbatim.
Hi Scott and Adrian prior
conversations and text messages
this morning and I maybe would
prefer to CSF CS 2.652 million
recurring general for an
increase in Section four for
enemy D appropriate placement
allocated to fully fund the
executive wreck.
And P 568, p 569, p 570 and P.
571, with any remainder Added to
P 567.
From my calculations. This is
how that would look, and then
there's an entire table with
those numbers.
We asked Lfc to execute exactly
what the environment requested
of us. They did, and LFC raced
some concerns in the process.
However, the Environment
Department was adamant that we
executed that way, so we stuck
with it.
Within the system. Lfc did
include copies of the emails
because they feel that the
Auditor. Once they audit, things
are going to raise concerns, but
we basically executed the entire
requests of the environment
department per
Their email and text messages
that they brought to our
attention on Thursday.
Mr Chairman, I would just add
that, um
With the amendment you have
before you the environment
General fund budget would be up
184% since FY 19 that would be
threefold Rest of state animal.
And we're paying for federal
employees correct.
The compensation package pays
for their federal employee
raises.
So
Anybody want to go back and in
just 1 884% of the Environment
department.
I don't have a problem doing it.
You want to lower
Discussing Kate.
So we're just gonna start
sentence financing meant Senate
finance amendments to House Bill
Two includes General fund
increases of only 31.6 million
from the House Appropriation in
Finance Committee sub total.
With a total re occurring
spending over 10 point,
2,000,000,010 $0.22 billion for
FY 25.
Which amounts to 653 more 653
million more or 6.8% over fy 24.
Probably the lowest spending
that we've seen in the last
three years. Correct, Charles.
Build transfers over 1.3 billion
from the General Fund, two
series of endowments and
Expendable Trust.
To support future spending in
the mid term and long term,
including housing.
Conservation, Water workforce
development If you also take a
look at the higher end trust
fund
Currently contingent on passage
of Senate Bill 159.
Then the Legislature is ensuring
that the 2.263 billion of the
Of the 3.479 billion.
And new money in New Mexico is
cured to address future
liability finance amendments off
right 222 million from the
General Fund for local
governments, Road maintenance
vacation Little Control, which
taken together with Senate Bill
300.
Creates $747.8 million
investment in roads throughout
the state.
Remove the step Tobacco set.
Remove the tobacco sentiment
permanent fund out of reserves
and instead are counting them as
a corpus of agro expendable
trust as part of the reserves
for one year to ensure we
maintain 30% reserve levels.
To ensure our triple or double A
bonding rating isn't
jeopardized.
And in that section for the
first time ever, we're going to
have an actual reserve number
that is true.
It's not adding money from this
pot and any money from that pot.
They can now calculate our true
reserve number that we have in
cash.
In the Dutch, in addition to the
great work done by LoC HFC in
the Senate, Faison Man Vitamin
Amendment process.
How about education?
Fully funded school meals for
reoccurring.
On the basis of $10 million from
the SCG reform.
And also adding 50 million in
evidence based, promising
promising literacy
interventions.
Reading instructions and out of
school time.
Programming. Summer enrichment,
educating Fowler's fellows and
high dosage tutoring.
For addressing the health and
human services needs of the
state's Senate Finance Committee
Amendments increased Medicaid
rates for rural hospitals and
providers provide an additional
$8 million to increase DD
waivers a lot DD
Et. Waiver provider rates along
with funding in our state's food
banks
Seniors and disabled receive a
supplemental snap benefit of
$100 a month up from 25.
The Senate Finance amendment
also includes 50 million to
support the operation of the
smallest hospitals.
Ensure medical services are not
shattered in most of our rural
communities.
We also added reoccurring
revenues to veterans for
suicide.
Transportation.
Barrel barrel equity and
homelessness initiatives.
Senate finance amendments also
prior to prioritize public
safety.
My funding our pay plans to
ensure recruitment and retention
was
Crewman and retention of state
police officers occur.
25 million for recruitment of
local law enforcement,
Correctional dissension and
correctional detention agencies.
20 million for recruitment of
statewide and local volunteer
fire departments and 11 million
for E. M s.
Lastly, we accomplished this
while still using cash for this
year's $935 Million Capital
outlay package.
I do. We also raised the state
police to the highest pay in in
law enforcement.
Adrian Charles. Anything, dad.
Stand for questions, Mr
Chairman.
Questions from committee
members.
To understand more.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and
Charles and Adrian. Thanks for
being here. So I have a number
of questions Number one. I just
want to clarify for people with
enemy D.
Mandated a state. Um, personnel
increase, which is great for our
public employees. Enemy D funds
a lot of their positions through
federal funds.
Just because we're giving an
increase, just because we we are
funding formula for enemy D.
Does not include those federal
employees.
So what enemy d was having to do
is take from other funds to
cover that statutory increase.
Okay, So when we talk about
funding that were funny that
increase that we're basically
giving everyone else the money
for. That's the right thing to
do, or we're
Kind of looking the other way,
while enemy D has to scavenge.
Programs that we say we care
about.
To fund those increases. So I'm
glad we did that Mr Chair. That
was the right thing to do, but
we need to figure out the
imbalance issue and, uh
Again. Continue to think that
you know, every time we talk
about percentage increase, I
think it's always not a good way
to talk about the environment.
Because when it comes to the
quality of our air or health or
water, and now we've given that
now they've had covid and
they've had cannabis and they
had all these produced water new
responsibilities.
Of course, it has come with cost
increases. And what do we want
the quality of our environment
to be, so it's a It's one of
those priority agencies just
like when we talk about veterans
services. We said no amount is
too much, and we double
everything because we put a
value on that. Anyway. I just
wanted to say that about the
Environment department and some
of those increases, but I have a
question for you all sexual
assault services.
Mr Chairman and guys, can you
tell me how much
We increase that budget from
House Bill two on the House
side.
Mr Chairman. Those were
primarily the additional
increases for those services. I
think we're coming through the,
um, junior process.
The House added some I believe
Okay. But and they also took off
the contingency for
The federal crime victims money
that they were concerned
Congress was going to cut. Um,
doesn't look like that's going
to happen. But don't get the
money either way.
Do we know roughly what it was
in grower what those increases
amounted to
And if we need to look it up, we
can. You don't have to figure it
out. Right on the spot here, Mr
Chair. My staff has a
accounting, so just in here will
provide that to us momentarily.
Okay, So I have another
question, Mr Chair.
Uh, single civil legal services.
There's a point I wanted to kind
of make.
Which is as I understand it.
Um, we have moved. Support for
singles, civil legal services to
grow funding and they had based
funding. We moved him to grow.
I don't think we gave him an
increase at that. So I think
there's a concern there. Mr
Chair colleagues.
That we took something that we
were giving as base funding and
we've moved into by definition,
an experimental program.
Um, a pilot program and and they
had asked to have their funding
be placed in based funding where
I guess it had been. Now we've
created a new program, which is
by definition of pilot. We've
moved their funding to that.
Don't and I don't think it's
even an increase. There's no
pilot to it, so I'm just
I want to flag that for the
future because I support
The grow concept, but
If we're moving existing
programs that are long
established programs into it. I
don't think that's the purpose
of it. Is that something you'd
like to speak to a little bit,
Mr Chairman? That right, Mr
Chairman, Senator.
The
House added, I think about
250,000
To civil legal services. There
were additional appropriations
through the grow for civil legal
services. On top of that, the,
UM administration requested not
to use fund balance that was in
the LFC recommendation. So that
was removed. I expect to see a
bar in
D F A at the beginning of the
year to move money from
personnel to contracts and
Keep those increases in place.
Um, for the next fiscal year, In
addition to whatever it was in
the in the grill
So I think civil legal services
came out way ahead, Mr Chairman.
Okay, so that thank you for that
little technical, but, um, it is
technical, Mr Chairman, and I
think it's caused some confusion
on the part of advocates, but
rest assured the Legislature
either individual members or the
full body of added money to
civil legal services. Okay.
Alright. So anyway, um So the
question about is it in base
funding or, you know, obviously,
we could put it in our own
growth funding, but
Anyway, I'll just leave it at
that. And then the sexual
assault was, I think an increase
of about 1.91 0.9. Okay, cool.
As usual, Mr Chair it just be
great if these documents were
online, so
So the public can see him before
we vote.
That's all I have a commission
chairman.
Their share.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair. Got a
couple of questions here of the
first one. We saw something that
talked about 700 or maybe
750,000. I can't find it now.
Ah $750,000 from the U. N.
United Nations.
To the governor's office in two
The environment Department. Did
I do I remember that right, Mr
Chairman.
$750,000 from somewhere else.
Mr. Chair, could you
Expand a little bit on what
you're asking, because we
$750,000 from foreign countries
to New Mexico.
There is a story somewhere that
New Mexico is issuing 1099 w
twos to u N employees. Mr
Secretary, Do you know about
that?
That doesn't exist in the
programming.
Hmm.
Mr Chair. I'm not familiar with
u N. There's US climate alliance
money. Maybe that's coming to
the stadium in Mexico.
Uh, but not, um, money that I
can think of. So maybe it's us.
Because I was trying to find it
here. And I couldn't So So what
did you call it? US Climate
Alliance. Mr. Sharon. Senator?
Yeah. US Climate Alliance of may
have money coming into the state
via grants.
Uh, for for staffing a person in
the governor's office. That's
all I can think of that's
related or closely related to
maybe what you're asking for
750,000 for a staffer. Mr Gerin,
Senator? I don't know. I don't
know about the number. I'm
trying to connect dots as to
what you're saying. But I don't
think that would be the right
number that we'd be getting in a
grant.
Okay?
Well, Mr Chair. I am curious to
try to try to sort this out
because I wish I could find it
here.
Because I did have it might be
in that stack there now, but
But it was a big number.
One of the questions I have is
so when federal money came into
the state
Uh oh.
You, Mr chair and others went to
the Supreme Court and Supreme
Court said that that money
coming into the state
It's appropriated by the
appropriating body didn't just
show up for the
Executives.
Will to do whatever this much
money should also been in the
budget if we're going to do
that, if it came into the state
paid paid state people
So we're paid for state program
or whatever. I don't know. I
don't know That's just a
curiosity that I'd like us to
follow up on Charles.
See if we can find
If first of all that happened,
and if it happened
Where did it go? So that's just
a real big issue because I'm
pretty sure it's not in this big
300 page budget.
How many pages is it?
It's only 294 Let me not
exaggerate.
Um
I have another question about
the C E. C. D.
Um
How much money in there? What
kind of increase in there did
Did they get budget wise? I know
that their their trust fund is
growing enormously, But what did
we do for them?
In Mr Chairman.
The only general fund increase
the CD received in this budget
was the proceeds that are
increasing from the Permanent
school fund. And that was about
17 million.
And that was going to pre
kindergarten and pre
kindergarten quality
initiatives.
There was an additional, um,
increase from their trust fund
that was just adopted by, um
The house. I believe yesterday.
So that trust fund income would
be a total of 250 million. It's
about a $95 million increase,
primarily for childcare quality
childcare assistance subsidies
targeting and infants and
toddlers.
Um, and a variety of other
quality initiatives.
It's all funds budget is
approaching around 700,000,700
million
of that in in here. Yes, sir. Mr
Chairman, because I didn't see
that kind of number in here.
It's broken across the number of
different programs from
childcare assistance to pre K to
program support.
The early interventions, and
you'd have to total all those of
so, Mr Chair. How about their
their trust fund? How big is
big? Is that now and what do we
expect it to be next year? Mr
Chairman. It's about 5 billion,
which is why it can sustain a
$250 million distribution and
the projections over the next
couple of years. Will that will
Um, rise to about $10 billion
before
Those inflows will fade out.
And finally, Mr Chair. I know we
set up several
Trust funds for lack of a better
Term.
How How many did we set up and
what are they
Uh, one of the largest this
session. Mr Chairman was for
higher education, financial aid.
Endowment.
Another small one, as an example
was for tribal education
programs. That 50 billion.
Or 50 Million? Yeah.
Um, financial aid. One is 959
million, and that will offset
Future liabilities that we're
going to have when the money
you've set aside for the lottery
tuition scholarship runs out as
well. As for the growth we've
seen in enrollment in the
opportunity scholarship, and
you're already using that in
this budget for both 24 and FY
25 where you don't need general
fund because it's expected to
Corpus of that fund will be able
to spin off proceeds to
To cover those costs.
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you chair and thank you
for all the work. I really feel
good about this this budget this
year and 30 year. I've been
doing this with you guys, and I
feel a lot better about you know
what I've learned and how this
is going. So if you take a look
at everything that we did this
year to make future now, money,
future money. What did we do
exactly in that, But what can
give us a total like what are we
looking for? For the future?
Maybe 510 and 15 years down the
road.
Sure, Mr Chairman? Well, the big
one for the long term was the
financial aid endowment.
The big new One for the midterm
is the expendable trust the
Grobe.
Which will give you you know,
four years worth of pilot
demonstration projects over the
next four sessions, And if you
further capitalize that you'll
be able to spread out in the
future years, Um
The ability to continue having
this surplus. Um, those are the
two big ones that come to mind.
So chair and then in terms of
the budget this year, the 10
bill or what is it now? 10
point, uh, about 10.2 billion
point to what sort of absorption
did we create? By making these
moves? I mean, on a $10.2
billion budget. Mr Chairman,
Senator, you're starting the
process of slowing down these
huge spending increases.
Into something that's much more
manageable for agencies to be
able to to expand. Hopefully
effectively as well as being
able to sustain this surplus
over a longer period of time
while still with the grow,
allowing you to, um
Provide opportunities for
demonstration projects that
improve the lives of new
Mexicans to still go forward as
you're pulling back the reins a
bit on the spending growth.
Um as I was talking with the
committee about during the
interim
Growing either through taxes or
spending at a pace of the 15%
that's seen over the last couple
of years simply accelerates the
date that you are building
budgets with only 2.5% growth
rate. Um, but
This type of approach through
this budget and assuming the tax
package comes in within the LFC
framework will allow this
surplus to continue for easily
the next five years before you
need to do that, Okay. Very
good. Um, Madam Chair. I only
have one specific question
Everything else I tried to work
on. I feel really good about
where we're all that went, Um
On the sorry Adrian on on the U.
N m press box, Um, baseball
press box. There was the ask of
the 3 million they were going to
put in another 2.5 to get them
to where they need to be. Either
of you have any information on
that and did that?
Remain.
So, Mr Chair senator body in
regards to that specific item.
It was in and out in and out in
and out, and we just checked and
unfortunately, it didn't make it
in this time around.
But Mr Chairman, there's also a
million dollar, um,
appropriation for non recurring
costs that, um athletics that if
they needed to use towards that
project, they could. All right.
Thank you.
Hmm. I mean,
I'm in business.
When I write
$100,000 check. It hurts.
When I write $500,000 check, it
hurts, right?
I've never written a million
dollar check without a bank
loan.
And so I don't know how
You don't realize what it takes
to make money.
It takes a lot to make money.
Thanks a lot to move money
around. It takes a lot to pay
taxes.
You basically worked from
January through.
April or may just to pay your
annual taxes.
And then you got to figure out
what the overhead is through the
business through the rest of the
year.
In maybe around November.
December. You're trying to not
pay taxes.
And planning for that, and then
you'll see what you have at the
end.
Sometimes it's a negative.
Sometimes it's in the positive.
Already you work, the easier it
is to live.
Any other questions.
Seen none. I mean, just wrap
this up.
If we on our spending pattern,
Charles and I'm looking at the
sheet that we ran last couple of
days, right?
We can run this out to you. And
then after Charles, but we're at
currently at today.
Sets us up for next year for
reoccurring for about $280
million in reoccurring money and
no growth over the next
Two years.
You know, we have three big
things that are
They're upon us in the next
year, the AMG study the SCG
study.
Hmm. And pay
Every take those three things
and and 1% is roughly 50 million
in pay right?
56 million.
Hmm. You say we have to adjust
three or 4% within the budget.
I mean,
That's 150 million right there
by itself.
No telling what the SCG is going
to come out.
No telling what the I n G is
going to come in at
I mean, we're at our peak
capacity for this next year.
Everybody thinks so. Let's just
spend money this year spend
money this year Environment
apartment 186% increase over
three years.
We're going to see this
flattening and if you want to
continue to spend in this
direction you're gonna see cuts
come quicker.
With tons of non reoccurring
money coming agencies think like
I can just get more money and
more money and more money.
Doesn't work that way.
If your pot of money minus oil
and gas revenues right there one
time money that are only based
on one time consumption and
you're already occurring pots
over here.
And that is almost to the top.
You're weird. Currying pot is
gonna be tighter and tighter as
we go into the future.
So it's people and and
legislators and agencies want to
spend that.
I mean, we could see a day of
reckoning.
A lot quicker than what you
think of anything happens in the
market. Thank God that the feds
and them are forecasting. We're
not forecasting. They're not.
They're starting to think
inflation is even off so he may
be
Alright, we may grow.
But you can't just look at today
and say it must spend this
today.
And what's going to happen
tomorrow?
There's certain things we need
to do it and there's certain
things we don't need to do.
Pay in Environment Department.
Was because she w a filed ER.
A grievance.
We fixed that we pay federal
employees.
We followed the executive
guidelines. We move money
around. We have email trails and
no matter what I've done for
four years
It's never good enough for them.
Never
Get what, exactly what they
want, but we try to help
everybody.
If you look at
Snap program where people were
getting $25 currently, Charles
right under snap seniors and
disabled
Yes, The higher income is
correct, and they were getting
$25 in the snap program.
What do you get for $25 in the
grocery store? $6 loaf of bread.
$12 dozen eggs.
There's 24 bucks in and we
tripled that
There's more important things to
help people out.
I mean, you have to help poor
people first.
If you don't help them with
food.
You don't help the food banks.
Do good work.
Then what is it? 10 point
1 $4 billion budget Mean then,
right? It means nothing when you
can't get people that
Disabled person is probably more
need than anybody, and then we
look to the future of New
Mexico, right?
You're saying there's a few
bills coming across.
That really need to pass.
How about never having to bond
capital outlay again?
That's a novel idea.
About increasing our bond
rating, right?
That'll do it.
How about setting up stuff for
the
With higher education. How about
what we've done in early
childhood? That's those are big,
bold moves that this
legislatures has made and
committed to about.
Hitting are we only need 1800
students.
In the entire state of New
Mexico to be in the median and
not at the bottom.
1800. That's such a small
amount.
2209th graders that repeated
ninth graders only 236 went on
to graduate.
If you just got those ninth
graders
And
Hand held them to graduation. We
wouldn't be at the bottom
anymore.
Simple things that I think that
Mexico needs to target
Right. I will say this and this
is nothing on the N MSU present.
Because he's he's here for a
boomerang trip.
Yeah.
But where's the vision for
universities?
They go to Arizona and I see
them s you building the clinic
right next to mail right?
Where's our vision for our
universities, and M is one of
the 11 of the eighth.
Eight of 11 of the eighth word
hospitals in the United States.
$3 billion.
And they can't find a place to
pay for cleanliness and
employees without somebody
crying and saying they're going
to cut somebody
I mean, we have an opportunity,
but greed is out trolling this
opportunity.
Overhead and universities is
just outrageous compared to what
we're graduating our cost in a
declining population.
Opportunity through a lot more
students in there.
And getting any education.
It's better than not having any
at all.
Even if you learn how to weld,
but, you know, have a welding
certificate.
I still hire those guys to.
Well, you know, there's wells
that don't have to.
Hold a lot of pressure and and
they just do that. I mean, you
look at my welding looks like
chickenshit and I got to grind
it back off. So looks pretty.
And I mean it holds and there's
a lot of opportunities. We can
give people with money, but
You got to take care of
everybody equally, not one green
should roll out any other.
As we move forward, so
I think we've kind of done that.
Cautionary tales as we move
forward for the next
Couple of years is
The reoccurring buckets, and
it's almost at its Max and you
have three of the biggest
Issue's gonna hit the state.
In the next year.
And so if you don't want to
Care about PD and educating our
Children. You don't want to care
about the N G and that we do it
correctly.
And if you don't want to pay in
New Mexico State employees
overspend this budget all you
want.
And you'll be cutting in the
next year.
In that connection.
Senator share You want to go
back? Thank you, Mr Chair.
United Nations Foundation is
quietly fueling
Climate policy funding.
In Democrat states. That's the
headline but as you go down to
Mexico, $725,000 to the
department
Of the environment.
According to this story.
So what did we do with $725,000?
And why is not not in our
budget.
And if he has $725,000
From the United Nations
Foundation.
Why did we increase
The budget 189%.
Probably not something we're
going to answer right here until
we dig into it.
But that's what I was looking
for.
And now I found it, and that's
from the United Nations
Foundation, and they gave money
to a lot of states.
Um
725,193 to the environment.
Department.
And energy, minerals and natural
resources. So I assume that had
to be shared between the two.
Um
But
Other states got more money than
us. So we're still a poor state,
I guess, but that's a lot of
money.
To go into our departments.
And not be accounted for through
our budget.
So
Found it. Other people can read
it if they want, But there it
is, Mr Chair, So we're gonna
have three motions on the floor
today or in the committee.
One is to adopt the language.
We're gonna have to adopt the
Senate finance amendments.
And then passed House Bill
three.
Correct to
House built to house filler.
Mr Chairman, Senator
Steingarten. You have a
question? Do um so we've voted
to approve the language
yesterday? I thought right.
We improved the language. We did
not adopt the language in the
house built. So my question is,
has anything changed from what
we adopted?
No. Once we adopted it, nothing
changed.
There's no other Adrian. Mr
Chair.
What you all adopted a few days
back, and yesterday is basically
this bill.
No changes. No changes have a
motion to adopt.
The language in the House Bill
two
Some moment. Mr Chairman Motion
by Senator Rodriguez. Second
Bank senator share
Call the Rosa were started
tracking
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes?
Yes, Senator. Compose. Yes.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Bradley, Senator Brantley votes
Yes, Central Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Yes, Idea votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer, Senator Sherrod votes.
Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes, Chairman Yeo's
German, no sports. Yes. 9 to 0
in adoption.
I mean, well, we're gonna adopt
these and then see if there's
any public. I need a motion to
adopt the Senate finance
amendments in the House, Bill.
Two. Mr Chairman, That's 31.6
million.
Emotional, second cultural
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes Yes, Senator.
Compost Compost votes. Yes,
Senator Bradley, Senator Bradley
Boats? Yes, Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla. Padilla vote
CIA senator chair senator share
boats. Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Chair. Rodriguez
votes. Yes, Chairman. Ah's yes.
Germany all sports? Yes, 90 0.
Where the SFC amendments no need
emotion to
do not pass. Uh, yeah, I'll do
that. Okay. Thank you. Thank
you. Mr Chairman. I move that do
not pass to the house
Appropriations of Finance
Committee. Substitute for House
Bills two and three and a do
pass for the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Substitute for House
Bills two and three as amended
in the Senate Finance Committee,
second
Most of my Senate Rodriguez
second by center media.
Call the girl.
Senator Bert
Yes, Senator. Bert votes? Yes,
Senator Campos? Yes. Votes? Yes,
Senator Bradley, Senator
Brantley Boats? Yes, Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Padilla. DEA votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer, Senator share
votes? Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes. Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. ARodriguez votes
yesteryear, Munoz.
Yes. No sports. Yes. You have a
9 to 0 for a do not pass a jfc
two and three and do pass. HFC
two and three is amended
as we do that, you know, I want
to thank
Senators, representatives Smalls
and House Appropriations
Committee work together We need
to make it better for next
year's We move across and
everything happens. I want to
thank our staff and Senate
finance.
Justin
Adrian.
Marie Viviana, SJ.
And
I think he calls him now. Regent
Phelps.
Yeah, for for their hard working
here because they did spend two
days in my office really putting
growing by hand.
Um, I don't know if it's really
It's it's labor intensive.
Then we find out that
There's political play A in
In cog.
That backed out and center.
Sure, and I may not know this
but are called backed out of
doing all the grow money.
I don't know what happened.
Other cops had other colleagues
have said that they will do it
for us. Thank God for them that
they're willing to work with us
cogs back out and and we have an
agreement and then a day before
we're getting ready to go, you
back out. That's
Not really. Not really. What
happens? I don't know. Maybe
that cog doesn't need to exist
anymore.
They don't want to work with the
Legislature. They're willing to
take our money, but they're not
willing to work with us when the
Legislature has ideas, That's
That could be a different
discussion for next year. But
what I mean everybody has to
join arms, Carol where you're
from, or what you do to the
higher end institutions to the
counties to the cities.
Sexual assault services
violence. Everybody has to work
better Just come up and save
some money Grab make things
better for us.
Hmm. Yeah, Mantra. The
conversation that New Mexico is
a small, poor state.
I'm over that Mexico's are rich,
wealthy state.
It needs to make
Tweaks to how they think and how
they adjust in the system.
Three. Every governor has
leadership and has ideas they
want to do and I've been under
three and
A good governor. Richardson had
the space part which I tried to
sell.
Um
Governor Martinez. I don't think
she had too many adventures
ideas other than destroying
behavioral health.
This governor has had some bold
ideas and bold moves.
A and you gotta accomplish those
before we move forward.
As we move forward, the those
bold ideas need to come for
Russia and in the last terms of
the executive
So that we can send them up for
the example. Right. Thank thank
you, Adrian. Thank you, Charles.
Thank you to our staff. I
appreciate that week. Just thank
our staff. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank God.
Senator Rodrigues Europe. Thank
you for my two bills. Okay,
Thank you.
And I have joy. Thank you. Which
one is first when we were like
Troy, I think we're doing House
House. Bill 20. Let's switch
around. Can we do Senate House
Bill 190 ec six. Real quick,
Okay. Has all the growing
accountability in there? Yes, I
thought that was important to so
I'm happy to wait. You talked,
the quicker we get Done. Thank
thank you, Mr Chair Committee.
Great to see everybody.
How some, UH, house Bill 196, as
amended includes the Pilot
Project Trust fund. It includes
the unencumbered $500 million
corpus that director slowly and
chairman when you just talked
about also includes Mr Chair
Committee members. The roughly
100 million for, um
The member district growth
projects. Ah, and with that, I
stand for questions any
questions from committee
members?
We go to the ops. Let's go to
the audience. Anybody in
support?
Anybody in opposition. Anybody
on Zune questions from committee
members seen center Woods.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
So
Mr Chairman.
Tell me why all the Republicans
voted against this. Thank you.
Chair. Thank you, Senator Woods.
I think there were some
questions around accountability
Measures. Chair, Senator. What
we've done is focused on the
upcoming summer on revisions to
the Accountability and
Government Act.
That covers the entirety of the
$10.22 billion budget We're
considering now.
Also Mr Chair, Senator Woods,
You always work and other work
to add additional accountability
measures directly in the House
Bill two
For the 16 pilot projects that
cover about $216 million. We
think that those are very strong
accountability measures
specifically with C Y F D. But
there were some questions on
that Mr. Chair, Senator.
So, Mr in
Mr Chairman.
You believe in your heart that
that we've had guardrails around
these things now?
That we can actually watch these
programs to see if they're
accomplished.
And make sure the agencies that
get these programs don't just
put it in a
General fund and use it for
whatever they feel like doing.
You think that we can actually
direct them to do?
The the the actual projects that
we want them to do and have
accountability for that, Mr
Chair.
And Mr Chairman, Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods. Perfect question.
I absolutely do. Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods Committee because
these are going in in a three
year pilot project directed by
the Legislature. I believe we
have unique and never before
seen accountability and ability
to track
Um, influence focus on
implementation and change.
Should we decide to do that with
this money that we absolutely do
not have that chance and other
recurring budgets? Well, that is
the problem. You know, when
these guys and I started to say,
these guys wonder when the House
Republicans came to me and
And showed me the bill and
showed me all the strikeouts in
it. It was very disturbing to
me, um to, you know, they gave
me some very strong thoughts on
that.
And, uh,
I know that.
I know that we're we live in two
houses in this roundhouse.
And I know that the
responsibility lays upon us to
govern.
Well, at least to watch
government.
To make sure that when we pass a
law that that law is carried out
And and not deviated from and it
it causes me. Great concern. Uh,
the more I learn.
The more I read a stack of books
that we pay good money for two
to watch government and and and
with this budget before me.
That's a great concern to me
because you know, growing
government is always a great
concern. And if we don't watch
them with both eyes open
It's It's not right if we're not
serving the people that are
elect us, so
I'm gonna go with you on this
deal.
But it's it's what's great
reluctance.
Because of the the information
brought to me.
So thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
You know, we we put just so
senator would just so you know
that we put language in the back
of the House Bill two for C Y F.
D.
Yeah, we've
Talked. How d F A and lfc are
going to work together to
develop those guidelines and and
really start scoring agencies.
But if you look at the
performance levels and
And their performance manual.
You know, some agencies can be
green and somebody just can be
read.
Bars are used all the time.
Currently the
Secretary of Corrections is
already barred out money while
we're here in session.
Ah!
They have already barred out
money like 30. Days after for E.
C. E. C. D.
That language is so dangerous
and what they do, They can move.
Um, Environment department has
used bars. The state treasurer
has used bars to move money
around.
We've set everything up to be
fixed, so there should not be
that many bars accountability
has to happen.
We can talk about the 20 million
that in Arba funds that said it
H s d.
For three years since 2019 and
did not get moved until we had
an LOC meeting in September, and
now they're moving that over to
see why FD and that's just to
open the front doors of
behavioral clinic turn on the
lights by tables by staffing
such simple money to get out
with our
But still has what 700 million
imbalances. Charles still have
700 million in balances. The
everybody is guaranteed me that
we can, but those people those
agencies that don't move the
ARPA if we're going to be the
only state that sends Arba back
I'm gonna have a big issue.
Because we gave them an
opportunity to swap Harper.
This year.
And for General fund, which made
no difference. It just allowed
us to count for him one year and
they entrench themselves and not
doing that so
They're they're on the risk of
of running that.
Accountability in government has
to happen. I mean,
I don't know how we're gonna get
there in the end, but the bigger
we get, the harder it becomes,
And so we've had an agreement
with D F A and lfc. We're gonna
over and you're on LSD over this
interim, Probably every meeting
happen where we're at. And where
are we going To get you to
accountability Any other
questions from committee
members? See, nothing can have.
Is it still Is it still the case
as we move this one out here
that there was about 512 million
that we moved from H what would
normally be funded with General
fund into this trust? Still
correct. Mr Chair, Senator? Yes.
Thank you. And and with that, I
would say to echo the concerns
of Woods.
That Senator Woods had
mentioned.
You know, there's a lot of
criticism about this, saying
that we're playing like a a
budget shuffle here. There were
taking what should be in the
General fund and moving over
here. My argument to that would
be they think that we are. We
are funding recurring programs
with non recurring money as a
budget shuffle. The reality is
if we were ever to defund
programs that were not
successful or didn't have
outcomes.
This would be the way to defund
it, So I appreciate the
conversations that we've had
here in in this committee and
understand that this step to
defund it. So I appreciate the
conversations that we've had
here in in this committee and
understand that this step two
step to eliminating those
programs that are not producing
outcomes. But this is the first
step to that, and I actually
appreciate the transfer of 500
Millions over to this side of
some of those programs aren't
working. This is the first step
in the right direction to
replacing the program, so
Thank you And thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you. We just can't spend
every single dollar
And not having outcome, right?
We know when he put the snap in
for 17 million more, We know
that they get $100 worth of
benefits. You know the outcome.
Those are very simple to
calculate.
Some of these are not simple to
calculate 1.1 billion in
behavioral health in that
consortium or authority, right,
1.1 billion
And
I don't know. Howard.
Not moving that money, because I
mean, I never hear any change
from people in certain areas and
It's not working, but there's
1.1 million. It's hard to
control this amount of money,
and we did add FT. East to lfc
throughout. That will help us
Charles may not like he's kind
of grim, innit? The expansion
but you know, we started with a
$4 million budget with the same
amount employees and where the
$10 billion budget
With the same amount employees
and in as you add more
Expense. You have to have to add
more staff, and that's just a
fact of life. Senator Compost
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman. I move approval of the
committee subject to for
hospital. 196 Center, Compost
second by Senator Rodriguez
Second we call the roll.
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes
Yes, Senator Company yes. Post
photo Senator Bradley Senator
Bradley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla. Yes, votes?
Yes, Senator Scherer, Senator
share votes. Yes, Senator Stein
born Senator Stein born votes.
Yes, Senator Woods, Senator
Woods Votes yet. Votes? Yes.
Vice Chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes? Yes. Ventura
Munoz.
Sports? Yes. You have a
duplicate. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Committee.
Mr Terror Center. Absolutely. We
would not let it out to use a
lot of white out.
Hmm.
We are looking forward to you.
Senate Bill 300, a couple of
senator representing small
Senate Bill
301 61. We're here in house
bills. I think two on the floor
and they're moving over. But it
doesn't take us along.
Rodriguez. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee. I have representative
Joy Garrett here with me and
I've got Marquita. Thank you for
your work and for being with us,
this bill that we have before
you today was endorsed in the
interim by the New Mexico
Finance Authority Oversight
Committee, and they are the two
that I have, and I'll speak one
at it for one at a time. Here
are annual bills that we bring
before the Legislature merely
the set house. Bill 29 is to
allow the
The the influx of federal
dollars to come in as it with
the changes that we're going to
make here. It allows them to
leverage federal dollars, and
that's really what the main
purposes it. It appropriates $13
million from the public project
Revolving fund moves it into
these three funds in order to
access federal funds, and, um
6 million of the 13 million will
go to the drinking water State
Revolving loan fund at the New
Mexico Finance Authority and 2
Million will go to the local
government planning fund, also
by the New Mexico Finance
Authority and 5 million to the
cultural affairs facilities,
Infrastructure Fund held at the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
All of these are, um,
specifically the first two to
generate and leverage federal
money.
And they do not impact the
state's general fund is just
moving money from one fund to
the other to access federal
dollars. Represent Garrett.
Anything, dad with that we stand
for my number one fan in the
house. That is so true. What can
I do? Besides questions from
committee in the audience movie
do pass. We gotta go to the
audience just to make sure
anybody in support
Anybody in opposition.
Nobody on the body and zoom have
emotion for do pass by Senator
Padilla, second by Senator Sheer
call her own.
Senator Bert Senator Byrd votes
Yes, Senator. Companies. Compost
votes. Yes, Senator Brantley.
Yes, Senator Brantley votes.
Yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla. Yes, votes?
Yes, Senator Scherer, Senator
share votes. Yes, Senator Stein
born Senator Stein born votes.
Yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez. Yes, Vice
chair. Rodriguez Votes. Yes,
Chairman. Ah's Yes. Votes? Yes.
You have a do past 90. 0. Thank
you on
287. I'm sorry. I have my
glasses. You must have stole
them.
So let me turn the microphone.
I'm sorry, and the annual bill
we bring before the Legislature
and what it is, is, um, it
brings the projects before the
Legislature just to allow them
to apply. No, it hasn't approved
or, um, vetted every single um,
provisions within these
applicants, but it authorizes
them to apply. That's all we're
doing here and it is authorizing
138 qualifying entities all
Also endorsed by the
By the interim committee of the
New Mexico Finance Authority, so
that is merely what it does. Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee
And with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Now these these are our loans.
These every one of these are
loans. Mr. Chairman, Senator.
Yes. Oh, I apologize. Yes, they
are. They're all loans from the
revolving fund.
Mhm. Can you just give me just
that Just a fraction
Of what it would take to get a
loan.
From these are public agencies
asking for local governments
asking for loans is we
understand that? Can you just
give me just a minute's worth of
briefing on how those loans are
qualifying? Mr Chair? Sure.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator
Woods? Yes, Absolutely. And the
New Mexico Finance Authority has
rules promulgated that that
clearly identify what it takes
to be able to qualify for a
loan. And so I will defer to
Marquita if you want any more
questions.
Support any more answers. Thank
you.
Mr Chairman. We accept
applications monthly for this
program. So if you are
authorized and the authorization
is good for three years at any
point at which you're ready to
move forward, you submit an
application and it goes through
an underwriting process at the N
M F A. We have a couple of
internal committees aboard
committee and then the full
board that ultimately votes on
these interest rates are said at
the time that the loan closes
But at the time that it's
approved, there is an interest
rate cap that success to it so
that we know that the interest
rate won't go above a certain
percent, and we know that the
local government has the ability
to repay the loan within our
policies.
And and with that, Mr Chair and
Madam vice chair.
I guess the question I have is
is how do these local
Entities guarantee the loan.
What? What is their source of
income that they guarantee to
pay these loans back and Mr
Chair about a third of them will
repay it from an increment of
government of gross receipts tax
about a third will repay them
from some sort of net system
revenue like their water utility
of your water rates.
Um and the battle third or
general obligation bonds from
school districts, Okay.
Chair. That's all my questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Represent Gary everything down.
Mr Chair. These are great bills.
that you could say I'm your
faith. Your my favorite senator.
Now you're both family. Other
questions from committee members
seen none. Movie do pass motion
for do pass.
The second by Senator Bert
Call a role. Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost compost
Supposed Yes, Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantley votes. Yes,
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Yes. Votes. Yes, Senator. Chair,
Senator Scherer votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, Senator Woods,
Senator Woods votes? Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Nice
chair. Rodriguez Votes. Yes,
Chairman. News? Yes.
Germany. All sports? Yes. You
have a do past 8 to 0. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Members of the
Committee and Marquita. Thank
you, Senator Lopez. You wanna
talk about the brain injury so
we can figure this out? Because
this has been a
Today issue and
I don't think we're going to
pass your bill today because I
Oh,
Thank you. I apologize Has you
know this is one of those funds
that disappeared when the fees
when we cut off all of the fees,
and we're having trouble finding
it in HB two, but my
understanding is that it was
appropriated to the healthcare
authority and the and there is
money in the fund. Um And so I'm
happy to simply withdraw my
bill.
Or just just want HSC to put
this on the record, right? Yes,
the money in your budget.
We know that's there is just one
of those issues like we talked
about.
People with brain trauma and
then relegating that that that
money has to be there.
So
I can't remember who the
secretary is anymore. If there
is one carry. Yeah, and I have
texted to confirm that and Mr
Sully has confirmed that for me
now, so I just am happy to say
that we're able to track down
the money and thank you very
much for putting it on the
record that that money is there.
Thank you, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. This
will take a minute to present
Senate Bill 72 makes it more
difficult for young people
because of increasing the price
of Vaping. Vaping is a gateway
to addiction. Uh, the money from
this will be split between the
General Fund and Vaping
education over the next few
years.
And after that all of the money
that comes from that will go to
the General fund.
You do have an amendment Senator
Hickey.
Sure Amendment.
My
I believe that there was a
subject came down. We did not
have a sub for that. 0.4 0.1.
Connection. It's an amendment to
your committee substitute.
There's a committee substitute.
This amendment is not being a I
am not presenting this amount.
It should just be a committee
substitute 0.4.
It came like double check on the
bill here real quick.
Is this amendment is to the
committee service 72, and we did
that. In the prior committee. It
was subbed into the bill and
then taken out of the bill
inversion for won't be subbed
into it would have been amended
into the bill, and then it would
have been drafted as a committee
substitute coming out of that
committee.
And so
Let me look in the minders. What
do we have what we have in our
binders.
Oh, there is there should be do
have a course substitute.
Senate Bill 72 771.3.
You do not have a 0.4 in our
books.
120 you want to look at 0.3?
You're right on that 0.3. We
don't have a 0.4. Okay, um
So are you, Senator Hickey. Are
you saying you have like
committee substitute?
Yes. Here.
It was supposed to come down
last night.
I'm sorry. Only snowed last
night. Nothing else. Yeah. So,
Mr Chair
Can we simply just roll this one
over until we get what we think?
What? What We're looking for.
Yep.
I'm just looking to see
Okay, actually, um
Yes. Uh, this this I'm sorry
I've seen now What? What They
did? Yes. I would like to move
the amendment. Wait, wait, wait.
Okay, so
Adrian's calling upstairs, so
just give us one minute to see
if you have a 0.4.
So that you didn't draft the
point. But this amendment
Is for falling from
Maybe using the
Campbell's soup cans and a
string did get up to council
services.
That's because our broadband
works.
So, Mr Chair while we're waiting
on that can we do to explain the
Bell center? The substitute that
already been adopted explain the
substitute. Uh, the substitute.
It Does amendment here.
Alright, basically the sub
substitute substitute
Essentially what the substitute
does is it takes the money that
comes from the tax on the e
cigarette liquid and the
cartridge and distributes its
over three years. Um, the
50% to the tobacco from 50% to
the General fund in 25.
Prior to July 1 beginning in 25
and 26. It's 80% to the tobacco
fund in 27. It's 100% to the
tobacco fund, and thereafter the
remainder of those years going
to the General fund and then
after, uh, fiscal year, 27 100%
of the revenue goes to the
General fund.
In perpetuity and how much
wrote, I guess. Sure you have a
question.
So
Mr Chair. I'm just curious on
So I know we're moving the money
the tobacco fund money. But
what's what's the value of
moving this money around? What
are we gonna accomplish in the
In the bigger picture here.
And
I know that there was this. This
0.4 that everybody is looking
for.
I don't really know what that
means, but I, but I do know that
there was some
Some other negotiations but
moving this money.
I know that you're raising the
tax for one thing, but then
you're moving it. So what's the
movement? Do
What? What is the movement due
to the movement will put
approximately the first year
next year about $7 million and
and I do understand if I might
just say, Mr Senator, what they
did with the 0.1 here. This is
correct. Uh, it was in this
communication and but the money,
uh,
For the first year will be about
$13.2 million. Half of that
about 7.2 will go directly to
Vaping prevention and education
for people 25 and under
So then the rest will go to the
General fund The next year will
increase as they get their
capabilities together.
Ah to 80% and then get to what
will be close to 1617 million in
the following fiscal year. Um,
and that that by that time the
removal of the tobacco fund out
of a reserve fund will generate
enough interest in and revenue.
uh, that it will cover the
prevention activity needed for
Vaping. And so this money no
longer needs to go to the
tobacco fund.
Rather can go into the General
fund.
So if I get this right, Mr Chair
So
As the tax increases.
Where does the tobacco
settlement fund money go right
now?
Right now. The tobacco
settlement fund is a
The money that comes from the
tobacco companies.
Through in the year, 2004
because the litigation has been
very are difficult, and they
haven't gotten any further each
year. They go into litigation
because of tobacco companies
have a lot of loopholes. But
right now that money goes into
the, uh
Multiple areas that goes into
Medicaid to pay for the effects
of tobacco. Um, it goes into
some programs at the university
and its 5 million right now goes
into, uh, tobacco prevention
education in the Department of
Health.
So
Under this bill, Mr Chair and
Senator
Money would go to Vaping. So
cessation could say that right?
But the other money would still
go to Medicaid and
Yes.
So this is additional funding to
increase the amount of funding
that and it goes specifically.
To develop campaigns to assist
youth and not taking up Vaping,
which is 40 to 50% in our high
schools now, uh, highly
penetrated in the middle schools
and Vaping leads to cigarettes
and also builds. Uh
Craving pathways in the brain
for addiction, And so it's
really kind of the start of the
nuclear reaction into addiction
issues. And so if we can nip it
in the bud by encouraging youth
not to take up Vaping, then we
will have thousands of use and
families who will not have to go
through.
The horrors of addiction.
So, Mr Chair. I
I don't disagree with that. But
But as we raise the taxes
instead of it.
Instead of it going to that.
Some of it's going to the
General fund right off the bat.
Even with the new taxes? Yes,
yes, And the reason for that,
Uh, Mr Chair and senator is that
the Department of Health has had
a very difficult time getting
their what they call new Pack
Their, uh, smoking general
tobacco, nicotine prevention
programs up and running.
And last year because of some
Ah, the money that came in from
the tobacco companies into the
fund fell short and then
negotiated, Uh, settlement, And
so a number of those programs
were terminated and April, um in
those contracts were avoided
This money will help. Also, to
be sure that we don't run into
that situation again.
Of when not enough money
potentially doesn't come in
through the settlement where we
will also begin to increase the
capabilities of the Department
of Health in combination with
the Department of Education and
Higher Education.
Um, to develop the programs to
go on TV to go into the schools
to encourage young people not to
take up Vaping.
And then the next year, there
will be more as their
capabilities grow the following
year, even more, and by that
time the this is the
technicalities of the uh,
Tobacco fund when the tobacco
fund generates more income
through its investment, which is
but taking it out of the reserve
fund did
And putting it into higher
return. Uh, funds that money
should buy projection.
Be greater than the amount of
money comes in into the tobacco
settlement fund and that money
should be somewhere around 1520
million. Hopefully, by that
time that money will be used
directly once it surpasses the
the
The
Money that the companies pay
under the settlement that was
built into the original
triggering of how the fund would
work.
So, Mr Chair and Senator
Is, you know, we got the the new
Healthcare Authority.
Whatever that is coming on board
from the Department of Health
and
Others. Um, but what did you
Did you say that the Department
of Health
Canceled contracts from this
year because they couldn't they
couldn't so, Mr Chair and
senator where they canceled
because they didn't have funding
or they canceled because of
bureaucracy couldn't get it
done.
They canceled it because they
didn't have the funding the
projected funds that were coming
in this year from the tobacco
settlement litigation fell short
of the projection and so all the
contracts that were out there
for prevention cessation
Etcetera had to be terminated
for the remainder of the year.
until, um, the new fiscal year
starts.
And and, um
Ah, the money that that comes in
that that can be cleanly
projected. But it was an unusual
year they actually predicted
Originally last year, there'd be
more money than what they were
expecting from the litigation,
but it turned out to be less
than what was baseline
predicted.
So, Mr Chair and Senator if
there was less money does that
mean there was less
Use of tobacco or vaping or
wherever whatever it is, we
taxed for that.
Well, uh, Mr Chair and Senator,
I wish we had that kind of
instant polling and measurement
tool available to us, But we
know in virtually every other
state who has raised the price
of vaping and cigarette
products, there has been a
significant decrease in the
uptake by youth.
Well, Mr Chair. The reason I ask
is because if there was less
money
It seems logical to me that
there was less used. Therefore,
less taxes were paid, which
means we're
Getting where we want to go.
Hmm. No, that there was probably
Mr Chair and Senator Moore used
because there was not the
education programming that was
on TV and in the high schools
going on discouraging the uptake
of Vaping, so it probably
increased in that inner Mr Chair
and Senator.
The fact that there was less
money tells me that the other
other way happened.
How long is this? Um anti Vaping
program been in our anti Vaping
program probably started.
Three or four years ago. Before
that, it was primarily focused
on cigarettes.
Okay, Mr Senator.
So, so, Mr Chair, so for three
or four years
What has the
Has just been a shift from
cigarettes to Vaping, whereas
Vaping brand new and 50% of the
kids smoke before now, 50% of
kids Vape.
Or is it a different We have Mr
Senator, and and? And Mr Chair.
Um, we have we did see a
significant decrease in
cigarette uptake throughout the
country, including New Mexico
when cigarettes were the primary
delivery system for nicotine in
younger people.
Uh huh. And and in older people
as well.
Um Vaping came around maybe 78
years ago. But the, uh the
companies who manufacture it,
Jade and so forth have been
targeting young people and even
though they are prohibited by
law to purchase it, they have
other people who purchased at
forum and we know that there has
been a dramatic steady increase.
Ah, since about 2015 to the
current day from almost no
vaping to now running into
likely 40%, maybe in the high
schools.
Okay. And if you do, Vape, then
what they have found in younger
people, Uh, Senator share and Mr
chair is that there are seven
times more like likely to take
up cigarettes after that.
So we may be undoing much of the
good that we did in decreasing
cigarette smoking in youth by
this new entity, Vaping that has
the illusion of where you don't
get any tire, and it's just a
It's just a water vapor, but
water vapor with nicotine that
definitely impacts. There are
direct sensors for nicotine in
the brain. And as we see it and
do MRIs on them. We do see
Um uh, increase in those
receptor areas, which is the
beginning of an increase in the
pathways of addiction.
So
This is this has been a
curiosity to me. Curiosity to
me.
Um
Certainly, when we grew up,
people smoke everywhere. They
smoked and Sears walking through
the aisles they smoked and
pennies they smoke.
Wherever, Okay.
Um
And a lot of people.
So my parents were not smokers.
I have not been a smoker.
Um
There was a comment Once in the
army. There was a
I don't know. Six or seven
lieutenants. I was one of them
standing around, and a colonel
walked by and made a comment.
That when he was a lieutenant,
all six of us would have been
smoking and he wanted to know
what our problem was.
Um
So clearly, at that point, there
was less smoking going on.
Uh um.
And I think for
For us. It's because, well, we
ran a lot and
I can't breathe.
Unless you
So so smoking has been going
down, or at least
I don't know what's happened
recently. But so smoking's been
going down for a long time.
Uh, in the early two thousands
Smoking was rare among adults.
And I don't know I don't
I think I only know of one
legislate toward the smokes.
Now that could
I could be wrong. They may be
smoking under their desk or
going outside wherever, but
Um
So if smoking has been going
down for decades,
And we've been
Advertising to the opposite.
We've been advertising
antismoking instead of the
marble man.
Or your doctor prefers camels or
whatever it was, um
If we're advertising, anti
smoking, Why did it go? Back up?
What? What is our system
working?
Thank you, Mr Senator and Mr
Chair, smoking his dramatically
increases countries banned in
virtually every inside any
building and and that you have
to can only smoke in areas way
outside of those buildings. Um,
this has been going on since the
early 19 eighties. The surgeon
general, um, under Reagan at
that time, really?
Drove his successful program,
but the smoking if you go to
Europe, Mr Senator, you you
can't get away from it. It's in
every room everywhere. For some
reason, it works so tobacco
manufacturers are selling a lot
of tobacco overseas. Um, but now
with this, originally Vaping was
Tired. How did as a way to get
off cigarettes? Um, but it was
still delivering the addictive
substance nicotine, But when
you're a teenager and so forth,
I smoked from 13 to 21. Mr.
Senator, Mr Chairman, because it
was cool. I mean, it was just
everything everybody did. It was
30 cents.
And now you know, doing
something like that? That's cool
in high school, particularly for
individuals who have frontal
lobe, where judgment resides
isn't well connected to the rest
of the brain. In women. It gets
there and the early twenties and
men. Unfortunately, not till the
late twenties. Um and without
that judgment intervention, just
adopting it and thinking that
you're not gonna get lung cancer
because you don't get the tires
and all the other stuff.
But you still get the nicotine
which is an addictive stress,
reducing momentarily substance
And so it's it is having an
appeal and his teaching
youngsters not to deal with
stressed through cognitive or
relationships, but to reduce
stress through the use of
nicotine.
And, um
And and unfortunately it's
becoming very, very popular. But
as I said, we may see that
smoking curve start to go back
up. Because if you do faith,
you're seven times more likely
than to move onto cigarettes and
the issue of this amendment had
to do with one of the companies
who were going to get around the
tax by not having this amendment
in there.
Ah because they burned tobacco
in the e cigarette turned that
into that goes through some sort
of filtering mechanism and then
turns it just nicotine but still
other toxic products into a
vapor and then gets in hell and
the the company who wanted the
by heating a liquid solution And
this this builds full of kind of
like, negatives. Double
negatives. And what have you to
get there? This would allow that
not to be tax.
And that's why there was all the
confusion through the first
versions of the bill. But we
want to prevent that if they and
they will be coming out with
this product, which again is
gonna be tobacco burning? Um and
but they need to be taxed just
the same way. The three other
major tobacco companies who are
involved in Vaping will be taxed
alright.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator. So some my
confusion and I asked you about
it, but I was asking the wrong
question.
Um, I see that we're taxing e
liquids at 44% e cigarettes at
44%. But then we have a closed
system Cartridges 50 Cent.
And is that Mr Chair Senator, is
that like a jewel product?
Closed system cartridge? Yes,
my my understanding. It is okay.
And what's the current tax on
those products? Do you know I
believe it's at 12%.
If there's a
Um, a member of an advocate
group who, if they want to
correct me that welcome to come
forward, Mr. Chair. I could be
wrong. My understanding is that
it's it may be currently at 50
cents, and I don't know if we're
raising it. That's kind of
My crocs. I mean, I
So if we could, I don't know Mr
Chairman. If there's anyone here
knows what the current tax on a
closed system cartridges, it 50
cents, or we raising that as
well.
Yes.
American cancer, Mr Chair.
Might have to sit at the table.
Ms. Chair. Uh, Senator Stein
Mart. My My name is Mahesh with
the American Heart Association
Right now. The clothes
The country just are disposables
and they're charged at 50 cents,
so we're not that's not being
changed.
Okay. Still remains 50 cents,
Okay?
So, Mr Chair, Senator. So my
feeling about it? I appreciate
the bill and I've long
recognized there is a
There's a
Inverse relationship between
raising prices and the amount of
people that smoke as a former
smoker myself. I mean, there's a
price point at which you don't
smoke, and there's a huge cost
to society and
You know, that's the reality of
the matter. And so I appreciate
the advocacy and that, however I
know when it comes to tobacco,
there is absolutely a shift to e
cigarettes with kids.
Because I think it's cool. It's
discreet. I mean, it has all the
advantages right? Has everything
a kid could
Kid could find, uh, appealing.
And it is very addictive. A lot
of nicotine in there.
So I think
To fully complete the circle on
the bill. I would recommend you
consider
Um, making the tax on that 44%
for closed system cartridges
like the other e cigarettes and
e liquid products.
If it's true that we're not
raising that tax at all.
We should do some parody on that
particular product, and I don't
know if that's in your amendment
or how you feel about that.
Or from misguided on that.
Um, Mr Chair, and Mr Senator, um
Because this whole field is
getting so complex and their
pouches in there. What is the
pouch? And could you put a pouch
in the cartridge and and and
they have and the technology is
evolving. Um, I think that in
time, we may come back with
additional legislation to deal
with evolving technology in this
field. Um, but
The we purposefully because last
year this bill did make it to
the, um send it and house. Uh
Committee and it it went down in
that committee and had pouches
and other things in it. And so
this year we just said, I mean,
the real problem is kids in
Vaping. That's that's you know,
you think of a nuclear reaction.
That's that's where the
implosion explosion comes and
then everything comes out of
that. That's what we're trying
to stop at this point.
Um, I may have to do some
additional research on the 50
cents, but I would like to leave
it as it is, And then next year,
we'll probably come back with
pouches. Um, but for now, we
just simply wanted to save our
Children and our families from
much higher presidential of
addiction, and that's what I'm
simply trying to do with this
bill rather than getting it
caught up in a whole lot of
other technicalities.
Oh,
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator.
Respectfully, though. I mean,
I hear you. I want your bill to
pass to. I just, you know,
helping the kids the jewel
technology in a closed system
cartridge. I don't think you
would think it's new technology.
It's very pervasive Technology.
Um it's very much part of the
problem.
So, uh, I don't know. It's just
kinda hard to
Hard to leave that out while
you're trying to attack this
problem, you know?
Um, Mr Chair, and Mr Senator.
Uh,
I think that Jewel is included
in this. There's also lots of
federal litigation going on
around jewel. Now they may not
even be able to sell. Um, this
is that there are many Chinese,
uh
Produced e cigarettes pouring
into the country that are so,
uh, for less than some of the
others, and this is an attempt
to to really cover them as well.
But again, we have the 50 cents.
And the more I understand. I
mean, if the East the East
cigarette is going to be taxed,
the characteristic goes into the
E cigarette.
Um, And as we understand the
changes in technology, I'm very
willing to amend the bill at
that time. Um, but as we worked
this through with three other
tobacco companies, they all
thought that this was fine and
they're not standing in
opposition today.
Mr Chairman Yang. I once had it
had a bill to, uh, to ban
Japan, cigarette smoking and in
cars with kids.
Because I thought that was child
abuse.
And it's funny. I got approached
by the tobacco companies, and
they said, if you just leave out
Vaping will support your built.
And I said, no, Go
Um
But
Let me ask this question for
maybe my hash.
So this says, for closed system
cartridges. So does the system
that the cartridge goes into. Is
that still being subject to the
increased tax in this bill? Uh,
Miss Chair, Senator.
I think the jewel parts that's
what you're talking about. The
pond jar have
You know, they're like 5 million
L liquids, and they come in
different flavors so you can
take them off and put them back.
So
Ah as per the bill, it is. I
think they will be charged as
the liquids.
So you think those pods will
actually be subject to the
increase?
I mean, as as as it is written,
right liquid
Okay, So in that case, the the
main ingredient there the main
delivery thing that recurring
expenses being subject to an
They they
Mr Chair, Senator, I think you
know.
Joel has, you know it's e
cigarette component.
Right and the parts
So the e cigarette component
would be part of the You know e
cigarettes.
Uh, delivery systems, which is
44%. And how many thoughts let
me just quick question and I'll
be done. How many?
Pods get used in the life of e
cigarette device.
Jewel.
Mr Chairman, Senator, I don't
know the answer to that. But it
depends on usage. How often you
use and and there's a shelf life
for every
You know, component, okay?
Well, maybe I learned something.
Here is the center. I'll keep
talking to you about this and
trying to
Trying to figure out this
technology a little bit more
just to make sure that we're
we're being comprehensive.
So that's all I have. Mr.
Chairman. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr Chair. First of
all I want to I want to thank
you and commend you for your
concern.
And I and I do believe that your
intent is to target young users
like like my young daughters and
their peers, and I think that
that's that's noble. Um, we
don't have the amendment or or
your suggested changes. And it
does seem, though, that the
original you are targeting those
that are that are that are
targeting Children.
Although I do echo the concerns
that I noted that Senator Stein
born pointed out where you're
not increasing cartridges, which
seems
Odd but it is so hard when we
just passed. You know, a $10.5
billion budget to increase taxes
and and in whatever form that
may be. I almost feel like we
could. We could we could tax any
kind of sin taxes. I mean, I've
never been a smoker. I don't
know the price of this, but I
have a very unhealthy habit of
drinking a lot of Red Bull's a
day and I know it's not good.
Should we should we double the
price of a red bull.
I don't know if it discourage
me. Um you know, we could have
fast food taxes. We could tax
everyone for taking the elevator
instead of the stairs. I just
don't know if you can tax people
into doing the right thing.
When you say Well, we're
specifically targeting the
young.
I understand where you're coming
from. I almost wish you had just
brought of straightforward
appropriation to introduce some
sort of programs in our schools
that would very specifically
target those at risk audiences
instead of something as
comprehensive is this. You know
when we talk about coming in and
helping our our kids
Which need a lot of help. One of
the best bills that I saw
introduced this year that didn't
go very far was to regulate
online social media can't
content specifically targeting
for kids and I could argue that
that does more damage to our
youth and even even tobacco
products. Whatever it is, there
are a lot of people out there
who are making money off of our
youth, and it's creating.
A generation that is far worse
than than what we've ever seen.
And so I commend you for the
intended is hard for me to
increase attacks, and I wish
that it had just been a
straightforward, um,
appropriation asking a program
I'd be. I would be happy to help
you next year if we're just
getting it in classrooms, But
But for the complexity of this,
I'm going to have to vote No,
and that is very difficult for
me to do because I clearly
understand where your heart is.
And I appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. I, uh the
folks who study this
Say that there are three areas
to to do that happened
effectiveness that have been
proven to reduce the uptake of
Vaping.
Ah, number three is education
number two is flavors. Number
three is cost so when the cost
goes up state after state after
state have demonstrated a
significant
Uh, decrease in the uptake of
vaping and cigarettes. And and
this I mean, the yes, it could
help to the General fund for
other things and going into the
future, But this is really a
deterrent cost is a deterrent.
And since there's a lot of
competition among Vaping
companies that isn't
You know, we would hope that
they would just raise prices
willy nilly, but they want to
get the kids. They want to get
them young and so they're
keeping the prices down. I wish
they did it that way. So this is
the only other way that we know
to do it where the evidence is
very solid and in multiple state
public health studies.
Thank you calling us to the
floor.
I think you've heard some
comments, right?
I mean,
My personal deal. I hate babies.
My kids when it first came out
started Vaping.
It changes they're meant to
chemistry in some way, right?
Hmm. And
I don't know that the amendment
is not tracking.
And what we're seeing in
context. I think you need to
work on that.
You've heard the they're the
comments from committee. It's a
general fund hit for 13 million
out of next year's budget in the
F I R. It is
2.5 of general funds. So that's
almost 5% of what we're
calculating for next year.
I think you need that.
13 point there in in the F I R.
13.2 million in the F i. R for
next year out of the General
fund, and then it back fills
General fund.
After that, the year after that
generates money, Miss. Can I let
me finish it?
Regardless I hate raping
probably vote for your bill, no
matter what it does, but the
General fund it is in the next
year.
And that's when we're going to
need the most money so
I think we'll just leave this
lane right here.
I won't vote on it had a good
hearing.
You can talk to us on the floor
and think if you can fix this in
some way.
I
I hate baby. I mean, do we tax
to, uh, marijuana that I
And do we tax liquid marijuana
that I
I'm sorry. Do we tax tax
marijuana? The liquid? I'm not
an expert of the pie. I believe
that's Mr Chair That's under a
whole another.
Uh um, venue this note. This
does not take money away from
the General fund at all. It adds
money to the General fund.
In the out years in the first
year in the first year, it will
add, uh, about six almost
7,000,006 and a half $7 million
it will add to the General fund
in the next year will add about
$3 million in the fourth year,
so that's money that's new to
the General fund, and then after
the third year
All of that money about 20
million is new money to the
General fund. So this is not
this is not taking money out,
then I they whoever wrote this
up
I didn't understand it
correctly. It actually adds
money to the General fund.
Senator Burke quickly because
we're gonna go to four. Thank
you, Mr Chairman.
I would like to know how this
money is going to be applied.
This is going to be a public
service campaign and marketing
campaign of some sorts. My
question is, Do you have a
campaign that has proven
Been proven in other states or
other areas to work.
Is it from an agencies are from
a state of
I'd like to know how this is
going to be applied. Can you in
a brief
For, um, tell me how this will
be applied. Mr. Senator. Yes,
Senator. Thank you for that
question. Um, there are already
programs on TV, and I've seen
him in cable TV that are very to
me, at least used appealing
about Why not take up Vaping.
There are programs and and
students in high schools who are
trying to get their peers.
And there is a lot of formal
education for youth from other
states. We could be applying
much more in this state
University of New Mexico has an
anti Vaping education program,
and so they're all out there. It
would be utilizing these
programs too much greater extent
than what we've done before.
German is a follow up.
Are these proven? Have they seen
positive results from the
programs that you will use with
this money? Yes, there are
Okay, That's I mean they've been
tested and where they've been
tested. They're seeing a
decrease. Okay, I whoever put
the parentheses around the 13.2.
It should be that should be in
addition.
I can't. I don't understand. I
mean, if you if you're putting
if you're taxing, you're putting
new money and I don't see how
it's a cost.
Oh,
You have to figure that
number. We're going to adjourn
and go to the floor. Thank you.
May I bring it back with the
