The motion and a second.
Junction to the motion.
Looking for people.
When you're gonna make sure you
got working today because that I
will not be able to keep up
with.
I got it figured out Mr chairman
it was a technological
breakthrough.
Okay no objection to the motion
as of right so are you with us.
Mr chairman I am here with you.
Senator souls is not with us we
have the amendment so Senator
could have are one of the
center's gonna have a motion to
the amendment for discussion
purposes hello Mister chairman
Senator review ratings
for discussion.
Thank you all right so you want
to explain amendment really
quick yes so Mister chairman as
you heard yesterday the sponsor
of the bill had an amendment to
put an effective date on the
bill of July one twenty twenty
two that is number two on this
ammendment number one it strikes
the the brackets in the line
through on the language that
eliminated reference to the
every student succeeds act
believe that's page five points
nineteen and twenty.
that provision of law allows the
public school capital outlay
council to make matching grants
to charter schools for
facilities for grants made
pursuant to ask some
I think it wasn't technical
cleanup and we spoke with
rafters that in it and agreed it
was not technical cleanup
and in fact it would expand the
type of requests the council
would be required or or allowed
to make requests for that was
not the intent of the sponsor.
Have a motion.
And I
do have some.
A second.
A motion and a second.
See any objection to amendment
we're on the bill can have a
motion for do pass on Senate
bill fifty four so mold Mr
chairman thank you Mr chairman.
Motion and a second path we call
the roll.
Yes Mr chair ask Senator Burt
is.
Not here Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond is also excuse Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share is not here.
Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Is not here Senator Rodriguez
yes Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Thank you yes yes that is seven
yes and for excuse.
Thank you.
Senator Candelaria we are going
to go to the language items on
house bill two I believe Charles
and David may be with us for
language and all.
Language Charles are you there.
David.
Yes Sir.
You guys reviewed the the
language I just want.
Charles to post up the language
that you guys approved and we
just need to adopt the laying.
There is another section.
Yes Sir.
Mr chairman as we're holding in
place so there we go.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr chairman and members of the
committee your language
subcommittee on house bill two
at a few days ago and heard a
presentation by LFC staff that
incorporated final revisions to
language regarding other state
funds bars technical changes.
Following the initial
presentation on house bill two
before this committee the
subcommittee Mr chairman adopted
the staff framework that is
before you and recommends that
the entire committee adopt the
staff recommendation in addition
to what I believe is contained
on this
our general framework there were
two additions that were made at
the subcommittee level Mr
chairman that the sub committee
further recommends the committee
adopting the first was
pertaining to the children youth
and families department staff
came to us with a recommendation
following the initial hearing on
house bill two to give
additional budget adjustment
Authority to CYFD regarding one
of their programs that the
subcommittee recommends that the
full committee adopt that
recommendation the last.
Proposal for the subcommittee
that upon which action was taken
was regarding the tourism
department.
The language subcommittee
recommends that the committee
include language which
appropriates ten million dollars
from the here it is Mr chairman
the additional proposed language
as you see here tourism
is taken to ten million dollars
appropriation of federal funds
through the bite and stimulus
block grants to the state that
is for state advertising and
cooperative marketing including
cooperative marketing for
communities across the state
equitably distributed by region
with no local spending matching
fund requirements for rural
communities from this
appropriation that specific
language was suggested by
Senator Steinborn.
Regarding the equity and the no
local spending matching fund
requirement Mr chairman I think
that's appropriate as these are
one time dollars and we want to
ensure that this investment in
restarting the tourism industry
in New Mexico is done fairly and
equitably and that these funds
are available to communities
regardless of their ability to
come up with matching funds and
so Mister chairman and suffering
your subcommittee recommends
that the committee adopt the
staff framework as I've
discussed today and happy to
answer any questions thank you
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
Do you have anything to add
before we go to questions.
That she would control screen.
Question from committee members.
Chairman I do have one quick
question.
Requirement.
Thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Candelaria the
explanation to the group for
working I know this is very time
consuming and in depart works
thank you very much and I'm
happy that we're adopting the
presenting the the if that
language list for adoption with
the two changes I just wanted
some clarification the ten
million dollars Senator
Candelaria tourism department I
see it from the general fund and
I I just I went blank my screen
went blank a moment here on this
on the the founder so but is
that additional ten million to
what we have put in I'm the
amendment before.
I just want to make sure thank
you can somebody answer that yes
that is in addition and that
would be part of the federal
funds section this is Charles Mr
chairman yes thank you that but
when I wrote I want to be sure
that I thank you all I have a
great Mr chairman thank you.
Charles Taylor and the house
added five million I believe we
added one or two on the Senate
side
there was a discussion with the
exact.
There that was a recommendation
was actually kind of go lower
but we think that just like the
secretary said it if we get in
recovery mode we need to bring
tourism back so we made space
with federal funds so that they
have that ability.
Also dollars correct that's
correct Mr chairman your during
your right now all our got we
got much closer to the twenty or
twenty five million that they
that the governor had asked for
for the tourism department now
we have the five million we came
into the house to lead that we
had a lot of and then also the
ten million now from the federal
dollars well we've got that
seventeen million dollars
during.
Mr the money in their base
budget yes I would just point
out as Mr so we mention Mister
chairman Senator Rodriguez
that's in addition to the base
budget increase for the
marketing program yes one time
sort of decisional dollars thank
you yes thank you very much
correct our.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to let the committee know
so the language that I work out
with the table with the tourism
department I reached out to
several visitor centers around
the state different sides of the
statements spoke to the tourism
secretary and everyone's really
happy with this language I will
say that on the cooperative
marketing it's going to go in
state.
we funded the full twenty five
million they were going to spend
twenty five percent of that in
state for to to support local
communities and and with the
seventeen million that we ended
up that they were happy to get
behind making a commitment of
twenty percent of those dollars
going towards in state programs
and then I guess we have six
tourism regions in the state
it'll be equitably distributed
by region so I want to let the
committee know that staff and
that that commitment is there
which will be a big increase
over what they've spent in the
past on that so that'll be a
great windfall for the
communities so someone to share
that with everyone.
Thank you Senator.
Campos.
Mr Chairman I'm just ready to
would make a motion to accept
the recommendation by chairman
Candelaria regarding the.
The the language of so we've
gone through thank you it also.
Check and make sure we don't
have anybody with their hand
raised.
I don't see anybody so we have a
motion and a second production.
Can we call it so
Mr chair before we focus is
Center share.
we're not voting on house bill
two right now we're just voting
on some language changes I just
want to make sure that that's
what we're voting on.
That is correct we we are
reviewing the language and
opting this the language
amendments to the house bill two
okay thank you Mr.
See anybody else's hand raised
we have a motion and a second
have a caller on.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt is
excused Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond is here yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share yes Senator
sure yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes to Rodriguez
that.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator Munoz CFS ten yes and
one excuse.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you senator Candelaria so
members know
They will begin to prep house
bill two which is is pretty
close we may have a committee
tomorrow morning to.
Look at house bill two in and
review it.
And maybe passed house bill two
but will we will look at that
for tomorrow morning committee
so we can be prepared.
Will move on to the next item of
business.
Senator o'neill.
Thirty five thank you.
We have a substitute correct yes
we do and because we've been
working really hard with your
provide committee on that
substitute here at all the
suggestions for amendments and
so forth so yes so let me just
lunch in here I'm joined today
by with higher ed secretary
designate Stephanie Rodriguez
and my and our co sponsor my
house co sponsor representative
joined Garrett so just to
immediately address the
committee set up in front of you
within this committee some of
the opportunities always.
Yes lotus adopted some.
Actually purposes.
Sorry.
Have a motion to adopt the
supposed to build greater
question for Mr chairman for the
purposes of discussion.
So I think that we need to then
that language say I move would
not pass instead of the one
thirty five.
You Mr chairman.
Couples we we state that force
these.
So I move it do not pass on
Senate bill one thirty five as
amended and do pass for the
Senate committee substitute for
Senate bill one thirty five as
amended for discussion purposes.
I have a second.
Second that diamond.
Senator.
Senator worry are discussing the
substitute bill so go ahead and
proceed thank you Mr chairman
members so the committee subset
in front of you as the
opportunity scholarship will
continue to support recent high
school graduates enrolling in
both two year and four year
degree programs which will
enhance the support for the gaps
not covered by the lottery
scholarship another state aid
also we've included language to
support students who completed
the requirements of a home base
or home school education in New
Mexico also the committee
substitute also also also
continues to support
nontraditional students by
allowing an adult to enroll in a
two year college and complete
their award in four years the
students can also continue their
education and obtain a
bachelor's degree using this
opportunity scholarship.
Also the returning lottery Scott
student is an innovative.
Hyla to allow students to finish
their degree if they've lost
their scholarship in the past no
I have a few semesters to
complete their bachelor's degree
so in essence Mister chair
members of the scholarship
program is critical of bills the
gap left over the lottery
scholarship and other forms of
financial aid and now I will
turn it over to secretary
designate Rodriguez said to be
followed by Representative
joined Garrett and that will
stand for questions.
Thank thank you senator o'neill
and Mister chair I promise
they've kept this relatively
short so Mister chair members of
the committee thank you for
having me here today to discuss
the opportunity scholarship and
the committee substitute that is
before you an educated workforce
is essential to the economic
growth and recovery New Mexico
desires but often times
prohibitive costs no matter how
small you keep college and
career training out of reach the
committee substitute brought to
you today keeps intact the true
intent surrounding our vision
however the opportunity
scholarship has become a
collective vision with your
input and expertise.
Program benefits the spectrum of
New Mexicans from the recent
high school graduate to the
military service member return
to school after completing his
or her deployment it considers
an unemployed or underemployed
worker who inspires to reskill
or retool to obtain that salary
bump you can only enroll part
time and then there is a student
who lost his or her lottery
scholarship and only had two
semesters left to complete a
bachelor's degree now tuition
free college has become a
growing discussion at the
federal level what is seen as an
innovative and forward thinking
trend by many states is
something that New Mexico
implemented.
Ninety five years.
It was our state's dedication
and compassion for our residents
that became an example across
the country and we can continue
to work together to be national
leaders and educational access I
even actually restoring that
promise to New Mexicans
regardless of their
circumstances or careerpathways
thank you for your time as many
of you know I have been working
with your committees analyst
Adrian Abbey lack and he will go
through the changes to the
opportunity scholarship act at
this time.
Representative you want to add
something before we get to that.
Mr chairman I'll just add that I
have one of those people who
went back to school at the age
of thirty two and and graduated
with my bachelors at thirty four
so and I think many people the
legislature gone this course as
well so I think it's it's the
kind of act that we really need
at this time and and that's all
I will say in support thank you.
Are you a repair you can share
your screen and and discuss
changes we have for substance.
I am engage Mr chairman.
A little bit of an echo in there
somewhere.
I think it's our.
The phone made very good.
Right so the opportunities are
simple like the people who just
are discussed focuses on two
different groups of students.
One is a recent graduate million
people who just graduated high
school completed a home school
program and they have the choice
of pursuing a two year degree or
an associate a two year
institution or a master's degree
at a four year program and the
opportunity cost of the cover
seven semesters of that for the
recent graduate learner there
are very clear requirements that
align with the lottery
scholarship shows there's
required full time enrollment of
fifteen credit hours per
semester and a requirement of
maintaining a two point five or
higher committed to a.
With the return graduate learner
there are a little bit different
requirements because these are
nontraditional students.
The first is the need to provide
them the flexibility to meet
them where they're at so they
can take a minimum of twelve
hours qualify for the
opportunity.
Second to provide a little bit
more flexibility they need to
maintain at least two point oh
or higher humidity PA and.
Really important aspect of this
is we're providing them with a
clean slate in other words if
they started college ten years
ago twenty years ago thirty
years ago that GPA does not
count towards the cumulative for
discussion of your location the
need to come back on a clean
slate.
Well.
second.
For the return regular class
work needs to be focused on
credit bearing coursework now
with the opportunity scholarship
there's a very clear funding
trajectory all other state be at
the lottery or anything else
goes first second is an
institutionally that the student
manages to obtain and lastly is
the opportunity scholarship with
supplements whatever's left
over.
Now with that said with the
return student learner there's
three different trajectories
that they can take and it's
worked into this bill the first
is every return student learner
get up to four years to complete
their degree that means they can
go fall semester summer semester
spring semester but from the
second the begin and receive
their first opportunity the
clock starts ticking for them to
complete either their associates
degree or up to two professional
certificates from trade schools
are trade programs
and then on top of that we want
to offer our students are New
Mexican population the
opportunity to continue their
education beyond that so we will
offer to your supplemental
funding through the opportunity
if an individual chooses to
pursue a bachelor's degree in
one of five field of high
critical need for the state so
that's not an education it could
be a nursing degree in social
work and these will be defined
by the department so as the
needs of New Mexico grow this to
your supplemental program will
be involved with our state and
our state needs.
And then on top of that we're
introducing the pilot program
for the returning lottery
students so if provided to two
years of funding for anybody
who's a former letter recipient
was just thirty six hours away
or less to complete the first
batch disagree I will provide
them with two years of funding
to be able to complete that and
knowing that most of our
students who used to have a
lottery and had to drop out for
what ever reason this is an
opportunity come back and finish
their program so that way they
can advance in the workforce
a key characteristic of this as
we understand that some of these
returning lottery students are
probably working full time they
probably have families that need
to take care of so instead of it
being a full time requirement
the rules we're reducing that to
six credit hours which is very
doable if you think about it
because they will have two full
years of three semesters in each
year right all summer and spring
and there's gonna be a
requirement of a two point five
GPA which is in line with
correct the lottery scholarship.
With that said Mr chair it's
important to note that the
scholarships right.
Provide the support necessary
for our population to continue
to be educated but more
importantly as we're able to
graduate more people as our
institutions are able to provide
those wraparound services and
it's highly probable that they
will we'll be able to get more
people enrolled more people
graduating and getting this
professional qualifications that
it would be a wise investment on
the part of the state to
continue to fund this at an even
higher level if need be so with
that said Mister chair I defer
back to Senator when you.
Thank you thank you and so will
stand for questions Mr chair.
Thank you at all for that.
They are sitting thirty feet
apart from me but the computers
were to close at the back.
We know that we just learned
something new about zoom.
Yes Sir Senator only only having
bad Representative cleared my
network of the objects are no I
don't.
And we have anybody in support
or opposition.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee we received at now
indication of opposition to this
bill.
At one we do have a number of
individuals with us in support.
I'm.
First we have and Becky rallied
with the Santa Fe community
college.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
o'neill my name is Becky rally
I'm president of Santa Fe
community college and chair of
the New Mexico independent
community colleges I stand here
in strong support of Senate bill
of the opportunity scholarship
we have surveyed our students
numerous times especially since
the pandemic and clearly the
single biggest issue that keeps
students from succeeding from
staying in school is lack of
financial resources financial
resources so anything that we
can do to assist them as
secretary Rodriguez said
sometimes small amounts make a
very large difference in whether
or not our students are able to
stay in school so we are
especially proud pleased to see
the provision for part time
status for returning students
many many many of our students
are parents even those that are
returning after a very short
time at a very young age so this
the part time aid will be
especially critical and we are
just very pleased that that this
is come forward thank you next
we have to create the hardline
president of central New Mexico
community college.
You're getting members of the
committee Mr chairman and and
the audience is I'm Tracy
hartshorn president seen M.
central New Mexico community
college we stand as strong
support of Senate bill one
thirty five as the amendments
are represented by the sponsor
and any analyst to discussed in
the secretary of share
you very briefly at.
All of our students are
concerned with how to pay for
college and their training this
opportunity scholarship provides
another opportunity.
For all of our students to but
most of our students to
participate we're particularly
supportive of the part time
of the provisions that support
part time students and just very
briefly even this last year that
that you all appropriated we had
a little over twenty nine
hundred students we awarded
about three million dollars to
our students in the opportunity
scholarship and of those
programs the majority by far the
majority of our students studied
nursing business administration
business
teaching in psychology which is
one of those print up to more of
programs to help with transfer
to a four year institution
source students were starting
degree programs and those
students who are string per
certificates were focused on
dental assistants auto mechanics
electrical mechanic electrical
technicians so again those
certificate programs that we all
know are so critical to help our
students so we stand against
wrong support this amendment in
this bill because we know will
improve our the chances for our
local economy to really take off
as a number of our restrictions
are limited are listed so thank
you.
Next we had did not see all of
it I don't student leader at New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee good maybe
opportunities B. two today my
name's not Silverado student
leader representing the black
student association which is the
essay New Mexico State
University as a student leader
static to support yes the one
thirty five the opportunity
scholarship that students should
not have to choose between
substance and education
education is a basic necessity
and supportability strongly
affects the students the family
and the community Senate bill
one thirty five will be a
catalyst for change and provided
gift with formal education The
New Mexico and its future.
I thank you quickly legendary
Act is Nelson Mandela.
Education is the most powerful
weapon which you can use to
change the world let's investing
Senate bill one thirty five to
change the rules and educate
Mexico thank you then we have
doctor Jones separate chair The
New Mexico council of university
presidents.
Good afternoon Mister chair good
afternoon members of the
committee good to see all of
you.
Imagine for a moment you have
a young lady who just graduated
from high school the first time
in her life she now has to pay
for education faces up to
fifteen thousand dollars with
room board and tuition.
Now imagine a mother who happens
working law enforcement your
husband works works as a school
teacher they make approximately
a hundred thousand dollars here
maybe making them not hello
eligible they are faced with the
same level of of tuition and
fees and so forth.
Madam also the thirty two year
old mother who's just laid off
from her job.
She doesn't have any money she
wants to go back to school she
wants to better her education
for her children and do
something for the state.
She's faced with the same now
managing your business wanting
to move here to New Mexico or
your business within New Mexico
and you're looking for high
quality students and and
workforce.
That are educated this
scholarship solves all of that
and it comes at a fraction of
your budget it only amounts to
approximately half percent or
state budget in terms of what's
being discussed you can make a
difference you can make a change
support the opportunity
scholarship because supporting
it is supporting the future of
New Mexico and and workforce
development thank you very much.
Next we have a doctor at Sam of
minor president that animates
you.
Good afternoon everyone Mr
chairman members of the
committee Senator president New
Mexico highlands university
effort to themes by previous
speakers ever issues of
affordability and I've also
heard issues of access we
literally lost a student use not
returning says he's not coming
back last semester for because
you couldn't replace one try not
a set of tires one single tire
what a loss to him what a loss
to the state what a loss to
society let's level the playing
field I urge you I implore you
to pass this bill would be a
beautiful thing for our students
in the state of New Mexico thank
you very much.
Next we have doctor Barbara
Damron chief government
relations officer for the
university of New Mexico.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Damron chief
government relations officer you
in in the professor at UNM all
of first thank governor Lujan
Grisham for her work and
dedication to higher education
there were also think secretary
rod Regus for her wonderful work
without all of us in higher
education
you Miss Universe New Mexico and
on behalf of president Stokes
stand in support of this bill we
appreciate the governor
listening to students and
listening to the for your
secretary we appreciate what has
been covered here in the
committee substitute I would
like to comment on the
institutional aid part I hope
that covers just tuition and
fees and have conversations
about that I just want to stress
that that institutional aid
coverages tuition fees so I get
a behalf of president Stokes and
UNM we think this sponsors here
senator Neil Representative
Garrett the governor and
secretary Rodriguez thank you
very much.
Next we have Dr Cynthia Rooney
chair and I'm ACC and chancellor
for UNM Los Alamos.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Cindy Rooney I currently
service the chance of UNM LA and
also the interim chancellor for
you and tells I'm also president
of the New Mexico association
community colleges which
represents the branch campus
community colleges in our state
as you've heard other leaders of
higher education speak today we
recognize the important role we
sure for students we right we
serve their individual growth
there if we increase our social
mobility and we provide
affordable and quality education
in ways that are assessable to
the students we try to address
the important issue of under
utilized and under developed
human capital we also serve the
businesses and industries in our
area by providing a qualified
workforce a workforce it's
important the Los Alamos
national lab but you all
organizations.
For the two year campuses that I
represent the major question
which part time and
nontraditional students many of
these jobs are trying to balance
the part time work family
obligations along with their
academic programs in the past
we've seen students register for
full time what's in order to
meet to obtain some financial
assistance and they're overly
optimistic about their ability
to do it all unfortunately this
is not always have the desirable
outcomes I'm especially thankful
to this proposed opportunity
scholarship will support
students including the part time
nontraditional students to
pursue both certificate programs
and degree programs on behalf of
the branch campus community
colleges Lujan strongly support
this proposed opportunity
scholarship with amendments as
discussed thank you.
Next we have me I mean at
president associated students of
the university of New Mexico.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
when using the steam Senators of
this committee my name is mia
meaning of the undergraduate
student body president at the
university of New Mexico
University of New Mexico I'm
here presents today to support
Senate bill one thirty five with
the amendment to include four
year institutions I want to
begin by expressing my sincere
gratitude to the governor
Secretary Rodriguez Senator
o'neill Representative care and
all related parties for being
responsive to the needs of your
constituents when this bill was
first introduced at the Senate
Education Committee I urge the
committee to consider an
amendment to include for
institutions to Senate bill one
thirty five and here I am today
throwing my support behind spill
with the aforementioned
amendment included like Dr Damon
I would like to mention that I
would support the institutional
aid consideration being limited
to those allocated towards
tuition fees alternately the
goal of the opportunity
scholarship is to provide
tuition fees while institutional
maybe maybe I'll offer to
students with the intention of
funding other college related
expenses like room and board
books and supplies etcetera
finally I also want to extend my
thanks to the committee for
including a ten point five
million allocation to the
lottery tuition Fund in house
bill two this funding will be
very crucial for students that
have suffered so immensely due
to the impact of the COVID
nineteen pandemic thank you for
your commitment to higher
education and thank you for your
time.
Funds next we had and Gabriel
rob you all and director of
governmental affairs the
associated students at NMSU.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee my name is Gabriel Ron
Keogh and the director of
government affairs for the
associated students New Mexico
State University I would like to
show strong support as a
representative for the students
for house bill one for Senate
bill one thirty five especially
with the inclusion of four year
institutions think it's all
legislators governor Grisham and
secretary Rodriguez and
everybody who was involved with
this legislation as you're
giving a chance to all Mexican
students to receive a higher
education really appreciate it
thank you again.
Next we have a family well now
with New Mexico voices for
children.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
Emily will doubt representing
New Mexico voices for children
in strong support of SB one
thirty five I'd like to thank
the sponsors for bringing
forward this bill today and all
those who worked on the
committee substitute we support
the opportunity scholarship
because financial aid has not
kept pace with the increasing
cost of to it of attendance and
offering financial aid to part
time students recent high school
grads returning adult learners
and those are just a couple
semesters away from a degree is
especially critical now as so
many people have faced financial
hardship over the last year put
in college even further out of
reach the scholarships important
to our community and our
economic recovery and future
develop development and we urge
the committee to support this
legislation today thank you.
Next we have Robert Beatty with
the Robert F. Kennedy charter
school.
Chairman members of the
committee are Robert Beatty with
Robert F. Kennedy charter school
I'm I'm here to speak are in
strong support of Senate bill
one thirty five and appreciate
sparking up the flexibility are
that's in this bill is
absolutely critical for the
students or or graduating from
Robert F. Kennedy charter school
that two year he says part time
pieces the ability to come back
when you very close to having
your bachelor's and being able
to finish speaks to me like
Representative Garrett arm when
I returned to a college to
finish my degree I was in my
thirties recently discharged
from the Air Force as a computer
maintenance technician and I
wanted to be a high school math
teacher it was a struggle as a
single parent it was very
difficult the flexibility are
and and other components of this
bill would have made a big
difference to me and I know it's
going to make a big difference
to students in New Mexico thank
you.
Next we had a call with the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Jerry
Cole I am the president CEO for
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce the chamber is a
strong supporter of making
college more affordable and
accessible and we support the
establishment of a non reverting
fund for opportunity
scholarships in New Mexico our
workforce pipeline will greatly
benefit from an increased and
agreed workers including
traditional students and those
who returned a higher education
in order to share or launch a
new career in particular we are
hopeful that this funding can
and will be used to produce
skilled workers and likely
shortage areas like health care
nursing teaching and any number
of trades so for these reasons
we support SB one thirty five
and asked the committee to do so
as well and we want to thank you
for our opportunity opportunity
say a few words thank you.
Matt we have doctors on how may
eastern New Mexico university
Roswell.
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for the opportunity to speak
I'll be very brief as a branch
community college I think our
mission is to serve student
needs and community needs the
opportunity scholarship will
assist us in helping students
reach those goals to meet
community based jobs throughout
the workforce thank you and I
encourage support of SB one
thirty five.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
Thank you mate then the
questions from committee
members.
One year Senator Campos your
first.
Thank you very much used.
The Senate finance committee.
I stand in of course full
support the opportunity
scholarship.
But in going forward with some
of the questioning
it all pertains to retention and
completion of our students.
Particularly at the don't
learners.
So many people who are going to
be going back to school.
And our agency mounted needs
it's not only.
The need for income it's also
the need to take care of their.
Families possibly provide
additional employment.
Take care of nutrition and so
many of the other needs are tied
to education particularly as
they've already gotten out into
the world were and are raising
their families.
So one of the initial question
is I have as we put together if
you will financial aid package
for returning students.
As we move forward
Will this in Kandace cover
everything from tuition books
fees nutrition child care room
and board on the work study.
And the reason I bring it up
because in an this may be if you
will the last dollar needed.
As president mentor had
indicated that definitely would
assist the students.
To purchase if you will a back
tire for their vehicle.
So the first question again
would be how do you all for C.
R. as part of the retention and
wishin.
This this particular opportunity
scholarships are working and
again not to go and indicate
that we do have hello and and
fast so we have other.
Mechanisms in order to put
together a financial aid package
but how would this fall in the
specially if in some cases some
of the other financial aid is
not available so.
Thank you Sir
US secretary Rodriguez did you
want to speak to that question.
Lately and thank you for that
question Senator Campos Mister
chairman Senator Campos it's
absolutely integral that I
mentioned last year when he
first brought this opportunity
scholarship forward the original
package didn't consider those
out of pocket costs our students
so we work with our president
and our chancellors other higher
education leaders make this a
middle dollar scholarship
program that lottery scholarship
and state is required first and
then opportunity scholarship
will close the tuition and he
got to allow for students to use
federal aid and other aid and
scholarships to pay for those
out of pocket costs the
dependent housing when you don't
have enough money to put that
tire in your car maybe you some
of your scholarships they do
that childcare is another
component if you look at the
bill as well there's a
memorandum of understanding that
will be completed between the
department and the institution
itself to identify those
students services wraparound
services that we can ensure that
no matter what student enrolled
in a university air support
services in place at that
institution make sure that they
can complete their degree within
a timely manner.
Mr chairman and in the.
Madam secretary really
appreciate that as we move
forward one of the things when
we had indicated that are
started if you will the lottery
scholarship we sent our and and
part of the data indicated that
also an increase of tuition and
our institutions and so within
this.
One would be able to also help
me to better understand well
that's what is your point broke.
What.
Thank.
Their microphone.
Thank you.
R. A. really sorry about that I
was talking to my husband.
If if this is implemented what
it means for future increase in
tuition and it's not an incident
insinuation it's as we go
forward we know that the are
there definitely are rising
costs to educate people of all
ages and so there maybe there's
someone that can help you better
understand that this is specific
courses we understand to tuition
and scholarships but along with
that I'm I'm also a.
Information on the possibility
of increase tuition.
And possibly the next couple
years.
Secretary Rodriguez absolutely
thank you senator Na'Allah
Mister chairman Senator Campos
this was something that was
considered by the executive and
and secretary o'neill we were
going through this process is
starting to talk about this and
the answer to your question is
as part of the M. O. U. we will
also provide guidance to
institutions unsustainable
tuition practices to ensure that
we don't have tuition increases
of twenty percent but we're
still accommodating the to it
that institutions to a certain
degree for some I'm funded
things that may come up here and
there but the whole idea of the
memorandum of understanding as
to make sure that we have best
practices of sustainability and
place and sign to do make sure
that we don't have and
sustainable increases over time.
Thank you David tied into that
is part of the presentation
The is this going to be allowed
for any of the four year degrees
and at two years Sir.
I think it's and the reason I
bring that up because as and
students continue with retention
and completion and then
placements.
One of the issues happens for
maybe someone's taking course
work and they find that that's
not in their interest so they
complete that courts but then
from there they are changing
their degree status and then
from there are they also going
to be provided.
With the guidance program so the
other part of this that really
ties into the successful
retention completion and then of
placement deals directly with
not only the resources what
if there is a plan to better
guide students in the state are
accepted to the opportunity
scholarship.
Another great question a
secretary can you speak to that
absolutely Mr chair Senator
Campos once again I think this
is what's so fantastic about the
memorandum of understanding is
we can ensure that those
services are in place at an
institution to make sure that
any recipient of the opportunity
scholarship specially since
we're considering are
nontraditional students you may
be full parents maybe working
full time part time and other
obligations that they can attend
to they at least have those that
list of services to ensure that
they know who to call on campus
if they have an issue arise and
make sure that they get the
support they need to graduate.
Mr Chairman representative madam
secretary Sanchez you know the
Senator on you Representative
Garrett in in moving forward
with the with the GPA
requirements.
Let's say for example in the
clothes of the semester.
Students GPA is going to be here
at two point four nine or if you
will one point ninety eight
is there going to be.
some level of are not
forgiveness but for work and
possibly an additional semester
to give that individual an
opportunity to bring the a or as
soon as they fall below the
threshold they would be
additional thank you Mr chair
secretary absolutely Mr chair
Senator Campos I'm gonna defer
to one of my experts here with
me doctor I'm all of the
financial a division he can take
this one very easily Dr I'm all.
Thank you Mr chair US secretary
in center Campos a for your
question we we run into these
cases with the lottery
scholarship quite frequently to
students and we have put in
place in the rulemaking process
mitigating circumstances
language that allows the
institution of the financial aid
office the flexibility so of the
student can take a class in the
summer for example of oil and I
should also mention that is a
cumulative GPA so it typically
one class will not and a
student's career it their their
pursuits so we would address
that and and definitely work
with the students.
Mr chair and of course I I
appreciate your responses but if
we're gonna put information in
statute are we want to ensure
that we're making that with a
cumulative GPA at the one
semester if they do fall between
the low let's say for example
that required GPA that they're
given the opportunity to
continue because in the past
what we have seen
have been that the students have
been distant rolled so again I'm
gonna pose the question.
Is that part of our.
Not necessarily a guarantee but
is it's are we going to be
working with our students to
ensure that there is going to be
that of successful completion.
Secretary.
Mr chair Senator Campos thank
you for that the answer is yes
we provide constituent services
at our agency and we have a
constituent service entity
within our financial a division
at any point you student within
our wheel entire system in New
Mexico can reach out to us to
address these issues at any time
and then our financial a
division in constituent services
team work directly with the
office of the president the dean
of students things of that
nature to see how we can help
that student before they descend
role or may not ever come back
to college so we do have
intervention steps that our
agency itself to ensure that we
can keep the students and and we
need to do a better job of
making sure that students know
that services available hence I
we've brought on a public
information officer right before
the legislative session after
this session will be helping us
get the word out about our
constituent services and our
financial aid program.
Mr chair members of the Senate
finance committee Senator you
representative here at in the
course the respondents thank you
all very much for the
information again I look forward
to a very healthy opportunity
scholarship thank you Senator
Campos senior years and
educational world.
Attract speaks volumes to your
questions appreciate your
expertise thank you Sir.
Hello.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you sponsors and presenters and
speakers
my question is well I just want
to say that first of all thank
you for bringing the bill
forward as a woman who has taken
I had to obtain financial aid in
order to get my degrees I really
appreciate the work that you're
doing I was the first woman and
my dad's family to get a degree
and so I'm very proud of that
and it would have been possible
without being able to access
financial aid and so I hope that
there are many more students
that are able to take advantage
of the opportunity scholarship
and it's a great investment it's
given me incredible flexibility
to raise my children and raise a
child with disabilities and we
need a lot of flexibility for
that so my question is do we
know is this going to be
something that state teachers
are educators can utilize in
order to get continuing
education credits or
endorsements as a something that
would be available to them.
Mr Chairman secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator thank you for your
question teachers have always
been in the forefront in the
legislative session as you know
we have many teacher preparation
scholarship programs already in
place so they'll be able to
continue to utilize those
scholarship programs and if
there is still an existing gap
the opportunity scholarship will
come in and fill it in so that
all of their tuition and fees
are covered.
Excellent thank you secretary
thank you Mr chairman.
Senator.
Thank you senator.
R. Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
I want to kind of
Touch on this kind of
existential question I've been
struggling with the session
about this program.
Which is.
You know having recently gone
through higher education myself
in at ten years now but still
isn't great memories.
you know it was it was a
challenge to get that paid for
and I went to college out of
state and so none of these
programs are available
luckily the institution I want
to has need a lot more blind
financial aid which is based
completely on.
On more at and I mean on family
income.
The institution has an endowment
to support it so you know the
sticker price of tuition is
seven seventy five thousand some
that most families who make
under a hundred thousand end up
paying very close to nothing and
that's sort of what the Ivy
League has been able to do.
And we're not we're in a
different situation of course
but one of the challenges I do
recall having that was very
stressful you know being a first
generation college student
myself and not coming from a
family with a lot of means was
just the proliferation of just
different funding sources
different programs federal aid
stayed eight and I guess the
challenge I have Mister chairman
is this could we not have
accomplish the goals of this
program by simply amending the
lottery scholarship and isn't
there just an inherent harm in
adding further complication here
while I create a new funding
stream and new application
process and you bureaucracy we
could have simply made
conforming amendments to the
existing system and I just want
to get the thoughts of the
Sanchez on that thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator for that
excellent question of Secretary
Rodriguez did you want to take a
stab at that.
I would love to Mr chair and
senator Candelaria I just want
to make sure it respect who you
asked how did you want that that
sponsors to maybe answer after
me but I can take the first stab
at Mr chairman certainly welcome
the administration's perspective
but I think from a policy
perspective and sort of most
interested in understanding from
the legislators why why adding
new program with with all this
complexity you know I think we
were joking and I think Mister
this law and and members of our
staff of but in a lot of
overtime our on this bill and
some others and we wanted to
check and see if the DFA
secretary to get us some
vouchers because we have some
overtime bills we need to
invoice and professional
services we need to get over the
executive.
But you know I I guess the
challenges it's not being
critical I mean I think it is a
fundamental question which is
this is already hard enough for
students.
Is already complicated enough
especially for the populations
we're trying to all why not just
keep it a one stop shop and just
reform the lottery why was it
what what do we see as
beneficial of starting an
entirely new program as opposed
to just going with the one we
have in performing and doing the
same thing.
Will.
Was senator I can say you know
and I know other areas better
than than that the specifics in
the minutes of the lot lottery
scholarship program I do know
just in a general way that you
know it it's
It's a question of
Have you left any any any way
shape or form I hear you loud
and clear must have been really
confusing when you're at
Princeton to have all these
different funding streams and
trying to keep track of it but
on the other hand I just have to
defer to the expertise of folks
that are closer to this than I
am and if they feel like this is
the best way to go about it your
points well taken on the other
hand you know trying to resist
that that aphorism don't let the
perfect get in the way of a good
or whatever this is this is what
we have this is in their opinion
that was the best vehicle for
this your point is well taken
and then you know I I always
want to learn more about these
very important programs in our
state especially lottery
scholarship the history of that
I know it's something that The
New Mexico New Mexicans really
proud and rightly so in respect
of wow just goes back through
our our former leaders senator
Michael Sanchez who we suggest a
for two on all questions of
lottery so are the complicated
history I can say that and yes
I'd be great to have a
streamlined
better solution sure and
existential way but I but I do
feel this is real solid and and
again I just feel the experts
can speak to that probably
better than I can but I do know
that this is this is really
important initiative in your
points always are well taken
thanks thank you Mr chairman to
my good colleague I was
wondering if Representative
Garrett had any thoughts on that
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria I do
I think that part of this bill
especially sections seven to
nine do what you're calling for
they are adding reforming
appreciate being delineating new
aspects of the lottery
scholarship and I think that is
excellent however the category
of returning adults I'm.
That's a little bit different
that doesn't fit in so much to
the person who went to high
school and in New Mexico and you
know got the lottery scholarship
dropped out for whatever reason
and is coming back so what I
like about this bill is it it
and dresses the adults who maybe
never even went to school
and become motivated and some
targets in their life that now
they can accomplish so I I think
one aspect of the bill is
dressing the lottery reformation
itself and then the other part
is addressing that adult now
starting on some type of the
career path that requires
education so I'm your points are
well taken but that's my
perspective thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
I I appreciate that and
You know I think the challenge
that that we we have thanks at
all I move on to another issue
which it is just a start out the
conversation I think there's
some real questions I have about
structure but real little late
in the game for those sort of
reforms.
but but the challenge for me
right is we can all agree in on
the principal in the aims of the
legislation what I'm concerned
about is in a few years we'll
have a bill on establishing a
council to advise us on how to
collaborate all these different
funding streams and then will be
asked to funded position at AGD
or somewhere in the us to make a
report and tell us well how do
we make this situation less
complicated when I think you
know this isn't meant as a
criticism to anybody it's just
having been here now after
successive administrations each
administration wants to brand
something.
And that's fine.
I'm a problem with that every
governor's allowed to do and set
forth the course that they
choose but it does come at a
cost when we have this
proliferation of streams and
these proliferation of programs
as opposed to simply getting
rights but we've already started
to trying to.
And I think Mr chairman I want
to echo Senator Campos is
questions about tuition.
Which is you know.
Both the lottery and now the
opportunity scholarship now both
sort of link very closely the
state of the state general fund
and these programs and by
extension tuition at public
institutions and so as this
moves forward I stirred of echo
Senator Campos as concerns about
tuition.
Increases it institutions
because now the state Mr
chairman as we now now is on the
hook.
And you know we sort of have
this odd dilution of our
appropriation power.
Where in the cost of the service
is not something we in the
legislature determined it's
something that's determined at
the institutional level we do
not decide tuition of the
legislature state institutions
do we just have to pay the
bills.
And and I think that's just
something as a finance committee
you know we just need to
understand and and and move
forward on Mr chairman.
regarding I want to just ask a
few questions Mr chairman though
about the this the program
itself over the last year.
Mr chairman and I guess this
question is I'll ask you to the
sponsors and they can feel to to
remember they they think the
best person to answer the
question but I was concerned
during our budget presentation
about the proliferation and
expansion of the humanities
certificates of CNN.
And those qualifications being
counted as the terminal degree
or this or that the
accomplishment and I think it's
not accomplishment trying to to
to to to anyway to mean that.
But but what I'm saying is it's
very unclear to me.
What the state is getting in
return for its investment on a
humanity certificate yes that's
right term I'm using the wrong
term now I have understood from
some conversations Mr chairman
that some of some folks to get
that certification then go on to
complete a four year degree it's
like where they guess they
complete some pre requisites but
what I'm concerned about is what
I understand at least to be the
case is that the number of
students who got that
certificate but then went on or
on path to completing a four
year degree is very very small.
And the bill doesn't call out
for any reporting.
On that issue so Mr Chairman the
to the sponsors and then to ever
can answer.
I am concerned and you know I am
concerned about the rostrum
generate certificates or degrees
but certificates and degrees
that may not be aligned with the
state's broader economic
development.
Desires which to become relevant
to this conversation when the
state begins to subsidize the
operations of all higher
education institutions in this
way so Mister chairman it's a
multi part question I appreciate
the Sanchez if they can let me
know what they think and please
defer to whoever you think you'd
like to answer as well thank you
senator Candelaria and I know
this is a concern expressed to
me by by the chairman of your
committee I think you know
Representative Garrett if if you
could speak to that and then.
Secretary Rodriguez follow up
and and that would be my
suggestion.
Presented of Garrett I mean yeah
during.
Mr chairman and and senator
Candelaria that's a great idea
because
in my second term I find myself
checking all legislation for
that accountability reporting
and that's something that is in
the bill
that the department has to
report on all aggregated data
the qualified students what they
were rules and all those sort of
things because we really do have
to look at that sharply there's
also a section that says for
those two years you can get to.
Tional certificates for example
if you're going into the film
industry you can't get you know
I different certificates you're
limited to a cap of two.
And they emphasize professional
program so that is something
that the bill delineates that I
think it's important in helping
institutions and students
understand the value of the
education in terms of skills
that.
Take them and the successful
pathways but
secretary Rodriguez I think can
probably really elaborate on
that even more yes absolutely Mr
chair Senator Candelaria thank
you for the question I to like
you I'm a big believer in data
and what it showing it as you
know I'm new to this agency but
I am appreciative of some of the
amendments that you have forward
towards data and having the
agency report that to you in
this group right here now as far
as certificates are concerned
we've done a roundup of our
certificate we have three
hundred and ten in the state of
New Mexico that our credit
bearing of those over forty
percent are stand age and over
twenty percent are strictly
career technical education on
top of that we did a preliminary
survey of the opportunity
scholarship recipients and I'm
really happy to tell you that
forty six point seven our stem
H. degrees followed by that
thirty point two percent our
career technical education
although I believe that there is
dignity and all degrees
including liver out arts and
humanities you can help by our
data that New Mexicans get it
right now we need people in
nursing stem career technical
education vocational Eddie
education need welders
electricians we get these people
on our national laboratories.
On our bases so.
New Mexicans are seen that in
there and rolling in those
programs but I'm with you you
need the data and I'm dedicated
to getting you that data as you
put in to the bill in this
committee substitute.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and and I'll leave
it at that on that issue because
I I do think that this is going
to be a collaborative process
moving forward and I know we had
a great conversation with our
LFC staff at the higher
education hearing this year and
I do hope it's something that
that you know I would like to
propose you know the appropriate
time that LFC at that issue to
its work plan and and really
getting a handle on you know I
really appreciate the data may
madam secretary designate on the
number of certificates you know
the challenge I have is I think
the character I think the
classification HB may be using
is a little different than at
least the way the data was
reported to us initially but I'm
certainly I think you may have a
more refined at and I've been
able to have at this point so I
think that's all well and good.
Mr chairman and so I guess I
guess this ultimately leads to
my final question.
Which is.
You know at.
Help me quantify what success
looks like for this program and
its next year.
By the numbers how many degrees
how many graduates in what feels
what is the then help me
quantify the return on
investment and because I think
the challenges Mr chairman for
us is.
You know it's it is we can all
get behind the principal right.
We can all celebrate the
concept.
But I think especially on this
committee our responsibility is
to make sure the tax payer is
actually getting what they pay
for so what is the taxpayer
going to gas for this in the
next year Mr chan to the Sanchez
and then to ever they would
designate.
Thank you senator and thank you
for that emphasis on
accountability and specifics
because just in a general way I
get a grow really weary of the
good intentions of the bill the
good intentions of this and that
but it all comes down to the
specifics whether it's in this
very important financial
committee or on a pa and more
policy issues and so I totally
hear that and I I want to go
first to start Secretary
Rodriguez and and the
Representative Garrett but I I I
hear you loud and clear Senator.
Secretary Rodriguez absolutely
Mr chair Senator Candelaria
thank you for that question as
you know every single program as
soon as it's establishing needs
time to ramp up that was the
case for the lottery scholarship
we really didn't start to see
the data make a difference
within New Mexico until the year
two thousand so four years after
it had started as far as the
opportunity scholarship based on
our calculations with the
sixteen million dollars that
will be appropriated to ask and
the fact that we can help what
will range of New Mexicans not
the respective twelve our
language that we had an H. P. to
plaster we could potentially up
to how about twenty thousand New
Mexicans to fill that gap which
can equate to one hundred
million dollar return on
investment in New Mexico but
like I said I have to ask folks
to proceed with caution because
even with our operations are
spectrogram the first year that
we started that program we only
found forty three students
actually utilize that and now
we're at one hundred fifty after
here so it takes time but with
opportunity scholarship we saw
well over four thousand five
thousand students going full
time who actually got to have
the opportunity scholarship
dollars for pocket but now with
this and the
less restrictive language we're
gonna be able to help even more
at some baseline and information
that I can provide you at this
time.
Mr chairman and senator I would
just add that the people who get
the scholarships are tax payers
for the most part and so you
know door knocking hearing from
people
it's good that we can give a
missed opportunity but also
there's a lot of college higher
education leaders on this call
and I think this effort
how they put it to the supports
into the system when I went back
and got my degree I hadn't
written a term paper for ten
years and part of my success was
that that was recognized and
incorporated in the program so
so what you're asking for is
something that involves the
college leadership the financial
leadership the academic
leadership the industry
leadership and the legislative
leadership so that that's kind
of my response just initially
speaking.
Mr Chairman all I appreciate
that and I I like I said I think
you know this is going to be a
collaborative effort I
completely agree with him
forward but you know.
Just in closing Mr chairman our
our our our job in the
legislature is not to pass good
feelings are good concepts are
job in the legislature's passed
law.
And is that the public policy of
New Mexico and I will just
sharing closing my from where I
am as a member you all judge
this success of this program
based on the numbers based on
how many students a budget how
many degrees and what's the
return on investment I'm all of
the good feelings in the world
all of the good intentions of
the world in my money don't
justify one dollar taxpayer
expense if we are not actually
committed to producing results
and the challenge I have Mr
chairman again and again.
Is we don't have a problem with
inputs or access in New Mexico
really we have challenges like
every state but we've done more
than most in getting people in
the door higher education the
problem is Senator Campos said
is the completion.
And until I think we change the
narrative and start with the
accountability on the front and.
That is that is the gate before
people get the money I think
we're going to continue seeing
the same problems but I hope I'm
wrong thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you senator.
Thank you senator Candelaria
Senator.
Gonzales.
They're Senator yes I am thank
you thank you Mr chairman on
okay brace and a lot of school
we have a very good discussion.
Well first of all you know I
just want to say on.
I think so.
You know in my part you know
well.
You know what a great day for
New Mexico you know to have this
kind of an opportunity to
provide to our young people.
And all the different choices
you know so many more you know
it's just a matter of you know
getting the total right
orientation that right
information to everyone but all
of the options definitely are
there you know and you know it's
so again you know how great day
for our state you know to be
able to offer this to one of the
major cation program to our
students.
I just have a just a couple of
questions Mr chairman I think a
lot of that has been answered
very eloquently and the the end
of the whole purpose of this
program at all.
it was in one of the charts and
also on page eleven of the bill.
So
of full time students now
fifteen hours.
Secretary.
I am pulling up the bill right
now one second but yes under
lottery scholarship
that has been in statute as
fifteen credit hours per
semester for a lottery
scholarship recipients.
Mr chairman and secretary of the
this at the university part it's
twelfth is no at the community
college secretary it's twelve at
the four year college sector it
is fifteen.
Okay very well.
The other part that I was gonna
ask you and this is based on
The the F. I. R. well prepared
by the LFC.
And Florida hassle.
Right to work for page up page
three.
And the you have all we have a
chart that is showing no you on
all all the way from seeing them
to all the way to New Mexico
highlands university the number
of recipients of the
scholarship.
Hello the only question that I
see here is all
I would even go to the top or to
the bottom but you know you see
like co.
I will say for example
Eastern New Mexico and Ross will
yet two hundred eighty three.
Though my concern is why would
you have to eighty three and you
have to and New Mexico highlands
you would only have the level.
Is it a matter of fall.
Just getting the word out in a
matter of full.
The right promotion to a
program.
Senator audio can I go ahead and
answer that I'm sorry yes please
Mr chair Senator Gonzales thank
you for that question New Mexico
highlands university as you know
has focused on four year degrees
versus the two year secretary
degrees that's why you see some
of those lower numbers that are
comprehensive colleges purses
are independent colleges and
branch campuses the other thing
that I have to note and I'll
take full responsibility for
this is promotion and that's why
we have hired a public
information officer right before
the legislative session to
ensure that all of our financial
aid programs are at the
forefront of New Mexicans so
that they know how to access
these opportunities but that is
why you'll see lower numbers at
our comprehensive universities
the other thing to consider for
example let me so lance
community college you also have
a lower overall enrollment
compared to our urban epicenters
like Albuquerque and made by us
with this so that's another
considering factor as well.
And.
What can I add one quick thing
Mr chairman and and senator
Gonzalez what I learned on
transportation is that they have
a terrific are playing engineer
repair program in Roswell just
as a side note.
very well thank you for that
amount you know all so just to
add to that so long Mr chairman
and senator o'neill and to our
secretary so with this new
legislation and what the
amendments have we probably will
see a big change in this number
is correct.
Secretary.
Mister chairman Senator Gonzales
absolutely this legislation
isn't as restrictive we have the
ability and flexibility for the
returning a lot about learner to
come back part time we also have
the incorporation of the
returning lottery students so we
will see enrollment numbers
increase for these degree
programs and at these
institutions whereas they each
each few language from last year
required the students to have to
go to school full time at a
minimum of credit hours per
semester.
the last part that I have will
Mr chairman and senator Neal on
one of the big members mattress
that I ever had was so Mister
Gilbert Martinez so he was a
title one director for the state
department at that time for the
spread.
And he handled the millions of
dollars in title one.
And the he would say of some.
You know I don't care how you do
it it's it's under a tree if
it's under city rules or
whatever yes as long as you can
teach students.
You know and get across to our
our the world coming up on this
so.
Is so what what part.
Or how is it going to be looked
at.
In other words to do the
outreach.
To see what are the needs of the
state for the certificates that
you are providing.
Secretary and representative.
I'll go ahead and take that
Mister chairman Senator Gonzales
that's an absolute fantastic
question and let me tell you why
the department of workforce
solutions secretary mccamley and
myself have seen that gap where
we're not really thinking about
that so we've actually
coordinated and started working
together on an initiative that
we will hopefully be launching
stand which the community
colleges where you're
institutions and branch campuses
for on this call today started
which is restart New Mexico for
the purpose of that is to really
serving the community and health
and see what the needs are also
survey the businesses and
workforce to see what their
needs are and then launching a
marketing campaign to really
target those areas whether it be
solar energy the automotive
technology whatever it may be in
a certain region of New Mexico
and start keeping that targeted
marketing out in those regions
so that we can start getting
those enrollment numbers that
and also filling in those
vacancies act job within the
work force throughout New Mexico
so it's something on our money
we're hoping to launch this very
soon after the legislative
session but it will be
collaboration among higher
education higher education
department the department of
workforce solutions.
Representative did you want to
add anything to that
that was very thorough pathway.
Very good thank you.
Very well of Mr chairman and
senator o'neill and to all
respondents are secretary and
others that have provided
information on thank you again
and you know again part of what
a great day for state you know
it is something that extremely
positive you know I think that
so solid footing to what we're
doing with education for our
young people in post high school
so thank you again that's all Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Senator Gonzales Senator Burt.
And thank you Mr chairman and
and thank you all for bringing
forth.
This legislation and and I'm I I
really appreciate the
opportunity that New Mexico has
for people to continue their
education and to finish their
education and so I'm in in very
interested this opportunity
scholarship but I just I I guess
couple comments that have a
couple of questions and and I
want to go back to some of the
comments.
Senator Candelaria made earlier
and and I know that
We're secretary damages are just
ran a couple of times but I I
get very frustrated.
When we we create layer upon
layer of bureaucracy or we
create different agencies and
all of them get a little money
and it's very inefficient and
ineffective in the way that we
apply that money.
and and so I appreciated the.
So Senator Candelaria is
comments about we need we just
expand the lottery scholarship
why can't the state of New
Mexico be smarter about things
like this be more economical and
more efficient why can't we
create a New Mexico state
scholarship.
Department or something like
that the handles lottery
scholarship channels opportunity
scholarship maybe handles any
other scholarships that are
available out there it's just a
very efficient way and what
really happens is the students
lose because they know about the
lottery scholarship they've
heard that in in in the media
for years and years and years
but opportunity scholarships.
Alamos because in her.
So I appreciate and this
Rodriguez mentioning that the
the part of PR person.
To help get the word out about
this but what you really need is
a marketing department we need
to sign a contract with
marketing people to really
efficiently and effectively get
the word out about these
programs and not only digital
platforms but traditional
platforms that everybody becomes
aware of them so that everybody
has an opportunity to do this
and I say this because the
research and I'm I'm looking at
here the right now the average
Students.
It involves the opting
scholarship is is each student
is actually doing about a
hundred dollars in scholarship
money per semester.
And and maybe that's all that
they need but but.
You know I guess one of the
questions that I would have is
is there money left over every
year in the opportunity
scholarship if so it doesn't
revert to stay in the pot do we
create more opportunities so I'm
just trying to understand may
be.
Mr chairman and and sponsor it
can you tell me how much money
is in the power right now before
we go to this new program and
and how much money is reverting.
Thanks Terry Rodriguez can you
answer that yes absolutely so
last year we spent approximately
based off of our estimates three
point eight to four point two
million we will not know how
much we spend until the end of
this semester we start
collecting that data actuals
from our institutions if there
is any unspent money based on
the language from last year it
reverts back to the general fund
however under this bill SB one
thirty five if there's any
unspent money it would actually
refer to the lottery wishin Fund
the start helping and assisting
that program each year if there
is a revision I.
Thank you for the answer and and
and I'm not being critical I'm
just saying so here to programs
running parallel helping each
other one reverts one does not
refer.
I mean there's.
In my frustration inconsistency
in the way we apply these
programs and and who loses the
taxpayer of New Mexico loses
quite frankly the people that
should be taking the
opportunities of the
scholarships are losing because
they may may not know about them
and they don't understand the
inner workings
So I I'm hoping that as we go
down the road if if we're
expanding these these
opportunities I I hope that we
can look at.
I hope that we can look.
and staying a couple of the
questions if I may
I'm looking at some some.
analytical information provided
in the analysis is the
eligibility requirements are
being applied on evenly.
Two year degrees.
Get five year sort of financial
aid well four year degree
students are only supported for
three and a half years.
Can you explain to me how why
and why this is an maybe this is
the right way to go but I I it
just doesn't seem to be fair and
equitable at this point.
Secretary and possibly a
representative.
Absolutely Mr chair Senator Burt
thank you for that question now
the reason why the lottery
scholarship recipient pieces
thirty and a half years because
that's what's in statute and
remember one of their semesters
is covered by the institution
ridge dollars ship and then the
lottery scholarship expand so
the total of the four years now
it is inconsistent with the
returning adult learner but let
me tell you why it's actually
decreased from five years four
years under the help with that
Adrian this that we did for
years but the reason why that is
is to allow our returning adult
learner to enroll in an
institution part time because
many times adults often have
other obligations such as
working full time or part time
maybe a single parent and
believe that brexit the lady in
order to go back to school.
Okay.
Yeah a the answer
Again I'm just I I just we talk
constantly in the legislature
may not being fair and equitable
and an equal so on so forth and
yet we have a program here that
it seems to be this group gets
is going to support this group
gets that kind of support and if
that supplemented by the lottery
scholarship I understand that
but my goodness you have to have
now you have to have somebody
that kind of guides and directs
people applying for these
multiple scholarships that you
know a roadmap given road on how
to get through all of this stuff
so do you understand the point
that I'm trying to make your
this is it's kind of cumbersome
and I think I'm I'm not not
supporting this this comp
concept I I I I kind of like the
opportunity scholarship because
it includes I think a group of
people that desperately need
their this kind of support
because I I think there's a
group of people out there that
do not want necessarily agree
what they want to career and so
it will help a lot of those
folks who are going to vote
tech.
Although location is.
Action on this and so.
That as well.
But but I guess the second
question is students enrolled in
a bachelor's degree programs.
Would only receive the
scholarship for two years.
So again this is that kind of
correlate with what you just
shared with me or is there an
additional explanation that you
can explain that to me.
Of course Mr chair Senator Burt
there is an additional
explanation for that what it is
is the returning adult learner
has four years to complete their
associates and then if they so
choose based on the
communication that I had with
your analyst eight hundred and
for Adrian the lack in the
committee members here they can
then continue on for a bachelors
for a maximum of two years so
any student that the returning
adult learner finishes their
associates four years our last
can then transfer to an
institution offers bachelor's
degree programs.
Okay.
A handle on it because.
Confusing to me and and again
that's that's why I'm I'm
certainly not upset or or have a
problem with anybody or that the
piece of legislation I'm just
expressing the frustration
because it's not only in the
scholarship program for the
state of New Mexico it's into
the apartment of health it's in
tax revenue it's in it's in that
PED all of these departments are
just seem to be organized and
running.
And it says inefficiently and
ineffectively and can be done
smarter if you will.
So I just want to again bring
that to the table and and look
at opportunities to do that I
again I want to acknowledge
Senator Candelaria for his
comments because a.
We need to be smarter about how
we do this because number one we
the bottom line is all the work
and hard work that you all are
doing and trying to get this
done for the the people of New
Mexico to have scholarship
opportunities.
I just wanted to miss out on
scholarship opportunities
because just a little bit over
here living over there in some
from down here in New York Los
scholar Water scholarship I may
never get back to college
because I can't afford it yes we
have an opportunity here for
them to do that and how do we do
that again I go back to my
comment about marketing it's not
it's not just a press release
here and there it needs to be
very active and and engaging
opportunities on both digital
and traditional plan so I I just
want to acknowledge up
Representative Garrett we were
riding up in the elevator
earlier and she says I need I
feel like a member finance
because I've been there so much
and I said well.
After today you made the next
official member I don't know
what.
Thank you Representative and and
senator for both of you bringing
for the scholarship.
I I hope this can can be applied
effectively we just need to make
sure we're doing the right thing
for the taxpayer New Mexico and
and the people should be able to
take advantage of this
opportunity so Mister chairman
thank you for the time thank you
senator.
I'm gonna have a dream get in
touch with the just to clarify
some point you may be a little
confused on back billing between
the lottery in the opportunity
space.
That would be great I
appreciate.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I'd like to make the.
We'll statement before I start
my question.
In all money spent in our budget
policy decision on public good
and we collect tax dollars from
citizens to push society forward
in that direction.
We feel it is good for society
as a whole.
And most people probably feel
that higher education will help
people in their.
Different skills such as
critical thank you.
What a higher good would be to
fill jobs that are critical to
society.
Now early in testimony we heard
that workforce solutions and
even some of the.
Our public sector and private
sectors trying to determine
needs.
Certainly we know how many
teachers would need by the
number of long term subs that we
employ.
And you know the Christian right
all know teachers.
And we need we know the need a
how many health care workers we
need out and the general public
strictly because of this
pandemic that we've had.
We know that were undersupplied
in that the.
So with that.
What I would need just.
Focused money's.
reveals.
Just general degrees.
And I know we do that other
scholarships years nursing
scholarship the nurse teacher
scholarships but why wouldn't
why would the state also focus
that money instead of just
giving a opportunity scholarship
one not give.
A teacher scholarship and I know
we do some of that.
But
Senator I know.
This is a question for you
and it's a philosophical
question.
You know should we focus
governorships more.
To the the.
Differ.
Different jobs we need filled in
society the different careers
that we need to build a society
it should reduce that they're on
a blanket out there trying to
cover all at once.
That's a question Senator I just
feel like this bill addresses
that and also I don't think it's
you know I I do feel it's really
really targeted and and so
perhaps Representative Garrett
can chime in but just policy
wise I don't feel like this is a
blanket approach I just don't
but I understand what you're
saying and it's just we need to
prioritize and and and these are
tough choices but Representative
Garrett did you want to answer
Senator Woods from a
perspective Mr chairman and and
senator would you have put your
finger right on one of the
issues and that's what please me
about the amendments it has the
the adult nontraditional student
who's coming back to get the two
year program they get to go to
the four year program if there
is one of those specifically
identified high needs areas that
Secretary Rodriguez was talking
about collaborating with
workforce solutions I. T. health
field teaching and and I'm sure
Secretary Rodriguez can a lab
right on that really important
point.
Secretary Mr chair Senator Woods
yes so based on our D. W. asked
that as it stands in the
component that Representative
Garrett just mention the
Topsfield and fastest growing
field in New Mexico right now R.
I. T. teaching health care and
solar renewable energy so those
are some examples of things that
we would cross reference with
department of workforce
solutions data on that returning
adult learner piece that is
going on for a bachelors degree.
Okay well.
You're two steps ahead of that's
a great thank I.
I have thought that for years we
have a and I understand that
that universities have coveted
of.
Some have a need to.
To give a student a rounded
education.
But we are.
And when the costs are so high
I've I've often wondered we we
do have quite a bit of.
General fund money to to hire.
And what I'm wondering is this
a.
What percent of the total
university Credit costs do we
already pay with their general
fund appropriation Mr Senator Mr
chairman and senator
the secretary of everybody
secretary can you answer Senator
Woods question yes Mr chair
Senator with I'm going to defer
to my financial aid expert in
institutional eight X. for and
that is Dr Rommel.
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Woods.
If I could just clarify your
question is about the percentage
of general fund verses other
sources of revenue is that what
you're talking about Sir all
right let's let's look at it
this way Mr chairman and and Mr
Rommel.
If we took all the general fund
money that we have in the but.
And did away with that how much
more with a credit cost be to
enter university I guess it is a
simple way of looking at that so
in other words I was saying our
our certainly there are.
There are costs to run a
university overall back to it's
hard to say well that goes to
that goes to a chemistry lab.
You know cost of that credit
but.
If we charge additional for
ever.
Yeah of the cost of his
education.
How much are with the credit
charge be that you know perfect
for credit have you got any idea
on that is that and if it's
never been looked at will well
we'll go on so Mister Mister
chairman Senator was that is a
fascinating question and I don't
think I could give you an answer
for that today the percentage of
general fund varies from
institution to institution it's
very high at our small community
colleges like Mason lands
obviously lower for the research
institutions have a lot of other
sources of revenue such as
federal grants
I would be left to follow up
that's a great research question
is not something I think we can
answer committee today but I'd
be happy to follow up with you
on that okay well and I realize
that you know we've got the
permanent fund that goes to some
of these designates and I know
some some of the smaller two
year colleges or two year
community colleges don't get any
of that and some do and I know
that it would be hard to to come
up with that figure a general.
Like that so may be an
impossible question I'm sorry
thank you Mr chairman.
Senator.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez.
This.
It and muted here thank you Mr
chairman and thank you to
Senator o'neill and
Representative joined here for
you presentations and our too
secretary Renteria's then that
everyone involved in this in
this work we've come a long way
over the years I was looking
back in for those of us that
have been here for a while we
have a deep appreciation even
more for the good changes that
are happening with education and
our goal that we have set from
several years ago and so in
providing affordable subsidized
education we see our commitment
more and more in so that means
that we can't do it all at once
but we are showing that we can
do some every time we come into
the legislature we try to find
ways to augment our support for
education and there are many
many students some people
aspirated to go to school you
know we didn't have much
ourselves when out when we were
going to school and so we really
have a very deep appreciation
for all these new programs that
are that are in that being said
Mr chairman I just have one
question for clarification
the funding we've got
approximately that's one of the
problems we have substitute the
substitute bill they command we
sometimes don't have a chance to
read everything but I think we
have four million dollars in
Europe and the the house bill
two has approximately eighteen
million now in their
and I would think that's
probably with the potential
Senate that changes the center
that this or that we're going to
do so I just wanted to to
reiterate that because the
initial request was twenty six
million I'm sorry yes twenty six
million and we we are now down
to this other amount that I just
mentioned do I have the numbers
correct Senator o'neill
Or made the winning Justice get
my head how much actually we're
we're paying for this staff
powers
remain in a lottery
Representative or Stephanie.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Rodriguez from my understanding
opportunity scholarship we have
five million dollars that is
recurring was there a big
recommendation out of H. A. F.
C. however the Senate has an
additional eleven million
dollars on top of that
nonrecurring for a total of six
million and then there was ten
point five million dollars
dedicated to the lottery
scholarship on top of that.
Yes that does that change your
position that that we mentioned
earlier my understanding that in
in this is where I got a little
bit confused because in this
bill I've just heard from the
staff there's approximately four
million in this report the
lottery scholarship and practice
bill is about the opportunities
college and that's why you're
wanting here you can see that
confusion there the response and
secretary.
Mister chairman Senator other
yes yes okay I'm sorry that's
the other appropriation that is
in the bill is four million
dollars for the lottery
scholarship pilot that will be
over the course of four years so
that we can make those awards
and also study at I'm I'm sure
the make up of that so I would
appreciate it Mr Wayne Propst is
on the call if you could maybe
clarify that.
Yes thank you very much because
of that four million dollars
that was requested for the
return to on this pilot program
that would be able to work for
you Jushin.
Right right I don't know
Adrian's back yet or not the
third version Mary language and
in key is not more not maybe
when you're up when we.
Let's wait for a green to get
back in and then we'll get you
that answer because.
All right not a problem Mr
chairman we can wait and if not
I can get this later on I just
want to make sure we have the
right numbers here so that as we
proceed because it's coming out
the finance committee that we
now we're on the same page but
no worries I will check in with
doing a little bit later janitor
somebody so thank you so much we
can move on and I support this
bill and Mr chairman I think
there's one more person on the
list and maybe yourself I don't
know if.
It was I would move the past but
there's others who want to see
well wait.
Sure has.
We're going to we need to wrap
this up we got to get to some
other stuff Senator share so Mr
chair I already know the answer
to this but of got some people
of us here at the straight from
the secretary.
Verso certificates it covers
short term certificates as well
as to your certificates as
opposed to two year degrees of
so there's welding and then
there's welding in someone
college cover both of those
secretary Representative.
Mister chairman Senator shared
you're absolutely correct okay I
just needed the world to hear
that from your voice thank you
thank you senator that was
important to us to Senator.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez
we're.
Four million dollars is
reversionary language is the
opportunity scholarship doesn't
use of coal plants the dollar
difference for over to lottery
and that's the four million
reversionary language.
Adrian went up to talk to
senator Byrd to clarify some
stuff so you should be back.
Yeah.
Sure we get the correct answer
here in just a minute.
Senator in.
I want everybody to know it
Senate finances bill came in and
it it will deposit really right.
We have to do a lot of work to
this bill.
To make sure that it progressed
the money was put into place the
people that need to be served
that wanted to go back to
school.
Could go back to school and we
gave them the time and the
difference to do that so is as a
secretary and Adrian worked
together to make this thing
right instead of the way it is
the way it came in the Senate
finance it's your staff in the
Senate finance that that work
diligently to make sure the
dollars are right they were
gonna get spent the right way
everybody had the opportunity to
get there whether that life
happens and and you gotta go
back to school and you got to go
back to work the opportunity is
now there so this is really now
an opportunity.
Scholarship program it wasn't
that way as it came across New
Canaan said so so the Senate
finance finance members should
be proud of their staff and they
will and the secretary the way
to work on the Texas bill.
Rather than prior years last
year when.
I think senator Candelaria said
senator Byrd also Senate
as we go through the session and
and I believe Charles and David
are on we should probably just
look at the amount of dollars we
spent
I think requests through and you
guys have like to.
The appropriation if you look
through a page three forty three
in your volumes I mean we spend
almost twenty two million
dollars in scholarships in some
way shape or form throughout
the.
About the budget in general fund
for New Mexico scholars
wartime veterans scholarship
medical student loan repayment
tuition waivers
industry.
Tons of it and and then you go
back for looking about how much
more money the institution to
get from the tax payer in their
meals when you go back and you
look at some of the community
colleges and may so and I'm not
taken anybody different.
Four million dollars for
operational from Basil and.
What are money really be well
spent just giving free tuition
at community college by the time
we piled I NG we piled at the
the mill levy by the time we
do special ads for every
institution.
Sometimes our costs are going to
be cheaper and David and Charles
maybe this this summer during
LFC we should we should really
look at picking institutions
that we can get certificates or
associates degree out of that we
can begin to to do this with.
We give away way too much money
it's hard for students to get to
I have college students luckily
I did a college savings program
for them and they don't have to
change that but the chase
dollars as a student going to
college it it it's like streams
for getting.
It goes one direction it turns
background it's gone the other
and if you don't do this you
don't get that in and this is
available is not available right
the letters were you writing a
letter recommendation how can I
help you right.
At some point we're gonna need
to either be leader.
Our followers we want to follow
the path.
People not having the ability to
exceed because we have too many
different bearing application
for institutions that should
change what we're doing R.
this before and I said again in
the other bill there's no better
gift that you can give a person
education.
Each and everyone of us on this
in this legislature knows that
because we commit that dollar
amount education we should
commit the dollar amounts to
higher ed anything we can do to
educate the children were on
until it comes to new money and
then we see the university
presidents jumping at the bit
see how much your money
available so they can access it.
For their universities and we
never hear okay money get this
kid a welding certificate
whether I get a jump through a
hoop and and dive off of the
backboard we always hear about
well the new money and you'll
have university presidents
jumping on the line to say okay
here's more money that we can
chase and we can add students
and increase R. I. energy I
still don't know when we went to
this what a certificate of arts
I still haven't quite figured
that out I think we've clarified
that a little bit of the
secretary now but.
What is particularly large
skilled person.
In in any field.
The certificate welcome to
soccer everybody gets a trophy
that's not what we're we're
spending our tax dollars for we
want people educated knowledge
is everything and so as we move
forward
We may look at changing this
next year thank you talk about
community schools we gather
those hello everybody has an
equal chance where they want to
be a welder plumber and the I
would love for my son to be a
player right now or Alexion
because they're such a great
shortage hi the millionaire in
ten years and not have struggled
this but that may not be as
career path he you may have
something different I I have
another one that loves to be
outside and was the working and
that's made this career path but
there is for past.
In the world has changed since
COVID.
People do not have to live in a
state where they work and they
do not have a location in the
universities have added on top
of that or you're still
declining population because in
New Mexico.
My household and my son
graduated shares friends.
I can.
Three that state in the state of
New Mexico how those kids
because the opportunities were
better in other states.
We should not have to go into
debt.
Given the degree.
A piece of paper that the
university thinks is so
prestigious.
Why and it never pays out in the
in and I have relations so
Senator Rodriguez said you have
aging right here he didn't want
to answer that question for.
What was the question Rodriguez
can you.
Yes I just wonder in this bill
for this a a substitute bill
I heard from staff of earlier
that there was four million
dollars were trying to ascertain
how much we're actually putting
into the opportunity scholarship
separate from the lottery and
I was told that we have four
million dollars in this
particular bill the rest of
course would be we have ten
almost eleven million in health
I mean house bill two one then
additional eleven million from
the Senate
but if there's four million in
here and that would put just a
little higher the four million
would be for the four year
institutions for that pilot
program for returning students
but clarify for me if how much
is actually going into this
opportunity scholarship total if
we were to approve office and
talked about.
Sure of course all right so the
four million that appears in
this bill is meant to provide so
we highly and the pilot is just
be returning lottery pilot so
individuals who use apple water
at one point time lasted for
some reason and have not
received any type of tuition
assistance for three years and
want to return.
That the fund that so they would
get back on the lottery
basically so that's what that
four million is in the bill in
regards to opportunity as a
whole the total is eighteen
million eighteen million
building
given to the opportunity fund to
fund the rest so that would be
the.
Recent graduate so it you know.
A little bit that's missing it
can go to the certificate
programs you can go to the
associate's degrees you can go
to the associate into the
bachelor degrees so that the
opportunity is eighteen and the
pilot of the lottery the last
part of the bill that one would
just be the appropriation on the
the substitute right thank you
thank you very much I just asked
for clarification so I I'm
having a hard time finding the
eighteen million for this
program because we have I
meeting house House Bill to
begin working in level that
sixty mentor or technically the
the opportunity scholarships I
can't work together to I'm not
missing the other two are just
approved today.
Thank you for.
Tell me again I can hear.
Rodriguez will in the other two
million within the language we
just adopted house.
I get okay that we have there
there okay thank you Mr that's
all I needed thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you
we have the name Adrian drive
broadband and now we're making a
drive opportunity scholarships
so.
Move along Representative
Garrett doing eight and have all
worked at a green broadband.
I don't see any other questions
from committee members I just we
need to look at what's best for
our students and and what what
really changes New Mexico gives
them an opportunity as we move
forward so.
Chairman.
Senator Burt I just want to
thank you for your comments that
you made about moving forward
with the with the you know what
I refer to as the vo tech part
of education but but all
education general what we.
I don't want to play catch up to
the state I want to be a leader
to other states and we really
need to take some quantum leaps
at and I'm not educator but we
need to take some conversation
and our approach to education
the states and certainly higher
education as well.
Just a comment Mr Chairman thank
you so much.
Senator Byrd I think senator
Candelaria and senator.
Me and you are all kind of
singing the same song because
we're all of Business and
sometimes what we have doesn't
work in business and we see the.
Institutions chasing dollars
instead of chasing.
I don't see anybody else's hand
right use.
I'm and I guess I see your hand
raised we're gonna be quick.
Mr chairman I don't have any
questions really just explain my
vote which is going to be in
support of this bill I want to
specifically thank the sponsors
for addressing some concerns
because this bill is much
different than the first time
that I saw that are specifically
thank you for that you to to to
for your purpose was to changes
there that I appreciate training
technical pass I appreciate
hearing here I also specifically
asked to make sure that we had
opportunities for home schooling
or non public schools which were
added to this bill I'm happy to
see this now I also understand I
want to thank Adrian has been in
my office really explaining the
weeds of this bill to me well
we've been hearing committee and
and he mentioned that we will
identify top of the top five
bachelor degrees into higher ed
will have a roll and identifying
has proposed priority
certificates and degrees that we
need to focus on in New Mexico
so I appreciate that I still
don't like the low GPA two point
out compared to lotteries two
point five but I will take
dismissed one thank you guys for
making those changes and I I
just stand and support at this
point thank you guys.
Mr Chairman.
Mr chairman I second the that
that motion on Senate finance
committee substitute bill one
thirty five is amended.
Have a motion and a second we
call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Of yes.
Thank you very yes Senator
Campos yes.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales possible yes.
Those yes Senator Hemphill yeah
it's Senator Hemphill yes
Senator share yes Senator sure
yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes.
Chairman yes yes that is eleven
yes.
Thank you senator Representative
congradulations glad you got to
come to finance madam secretary
appreciate your help we will
need about your from DFA for for
all the work that Senate finance
did kind of prove this bill so
thank you thank you senator and
thank you other senators that
worked so hard on this your
staff this bill obviously so
much better than it was when it
came to your committee and I am
confident that our acting
secretary rod Regus will relate
the very smart very recent
comments especially by you Mr
chairman Senator Candelaria and
senator Byrd and just everybody
in general but it's excellent
excellent be back and and I'm
confident that this better to
secretary of higher ed will
carry that message up to the
fourth floor so thank you thank
you center on you will expect a
box of chocolates on the floor.
Read some of them don't have how
much the term anyway okay.
We'll probably confiscated money
outside the building would never
get in the bill that.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you we are in the Senate
bill five and we are going to
stay for a share one even if we
did not make it to the floor
well we're gonna start that that
process we do have some
amendments so just get ready for
that Senate Bill I.
Is was part of the solvency
packager recovery package early
on our committee looked at the
G. R. T.
it failed we came back and and
we work the G. R. T. a little
bit I'll let Janet explained the
G. R. T. everybody sing this
bill before so Janet you want to
quickly explain that the changes
to the the G. R. T. I.
Yes Mr chairman thank you so
that Senate finance committee
substitute that we have today
has pared back to G. R. T. from
the original seventy five
percent a state she R. T. and
fifty six point two five percent
of local fifty percent each and
it's not up to it's that we are
well thanks fifty state it'll
put in fifty percent when the
local government decides to put
in fifty percent money only be
used for the project the three
hundred fifty million dollar or
more projects it will not stay
in the funding to be used for
other purposes
we have added a requirement that
the the money would continue to
go into the leader funds that it
would be separately accounted
for Lee added language stating
that the actual lead agreement
will specify that this project
fails to meet the three hundred
fifty million dollars threshold
normally the clawback provisions
would apply and recaptured funds
would go back to the state
general fund or the and the
local government based on their
pro rata contributions reporting
requirements that they that they
have to notify the LFC and the
DFA listen thirty days of
executing one of these long term
provisions and report sort of
relevant information those are
on page five line twenty two
that's the main of provisions
that are now in this bill.
I need a motion not passed on I.
Senator Candelaria Greg make the
ocean course.
Mr chairman I would hate to not
passed Senate bill five but it
to pass.
finance committee substitute
For Senate bill five for
purposes of discussion.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Second do we need.
Just for technical consistency
unless it Senate finance
committee substitute.
Hacks business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill five.
Mr Chairman that would be my
emotions would be my second.
We're clear of alphabet soup of
but when I got name.
The.
Madam secretary do you have any
comments.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm actually going
to ask for deputy John Clark to
make comments on the bill this
evening.
Thank you Mr chair and madam
secretary.
This bill expands leader to
allow New Mexico to potentially
land companies that we wouldn't
have can been able to compete
for the past I as Janet mid mid
mentioned this bill now allows
for fifty percent of select
state local G. R. T. in
compensating tax revenues from
largely to projects with more
than three hundred fifty million
dollars in construction expenses
to be placed into the leader
funded to help with recruitment
of those specific projects only
costs associated with new
construction of the project will
be subject to this provision and
EDD and all the local
governments affected must agree
to the revenue share this allows
the state to compete for
projects there so large the EDD
may not have enough I'm
committed leader funds to
successfully compete with offers
from other states the general
fund and local governments would
still get an increase of half
the total tax revenue and the
result is potential for far more
private investment jobs in
revenues for state and local
governments we are currently
being brought potential deals
that we have never seen before
as New Mexico has made itself
known as a progressive and
business friendly location and
as many companies have decided
to leave the big cities these
are projects will bring
thousands of jobs not just
hundreds these are companies
that will bring hundreds of
millions or even billions of
dollars from outside New Mexico
into our state in capital
investment in payroll these
companies want to know that they
have a partner not only in the
state but in the county of the
towns that they want to call
home getting these companies is
a competitive game The New
Mexico needs to get in the game
this bill does this without I
would ask for your support Mr
chair members of the committee
and be happy to answer any
questions.
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
Anyway so that John I guess in
the preparation and house bill
two for two hundred million for
Lita out of the federal funds
the EDD department will need
that now so I guess we can
change that and.
House Bill amendments tomorrow.
Make them do we have any public
comment.
At Mr chair members of the
committee at yes we do we
received no indications of
opposition to the bill but with
us in support is Ashley Wagner
with New Mexico chamber of
COVID.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we stand in
support of Senate bill five
because it enhances an important
tool to help us grow and
diversify our economy and help
us expand our work force this
kind of outside the box creative
thinking is what we need for our
recovery in economic future
thank you.
Chair members of the committee
that concludes public comment.
A lot of people want this.
Question from committee members.
Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman you know I
I really appreciate all of the
work discussion obviously.
On on just fine tuning that
concept but I remained and
started in the same place I was
initially which is I don't like
on.
leaders already incredibly dash
discretionary pool of funds what
this legislation does.
Effectively Justin says the
legislature further away from
the decision making process.
And in this instance effectively
allows the executive to
appropriate gross receipts tax
revenue.
You know if if there is truly
this clamor.
Of companies and and this just
sent the message as a stone and
a beautiful pond and all of
these ripples are spreading
than than those than the
department should come to the
legislature and state this is
our leader needs for the coming
year and asked the legislature
to appropriate that money after
we have that it or right after
we have the opportunity to
consider whether or not the
public is going to spend public
dollars so I'll I have a motion
Mr chairman I will hold off if
there's other members who have
thank you.
I guess I'm looking right now I
just want to scream.
Now see anybody else's hand
raised.
Mr chairman and that case I
would move to table.
We have a motion on the floor
Senator Steinborn you didn't
have your hand up.
When the motion was made I just
this clicking tweet screen.
We call the roll.
Thank you yes Mr chair Senator
Burt.
Apparently I do.
Senator Burt are you still there
okay well I guess ask Senator
Campos.
Senator Campos no senator
Candelaria yeah but a lot of the
a yes Senator Diamond just.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales no.
Senator Gonzales no secretary
Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes for sure
yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn no.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez now.
Senator Rodriguez no Senator
manos.
Well.
Senator Munoz no senator Byrd is
right right hand could.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Burt yes so that is six
yes and I know.
Thank you.
Thank you yes.
Representative are you there.
Yes Mr chairman.
Yes
Representative.
Martinez.
I know this is gonna be a lot of
people want to talk and and
we're gonna let him talk this is
been a long time coming.
I will inform you we're gonna
try to go to the floor but we do
have some amendments you have an
amendment representative of we
do have a set some Senate
amendments.
So why don't you introduce the
bill.
And here expert witnesses and
then we will go to the audience
and then we're going to.
Trying to get the amendments
looked at so we know what we're
doing and see what time frame we
we and and so.
We do have some legislation they
they just text me that we do
need to be there for because
we're going to be there for a
long time to do so
Representative I want to start
of H. R. one and R. one startup
first correct and.
Mr chairman honorable members I
think we saw I think folks are
very familiar with this and with
your permission we just stand
for questions
we believe the fund
you know just a couple quick
points the fund in the last six
years has received four point
two billion dollars of cash from
the State Land Office.
Well distributing four point
three five billion to the
beneficiaries so that's not
including the financial growth
of the funds through
international markets so we
believe the you know Arizona
went to six point nine we think
the fund can handle upwards of
six and we really really are
grateful to this committee of
for the conscientious miss and
the thoughtfulness and looking
at the how best we utilize the
land grant permanent fund.
For our state of our state's
children.
but I think of we're we're
joined by with secretary
Groginsky and are up our expert
didn't get a chance to visit
with us okay if you could have
just a moment or two of miss
Jessica G..
Mr chair members of the
committee I just that one I
think this whole committee for
all the thoughtful process and
considering this bill and I also
stand for questions
for the discussion thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Martina
she adding that are.
No we're good Mr chair thank you
for the opportunity.
Thank you.
How much public comment do we
have.
The chairman members of the
committee would only have a
couple people that are still
with us to speak in support of
the bell.
All right because in support
first we have as secretary Ryan
Stewart.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee want to
thank the sponsors for all the
work on this bill.
The ability to support this bill
is something I'm very proud to
offer the of the work that we're
going to do to make sure we're
taking care of and create a
robust early childhood system
couldn't be more important to
the success of our students both
in their early years and as they
enter into the K. twelve system
I know that there are of the
many folks who have looked at
this bill over many years and
we're hopeful that we have the
support to really move this
forward and and make a huge
difference for children early
childhood so thank you and PED
staff the strong support.
Next we have Angela Garcia.
Members of the committee thank
you so much for allowing me to
speak today my name is Angela
Garcia I'm the owner of the
twenty Bucks early learning
centers in Los crucis and I also
serve as the president of the
New Mexico childcare and
education association The New
Mexico childcare and education
association staff in support of
the intent of funding in this
bill the funding would be life
changing for our youngest New
Mexicans we do our have to
consume concerns that we've
shared with Sanchez and members
of the legislation about the
analysis of the bill by the LFC
and now yes the in regards to
the legality around these funds
being able to be distributed
through the early childhood
education and care department to
the private providers we
provided significant portion of
these early childhood education
services and the analysis it
states the congressional
approval would be needed to add
early education early childhood
education services as a
beneficiary in order for these
funds to go through the
department and be distributed to
private providers like myself
and other members I encourage
this committee on the Sanchez to
I'm looking into these concerns
and take action to address them
to ensure the amazing intent of
the funding laid out by the
Sanchez the governor and other
legal are and the governor that
they are legally able to be
distributed to amazing early
childhood education service
providers on the ground floor
that are doing this critical
work thank you so much for your
time.
Next we have automatic meter.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of Meredith makes you
speaking on behalf of legal
women voters of New Mexico and
we've been supporting one
version or another of this
legislation I think it's ten
years now it is time that the
voters get to decide whether or
not T. invest in early childhood
education we think that of the
figures whether it's one dollar
invested is equal to seven
dollars saved elsewhere thirteen
dollars no matter what the
figure is in terms of quality of
life and the economic
opportunity in our state and for
individuals and families this is
time for the to get on to the
ballot the twenty twenty two
ballot we thank the sponsors for
all their work and all of the
supporters who worked so hard to
get us to this point.
Please support this bill.
Thank you.
Next we have Secretary Blalock.
I thank you Mr chair members of
the committee privately like the
cabinet secretary for a children
youth and families department
appreciate this opportunity
stand and support for this bill
I think probably everyone of the
committee almost everyone is
here read all of the reasons why
this is so urgent for years now
I think it's exciting that right
now is the time we have the
creation the early childhood
department under the excellent
leadership the secretary against
the us the way the is continuing
to invest more more time and
effort and money into early
preventive services really
moving our services upstream and
the everything is online now I
think with the government we can
really make an impact and we can
really expect.
In the next few years the C.
CYFD the the you do need the the
conditions where we have
children more have the highest
number of adverse childhood
experiences if you and the
childhood ranking all of the
things we talk about so much now
the time to really invest so we
can pull.
New Mexico out of that and make
New Mexico truly a good and a
place for our children here so
thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee that completes public
comment.
Over the number of the years
that they heated debate about
this this piece of legislation.
It is nasty is in turmoil.
Mr Sanchez I don't think there's
anything funny about what
happened to legislators and
meetings.
The lack of
Responsibility and and acting
like adults in the room because
somebody came get it their way
it is very difficult for me to
handle.
And so.
We're here today.
There is some still tough issues
with this bill I see the
amendments that we do have and
so.
It.
As a chairman of planet she got
hearing well we're gonna hear
this bill in order to hear the
amendments and our committee is
going to decide were what
happens here today but the prior
things need to be straightened
out and they were done wrong.
I will probably repeat that
several times throughout this
members of finance and LESC were
embarrassed and shocked about
what happened and you guys
struggled and failed because of
your clinical actions that he
took from billboards to.
Political embarrassments.
So.
Representative and
Representative you have anything
to add.
No Mr chairman we're grateful
for the time and we're here to
answer any questions.
Thank you.
Okay Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative good to see you
again.
The question I have Mr Chairman.
Is in Washington DC as are been
any recent nomination last year
to laws passed to change direct
munitions department for.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman Senator Woods there is
there is there hasn't been
because New Mexico has such a
unique relationship to the
federal government I think only
Arizona Mexico and maybe one or
two other states have this trust
relationship or will let you be
a state if you spend the money
the way we want you to so I know
this very very rare New Mexico
did go to Congress in the late
nineties when it when it made at
tweet.
To this portion of the
constitution but
but no not in the last couple
years no it's very rare.
With that Mr Chairman and Mr
chairman Mr chairman.
Have you been in touch with our
with our particular delegation
in Washington DC and at what are
they saying about this.
Thank you Mr Senator Woods we've
spoken I've spoken to a Centers
Heinrich about this and maybe a
couple other of our delegation
members but but it doesn't it's
not really relevant to the
voters vote.
Oh yes but I'm sure that I'm
sure that with the up you know
the state's rights attitude
amongst our colleagues in the
south and and the.
And the such a great proposal
that went through a democratic
process we think it'll be
nothing more than a formality in
Congress it'll happen I Mr
chairman there was between the
certification of the election
and then before we convene
That next January.
Okay well I'm glad you talked to
him because.
Thank it seems to me and and I
don't mean this to be.
Real political but it seems to
me that the the object any more
is to see how much are we can
gather in your hands whether
it's in the state government or
the federal government it's it's
you know how much can we.
Of.
Dictate that room so to speak so
what I.
I just wonder I I would I would
suggest you know you you get a
hold to of.
Senator
And senator Heinrich can and our
three congresspeople and I know
that one is is.
Been more busy right now so you
may not be able to find out
which but but the other two I I
I that would be a very
interesting thing to find out I
don't know what you're at thank
you to do that over the next day
or two or not but that would be
interested to talk to him about
so Mr chairman that's that's all
thank you Mr chairman Mr.
Thank you.
Thank you senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman so.
Is is I'm sure you know Mister
chair Mister chair Mister chair
just philosophically I have a
problem with this of the just a
concept.
And would.
Last time we did something like
this we hello we went through
this is the legislature in two
thousand of three of the
citizens voted in two thousand
four in New we changed our our
distribution in two thousand
five in that ran for four years
at five point eight percent and
then another for five point.
I am now we're back to our I
actually think it was eight
years of five point eight.
and and and and the reason that
we did that was because we were
going to fix education in all of
the people I talked to was so
yesterday and today and all
through the last years I have
said now we have to fix early
childhood education.
And the only way to do that is
to put more money into it and
the only way to get that money
is to tap into this this of
twenty two billion dollar fund
the only way we can fix.
But it seems to me that we've
added a lot of dollars to early
childhood over the last ten
years looking for this right
here
Yes according to the FIR here is
to I get this right here in the
last decade appropriations.
for PED administrator for the
PED administered early childhood
education programs have
increased tenfold from about
five million in two thousand
seven for pre K..
Two hundred and thirty eight
million for these programs in
two thousand twenty one.
So we've put a lot of money in
there
Why is why is this funding going
to be going to change what all
that additional money the money
didn't change Mr chair chair
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
sure if I could ask secretary
just to talk about the unmet
need.
But before I do
You know when this started was
to create this program and now
that's been created with the
first state in the country to
have a Department specifically
devoted to early childhood.
but it is sorely underfunded in
terms of all the children that
could benefit from it and also
just in general Mister chairman
Senator that the deeper dive we
took into the fund over the
years and watching it every
single month grow relative to
the distribution.
Every single month I get more
and more and more comfortable
that an increase distribution is
in our interest because it pays
off in the long run by
developing human capital but
anyway secretary Groginsky could
you address the Senators
questions thank you Mr chairman.
And check your check your sound
six secretary we can't hear you.
Mr chair.
Can I hear.
We can't hear you secretary.
Yes social work on the sound.
But in general
I think that's been new numerous
studies Mister chairman Senator
with regards to the unmet needs
of this would not get us there
if this committee went to one
percent V. approximately a
hundred and.
You know seventy million to
start that would not get us to
that unmet need but it would
certainly
This would certainly help out
I think in total.
Well then total gosh we're short
maybe four million dollars and
unmet needs.
So Mr Chairman representative.
It is I look at the.
I'm not sure the American rescue
plan I think that's were called
and one point two one point nine
billion dollars to the patients
of that comes to actually do
COVID relief it says here New
Mexico will receive three
hundred and twenty million
dollars.
for child care assistance funds.
in the next this coming year.
So that would that would
certainly you you said you
needed a hundred and seventy to
start with well let's three
twenty thank you so the whole
total unmet need is is four
hundred.
but so there's a lot of federal
money and I think there's even a
lot more federal money coming
here there's other of money four
hundred and fifty million
dollars of for prekindergarten
for K. five plus
So.
There's money coming to us for
education which means we can use
the money we have for early
childhood
so
I I just look at this these
dollars here dollars which are
hard for me to wrap my head
around I gotta drop a whole
bunch of zeros to so that I can
figure out what those numbers
mean.
So what do we need to do this
when it appears that we have.
Not only do we have money in our
budget today but we're gonna
have a lot more money soon.
Thank you Mr chair and and and
Senator a year right and and but
keep in mind the American rescue
plan money is one time money
it's it's slated probably to pay
for things like PPE and other
things that schools and early
childhood centers are going to
have to do to to become COVID
ready in a post COVID world in
terms of the unmet need a four
hundred million dollars that is
on top of all of the great
investments we've already made
that's part of what we're doing
this to to ensure that there's a
substantial and permanent
funding source for early
childhood education programs and
services
and so that we can finally turn
the corner on what it is a fully
funded quality early childhood
system that is that that is
delivered in the model that we
have right now this mixed
delivery model which is probably
the envy of the country got
public sector and private sector
actors in every corner of the
state ready and willing to
provide these critical services
so American rescue plan will
take that money I'm very happy
were getting it but it's one
time money it's not going to be
here any recurring fashion these
investments are recurring
investments that need to be
made.
So Mr chair and representative.
This was the exact same argument
that we heard two thousand
three.
That we had to make this
investment investing in human
capital what's the best thing we
could do of and and and what we
were told then is that this
investment was going to fix our
education because that human
capital support and I I agree
with that that that's not that's
not my question on my point on
my concern.
But we were forty eight or forty
nine forty for about forty to
forty nine years and so we were
told if we get into this fund.
Would be better.
And after twelve years of this
going from the five point eight
for eight years and then the
five point five now back to I we
never moved the needle.
We never moved we state forty
eight to forty nine.
In in in in I think that's the
base concern that I have so
we're gonna go into this fund
we're gonna take out the hundred
seventy million or the two
hundred and twenty eight million
whatever that the the large
distribution would be a couple
years from now.
And we're not gonna move the
needle.
We're not gonna move the needle.
Because it's not money that's
our problem.
So just as a base issue there it
was mentioned that we were the
first state with the
department to do this.
And I think that that might that
might be a reasonable move for
us to make in New Mexico but I'm
looking at the private providers
that are doing this today.
In my concern for them is.
Once this department is fully
funded the private providers
will simply be squeezed out yes
we have private schools in New
Mexico they receive no state
funds.
Well over the funds a receiver
or are minor they get to think
they get to buy books okay
And and I know that the private
providers want to make sure that
the money will flow to them
that's why the need to
constitutional they need because
of congressional approval.
In in I I think somebody out
there is going to try to to do
that within amendment I'm not
I'm not exactly sure.
But.
But my bigger concern is.
If we make early childhood a
beneficiary.
It will be a state beneficiary
just like every other state
beneficiaries the other
beneficiaries are are all state
entities there's no there's no
private in any other and what
did I do with that.
You know for the inclusion of.
Certainly the COVID schools are
public schools University of New
Mexico New Mexico State
University western highlands
eastern
New Mexico institute of mining
New Mexico military institution
New Mexico boys schools the
minors hospital state hospital
of the school for the deaf for
the visually impaired so none of
those are private entities.
They're all public entities.
And so I know that the the
providers they are currently
doing this the private providers
are currently doing this.
I want to make sure that they're
included.
But I don't see how the state
included.
Once this becomes public money I
know we've talked about
contracting but we don't
contract any private schools how
would this be different Mr.
Well thank you Mr Senator share
of to to the previous point your
writing two thousand three we
invested a lot of money from
land grant Fund that year we
also cut income tax rates in
half at the same time the
legislative session so we swap
money I think ultimately what
happened the so these
beneficiaries of the land grant
Fund all of them contract out
for services in different ways
department of corrections for
example contracts out with
private companies all the time
including private prisons this
wouldn't be any different.
The funding that would flow for
early childhood could be
contracted out by the early
childhood and Care Department
the way they've done for for you
know for the last couple years
and the way we've done for many
years in the early childhood
system.
you Mr chairman I I I understand
we can but I also know the way
government functions okay when
we got the private prisons
contracted out of of.
Governor Johnson at the time
really really fought hard for
that and we have built in the in
in the legislature today I think
one of in fact is a member of
this committee to the
Investigate check out the audit
I think about it was the the
word for private prisons and and
I think there's a huge push to
do away with private I know
there's a huge push I have to
guess that it is a huge push to
do away from.
And so I think that while yes
under some governors we might
say yep the the the private
providers for the right thing to
do but under the next governor
they're gonna say no it's not
and so I think that kind of.
Uncertainty of causes some real
problems with the pro private
providers.
And unlike the prisons most of
these private providers are
small they're not big
corporations these are these are
small family run businesses of
most of men's in you know the
local community they're dealing
with the the folks that are
right in that community and if
you put about a business one
year they're not coming back the
next year under the next
governor it's not
So.
That is a concern of mine is is
private versus public.
I I personally think that if we
look at it how of our education
system is working we have some
great great public schools
We also have some great private
schools.
But we really don't want to the
private schools to to succeed.
Seemingly it's a state policy I
mean we're not trying to put him
down about putting out of
business at the moment.
But we also have some some
really failing school districts.
As a side note I think the worst
possible job you could have an
education in New Mexico's a
physics teacher at Los Alamos
high school.
Because the matter what the
physics teacher presents
somebody in that class is going
to say oh no no my mom or dad
prove that wrong last week.
but.
But that's a concern the small
businesses can't survive that
uncertainty so somehow we have
to make sure that they are
protected if we.
Senator let me just inform
people Senator Rodriguez if you
need to come to the capitol and
log off no Senator Senthil had
had to log off to come to the
capital thank you I don't know
how long it takes you Center
Rodriguez Senators thanks for
fifteen to twenty minutes
Senator Steinborn I love your
come into the capitol yet for
the for.
In center Campos has to leave
for the opening prayer.
So Senator go ahead and continue
to and.
And keep talking Representative
Maestas thank thank you Mr
chairman center sure we and I
think we spoke earlier in the
week Representative Martinez and
myself share the same concern
We think whatever we're doing
now let's do more of it it is
working now let's continue
building out that system I think
the best way to ensure any levy
at all the stress in the private
provider world is to if if this
if this committee is committed
to acknowledging a new
beneficiary and acknowledging
that we have to go to Congress
to create a new beneficiary that
we put instead of calling it
early childhood education we
just say to the early childhood
education department I really I
really really would ask this
committee to consider that that
we codify that new beneficiary
as this new department.
And then then you know I think
that'll be better.
Thank you Mr.
Okay what Mr chairman that
that's probably is a good idea
yes.
When we did this in in starting
in two thousand five one of the
things yes there were tax cuts
in there but they were also some
tax increases I'm not sure that
we completely had a balance on
that but.
Of the one of the things that I
think happened was so we we
brought this extra money in from
the permanent fund from land
grant permanent fund.
It is distributed by.
By our constitution in certain
matters most of it certainly
goes to the COVID schools public
schools eighty five point six
seven five percent of whatever
comes from that fund it's got to
go to the COVID schools and then
it gets broken down
unfortunately for the state of
New Mexico Mr chairman you your
school is the next one on there
was one point two percent which
I think really should go to well
anywhere but that community
college in Albuquerque.
But that's it it's still going
to be distributed the same way
so we had another percent in
there still eighty five point
six seven five of whatever new
money comes in is going to go to
the COVID schools and the New
Mexico military institute it's
going to get a two point nine
five six percent of so no matter
what that money comes in so what
I was looking at your charts
before the we're talking about
in this just the start on the
earlier today so.
So the new money's coming in
it's not really a hundred
seventy million dollars to goes
to early childhood that hundred
seventy million dollars in gets
divided up among all of these
things.
So how would we how would we ask
Congress to do that because the.
What is here on this piece of
paper now adds to a hundred
percent of whatever comes in.
So you have to take it out of
something to put it in the early
childhood if we're going to do
that what we take it out of.
Mister chairman Senator the
common schools portion and keep
in mind when we raised when we
raise the percentage of
distribution we do not need
Congress's permission that the
everyone is clear on that
however if we remove the
beneficiary or create a
beneficiary then that's when we
need Congress's approval so if
folks on this committee are in
agreement that we are in fact
creating this new beneficiary
then we would need congressional
approval in order to do that
when we became a state it was it
was it was in trust will meet
we'll let you be a state
building Mexico and we've got
all this land but the money from
the land has to go to these
territorial institutions back in
the day so but it would come
from the COVID school so you're
correct Mr chairman Senator when
we were up trying to help this
it's one percent of that eighty
six percent would go to early
childhood.
Okay so that Mr chairman and
brings me to my next point so we
have the of the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit we're the courts
basically said I'm not sure the
courts have the authority to do
this but what they told us as
legislators that's my problem
it's the courts don't really
have the authority to tell us to
do anything what they told us is
we're not put enough money into
the common schools
in so yes we would bring some
more money and but the media at
Lee we take money out again so
so we've not solved that problem
at all and in fact we may have
we may have made that worse by
taking money out of the COVID
schools and put again in the
early childhood
did you see that is that or my
since I just thought of it
earlier today is that.
Is that a real issue.
The Martinez.
Mr chairman and senator yeah I
mean I I I think the the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit I I don't know
that they use the trip
terminology common schools they
certainly did talk about.
K. twelve and actually talk
about pre K. as well as part of
the solution to ensure that
children are receiving
inadequate education
you know I I think I think when
it comes to.
Our our our the way we fund
programs whether it's Senate
finance House Appropriations the
legislature as a whole the
governor there are proposals you
know I I it's my in my opinion
we should be we should be
elevating as much funding as we
can to ensure that these
children have the opportunity
now I will say.
A big part of the reason why I'm
so invested in early childhood
is that unless we prepare these
children to learn.
Unless we get them ready to
learn by the time they enter the
system you know the public
system kindergarten.
All of those big investments
making K. twelve.
May not do the job that we
expected to do because a lot of
children are starting so far
behind.
Through no fault of their own
it's the circumstances of their
families you know maybe they're
they're they're in poverty or
they live in communities where
maybe they don't have access to
running water or whatever it
might be all the toxic stressors
that.
Really create very difficult
situations for children are
that's why funding early
childhood is so critical that's
why this legislature I'm very
proud of the work we've done the
last few years in increasing
funding in creating the early
childhood care department you
know in in creating an entire
system of mixed delivery of
services.
Now we need that permanent
substantive funding source and
and and I believe this is this
is it this is that permanent
substantive funding source until
we address the fact that New
Mexico leads the nation in
adverse childhood experiences I
don't think the K. twelve system
is ever really gonna move the
needle in a way that we want in
the way that we expect Mr chair
Senator.
So the.
Mr Chairman representative you
know I actually agree that
there's some some serious issues
here.
And I thought about some of
these I in fact I've spent an
awful lot of time thinking about
why do we have a crime problem
today that's different in two or
three generations ago why we
have an education problem today
that's different in two or three
generations ago my grandfather
had an eighth grade education.
And if you go through my father
threw me through my son of so
each one of us has spent more
time in school.
There is no doubt in my mind
that my grandfather was the most
was the best educated of any of
us even though we only went to
the eighth grade.
Eighty eight great was a lot
harder than and be he simply you
have to reach we read.
instant so in in he he grew up
on a on a poor farm in
Mississippi and and his father
learned about irrigation by
reading and they move to Ross
will cause and Russell it'd have
to rely on rain out of the sky
high your donation could do
there feels and so that's how I
moved from a poor farm in
Mississippi to a poor farm rules
will.
but.
Yep not a formal education
and even formal education he had
came from Mississippi schools
but they did take you right.
And that made all the difference
in the world important you learn
to be but the other thing that I
think he had was he had a family
structure.
And today we don't have family
structure.
Ends so this is kind of a
different car the conversation
but I think it's it's terribly
important to this issue.
And I would like for us to think
a little bit out of the box is
not what I say it's not just
money it's not money
poor dirt farmers from
Mississippi who became a Porter
former in Roswell.
Head to head the my father
traveled around the world place
only rental place he had the.
Great jobs he he he he worked
and lived in Japan he worked and
lived in Laos he worked and
lived in the Philippines.
So it was possible then for the
Porter former to be well
educated and to send his son
around world get at least get a
spot so we could go around the
world it working for the United
States government.
Then his son of the you know
ended up as a state senator
solos with a deep dive from
where my father was to me
but.
What's the difference and the
difference is really the family
the difference wasn't money in
their school districts it's not
money in our school districts
it's the family and today we see
all these seriously broken
families and in the end it's
probably it's really made my
head hurt on on how money's
going to fix any of this.
In.
In my mind.
When we when we've taken
enrollment data out of the
family or one or the other or
both in many cases then we've
got a child it's just lost.
In.
If you take that same child then
if you put in a family with with
the.
All of the support the family
has.
They're going to get certain
things that they're not going to
get from any school anywhere.
For one is probably love I mean
that's probably the biggest one
although today I.
There's plenty children out
there that receive love from
anybody not mom not dad not to
school the teachers not their
brothers or sisters knowledge in
that's the problem.
So how do we fix that.
In in so in my mind I'm looking
at this this effort which I
apply I'm glad you're trying to
do something.
In in don't misunderstand that I
think that this the teacher
hearts in the wrong place I just
don't think this is the
solution.
And.
If we're talking about a
permanent funding source.
We've talked a lot about how to
diversify our economy in New
Mexico.
Obviously I live in oil and gas
country.
I am not ashamed to love oil and
gas
I think it's done wonders for
the world in general
it certainly for the state of
New Mexico yeah and and I've
repeatedly told the I challenge
you to try to live without oil
and gas.
It's not gonna happen the
clothes there on every one of us
right now our prostitutes of oil
and gas and I I don't mean that
they were made but using
machinery they really are the
base the base to the substance
was was something that came from
the oil and gas field.
so we all live indoors we have
fifty more conditioning and you
know or or or we got our cell
phones and we're right now
communicating on things that
were it would not exist without
oil and gas.
Oil and gas is not a stable.
Industry for the state of New
Mexico and never has been.
So we do I think there's three
things that we have to do first
of all we have to have some tax
reform.
And I'm not necessarily talking
about tax cuts.
I'm talking about tax
simplicity.
People don't industry doesn't
want to come here so understand
our tax code.
Ernst and young actually
measured all the states a few
years ago and we came in fifty
first we came in for Rico or is
like well how could that be and
so then we went in and we showed
Ernst and young all of these
things that we had going for us.
And they adjusted well okay you
you're really number thirty six
not fifty one.
But if the largest.
CPA firm in the world can figure
out our tax code.
How do we expect which industry
figured out.
We just need simple taxes this
is not we also need enough so
it's going to be simple.
We have to raise enough money
I'm not talking about.
Not raising money.
The most important it's got to
be attractive to to other
industries so those under other
industry look at us and say
well.
New Mexico really is a great
place New Mexico itself really
is a great place.
It's our tax code this great
okay.
There's lots of industries that
would love to be here.
But we need to make life so hard
on.
We send these messages that we
don't really want to hear.
This is not just the tax go but
the other part of it is is
regulation again we've got a of
I don't know how many bills out
here that just seem to be
designed to beat up on industry
because industry failing somehow
and we got to beat him up.
So we're telling we don't want
to hear.
But if we can attract new solid
industry.
Well if you could find somebody
that could really of the rifle
oil and gas in revenue that was
available to the state think
about that.
Think about if if you could
double what oil and gas put in
the state oil and gas which is
approximately a third directly
of our budget and has for a very
long time.
If you could double that part
wow what a funding source we
would have.
Our permanent fund would
actually grow faster and the
reason for this this this fund
was to fund education after all
the natural resources were
depleted.
So even back in the eighteen
nineties the in in which we
became a state nineteen twelve.
This was built to to fund
education for ever.
Even if there were no resources.
So we want this to grow we want
this to grow to be as big as our
budget is today eventually.
Did the distribution to be as
big as our budget is.
So we we would take a with it we
stopped that process a little
bit just because of the power of
compound interest.
So how do we do something.
To fix that.
Sure.
Senator Rodriguez needs to leave
our house to come to the fore.
I think Center handhelds already
on our way and I can see where
we're headed with the but the
arguments for the for the night
but we we do have to get to the
floor we are going to have this
back on the calendar for
tomorrow I just want to make
sure we have enough Senator
Campos is gone I want to make
sure we have enough these are
here in this bill so
let's just roll it over till
tomorrow
I do need our democratic members
when we are talking about this
in the.
Overall this over till tomorrow.
Can I get to to representatives
to think about those two things
what we do about family what we
do about other industries and
does that work and also to thank
you Mr Senator I.
Thank you senator.
Just one more thing I want to
think about is which benefit
sherry are we cutting out that's
going to be a quite big question
for me.
But I do need my democratic
senators in the room or when
we're doing some.
Thank you guys appreciate it
we'll we'll be back on it
tomorrow your first on the
agenda that's a house bill two
stuff to do and and then in the
afternoon we will wrap this up.
Even if we have to get some
candles from the governor's
office and implement the windows
so we can get like thank you.
Mister chairman Senator.
Did we ever find out where we
need to send our invoices
because I have a couple vouchers
I need to get to DFA to.
Senator.
Those will be to DFA are a maybe
we can put in house bill two
language for the federal funds
that we get vouchers.
That would help us out
tremendously Ezzell thank you
senator Rodriguez you're good to
go thank you bye the capital.
We have a long for debate and I
appreciate you guys I'm not.
Representative so I appreciate
you guys.
Just need to make sure my
democratic members are here
thank you.
Thank you.
