If you
want to go ahead and begin is a
substitute.
I just don't have the sense to
to write with meeting.
Thank you.
And Mr we give you the number to
ensure we're on the same page
it's.
Two two two three eight four
point two.
Okay.
Thank you so much chairman
members of finance for hearing
this this afternoon I do have
with me that secretaries
impairments James Kenny and
Sandra Ely who like this are
council.
It I thank you for not
protection division.
Yeah director than normal
protection division so I'm gonna
I'm gonna explain the bill
little bit then I'm gonna talk
about why we did the substitute
and then I'll be open for
questions that were.
So
Recognize this is a bill that I
brought last year in the
meantime the secretary and and
his staff have worked with the
number of people that substitute
you have today is because of
amendments from the utilities so
we've continued to work on this
bill to make it better so
essentially it sets up a clean
fuel standard.
When we started doing this last
year we heard from twenty
companies who want wanted to
move to New Mexico or expand
their operations here we're not
up now up to twenty eight
businesses that are supporting
this so we're conservatively
estimating that we're going to
get at least sixteen hundred
permanent jobs twenty three
hundred construction jobs this
is yes good for our economy but
we think it will have an
additional benefit Turner forty
million investment in facilities
and infrastructure if we move
forward with this bill the ideas
to diversify our economy find
good jobs stabilize our
revenues.
These businesses are also
committed to cleaner energy and
fewer emissions it's really a
part of this bill so it's our
first step toward adopting a
comprehensive market based
program with credit recovery so
how it works is that we put in
place these clean fuel standards
this is changed since last year
we are trying for reduction and
carbon intensity by twenty
percent twenty thirty and thirty
percent by twenty forty off of
twenty eighteen levels.
so these have increased because
of input stakeholder input so
those businesses that re signing
for blend mate for import
transportation fuels is what's
covered in this act does not
apply to fuel retailers like gas
stations so those companies who
refined blend maker import
transportation fuel can need
this clean fuel standard by
either reducing the carbon
intensity of the fuel lower
purchasing credits and credits
can be generated from everywhere
active culture oil natural gas
power generation if you can
reduce carbon emissions in the
transportation sector you can
generate credits.
So we think this answers some of
the issues with our impacted
communities a clean fuel
standard will clean up the year
along our interstates and
highways it will have great
benefit from the health of
overburdened communities that
suffer from poor air quality
like as my heart attacks lung
cancer.
So it benefits
disproportionately affect
environmental justice rural
communities by requiring
utilities to invest the money
they earn from credits into the
electrification of
transportation in fees.
So I want to talk a little bit
about prices at the pump because
that's one of the only
criticisms that I hear we really
think these criticisms are
unfounded we have several other
states that have moved to clean
fuel standards and so we have
their mechanisms to look at so
here's an example of consumer
choice drivers have flex fuel
truck models including Chevy
Silverado and F. one fifty pick
ups paid a dollar and a half
less per gallon Act stations in
California for a high blend
ethanol E. eighty five the
competitive low carbon E. eighty
five market has grown
significantly in the west in
response to these clean fuel
standards that they have a
Marchington Oregon California
looking at him in Minnesota and
hopefully here so another
example of this increased
competition is the renewable
diesel market the price for
renewable diesel in state to
clean fuel standard is forty
cents cheaper than fossil diesel
renewable diesel can be used in
diesel engines with no adverse
effects often made from products
like cooking oil waste products
like cooking oil.
In the realities States with
experience in this clean fuel
standard found that really
global markets that affect fuel
prices not the clean fuel
standard Oregon which has a
clean fuel standard has a clean
fuel program state periodically
estimate the costs and they have
pretty conservative analysis
and with they've come up with is
that the latest calculation for
twenty twenty estimate to a
maximum cost increase of three
point seven cents per gallon
about one percent pump price in
New Mexico this week.
so
we're excited about the
agriculture using these clean
fuel standards farmers can
supply large quantities of
biomass thanks Clovis Peconic
chills and Dona Ana organic
waste from growing and
processing green chili any of
that could be turned into
practice so let me practice a
little bit about why we're
bringing you the substitute as I
said this was a
negotiations between utilities
and Our Environment Department
the substitute clarifies that
utilities can obtain credits for
projects conducted under the
transportation electrification
plans that they submit to the
PRC.
It requires utilities that
generate and sell credits from
electricity used in
transportation to only use those
net revenues towards additional
investment in transportation
elector K..
It defines net revenues to me in
revenues from the sale of
credits let us the reasonable
transaction administrative
marketing and other costs
associated with program
administration.
And finally the enables an
accounting mechanism called the
regulatory liability which
simply allows unused credit
revenues to be purser for later
use I will point out to you Mr
chairman that the amendment put
on last year in the Senate
finance remains in this bill and
it's the bottom of page nine.
To ensure that there is an
emergency deferral process for
the department in consultation
with stakeholders to temporarily
suspend the implementation of
clean fuel standards to address
market conditions the rule shall
require the department to
consider a providers request for
emergency deferral that's what
you all put in last year so it's
long winded I apologize for
salon in this bill proud that
we're trying to do this and I
stand for questions and if my
experts want to make a comment
I'd be happy to hear that.
Some.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Sandra Ely
and I'm the more mental
protection division director at
the New Mexico environment
department I'm incredibly proud
and excited to be part of this
effort alongside Senator Stewart
in our sister agencies Economic
development department energy
and minerals and the department
of act to move forward with the
clean fuel standards act the
clean fuel clean fuel standards
means diversifying the economy
creating more jobs and bringing
new innovative innovative
businesses to New Mexico but it
also means most importantly at
least from my sticks perspective
a giant leap forward in our
climate change strategy as one
of the colleagues agencies for
the climate change task force I
know we must do more to meet our
goal of reducing greenhouse
gases by at least forty five
percent by twenty fifty and
while we are making great
strides in the oil and gas arena
with the number of rules in both
energy minerals and the
environment department we still
have yet to make good strides in
reducing greenhouse gas
emissions in the transportation
sector this bill will do that.
In this decisive decade on
climate we must invest in
transforming the transportation
sector to low carbon fuels and
electrification we will not
reach our climate goals unless
we do.
As noted by the pro tem it is
critical that we enact this bill
for climate and health of New
Mexicans if enacted this bill
offer protection to vulnerable
populations like children and
the elderly it also benefits
environmental justice
communities those communities
across the state share in the
inequity greater pollution and
associated health impacts when
fully estimated we are
predicting eighteen point five
million metric tons of carbon
will be reduced over an eight
year period.
that's all for me right now
thank you very much.
Thank you well we're gonna go to
the audience and we're gonna go
to the.
To.
Our people and zoom are online
and so we're gonna go full of
for the bill first online and
then against online and then
when it come back to the
committee room so we can wrap
that up it's a fifteen minutes a
total so I have some people in
the and I have a state agency I
don't think they need to
testify.
so we won't be here from the
state agency or state employee
let's go to the audience and and
Tiffany Rivera.
Mark and we're going these are
the ones on the list are going
against of it.
She in.
Well I'm sorry I'll just wait
then I'll take of this list.
Charlie Marcus is not marked
check my home.
So he's here.
Bronson corn.
At U. Brunson go ahead.
I'm sorry.
I'm speaking in opposition of
the bill as well.
Yep go ahead.
Okay.
Chairman Mr chairman and
committee members.
Explore on speaking on behalf of
the New Mexico will growers we
are speaking in opposition is no
fourteen days still that that
bother me.
It is not specify our carbon
credit for how it is twelve is
about.
It is value change from citizens
and regions region in October
state.
Is going to apply all for small
and if so what would be the
incentive for small producers
willing to participate in this.
This is not it's not going to
benefit.
Hardly at all when it comes to
the trading or selling carbon
credits how are they gonna be
considered.
Senator personal property or
real property.
And it's a real property can
that in the property be
transferable like a like a
mineral or water.
Well lands in the current credit
system be considered
to be in a conservation
easement.
And what it would be the one
that the future of that property
issues okay we're gonna cut you
off your path what would be the
lady of the contract be.
That none of this stuff.
Thank thank you we're limiting
the amount each one can talk as
word fifteen minutes total let
me go next to Lauren Patterson.
And we do have a time on the
screen so lord.
She's not there Casey's proudly.
Travis date.
Thank you Mr.
Yes we got to.
Thank you Mr chairman from the
state director for the New
Mexico association we appreciate
the intentions of the sponsor
however we have strong concerns
on the impact this legislation
I'll have more members I'm I'm
members are already seeing
record prices free costs in this
price takers limited resources
to recruit I we also do not
believe that the carbon credits
will benefit our smaller farmers
you expect this committee
opposed Senate bill fourteen
thank you.
Thank you Erica Walker.
Matthew Gonzalez.
In the room okay.
The coal Cerro.
The only.
Thank you Mr
president CEO
we can converse well we can
appreciate Sanchez intended we
believe that more New Mexico's
economy by tax funds many times
standards in prices for
consumers for medically increase
New Mexico not be considering
legislation that increases in
the costs of the worst.
Here's some state LCS as
increased costs of fuel nineteen
point our is a telling ensuring
that this is actually one of the
most regressive and costs to
those who will be most impacted
New Mexico support clean fuel
standards is not prudent the
delivery meaningful emissions
reductions California's
legislative analyst's point that
there's LCS has proven to be
relatively costly greenhouse gas
reduction strategy some of them
for about the economies of.
One of the few details provided
as forty is that if we feel
standard created on what we need
from individual program.
But in the state of the public
funding.
How that money.
Part of fire for these reasons
we oppose.
Chairman members committed.
I see Jim Lester you're more
interested in the room and
that's also let's go to for for
the bill online
Scott hand and Rick.
Mr chairman members many good
afternoon everybody.
One hundred and with.
Thank you renewable energy group
we're one north America's
largest manufacturers
requirements diesel we also have
a partially constructed facility
close to Mexico the simple we
are strongly in support of this
bill it's good legislation.
I'm I'm going to put a stop
thanks that so we are committee
the other day and for some folks
opposition folks concern about
prices folks concerned about the
impact of agriculture going to
craft policies that focused on
decarbonisation and biofuels
this is the most agriculture
from the policy you could
possibly imagine.
We've added over a block portion
of the value HBs fifteen Bucks
to the value of cattle about
something I sense to
To respond market in terms of
costs the data is not there but
with the last six because
California is one of the highest
gas tax system that we with the
thinking that it gas that has
come over here it's a good bill
the authors taking a tremendous
amount of time to make sure that
it's all sides are heard we are
here to support thank you.
Thank you Rico Gonzalez.
Chairman and committee members
recalled it is also self pasal
electric.
Like to first state in our
support for the bill
and the commitment that the US
Environment Department and the
Senator Stewart was made in in
working with us to ensure that
we could be part of this
credit is moving forward we do
think this will be helpful in
terms of getting transportation
for cation out into the public
along with our transportation
electrification plan that is
part of our PRC approved plans
and with that thank you very
much gentleman moving on and
members of the Senate finance
committee.
Thank you I see series in the
room Carlos on thank.
Ryan Kinney.
Members of the committee my name
is Ryan.
Introducing our company is a
nation's largest provider of
renewable natural gas.
We are strong supporters
fourteen we are.
Alright the LCS you're you're.
I would rather yeah.
Allow.
I think you would be.
And carbonated Department you'll
be paired with that the less the
celebrities greater prosperity
for the rules he
our our company actually has
five hundred sixty stations
nationwide what are the in New
Mexico we
have been in the truck
crossovers and we had our
program could grow with the
passage of the bill along with
other cities tracked again out
California
stock in that it is
asked hello working thank you
thank you camellia filament.
The moment.
Thank you so much can you hear
me OK yeah we got to.
Thank you so much chair members
of the community and thank you
ten Stewart for all the work
Hanisee fourteen we support the
committee seven thank the
sponsors.
To the bill including
aspirations for greenhouse gas
reductions and hundreds Senator
electrification.
Entities as well as the
elimination of credits for
carbon reduction is not based on
transportation fuels this is
what
away from fossil fuels the
building new industry trying to
let people cut down on carbon
pollution I change we appreciate
you some thank you.
The legislation.
I William Hagens.
Parsons.
My name is Connor chair
committee members can you hear
yes we can hear you.
I'm speaking the fourteen the
clean fuel standards.
Although I'm somewhat
disappointed with the lack of
urgency with the two year
lifetime.
The state to Mr Stewart or
making.
I'm.
That because.
In the businesses to adapt and
help clean Mexico's.
The greenhouse gas emissions
reductions goals in forty
armadas they are.
Step forward to with you twenty
percent emissions five below
twenty eighteen by twenty third
and third.
Percent below twenty eighteen by
twenty four therefore I please
vote yes on his fourteen
clearly.
Two hundred Mexicans to be a
part of the claim future for New
Mexico thank.
Thank you Paul Rosenberg.
I do see some hands up on on on
the zoom but if you didn't
register with Senate finance to
speak
I don't have you on my list and
so we're gonna go to the
audience now.
the follow Senate finance
there's a link to this and to
Any email address in a link to a
committee COVID on June I can't
see who it is I can't region
names it's a little far away
also we'll go to the audience in
the committee room against first
and.
Who wants to go against first.
Right of any origin.
Mr chairman.
The opportunity to comment this
afternoon near there a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
I would like to thank the
sponsor and the supportive
agencies for the hard work
you've put into this bill
however.
I love in this in New Mexico
part of livestock growth within
the environmental mandate
instead of that policy
transmission should be voluntary
incentive based and provides
market driven innovation first
of all rural parts and service
increasing your costs associated
with implementation of this
policy which is noted by fuel
price trends in California and
Oregon the proposal for you
today that's more aggressive
targets in our neighboring
state.
Legislation if enacted will
directly and disproportionately
affect our rural communities
much travel further distances
for basic services.
Currently there's no national
standard for credit markets
which raises concerns among our
members about the consistency
and clarity of implementing the
credit process as one of the
identified sectors eligible to
generate credit we have many
questions and concerns on how
this process could potentially
affect land use private property
rights and whether the reduction
efforts we have to wait in state
lastly we have concerns with
Environment Department having
both responsibilities of
administering the program and
ensuring compliance it may be
beneficial to have a separate
entity administered the
compliance responsibility to
ensure transparency further I
will also mention that the
biodiesel though enacted in the
state of New Mexico has received
a waiver since the enactment of
that policy and government
publications thank you.
Charlie Munoz I have you on my
list to.
Mr Chairman were you taking
opposition opposition against.
we shock because we.
Committee members on traffic
madam working with early
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
business coalition the New
Mexico business coalition is
concerned that this is a
legislation may increase the
cost of fuel and that cost the
increase will be filled by
businesses.
Have to pass the cost increases
to their consumers impact rules
and.
We respectfully urge you to so
do not miss thank you thank you
Manchester have you thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee along with Senator
Stewart we do appreciate that
this bill being brought forward
to the opportunity to comment on
it I also want to especially
thank the agency who's been
working with us the last several
years reducing methane emissions
in the proper process has been
pretty long pretty extensive but
obviously we appreciate the fact
that we've had a voice in that
and that will in regards to the
specific bill we just want to
say that we wholeheartedly agree
that the goal to reduce
emissions is what all parties
one specifically in the state of
New Mexico however we do have
some specific concerns related
to what the cost would be passed
on to consumers there are
studies on all sides of this
legislative it won't be that
expensive and there are studies
that say would increase prices
up to thirty cents a program
we're concerned about that and
it's impact specifically on
rural communities if I want to
emphasize that we're concerned
about the fuel conversion
process and how that will affect
the supply chain as well as
coming down to our specifically
small producers for oil and gas
so I I did leave a letter on the
desk from our association to all
of you so appreciate your
attention to that and present
the opportunity speaker today
but we do stand in respectful
opposition.
Anybody else in the audience
against that I missed.
Our.
Mr chairman members many
amendments all the stated first
director for the consumer to New
Mexico thank you for the
opportunity Commons legislation
first we want to fund sponsor
for her for her willingness to
try to improve the environment
this is something that we should
all be doing thinking about
every single day so this
legislation for we do feel that
it'll help in that regard NCAA
we support all of the above
energy policies that promote
energy production and
environmental stewardship the
result and affordable energy
options for working families we
believe energy production
environment stewardship are not
mutually exclusive in the state
of New Mexico we prove that
consistently
New Mexico has a large number of
residents that live at or below
the poverty level those citizens
already paid disproportionally
amount of their income towards
their energy prices and so well
this is a worthwhile idea are
concerns that right now gas
prices already dollar higher
than they were last year we're
just concerned about how that
affects people limited success I
can afford anything that this
will go up to our concern is
those people who live on a on a
fixed income for the paycheck to
paycheck how this'll affect so
what incredible respected
Sanchez
decisions thank I believe I did
no one else in opposition in the
room correct.
in support of the service area I
guess and then.
The morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
state your Yamada with public
service company as many of you
know we are committed to meeting
the Energy transitioned Act
legislation in addition my
piano Senator transportation
electrification planted the PRC
that was approved in December
PNM shares are Senator Stewart
its commitment to reduce carbon
emissions very economically and
environmentally sustainable for
a great infrastructure for New
Mexico we appreciate the Senator
and Sandra and her team for
working with us on the
legislation and we stand and
support thank you.
Who else in support in the
audience not permit state
agents.
Are the markets.
The.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Senate bill fourteen comes at a
time.
For this effort as a pivotal
point in the development of the
electric vehicle market.
Today there are sixty EDD's
that's all the referred to.
In the next four years all of
the automakers have committed to
introducing a hundred and thirty
electric vehicles.
In order to get to this point.
The world one of the issues is
the the state has committed of
course.
Or electric vehicle market.
It can't be done simply with
investment by auto
manufacturers.
So it is necessary that efforts
like this occur in support of
the initiative.
It's really a complimentary.
Policy if you will of the stands
in conjunction with the
introduction of these electric
vehicles we sent support thank
you very much thank you any
anybody else from the public
that is not a secretary that
would not like budget cuts.
Secretary probe some of the call
when you know when here but
yeah.
No no I just.
But it and then other from
secretary king and then we're
gonna go to.
The committee I'm here.
You all thank you for the
opportunity to speak and in
favor of this important bill I
Mexico to other committees task
forces secretary Kenny
transportation is our number two
source of emissions and this
bill will bring emissions
reductions and cost effectively
as well as office of the state
that we support the bill we have
an alternative fuels program and
under that we administer that
will complement this effort and
we look forward to passing thank
you.
Secretary can.
Mr chair members of the
committee and like to talk about
my budget funds.
I don't have a sharpie in my
wrist.
This chair members of the
committee obviously we stand in
support of this bill and want to
thank the sponsor and Sander who
put a lot of work to do it Mr
chair one of the things that I
just feel as though it's a COVID
to say is if you go to NMED's
website there are over twenty
companies who have written a
letter taking the time to talk
about the investment they want
to make in New Mexico because of
our climate goals because they
see this is the right place to
invest just this session last
week another company stepped
forward in Lordsburg and they
wanted their want to build a
green energy campus if you will
bringing green energy jobs down
to that part of the state all of
that is is welcome investment
but all that generates credits
all that spurs the economy
throughout our state I think
this is just another great
example of how the
administration is using market
based mechanisms to reduce
carbon emissions and at the same
time grow the economy New Mexico
you.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Stewart a little bit
disappointed that the larger oil
and gas companies are here to
provide an industry perspective
my suspicion to that is because
they may be more motivated by
the the tax credits instead of
you know environmental standards
we're here to improve I do want
to thank the smaller producers
for being here The New Mexico
businesses really standing up
exposing the real costs
including those to consumers not
in my district Representative
mostly by agricultural producers
and so they they posed a couple
questions were asked and would
repeat during public comment but
I think the fears is this
imposes an unnecessary cost to
those producers you know not
just in my district with
throughout Mexico Senator
Stewart Mr chairman.
Could you answer one of the
questions on there that that I
appreciated was it doesn't the
bill doesn't specify how a
deficit credit or carbon credit
gets its value can you explain
how does it differ from from a
citizen to citizen.
Mr chairman of like to have
Sandra Ely Ely.
It answer that chairman members
of the committee
under the bill the environmental
improvement board would
establish rules on developing
market program they would then
most likely be administered by a
third party rather than the
environment department that
market would dentist abolition
price now as recommended by
number stakeholders the
suggested that we establish a
floor and potentially a ceiling
for determining what those
market prices were to help avoid
fluctuations so we'll have to
look at what other jurisdictions
have done regarding price to
make sure that it's a nice
reasonable price and that it
doesn't get came to so it's
really the market that will
establish the price but with
market mechanisms that would
create a market that is this
works well for the state thank
you Mr chairman and why isn't
that why don't the building at
least I understand that we we
would publishes based on market
market prices but who establish
is that why isn't where we
linings that out of the bill.
The the board was through that
work and work with stakeholders
to develop the best rule to
rules to make sure that those
market mechanisms work for all
stakeholders.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
senator this maybe also question
for expert but is a carbon
credit considered personal
property or real property in
this bill I'm not sure what the
difference between personal and
real needs it is fungible it can
be traded you know it would go
on the market and could be
traded three we anticipate that
we would work with the third
party to help set up those
markets and every once in awhile
we'd establish a clearance
market if we had an entity that
needed credits in order to come
into compliance thank you Mr
chairman so if you're saying
it's transferable like a water
or mineral right I would
consider that a real property.
Is that safe to say.
I don't know the answer to that
sorry.
Well a carbon credit be
considered a conservation
easement and so we've had lots
of conversations the session
about conservation easements and
now that they in the future
limit access it is is that
defined anywhere in this bill.
I'm sorry chairman and
Representative Senator Diamond I
I don't there's nothing to
finding an easement in this bill
it's not addressing conversation
of conservation easements at all
thank you.
the concerns and I hope that
this is that your questions have
have have been heard by a lot of
the Act producers what their
greatest fear is on this is
because there's a lot of
unknowns in the bill and as
price takers our farmers and
ranchers are not are not
flexible in their limited in it
in their ability to recoup costs
in in and because of that not
only do we stand to have an
increase on to consumers in fuel
prices but then also at the
grocery store they're going to
feel the impacts of of
legislation like this and so
because of that and because as
as a senator I'm nothing more
than a messenger and carry a
voice from my district the voice
my district is very loud that
there opposed to this so with
all due respect to to the
sponsor of this bill until we
can address some of our smaller
producers concerns in the
agricultural part of concerns
and they're great and they're
like the I will have to be
voting no on this pre appreciate
your time thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator Steinborn.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and madam pro tem the feeling of
questions for you first of all
kind of pick up for my colleague
left up on agricultural
producers.
We go to page nine section
staff.
And if can you talk about the
special kind of exception made
for agricultural producers to
deal with price fluctuations and
suspending this.
Representative under market
adverse market conditions you
talk about that a little so
Mister chairman I'm just going
to remind him to turn it over to
center of the I'm gonna remind
the committee that this was put
in last year by this committee
and it it was in reference to
people's fears about this not
being able to be flexible enough
which is the point in here we
really think it's going to be
the agriculture committee that
community that gets credits more
easily than many others but
that's the way we feel about so
this yes there is a provision
for an emergency to for all
process and also the requirement
that the department considering
the stakeholder that comes
forward with that request for an
emergency referral process so
it's it's not something that we
can ignore and we must consider
part mostly based on what ever
market conditions may be at hand
at the time.
So thank you for that matter for
time so I read that to mean
that.
Depending upon global conditions
with this commodity with bill
commodities there's kind of a
release valve if you well for
for agricultural producers to
protect them a little bit so I
think that's important point out
Ask about the regulatory
liability clause which are FIR
talks about is trying to come in
the bill which simply allows
unused credit revenues to pre
reserves for later use.
So.
I apologize for through to get
here is this is that relate to
on use credit revenues from
utilities.
You know yes the reference for
this bill.
Now you're looking at your FIR.
But.
Line fifteen.
This is some of the language
that we recently negotiated with
the utilities and some of the
environmental groups and what
this does is it helps set aside
those revenues that are
generated from the sale of
credits by the utilities to make
sure that they can be used in in
the future
for expansion of electricity
transportation and Tricity
projects.
So that's that's what that
means.
Thank so those unused credits
can be used at a later date sure
thank you so it's really it
really Mr chair kind of.
Kind of plays into how they're
able to use that to.
Is it used to offset their
liability in a way on how much
for that case and I have to
fund.
Because they're able to defer
some of that later years.
Yes.
Okay.
Mr chair okay does that in any
way.
Reduce the impact of.
The volume of.
To reduce the impact because of
the loft by.
Allowing a deferral of.
That.
Mr chair now all all net
revenues generated have to go
towards the expansion of
electrification okay thank you
for answering that I just want
to ask one other question Mr
chairman of which is that just
kind of an academic point maybe
for the secretary etcetera but
of our carbon pollution that's
contributing to climate change
what percentage of that is
coming from fuels in cars.
In New Mexico it's approximately
fourteen percent it's the number
two source of greenhouse gas
emissions in the state it is the
number one source nationwide.
So is this is this is a very
important Heller of reducing our
carbon emission as the state and
improving your quality Chairman
absolutely it is in in across
the country many states are
having a hard time trying to
determine how to reduce
emissions in what may be their
number one source of greenhouse
gas emissions like in Arizona or
Washington state this is key to
getting those emission
reductions we spoke and we know
that more states are following
states that are interested in
reducing their carbon footprint
will be following the lead of
states like New Mexico thank you
Mr chair last question in
addition to that will this also
serves to improve air quality
can actually reduce pulmonary
conditions that respond
pollution like asthma or
whatever.
Yes chairman it definitely in
you may have heard that New
Mexico has a real problem with
ozone in certain parts of the
state in Bernalillo county Lee
Eddy County and part of that is
because emissions related to
transportation this will help
with that not only help with
improving immediate air quality
the greenhouse gases over all Mr
chairman it's not just a clean
field but it's clean air bill is
reduced carbon build I think
those are two really important
goals that that people ought to
think about so thank you Mr
thank you for ten.
We'll talk about trading bitcoin
credit Senate work Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Intel Griffith.
That happened.
The first thing I'd like to know
and no Senator and Mister
chairman Senator you didn't make
the statement.
But it was an indication that
we're going to raise the price
a cattle by doing this.
And I know you didn't make that
statement.
But I would love to find out how
that was done.
Through a clean fuel packed.
Because all indications the
price of fuel is going to go up.
And I just don't understand how
that's going to raise the price
of cattle.
So I found that very interesting
when when somebody would make a
statement like that Mr chair
it's a leading statement in my
eyes as to trying to influence
someone on the panel that this
is a great thing because it's
going to help the ranchers
raising the prosecution.
And I'm sorry to to bring you in
a discussion Senator because you
didn't make that statement.
Of the things that I would like
to ask from you are are from
your expert.
Is a we're talking about a
fourteen percent of of the
source of carbon emissions from
fuel what's the number one
source of carbon emissions in
the state of New Mexico.
Yes Mr chairman and get.
And you talking about the
exploration and production of
oil and gas.
Not the burning of oil and gas
but the but that and what's the
second one Mr chair and
transportation fuels Mr
chairman.
So it goes from so what percent
is is the oil and gas
production.
Three.
Fifty three percent nation wide
its transportation fuels are
number one.
In New Mexico it's oil and gas.
Okay.
Well I'm certainly you don't
have measured that.
And to me this I'm going to
drive.
A cross country trip across New
Mexico.
Then I drive I forty a lot.
And there's lots of trucks.
Then they carry.
From one thousand to two
thousand gallons of fuel with
the.
So how are we going to.
Make them.
They can fill up out of state
income across our state.
Near to drive all the way
across.
In.
Not comply with this.
And there's lots of trucks that
there is you know Senator Mr
chair so explain that to me tell
me tell me what you gonna do to
those guys Mr Chairman they
don't really that's that's not
what we're talking about we're
not talking about getting the
gas at the gas station filling
up your truck we're talking
about the companies that refine
blend import make transportation
fuels they are the ones will
have to cut their credits cut
the carbon and generate credits.
So we're not talking about going
to the gasoline pump and filling
it up there we're talking about
the people that make the fuel in
New Mexico.
So.
The put so the guy that buys it
didn't have to pay for it's a
guide that produce and in making
it that has to pay for it Mr
chairman and senator.
Mr chairman that's right.
So what happens when they quit.
Mr chair.
Senator.
Mr Chairman who quits the the
guy this producing gasoline that
he can not only no longer afford
to sell it.
Because you can't pass the cost
to.
Mr chairman that's not what's
happening and other states that
have a clean fuel standard
I I mentioned the.
Hi Blaine F. and all that that
you can buy in California for
your trucks that's a hundred
it's a dollar fifty less than
normal diesel so
We have twenty eight businesses
who want to come to New Mexico
and produce these fuels here one
of the men Clovis.
RT have the have the building
fair so this is some way for the
transportation industry many of
whom want to do this to
produce fuel that less emissions
less carbon intensity so it
proves our air improves all
those health benefits to go
along with improved air.
It people who plan to refine
produce may sell fuel in New
Mexico they're the ones that
want to do this and that are
going to be price to do it a
once we get these regulations
simplex.
You'll be the beneficiary
anybody driving a truck will be
the beneficiary of being able to
buy better fuel.
Okay.
A good.
This analysis.
But pretty good cons.
On backroom.
N. as of one twenty six twenty
twenty two.
triple a.
California gas prices four
dollars and eighty four cents.
New Mexico gas prices three
dollars and fifty eight cents.
Mister chairman Senator that's
not because of the clean fuel
standard those are the market
prices in California spent over
four dollars for effort.
So you also said we're going.
We're going to four dollars and
ten cents Mr.
Mr chairman those western Mexico
City that the states have all
had I passed prices for many
years and they still do.
The clean fuel standards doesn't
really affect that except for
the two examples that I gave you
you know
this work and has a
First call working clean fuel
program and they estimate a
regularly the cost of clean fuel
standards on the price of
gasoline and.
Their latest calculation to
twenty twenty estimates that the
maximum cost increase for clean
fuel standards is about three
point seven cents a gallon.
So you know what are three
dollars and twenty five cents
that's one percent of our pump
price date also did a study in
California and they found for
the clean fuel standards program
it might have been about little
less than two cents a year over
ten years nineteen cents over
ten years there are other
market.
impacts on gasoline at that are
much future then that symbol one
thing their gas taxes are more
than double New Mexico St
California alone organises
saints have much higher gas
prices gas taxes per gallon than
we do so you have to turn to
look at the big picture.
And try to study what because
this is done in other states and
you know was one of the.
Thank you to mentors of
emissions in the country for New
Mexico we believe that this will
help us I reduce those emissions
are so dangerous for public
health and climate change.
Mr chair and then Senator.
How many gallons of fuel.
Is used in New Mexico per year.
We don't know Mr Chairman.
Bill cordon my crack team behind
me.
It's a billion with the.
A billion gallons.
So you're saying that if we
raise the a few cents it will be
anything.
But that's pretty big Bucks.
Anybody's in anybody's work.
And if it's and that that three
dollar gasoline.
We're spending right now three
million dollars in gasoline.
And it was talked about in the
bill.
A five percent increase.
And I apologize to you I don't
have that percent.
The finger tips.
But if it's over ten percent
there's quite a bit.
And when and when you start
talking.
And I know you said it's three
cents which is one percent.
Mr chairman that was an Oregon
fuel standard to call again.
Organs.
Oregon's clean fuel program they
were estimating the cost of the
four or you can and and Senator
Woods Mr chairman if I let
center at the lady answer some
of your questions she's looking
at the bill and may have a
better answer than I do.
Mr chair just wanted to comment
about that Oregon study
as noted by the pretend they do
periodically look at what may be
the anticipated increase in
costs related to the program and
that three point four point
seven percent is a very
conservative number is the
maximum that they would
anticipate and it depends one
hundred percent on the trading
of credits rather than industry
actually reducing the carbon
associated with that fuel so
they talking to the folks in
Oregon they say yeah we do this
but we don't believe that that
is what the impact is going to
be because it assumes a business
will not do that cheapest way or
implement the cheapest way to
get those carbon emissions or
meet their carbon intensity
requirements.
Lindman notices it said that the
New Mexico EDD estimated that
the twenty twenty one that fuel
costs could increase by five
percent.
Mr chair
Percent and three percent
increase that's based off of the
results in California Colorado
we're.
I see.
Okay well got seven zero zero us
even figure out how many there
is here let's move on.
We're.
you.
I
I am concerned about.
This bill is so wide open all
the rulemaking alright.
That.
You know what we it is stated in
testimony that we were going to
follow somebody's example out
there.
I would really like to see
before I have to vote on this
again.
At least one of those examples
of rulemaking but someone else
may.
Because this is wide open.
This leaves an agency where they
can write any rule they won't.
And the legislature has no
control.
Of Mr chair
It's pretty hard for me to agree
to do that.
To to see a of of of of a bill
that allows that.
We should.
Define it down a little bit.
So that we would.
Know what we're voting here.
Means that we're we're voting on
a concept.
Great the concept that choose
it's going to cost to three
cents because that's what was
done in this state.
There's no state like New
Mexico.
You take states on the on the
coast they they can grow things
that we can grow they can have.
They can sequester carbon ways
that we can't come to a
constructs a because of the.
Much could read would.
Sequester Mr chair your.
You know he you know.
We live in New Mexico.
The the forestry bunch still
wants me that what we can have
the forestry division that has a
a big lumber industry because it
takes two hundred years for tree
to grow.
Big enough to to cut four lumber
I don't quite believe that that
they have told me that.
So.
You should have a real problem
with this bill I will try my
best to make a better questions
if I get to hear it again and
and and please.
If you could send me some
information on how you go to
write the rules.
Of I would you know it's only
fair to my constituents in your
constituents that we vote on
something that we know something
about.
It's it's not fair to say well
in that state the did it this
way the state they did that way
ever state is riding rules
different then we should know
kind of what we have in mind and
I know that it's it's it's not
brought force right now because
you had made a payment it's that
simple it's just a good idea.
Here's your bring it eight eight
eight idea of in front of me.
And that's not good legislation.
And ideas not good legislation.
So some in German Sir words if
you just read section.
Three.
It winds through six pages of
what we want to do with this.
And lays out what we what we
need in those for.
It's not the rules themselves up
but this is what we've worked on
with the utilities with oil and
gas with the environmental
groups so I hear what you're
saying
we give rule thirty rulemaking
authority to all fire
departments
I've been appalled I I've had a
three page education bill turned
into twenty pages Senator make
didn't even recognize the bill I
understand what you're saying
but I believe a section three
really lays out in detail what
we want them to do and lays out
the credit credits I think this
is very exciting to be able to
offer a carbon intensity credits
that will take the place of
lowering the carbon intensity in
the fuel you're using I just
think this this makes us use our
market in a way that is very
innovative and creative and I
think we can do this.
So I would ask one more question
Mr chair.
What do you expect the fees to
be.
It says it it creates a clean
fuel standard fund for the
collection of fees the servant
of the clean fuel standard act.
What do you expect those fees to
be.
Mr chair Senator Woods the fees
can only cover the cost of the
program of administering the
program so once we've designed
the program will make a
determination and collect an
annual fee but it is specified
to cover the cost of programs
that in here.
Yes Sir yes Mr chair.
You should be able to budgeted
if it's in.
Mr chairman of section for the
thank you for standard fund it's
on page seven.
I.
Which states Mr chair require
the assessment of an annual
registration fee for providers
and any persons generating
credits and sufficient to cover
the reasonable costs of the
department's administration and
of course the clean fuel
standard Act and implementation
of the rules.
So Mr chair Senator it's in
there.
We just these agencies to bring
this budget.
Have you got any idea what that
budget will cost.
Mr chair Senator Woods it will
have to determine what this
program looks like before we can
make an estimate we don't we
don't anticipate collecting fees
for a couple of years and so we
work with stakeholders to
develop a program then we'll
know what our budget is
okay tell me something else
we're talking about credits and
debits.
Are we talking about it in the
a lot of these utilities it in
Mexico utilities thank all the
renewable energy correct.
Bricks.
Is there a relationship between
a wreck.
In these credits for David no.
Okay.
So we've got a status that would
have a credit is in a deputy.
And then you got establish a
price on those and you got to go
to a third party to create a
market for those.
Is there a market good question
I just thought of Senator.
Excuse me for being so slow.
There's got to be a market in
the country right now.
If we're following somebody
else.
So what what is a credit and
debit Wirth today is can not
find it in my home smart phone.
Mr chair Mr chair Senator Woods
there is a market in Oregon
which is separate from the
marketing California which will
be separate from the market in
New Mexico we are regional
credit markets in our is there a
spot I can find.
I'm sure you could Google it Mr
chair okay yeah I will.
And I I that's important part
because if you're going to
Senator Diamond said if if you
expect a farmer or rancher to
provide some offset for carbon
emissions.
Then he needs to know what to
expect the return is.
So when my guys called me and
asked me.
How can I make money off this.
I need somewhere to go and say
well in Oregon you can make this
California you can make this.
So if you could send me a link
to those I would appreciate it.
And Mr chair I don't mean that
you.
will return floor to you Sir
thank you Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
A couple of things I'd like to
to point out to the committee
first here before I start asking
questions.
When we talk about economic
diversity we want to move away
from oil and gas and I'm all in
favor of economic diversity.
But moving away from oil and gas
is difficult for a variety of
reasons one its role is money
came from right now.
It's always roll the money comes
from.
To.
Oil and gas is just embedded in
our world it's in the that you
are aware you can hate oil and
gas but if you take off all the
clothes that have oil and gas
product in a.
Some of us will look very ugly.
It's in the carpet in the paint
it's in everything that we do.
Very difficult to move away from
that.
I am the I want to have
something else because I like
you would rather not have a
budget that does that.
But just the the.
The myopic hatred of oil and gas
or fossil fuel in general I
think it's counterproductive the
specially to diversifying our
economy.
We can do other things.
Also when you have when you
convert fuel so when you do
something different with it we
have refineries that are then
going to do something different
with that burns energy as well
that takes energy to do that so
that overall this energy loss
that we that we can't use to do
other things.
It may be worth it but we
understand that there is a price
to this it's not in any of these
numbers that we see there's a
price to somewhere in the in the
program.
I am concerned.
About when we talk about
pollution in New Mexico.
So I have here is the EPA non
attainment of things for you
it's for twenty sixteen through
twenty twenty one.
So not attainment of a variety
of things so Bernalillo county
had a the carbon monoxide non
attainment.
Only one into but.
While carbon oxides.
It okay
In in Dona ana county had
An eight hour ozone non
attainment twenty one times in
twenty twenty one twenty one
times they didn't attain the
ozone standard.
Twenty one times they also did
not obtain the particular
standards that the EPA has set.
Police counties not on there.
Either Santa Fe County were you
County or Harding County.
Those only count is brilliant in
going out they have to have some
of the all but what about San
Juan county's I know that they
had a nose on problem.
Twice.
It was reported the San Juan
county had an ozone problem
twice when people went out to to
look at that monitor the from
monitor was was not functioning.
That's why they're not on the P.
list.
This is the pay less money I
make this a.
According to the American lung
association in twenty fifteen.
Forming to New Mexico had the
second cleanest air in America.
Any twenty sixteen and twenty
seventeen to twenty eighteen
they have the cleanest air in
America.
The.
One Association again I can make
that up.
America no so much although it's
not you know why because Casper
Wyoming comes before Farmington
New Mexico in alphabetical order
and we tied.
We talk with each other.
Same numbers.
Please is there an American.
Do we have pollution of course
we have pollution.
Is there concern about global
warming and things absolutely
there is.
But I don't want to get so
focused that we don't see a
bigger picture everything we do
has consequences and most often.
We get we have to come back here
and fix the unintended
consequences of what we did last
year.
So with all of that.
Do you know.
Mr chair.
And put them how many refineries
do we have now in New Mexico.
And how many would we have if
this was implemented and what
kind of refineries with eighty.
Mr chairman I I don't know all
of that I'll turn it over to
Sandridge see if she does I do
know about the one in Artesia
which right now is producing
these low carbon fuels that
we're asking of us all to do so
we certainly have these twenty
eight companies who want to be
here some of them will be
refineries but to have any other
condition of Mr chair we have
the refinery in Artesia that's
the.
The one in up north is closed
this is so.
Mr Deputy the two refineries the
one in McKinley wanted someone
that well there's several in San
Juan that closed long time ago
but in recent times of the
closed up to.
in in in what you said I think
this is exactly my next point
here the market is already
moving in this direction.
We have refineries that are
already doing this.
The oil and gas industry already
dramatically reduced its methane
output before any methane rule
that it.
So
are we doing this electric
vehicles already coming.
Why do we need a hammer to beat
ourselves up over it.
The markets already moving that
direction.
And I think if we have a hammer
and beat ourselves I think that
directly goes to diversifying
our economy because all of a
sudden people that might want to
come here because there's
opportunities here because we
got clean air in because other
than Dona Ana County it didn't
get above a hundred degrees very
often when it does just on
state.
It doesn't get below zero very
often when it does it doesn't
stay this is a great place for
any industry to do we ought not
going out of our way to
discourage them and I think this
is a hammer this unnecessary.
Markets are going that way.
I'm.
This also appears to me to be a
mandate.
For innovation.
We're going to see Dallas shout
have an innovation idea to
create something new.
By this date.
Even though we pull that off.
We can't force somebody to have
an idea.
This is that this boggles my
mind boggles my mind.
This is it carbon capture if I
read this right only apply out
applies to.
Moving vehicles it doesn't apply
to carbon capture in other
settings like San Juan
generating station do I read
that right.
I can't stand for a response.
Senator so.
Our current generation has to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
in the transportation sector
carbon capture that does that if
it's associated state within the
oil and gas facility or an
electric generating facility in
which that electricity would be
used for transportation who
qualify.
So the only.
Project is exempt from that
transportation action to
transportation emissions is
director capture.
Okay so Mister chair
So.
San Juan generating station
this.
It is it is already the cleanest
I believe the cleanest coal
fired power plant world but
certainly route here's
plaintiffs by fall.
Two things come out of San Juan
generating station electricity
and CO two.
All of the other things all of
the the the nitrogen dioxide
sulfur a murky all of that is
already captured.
We're gonna plug in more cars.
That that's true that's kind.
Which means we're gonna need
electrical generation.
If we simply.
Turn half of our of our vehicles
I have to be the American
vehicle fleet into electric
vehicles half of.
We're going to need to build two
hundred more San Juan generating
stations or the equivalent.
Just to charge those cars.
Two hundred more someone and
someone generating station big
power plant.
Two hundred more than just
friends just so if this includes
because it wouldn't be just for
transportation because once you
put an electron why are we don't
know if it's going to your to
your electric stove we're going
to electric car.
With these credits that might go
to an electric stove.
Be available San Juan generating
station which by the way is now
changed they said they would be
they promised take ninety
percent of the CO two out of
that power plant.
Mitsubishi who is not a fly by
night company but a really huge
international company.
Is now told them that they can
do better than ninety five
percent.
Their their technology is
growing to ninety five percent.
Carbon capture.
Well these credits applied to
San Juan generating station for
the forbidden because we don't
know where the electron goes.
Chairman one of the issues that
we've been talking with the
utility about is how to quantify
exactly how much electors
electric Tricity would go to
electrification of vehicles we
have some sense of how to do
that but we're going to have to
work some of those issues out in
rulemaking so eight.
San Juan generating station
would have to be able to would
work with them to figure out how
to demonstrate where those
electrons are going and how much
is actually going to
electrifying vehicles so
potentially yes but there's a
lot to work out in determining
how that would actually be done.
I can't even imagine that.
I can't even imagine that.
I can imagine how much goes to
charging my phone is charging my
car once the electrons in the
water.
Reserve.
But I think there are things Mr
chair and committee members.
That.
That we need to consider.
What is the real cost at what
cost we know there's going to be
a cost to our budget even though
she said we don't know what the
cost is.
So we know to exist.
We also know there will be a
cost to consumers of some kind.
But we don't know what that is
either no maybe the cost is
worth I'm not saying it go all
cost aren't aren't worth which
again.
I mean clearly I bought a phone
cost me something was it worth
having.
No because all you all text me
an email means is is not what
worked but I did it anyway.
Published by itself is not bad
but what is the cost versus the
benefit what's the return on the
investment in right now you so
we don't know.
We don't know.
I would like to see the hard
data.
But he pointed out we don't
know.
We don't have the hard data.
And finally are there any
alternatives to reducing the
greenhouse gas emissions besides
this.
Which I think has built in
unintended consequences.
So are there any other
alternatives that we can think
of to do this that we ought to
debate.
Before we pass this.
Shut up now Mr.
Thank you Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam pro tempore this
important legislation forward
one of my legislative priorities
that Mr chairman you haven't
probably heard of was outdoor
expanding outdoor classrooms in
in New Mexico.
My bill was heard and Senate
Education Committee a few days
ago and Senator Kernan had made
a good point about her concern
about the air quality in her
district and I was just curious
what the impact would be on air
quality and then children's
health and well being in New
Mexico if this legislation
passes.
Mister chairman Senator.
You know we we certainly can't
tell you any numbers right now
we can certainly tell you that
from other places where this is
working that the air quality is
better so.
You know what what we're
anticipating active on a number
here five twenty thirty we're
estimating that eighteen and a
half million tons.
In reduction of carbon emissions
in the transportation sector by
doing this then this is a
significant reduction of carbon
in transportation fuels so
plenty of our impacted
communities including schools
are near highways are near our
our in areas where there's worse
air pollution so we believe that
this will help clean up our air
and that will reduce those
health impacts Senator Kernan
mention.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam Protandim thank you to the
expert witness Senator think to
questions when we were going
through the public comment Mr
chairman I think it was I can
member who it was but brought up
the term a property rights that
there would be a property right
some sort of infringement or and
you know we've had a lot of time
today and I'm I'm looking
through everything and trying to
find for property rights might
be affected and I don't see it
anywhere you wish to comment on
that I don't hear anybody
comment on its I want to give an
opportunity to talk about that.
You Mr Chairman some people
think thank this bill is you
know this looking man all and
they put other things on this
has nothing to do with land
easements it has nothing to do
with private property rights
read the whole bill you won't
find anything in there and
there's nothing in that in
section three which is really
the section that says let's do
this let's do this let's do this
these are regulations we need to
put in place so I I don't know
it's kind of reminds me about
the capital
this site everyone thinks this
is more than it is it's a
relatively short Bill three that
you won't find any of that in
here I appreciate that Mr
chairman thank you madam
protests and then the second
question I had was more of a
COVID I guess but on the
the question from the committee
a little while ago to do a
Senator share just on this might
be a good investment the some of
the I believe it is personally
because this isn't my swim lane
in the legislature I don't I do
with a swimming about six or
seven lines very hard but this
just isn't one of them but when
I think about this it really is
innovation for our people if you
think about it it really is
innovation and trying to find a
better way to make the planet
last little bit longer and be
able to walk up to each other
when I have to wear these
horrendous mass and Previn's
talk to each other
so my question then is how long
do you have from the time of the
enactment to when something
actually starts happening with
this act I think I saw twenty
four months and then there's a
whole bunch so I hope that one
Andrew this is an act that we go
down the road of.
With the north not to make this
as expensive as maybe some
people are concerned about we'll
talk about that with what's the
time that we have to really
think this through is it's being
implemented.
And so Mister chairman I I you
know this is Senator share
closes the hammer I think that
this is the carrot and carrot
that's been cooked in a sauce or
something because we're offering
credits for the production of
carbon that's going on all over
this state needs to me that's
why I wanted to carry it is like
wow now this this is different
this is great this is an of
eight so we should if we pass
this if we move forward with it
I with that I think within for
five six years you're gonna have
everybody on board and that Ag
community in particular is going
to be producing credits with
their methane et cetera so it's
a way for us to all finance and
to not have it hit like a hammer
but hit like the care.
The to be thank you Mr chairman
thank you madam pro tempore that
description how many states are
doing this already.
We have several states that are
looking at this here the same
way we are a California has been
had a clean field center for ten
years and they want to buy clean
fuel from us Oregon Washington
is looking at Minnesota is
looking at the.
The pandemic.
In fact chairman Washington just
recently adopted a past with
clean fuel standards act so they
are fully invested in our
developing rules right now
Minnesota is on our heels and
will maybe one of the next
states Nevada is also looking at
it so there are a number of
states and a number of
midwestern states the support of
their agricultural community
looking at a clean fuel
standards that will I think the
following our lead.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
those responses and just a point
of a I guess no it's personal
proper public privilege Mr
chairman we
maybe often seen word that our
our junior U. S. senator has
been hospitalized and I'm very
concerned about him as a friend
all of us and if we could just
maybe have a moment of silence
as a.
A moment silence as a reflection
for him.
Center well I I don't want to
you know the you let us finish
the questions and then okay but
if you'd like Mr chairman thank
you.
He didn't have a stroke today at
the twenty seventh and so he's
in the hospital in the As at UNM
and and we'll talk about that
after the question I did get a
note so I just want to interrupt
Committee questions when we're
focused on one thing to to focus
on another thing of importance
of is it simply be.
Thank thank you
madam protest me ask some
questions on page five of the
line thirteen.
Why are we using twenty eighteen
is the base year instead of
twenty twenty.
Mr chairman I think that's
because it's I don't know they
would become the last year and I
don't remember it it's when we
have food full data.
What we have yes that is correct
yeah and so what we use current
data and I'm gonna get into some
examples later on we use current
data for the year twenty twenty
one.
And then move forward from
there.
So we'll be evaluating Mr chair
the emissions of the carbon
intensity of the fuel in twenty
eighteen and then set the right
glide path with the help of our
stakeholders in the in the
rulemaking it may be a hockey
stick where we started off slow
and then increase so they have a
chance to get used to the
program and then increases be
able to generate more credits to
help with
help with compliance in the
later years so there's
flexibility on that glide path
and currently we are starting
with twenty eighteen as our
carbon intensity baseline.
And then I see the electricity
company left the room rather
quickly so let's let's say PNM
is power plant in San Juan right
and you're basing it off twenty
eighteen numbers well they're
twenty twenty one or twenty
twenty should be the current
numbers and so their carbon
intensity went down because
they're not doing that but
they're also importing
electricity and they're eligible
for the credits as a by
electricity on the free market
correct into New Mexico so why
would we do that and it's it's
free marketing and and they're
buying clean energy from the
state why would we issued a
credit when they're buying clean
energy from another state.
Chairman members of the
committee we look at the life
cycle of whatever fuel is
whether it's electricity or bio
fuels that we go into your in
your gas tank so.
So if so you're I'm sorry
chairman I'm thinking you're
saying why shouldn't we limit
this to clean energy produced in
New Mexico rather than imported
from out of state correct yeah.
Greenhouse gases are global
pollution so we do have
definitely have local benefits
for reducing things like
particulates and ozone
greenhouse gases are a global
pollution and if we can get
those reductions outside the
state then we will get those
reductions from outside the
state we will have to look at
that particular issue as we go
to rulemaking with our utilities
that's for sure yes I mean the
benefit should be to the people
of the state not where the
powers created and we understand
that and so the credits I think
become real property when when
you issue a credit or bit coin
becomes real property you have a
identifier number in so but I I
I mean now pass electric was was
one that was on for in in PNM
was one that's on for well other
than solar that they're
producing or wind in the state I
mean those credit should be.
State companies that that reduce
the carbon amount in New Mexico
if we want clean air and
Albuquerque we want clean air
and in the in any counties where
they have the two refineries and
those are priorities and I think
that some some should mention it
here
on the credit.
Because anybody can sell us
power right.
And whether they're eligible for
the credits are not because PNM
is not gonna have power for next
year because they don't have it
in the open market and rolling
blackouts are going to come
across the state if they don't
find that power in so.
That concerns me a little bit
about how our nation the credits
because we're buying clean
energy from other states
California is money clean energy
from other states and we're
transmitting across New Mexico
in the revenue generation and
and they fit I think it's fifty
cents a kilowatt in San Diego
and so we get no benefit other
than they get to use are you
easements and so the company
comes and says well we'll divert
off that line so many kilowatts
on the open market we're gonna
allow them have that credit that
concerns me just a little bit
help me understand.
Well before Sandra says anything
Mr chairman I just want you know
you reminded me that on page
five this also that language and
do.
We're gonna take part time to
get this right it says no later
than twenty four months but
issues like this we really need
to work with our stakeholders
and they are the utilities among
other people so we're going to
be working with them on setting
these credits and setting these
of these procedures to get there
so you know the the issues you
raised will be part of this
rulemaking with our
stakeholders.
And Mister chair if I may
The carbon intensity of fuels
produced out of state and used
in state have to be all of al
you waited and if the carbon
intensity of transporting that
fuel into New Mexico it is
increased that will be
considered when in the
generation of credits also want
to note that when and
establishing protocols for
generation of credits we have to
look at prioritizing
disproportionately impacted
communities and if those credits
are in a location in New Mexico
that offsets some emissions that
would otherwise be from a point
source polluting in that
neighborhood they would be
prioritized themselves so there
is some language in here that
addresses that it gets to your
point.
So then let me ask you this on
on the on the field standards so
we took the power plant or the
refinery that closed in in
Gallup right outside again and
converted that to bio diesel.
Right and we we trucked in oil
outside export and reopen that
as a biofuel facility how do you
score the credits from the oil
and the importation of corn oil
into the refinery I mean that's
that's gonna be done rulemaking
that that will be scored
correctly right that's correct
and it's life cycle so we have
to and if so if it costs money
to transport the fuel to that
refinery we have to take if if
it takes carbon emissions to get
that fuel to the refinery we
have to count those carbon
emissions and so if that fuels
coming from further out of
state.
You know we have to count those
emissions if it's coming from in
state there is a little bit of
an advantage there because there
are fewer carbon emissions
associated with fuels produced
in New Mexico than those
produced outside.
And I may be completely wrong I
don't know this but you take the
two refineries that are left and
I don't think any of that oil is
from Penn state because we can't
process Sweetcrude in New Mexico
we have to put process our
crude and so I don't have those
credits work that.
Chairman I don't know the answer
to that question it was
interesting that the oil and gas
company's big oil and gas or no
mogul is here on this.
Let me then ask you another
question you you and I don't
understand this so if there's
not credits issued you you
mentioned there's a clearance
market for credits to be issued.
I understand that yeah.
So we don't have a real big
hammer for non compliance we're
following the lead of some other
states that rather than taking
enforcement action or it it
administrative and
administrative compliance order
we make carbon intensity credits
available to those sources that
may be and deficit and we do
that through the clearance
market it's just to provide a
clear pathway to make sure the
credits are available to the
companies that need it when it's
time for them to true up their
carbon emissions with their
credit.
And then I know you can do this
rulemaking but just if you did
that.
Passed through our our test run
rulemaking what is a credit
worth how do you value the
credit the amount of carbon
capture verses multiplied by got
together to get to one credit
and now it's so again you know
you establish parameters for the
market to keep the market
healthy and make sure that it
can't be played
and then you let the market do
its thing it's it's the market
runs it and so if you've got
credit deficits on the market
you're gonna have an increase in
the cost of the credits if you
have a lot of credits on the
market you flood the market in
the cost goes goes down.
So if we don't know with the
cost of those credits are it
will be a New Mexico market we
won't know we won't be trading
with the states of Oregon and
California Washington we can
sell our fuels their but it
won't necessarily be a market in
which we trade credits with
those programs secretary
Kinnear's criminal detailing
that.
Jim and I think just revert
enters a credit is a metric ton
of CO two equivalents.
So that's the piece of that's
the carbon the model financially
by the credit number the dollar
amount I think that's what I was
thinking for us.
And they can only be traded
within the state.
Raul making their own be no
trading out of state for that's
my understanding and talking
with folks from other
jurisdictions that they would
not necessarily want to trade
with New Mexico they would
accept or if you all but they
would be happy to purchase our
fuel but they wouldn't
necessarily be involved in our
credit market doesn't mean it
couldn't change in the future if
we can line up the credit
requirements you're developing
in the bitcoin.
There is a period for me again.
On page ten let me
this is the main concern for our
committee.
Take any funded procreative by
the department should be
administered by the department
staffing resources do you know
what those dollar amounts those
funds are gonna look like as we
incentive finance money make
sure that that we have the whole
of the purse strings.
and I know if we're gonna have
to talk about an amendment on
that to make sure.
Mr chair we we don't know what
those dollars are going to look
like until we know what the
program looks like because it's
clear the direction here is for
administering the program and so
will be developing the program
and we'll have a better
understanding at this point we
think will need about six FTEs
to do that work in talking with
other states are doing similar
work that's where we landed.
And then it if you don't have
the the funds right then we'll
have to back fill of.
Correct when you start up this.
Thank you.
Go to hemp and marijuana and
whatever program when programs
are starting up you will not
have the funds to do that so you
will come to us for the funds
and then once funds broke.
Reporter there then you assume
that TV's but sometimes that
doesn't happen in government and
so.
That's one of those questions I
want to make sure I understand
chairman members of the
committee the executive budget
includes on probation that would
cover the start up for this
program and after a few years
once you start collecting fees
we the plan is to be an
enterprise program but until
then we will need Revenue to
start the program and that is
being asked for through the
executive budget.
And was that approved and house
bill two is it passed out of.
Which is.
This committee so they have an
entities looking house bill two
budget I believe that there was
money put into
hearing I believe that there is
I think sixteen or eighteen
percent increase in general fund
in NMED's budget for our crime
if you're aware this program
with the out of so I think we're
on a good trajectory I just need
to look at the numbers.
Then you might need this fund to
be created for unit right now
the climate bureau because
already funded those F. T. so
we'll check on that that's one
big question.
Correct.
We already have an agency that
the funded climate bureau and
you're gonna run this out of
that agency than we've already
created that eight the funds for
the agency so then you would
need this sister germinating the
answer to that question is if
we're putting general fund into
the standing up for the
committee to stand up clean
fuels program incentives go to
the point that was racing
Committee on in the.
The COVID let's do this sooner
right let's get the roll out
soon we have the FTE to do that
but then once the revenue start
once were starting to manage
that market then there's
transaction fees would go into
the fund that would be created
through Senate bill fourteen.
I just.
What's the water testing fund
that will that be collected
permit fees and then we're short
right is that for water
conservation and.
The same scenario could happen
here.
Mr chairman I think we the I
know for us the environment
department we've really.
Having sort of integrated some
of these funds.
And standing up programs
maintaining programs you've
given us a lot of talk about
what we need in our base budget
to stand up the rules and what
we need to sustain the
transaction costs going forward
and that's the balance we struck
between the executive request.
And ultimately what we put in
the role to administer the
program I understand your point
and I I get it will work with
you on that but that.
I thank you for yeah I think
we're on a good track your house
bill two.
And I'm not sure that I there
are yet that we don't need to
fund.
I just think that had brought
the languages they into those
and nothing shall revert.
so I just want to like that
again.
Thank yes.
Okay because so the credits can
be changed exchange rate PNM
could trade off the credits
with.
Occidental petroleum right
that's correct and then they can
apply for them in their income
tax return right the credits.
Accidental if they generate an
income off of that I believe
that yes the chairman they would
have to put the Clarets.
And so what what the offsetting
number be to to the to reflect
that because that's that's a
budgetary number that I'd like
to kind understand right there
train inside credit that we have
no value on and can apply that
that.
You know how to they move that
credit around to get to their
the reduction.
The chairman if they purchase
the credit we we know the value
of that credit
that they could trade the credit
and bank at or they could sell
it but isn't as long as they're
not selling the credit I don't
believe there would be a revenue
without taking these waving his
hand from.
Mr chairman I think the use of
the word that it is something I
just wanna be really plain
English about it the use of the
clean fuel credit is is a market
based has nothing to do with our
tax code so anybody who would
sell the credit and whatever
retail value face value it is
they would then have that then
they would have to then take
that money and go into the tax
code and and work that way the
the credits are completely
different right these are not
TRD credits these are credits
the the in the environmental
world Mr chairman members of the
committee it is not uncommon and
has been the the practice for
many years under the clean air
act in areas that have worse air
quality The New Mexico's we're
not really familiar with this
year the emission reduction
credits our our commonality so
you know again I don't want to
over complicated but there are
emission reduction credits or in
this case these transportation
credits are commodity that has
real value that companies will
trade and can you utilize
whatever they do with that.
Will work whatever they do with
that revenue is then separate
and apart from their tax payer.
obligations the state of New
Mexico
taxable transaction if you're
selling twelve about a.
It has to be yes I Mr chairman
members of the committee I have
no reason thank you would it be
we can confirm that with your do
but any I mean if if the
corporation has income.
That that is the the basis for
my understanding of of the
taxable event and that's that is
not related to this bill but it
is generally related to how it
works and related how the budget
understand.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
You have your substitute to use
last night it can correct and
and we're gonna live by the rule
it and say okay we want
everybody to make sure that the
substituting time is twenty four
hours in advance and so I think
We discussed the bill today and
tomorrow morning we're gonna
come back at nine AM and vote on
this so everybody has their
comprehension is that time work
for you madam chair.
Mr chairman I am due in rules
tomorrow at nine AM with the
confirmation of Kurt Steinhaus
so that does not work for me
I've committed to him and the
rules committee the thirty work
yes and we want we had public
comment I think are committee
members will stand in the way
the voters want to make sure we
by by the rules of the SEC
Center finance so we don't get
ourselves in trouble so members
will be back here well we're not
done yet but I will be here at
eight thirty to vote on this
bill you know I'll have to leave
money on we will have you out of
here by nine o'clock okay win
lose their drop.
Thank you so much thank you.
That twenty four hour time line
avoid any amendments thank you.
All right really let me and so I
you guys are here so are you
just enter pin ray had on had a
stroke on the twenty seventh.
he was transferred to you and
can is expected to recover I got
that message and they want to me
and now so but we're very
funding the conversation so can
we just keep in your prayers and
and we all know what a great
Senator isn't a great fan the
commune my family my kids so
just keep him in your prayers
maybe reach out to tax messenger
as mother may.
We do that thank you.
Thank you.
You might start the clock for
the secretary of tourism.
You representative madam
secretary.
Mr chair yes I did.
This is supporting senator madam
okay.
Thank you yes Mr chair you
should.
One of those conversations so we
can hear the secretary of five
minutes or less.
But then secretary having
presentation.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and the spirit of
the building where I have
already flipped the presentation
to the very end of my
presentation
which basically just gets down
to the difference between the
LFC budgets and what has been
proposed in the the executive.
And so what we've asked for is
one to have some accounting
realignment which has mostly
been achieved with the LFC is
thank you.
We had an event accelerator
program in the three hundred
that was funded by the LESC so
far thank you.
An online marketplace was which
is going to allow us to help our
artisans and other makers
throughout the state sell their
products online through E.
commerce platform thank you.
You also take into consideration
by adding some additional money
to our media budget for
inflation because we're seeing
inflation in media.
An important note is that in FY
twenty and FY twenty our budget
was ten percent higher.
So with the increase of LFC is
budget this year really it just
takes us to that level of FY
twenty.
We're things become different is
in the campaign seasonality
imply markets with the LFC
budget we're gonna be restricted
to only being able to do six fly
markets we will not be able to
continue with Los Angeles which
is performed very well and is in
this packet for you to review or
ask me later.
With the executive budget allows
for seven point markets
including LA and it allows for
year round advertising which I
believe is a critical for the
recovery of this particular
industry to provide
stabilization for these
businesses that have just gone
through a very difficult time
what's really exciting is
because of that special
appropriation that we did that
get last year we were able to
really go full force and have a
robust marketing campaign a late
spring last year which has
yielded results of bringing
visitors spent back to pre
pandemic levels across the state
and we are also outpacing the
national average.
Also the big differences with
our cooperative market marketing
program this is where we
collaborate with local
communities.
Pre pandemic we had a six
hundred thousand dollar budget
we're we did a one to one match
if we go with the LFC budget
that's what we will have for
communities as a one to one
match with the six hundred
thousand dollar budget the
executive allows for two to one
match at five point five million
dollars this is drastically help
our communities across the state
especially our rural
communities.
And finally for the executive
there is a special appropriation
of twenty million dollars for
event sponsorships.
And then that allow us to to
expand to the bay area.
I just also want to say thank
you to the arpa funding that we
got the fifteen million dollars
greatly appreciate that the
tourism department did ask for a
fifteen million dollar
supplemental for this general
session but that was called back
because of that are but
investment so thank you very
much those funds will be used by
the end of fiscal year it will
fuel our spring campaign which
will drive summer travel.
With that Mr chair members of
the committee I stand for
questions Director Abbey I mean
do you know what they got out of
the house and in and then the
comments on hello she's COVID.
We have a Mike so just on the
second page you can see a
fifteen percent.
This Representative yes could
you please yeah I'm sorry.
On the second page you can see
the LFC recommendation.
in the.
Is a
Fifteen percent increase of the
nature of see at it as shown on
the first page there's a bowl of
HSC at at thirty three thousand
of the LFC recommendation to
address the concern on person so
it's going to get to a fifteen
percent increase which is above
average and then as the
secretary pointed out the
fifteen million dollars special
appropriation from the special
session is extraordinary as
probably as much as we've ever
had in marketing so thank you Mr
chairman for the opportunity to
present for the LFC
recommendation action's from
committee members.
They're done.
Chairman thank you madam
secretary it's good to see you
in in the special session we
allocated fifteen dollars of our
funds that the are those the
only our dollars she received
that fifteen million Mr chair
members the committee yes it is
the only our money and we did
not receive cares Act money
either thank you Mr chairman and
how have you spent that money
and if you haven't how do you
intend to spend that money Mr
chair members of the committee
senator thank you for that
question that money just arrived
in our account now so we can
start we will be using that for
a spring campaign and so it'll
be gone by the end of the fiscal
year it's to fuel summer travel
and we know that other states
have invested significant money
including a hundred one million
dollars to our neighbor Arizona.
And we need to remain
competitive.
Thank you chairman I was
actually one of my questions is
get down to that we talk about
neighboring states that they've
received from for for tourism
you said Arizona's at one or one
what about what about the
remaining
Nate neighboring states what we
invested during COVID recovery
for tourism Mr chair members of
the committee senator there's
been significant investment
across the United States
including Alaska that has ninety
million is a similar economy
with extractions Arizona is a
hundred and one California is
ninety five million Louisiana is
sixty million Florida is seventy
five million Washington is
twelve million wins Wisconsin is
forty seven point seven million
Michigan just allocated twenty
million and have intention of
doing more as well and Virginia
did fifty million and secretary
you want to give us a
populations of those states
unfortunately Senator and Mr
chair members of any I don't
have that in my text message
however I will say that for New
Mexico tourism is our second
fastest growing industry next
oil and gas if you look at the
job growth we have outpaced all
the other industry up until the
pandemic and then our industry
had to go through the entire
experience and have already
recovered there are recovering
at levels at the scene at the
two thousand nineteen so as we
talk about diversifying our
economy we know that this is an
industry that works it's not
some concepts for plan this is
prove it and I believe that that
the small investment and like an
additional nine million dollars
can win big for New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman there's
time on.
I know I was gonna say some of
those states that you listed
have been open for a long time
so I just want to know if you're
you're having to manage the
challenges of having New Mexico
closed and and for that I
apologize this is a great
challenges I'm happy to see that
we're we are slowly reopening my
greatest concern is what are we
doing about like local events
and local tourism so I have the
elephant Butte balloon regatta
that's not that that's a huge in
my community the whole enchilada
fiesta done Dona Ana are any of
those money's going towards
local tourism and and specific
events.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator thank you for
that great question we know that
these events are part of our
culture and our heritage for
communities and their their
their treasures their assets and
it drives tourism we have a
special appropriation in the
executive of twenty million
dollars ten of which is to go to
support events throughout the
state to help not only drive
tourism into our communities but
then also to make sure that
these events can continue
because they did not have a
stronger this last year balloon
fiesta was able to do a pretty
good job they were down about
ten points visitation but we
know that we can support these
events to come back in full
force and support our
communities and protect our
heritage and our culture.
You thank you Mr chairman.
There's more.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary to see if I'm glad
you're here first of all thank
you for the letter on the Rio
Grande trail is very good to see
that that's on your radar that
is such a huge potential project
for New Mexico and then talk
about marquee marketing brand
This incredible in fact so many
members of the legis our
districts and the whole state so
thank you for that I want to ask
you a question
Of the fifteen million that you
got during the special.
How much of that fifteen million
is for cooperative marketing.
So Mister chair members of the
committee senator thank you for
that question right now that
full amount is to do national
marketing to attract people to
New Mexico we have a our current
cooperative budget we did it to
one match for those economies
local economies that were more
economically injured and we did
a one to one for those that did
not have as high of an injury
what we know is that when we put
out the call to our members or
to our partners across the state
they want to work with us in our
cooperative marketing program
because we can actually make
their dollars not only stretch
further because we're matching
it but also because we're buying
media in bulk and so it's it's
like going to Costco verses I'm
going to add to that the more
expensive store and so because
we're buying in bulk we're able
to make our local communities to
the dollars go further.
Thank you it's so yeah I
remember last year when we gave
a good amount of funding and
Then I guess that part of the
bill that hesitant because it
was our fire whatever we were
anyway it is what it is we work
out some great language to where
we were going to suspend thank
you suspend the local match
requirement of the cooperative
program just to help communities
get on their feet and and so
that special small committees
are really may not have the
marketing budget but at that
time anyway now I guess I've
gotten federal funds but could
really help get in the game
rather than just have this
program benefits.
Furthermore I know there is a
desire.
To have the funding to be
distributed regionally by
tourism region for those that
don't know we have regions in
the state.
Speaking Los crucis informants
and others I felt like okay if
you distribute this money
recently that was kind of fairly
distributed so I guess I just
want to know
Is it possible that you would
still look at that language or
and look at that distribution of
cooperative funds.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator we are very
intentional about making sure
that our funds are distributed
in an equitable way including
our rural communities and making
sure that it's has some
geographic diversity that is
really important to us we know
that every single community
through the state have assets to
promote and every single
community benefits from getting
those tax dollars in their
statement visitor spend so
that's a very important
component of how we allocate
those funds but it is also a
competitive grant because we
want to make sure that people
have our communities have skin
in the game so as we move
forward we want to make sure
that we those dollars are used
at the very highest level of
excellence and so we have found
with having some sort of match
we get that skin in the game
however last year when we knew
that a lot of these communities
did not have the largest tax
budgets anymore because
everything was shut down and
they were able to collect that
tax revenue those budgets are
really small and so that's what
we were going to use those are
funds at the time to look at
that.
Thank you and so
The madam secretary Mr chair to
do you actually own the property
the we segregate the budget by
region to ensure that that
they're actually down by region
I understand what you're saying
about competitive grants but
within that Mr chair members of
the committee what we we look at
as we go is a we want to make
sure we do enough outreach to
communities to make sure that
they know about it that they
understand how to apply we
provide technical assistance we
provide consulting on looking at
their marketing strategies to
make sure that we can help them
the best and then making sure
that we have another outreach of
people knowing about our program
from the get go then they apply
we look at those competitive
grants to to really make sure
that the state's dollars are are
going to be is wisely and then
we make sure we look at the
different regions and we look at
making sure that global.
Thank you madam secretary Mr I
know that's just so important
for all this of thank you very
much thank you Mr Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation said a quick
question on Special Olympics on
again on page twelve that you
have here
is I'm concerned that why did
the executive not put this in
there recommend your
recommendation I I'm couple
years ago just completely fell
out of the budget all of a
sudden and then we got it back
in and I'm happy that LESC came
forward with three fifty I think
the normal appropriation was
three hundred but do you know
why that is Mr chair members of
the committee senator thank you
for that question I I don't have
a specific answer I think the
thought process was because of
the special appropriation was so
high for from the executive that
some of the money could be
carved out there however we know
that the HSD recommendation that
we put forward did have a
special appropriation for the
Special Olympics there is the
LFC has a the special
appropriation there's also a
bill the number is escaping me
but there is also a bill that
has another special
appropriation for the Special
Olympics we've been an ongoing
conversations with them about
how they're going to be using
those funds and so that's
reflected in the FY are we did
for that bill thank you Mr
chairman let's hope that this
you know doesn't ever get
dropped off again because I
don't know why it would I think
it's happened a couple programs
on page in a former pro tem
sitting in the audience there is
a very good friend of mine many
is here we got together that
year got it back put back in so
then I don't know David if you
Mr chairman if you want to if
you have this and focus on the
junior bill to do you know if
there was any money put towards
Special Olympics I did last year
but I know I didn't do it this
year and I don't think I I'm of
the opinion that question might
be better for your staff okay
we'll find that out okay.
Current that that thanks thank
you Senator Gonzales.
For.
Many of our.
Jobs.
Are you.
Every of.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
and search or David and just can
you explain to me why the
difference in marketing money
what why were the nine million
dollars my were so different.
Turning this appropriation and I
I think you'll see
recommendation reflected the
fifteen million which is an
extraordinary amount of funds
for tenants and if if the
secretary would put those
amounts for other states on per
capita income I'm sure we'd be
at the top of the list on a per
capita
dollar amount of tourism so I
think those are the factors
predictive tourism is a great
industry for the state and the
LESC support center it's just a
matter of balance but you have
the opportunity just to in the
next week.
Well and I appreciate that madam
secretary have any additional
thoughts or thank you Mr chair
members the committee Senator I
think sometimes that per capita
might not be the best way to
measure how we fund thanks and
when we have a strategy that is
proven nine years consecutively
of record breaking growth and
the state came industry was able
to overcome a pandemic that
happens every hundred years and
we've already reached pre
pandemic numbers for visitor
spend and this is a state that
has been talking about
diversifying its economy for a
little while we know that this
strategy works and it doesn't
cost a lot of money to move the
needle and so I'd greatly
appreciate consideration for the
executive budget and to really
look at tourism is not just
something that we do well but
something that we're proud of as
an industry as a workforce.
Mr Miller I I guess you know I I
look at this is a marketing guy
I look at tourism without
marking dollars kind like
McDonald's of that hamburgers
and.
so so if it sometimes can be
shifted or they've they're
already committed I understand
that but the bottom line is I
think tourism runs on marketing
dollars and and if we're going
to get tourism I think is the
introduction to the state of New
Mexico if we can get in here
than a phone love with it they
can move hearing and this is
here there there and nine times
out of ten I think that's that
certainly that the case and so I
I just the.
Would certainly
I encourage my colleagues to
look at that that figure and see
if there's a way we might
enhance a little bit so that
would be my appreciation so
thank you Mr chairman that's
only half thank you senator Byrd
I can see that right now come to
New Mexico don't forget your
mask.
Thank you Mr I'm going to ask
Miss standard question.
under contract for services you
have a of.
A pretty steady budget but I'd
like to know.
Of I would like to have a list
of your current.
I would like to have the value
of the contract and I'd like to
have the services they provide
if you could send me a
spreadsheet like that I would
appreciate it and I'm sure that
the.
The the chair would like the
committee secretary to have the
same spreadsheet.
Thank you Mr
thank you Mr chairman to see
secretary thanks for the
presentation I really valued
tourism to I know how much it
means to New Mexico I'm just
curious what are the fastest
growing areas of tourism why are
people coming to New Mexico.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator thank you very
much I think the entire nations
looking at inflation right now
to the Senators point however
what we know this at this time
is that leisure travel has gone
way up
group travel business travel.
Is down still a little bit and
the reason being is a lot of
businesses are not asking or
requiring their employees to
travel right now.
What's incredible is that
despite business travel not
being prominent.
Our state still.
Exceeded two thousand nineteen
levels a visitor spend with
leisure and so we have an
incredible opportunity
especially with more people
working remotely throughout the
nation more people wanting to
kind of escape because of just
what we've gone through and what
we continue to enter we're
seeing leisure travel greatly
increase especially the drive
market people driving even
longer it's that spirit of route
sixty six coming back of people
doing long road trips with their
families getting an RV and so
that's what we're really seeing
here in New Mexico even people
driving from LA and New York in
Oklahoma we're seeing a lot of
drive market excellent thank you
for for that response and I was
just reviewing on the
information that you provided me
and particularly enjoying this
photo of the cliff dwellings of
me in line my boys and my
husband took a few years back
but I did want to highlight I'm
not sure who put this together
but it does read that it's the
catwalk national monument but
it's actually the healer cliff
dwellings so thank you for
bringing that to our attention
we will adjust it thank you I
wouldn't want somebody to be
misled and think that they're
visiting that cap lock and it
doesn't look like that thank you
and they get their thank you
madam secretary in the state and
I'm in a real add some money to
make sure correct places and
times that that they have in the
correct madam secretary
when you're talking about an
increase in tourism are you
talking about dollar spent or
number of visitors visitors
spend refers to the number of
dollars spent or visitors Mr
chair members of the committee
visitor spend means money spent
and yes it has something to do
with inflation
that we're seeing that these
hotels are able to drive right
especially with leisure because
people are willing to pay me.
More.
And they're staying longer so
while our visitation our
occupancy hasn't reached pre
pandemic levels visitor spend
has and it's because we're able
to drive right which is great
for our hotels because they're
able to actually realize a
higher profit margin and so as
the work force comes back as
everything starts moving we're
gonna be able to see a higher
occupancy rate and more people
are going to travel as we get
that a pandemic under control.
I think that's something that we
need to clarify it's not
actually increasing the number
of visitors it's increasing the
dollar spent because hotel rooms
before the pandemic you book a
room under a hundred Bucks
somewhere.
Best western Hampden depending
on how early you book and what
the rate was now you you're at a
flat rate everybody is over a
hundred to a hundred twenty
Bucks so the dollar spend is up
in the reserves numbers may not
be down quick places like talus
which Senator Gonzales paying
attention if if you go to San
Diego and you're saying on the
beach in San Diego and the plane
flies by with the banner and it
says forty nine dollar flight to
Health New Mexico I I do believe
that.
But yes you're sitting there
that's what talisman that's with
the ski industry in in the
people that own that resort are
doing on their own right and so
you see that in the state how to
get a forty nine dollar flight
details makes lots of private
charter really in essence but it
is pro transportation some of
those places we need do need to
target I think your numbers the
U. court about other states are
a little bit inflated on the
number of population to the to
the cost
You go to Arizona and other
states and what are the five
major tourist attractions right
Grand Canyon right arches all
that four corners to work that's
that's a different scenario I'm
not saying that we don't need to
do something but I think you
need to be a little bit more
truthful in the way we set up
our numbers saying that
Washington's been twenty million
somebody spent twenty million
Colorado spent so much but the
number of populations in those
states derive the number of of
numbers that you can put into
tourism and Arizona is a TIRS in
the state other than that
because you're going to spring
training football games travel
and so those are tourist
attractions that that we don't
have in the state.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for that I I
think just looking at Alaska
they have less than a million
people that live there.
And they have put quite a bit of
money in is because tourism is
such a big industry for their
state
while the others the other
states mentioned might have a
higher population but I think
that reflects how important
tourism is to their economy up
in Alaska for marketing and
promotion purposes and in
regards to you know this
industry coming back
visitor spend is that pre
pandemic levels and that is
helping our businesses that is
bringing G. R. T. into our local
communities and I think that's
still important point to
emphasize Sir and I'm not gonna
use but the visitor spend is
employment but the number of
people visiting it's not back in
prices more important as amount
of visitors spend because we
have more people visiting your
numbers go up the TIRS comes in
in the rate of New Hope Santa Fe
hotel room is it was pre
pandemic two twenty five and
it's now up to seventy five well
there's a raise or spend
increased is not gaining
anything in the economy it's
game into a little bit for the
hotel you're.
it's not the dollar spent
throughout the walking the
downtown streets I mean the
visitors spend is is not that
that.
I thank you for your
presentation Leji text everybody
on the committee.
And within the capital range of
texting ability.
I think we have we appreciate
that we'll have a discussion
will center will return I'll
spit and.
I just don't know if you wanted
to hear might be story.
Mr Chairman I just wanted to
this is senator Cory and what
Senator Diamond over there I'm
sorry.
This is not matching dresses I
tried to keep track these days
we are back at eight thirty so
we can get that bill out
in the morning house bill two is
on staff this is what came over
from the house we'll be having a
lot of discussions as we move
toward.
And be prepared for a lot of
time in the next week or two and
one plan on Saturday will be
with me thank you would you can.
It
we lucky.
