We'll get started. Center
Compost is on. Zoom right, Get
it. He's getting him on Zoom.
Kelly, You're gonna start us
off, right?
Um, Mr Chair members of the
Committee. Thanks for capital
cuts today. Correct? That's up
to you, Mr Chair. Um, thanks for
having us this morning, smiling.
So, Yeah, I think he's an
appreciate them.
Um I'm Kelly Carr as well. Um,
Capital outlay analyst at the
LFC. I'm joined today by my
colleague Antonio Ortega, who
has recently started working
with us also on Capitol Outlay.
Um, I'm actually gonna start Mr
Chair. Your your staff asked us,
um, towards the end of the day
yesterday to start out by
talking about some big picture.
That capacity issues, so I have
some pretty simple bullets on
this in front of you, Um and Mr
Chair. I do also have some power
point slides that
Illustrate this issue that I
could go through if you'd like a
little more.
In depth than the sheet. So
what's sure? Okay, Um, can you
guys pull up the power point We
talked about
And start on slide two.
Um, So while while they're
working on that, um I will
preface this by saying, Um, Mr
Chair this summer, you asked Lfc
staff to start looking at the
issue of the state's debt
affordability? Um, which has
also been an issue that the
Board of Finance has been
looking at more closely
recently.
Given our dramatic increases in
debt capacity that are related
to
Um, so it's not the sheep, but
the power point.
Um, that are related to
increased oil and gas revenues,
which, uh,
Severance taxes on minerals,
including oil and gas are
traditionally the revenue source
that have supported our capital
program.
Um, And so I'm going to start
out by kind of giving you an
overview of, um some of the
issues and challenges related to
the increase in severance tax
bonding capacity that we're
experiencing right now and then
also some of the potential
solutions to some of these
challenges.
Antonio. I thought the rule was
no tie Fridays.
Mhm.
Mr Chair. I got an extra tie in
my office like to borrow. It was
no type. Just not wear time
Friday. I have about 20 of them
in my office.
Things.
Yeah, We're jeans casual Friday.
Okay. Um, I think I can start by
just kind of talking through
this first slide. Um
So obviously the big increase in
revenue that we have right now
is a big opportunity and we know
where capital is concerned. So,
Senator, we're just going to be
following along on the screen
for this one, and then the
handout that says that capacity
is just basically a simple
overview of the issues that I'm
going to give you a little bit
more of an in depth look at
Um, in this presentation.
Um, on the capital front. We
know that our state has long had
many infrastructure needs that
have been difficult to address
with our limited revenues in the
past. So all of the money we
have available to us now is a
big opportunity for both the
state and local communities. Um,
but we also face a number of
challenges in realizing this
opportunity.
Um, so some of those are
systemic issues that are unique
to our process for financing
capital projects. Um, another
kind of unique to this
particular moment. Um, is the
dramatic increase in
construction costs, which has
continued, uh after the
pandemic, um, and another issue
that we continue to struggle
with is capacity limitations in
both the public and private
sector.
We're capital and construction
is concerned.
Um, Additionally, recent
increases in revenue that are
dedicated to capital projects
because they are tired, tied to
oil and gas.
Um
Yes. If you could stop there.
Um, are likely to be temporary.
And though you all have taken a
number of measures to insulate
the General fund from
volatility, we have not done the
same thing for the capital
program. So where you've kind of
developed backup plan for the
General fund in terms of future
declines in oil and gas revenue,
we really have not even
Started that for the capital
program. So at this point, we
have no backup plan for the
eventual decline in those
revenues that we know is coming.
We just don't really know when
and how much.
Um, Additionally, this big spike
in deck capacity that we have
that I'm gonna sort of show you
some illustrations of
Um, If we feel it fully you to
utilize it. It could have some
on a unintended consequences for
the state that are
Potentially quite significant.
So on this slide, you can see
the Capitol outlay is the
states.
Hmm.
Well, you could see that capital
outlay is the state's most
reliant program on on oil and
gas revenue.
Um, and these slot or these
charts on this page?
Um Yep. If you could stay on
that side
Um, are
Are giving you a couple of
different looks at, um, the
recent increases that we've
experienced, um, So as I
mentioned severance tax bonds,
which are a form of debt issued
against severance tax revenues
that flow into the severance tax
bonding fund.
Um, capacity is based on
estimates from oil and gas,
which are really difficult to
predict and forecast over long
time periods. So currently the
board of Finance projects are
capacity over about a five year
period.
Um, one thing that I've learned
in this process of trying to
look at how this program is
working and think about
potential changes and kind of
try to make some calculations
about you know what kind of
money could be saved over what
time period If we do change how
we calculate capacity is that
even over that fine even over
that five times, five year time
period, you know, once you get
out to your
45 even potentially year three.
It's a little bit of guesswork
just because these revenue
sources are so volatile.
Um, you can see on the chart on
the left here.
Uh, that that we use general
funds last year. And you all are
looking at doing that again this
year for capital. Um, our
ability to use General Fund for
the capital program has
historically been very limited.
We've only done it twice in the
past, and the first time was in
2019. So this is really quite a
new thing. Uh and usually, the
severance tax bonds have been
the source that we've really
relied on.
Um, they are also the only
dedicated revenue source that we
have for capital.
If you could go to the next
slide.
Um, I am gonna preface some of
this by saying that, um
Uh, our chief economist and I
have been working on this
together, and some of these
slides are really more his
bailiwick. So I can talk to you
about it, but I'm gonna try not
to get too over my skis. Um,
because it's a little bit more
his area of expertise, and this
slide is work that is he has
done.
Um, to identify that our states
bond ratings are in the bottom
20% nationally and you can see
in the bullet points on the
right of those slides. Um, what
kind of body What bonding
reading. Bond rating agencies
are looking at when they're
making these ratings and some
issues that they might be
flagging for us.
Um, which include high levels of
debt and high levels of revenue
volatility.
Feel good in the next slide.
Um, so this chart is giving you
a
I think pretty
Good picture, um, of how our
debt could really balloon over
the next few years. If we do
follow you utilize it.
Um and again if we were to go
that route, it could jeopardize
the state's bond ratings because
the rating agencies are looking
at this, as, um, potentially the
state is essentially taking out
too much debt.
Uh huh. And the green the green
portion of this graph is showing
you what's mainly driving that
So one of the concerns with the
level of debt capacity that's
available to the state right now
is that if we fully utilize it,
it could put our current bond
ratings at risk.
And I'm going to explain a
little bit more. Why in the next
slide Helpful. Thank you.
Um
Alright. So, uh, one of the
measures that the rating
Um, And then you can see, um,
potential debt per sorry debt to
income ratios for our state in
the lines on the top.
So you can see that New Mexico
relative to other states, um,
could have quite a high debt
burden. Um And so, senator, to
your question, Um, these are the
sort of things that the rating
agencies are looking at when
they're making these
determinations.
If you go to the next slide.
So, um, Now I'm going to get
into kind of a separate but
related problem that I spoke to
at the beginning, and that's not
the state has no long term
backup plan for funding capital
projects. Um as severance tax
revenues do decline in the
future.
So in the chart on this slide,
um, you can see what are
economists have put together? Um
in terms of our potential
maximum bonding and debt service
capacity over time under several
different production scenarios.
Ah, a couple takeaways from this
chart. Are that again? A decline
is coming under any scenario and
sort of the question is when how
much and how high does the
capacity get before that
happens? You can also sort of
see that there is a lot of
uncertainty here.
Between these low production,
high production and baseline
scenarios.
So what does this mean for our
capital program? Um, first
Given that we have no backup
plan for this, Um one of these
revenues do decline. It will
make it difficult for the state
to finance new capital projects
and also potentially to protect
the assets that we already have.
Um The other problem is that
again if we don't sort of
develop another plan, um, the
most likely replacement source
for severance taxes. Severance
tax revenue is the General fund.
Um, why this is problematic is
that the General fund could come
under pressure for being a
replacement source for capital.
At the same time that it is
facing its own headwinds from
declining oil and gas revenues.
Um and you know the effect that
that has on the recurring
budgets that the general fund
primarily funds.
So if I can have you now, skip
ahead to slides 15.
Keep going, Okay, Stop right
there.
All right. Um, So what do we do
about this? Um, one option is to
reduce, uh, the annual maximum
debt capacity that is available
on an annual basis and consider
redirecting the savings.
So if we set annual bonnet
capacity, um, which is set by
statute at a lower level than is
currently allowed, we could do
that with several goals in mind.
Um, one would be to extend the
overall life of the bonding
program with the revenues that
we expect will be available to
support it.
Um, another goal would be to
protect the state's bond
ratings.
And when I talked about
redirecting savings
Um, If we did this, we would
generate savings kind of similar
to similar to how we're doing it
now by using cash for capital
and then directing that savings
into the severance tax permanent
fund from the avoided debt. Um,
if we sort of bring down the
limit on bonding capacity, we
would be saving money in the
near term.
That could be redirected to a
new capital reserve that you all
could consider creating.
Um you all are familiar with
kind of the approach that we
have generally one of the big
approaches we've taken to
insulating the General fund from
revenue volatility is to create
trust funds.
Um, so we've kind of been
looking at that for the capital
program. The reason it's a
little bit difficult is because
the size of the trust fund for
just a trust fund on its own to
be a true replacement source for
capital. It would need to be
really big.
Um, So you know, we've been
thinking on the on the scale of
like a $10 billion fund, at
least, um, even with revenues we
have right now it's going to be
hard to just quickly build a 10
$10 billion fund. Um, Still, we
think, sort of moving in this
direction of creating kind of a
long term savings and spending
account for capital.
Um, would be positive even if
it's not a total solution to the
program. Um, and the idea is
that that fund would be able to
grow over time and provide an
annual distribution that would
be available for you all to
appropriate to capital projects,
potentially much as you do now,
just from a sort of different
source.
You could go to the next slide.
I will wrap up this portion
Um, so this is showing you just
a little more detail on the idea
of creating a capital reserve
and the kinds of things that
could support. The first is
emergency debt coverage if that
were ever needed. The second is
cash financing for capital
priorities that would be
determined by the Legislature
and could also be specified in
statute.
And just an example of that. Is
that this kind of fund could
support appropriations for
things like planning, design and
small projects, which could help
the state transition to kind of
more of a normal bonding program
or sorry more of a normal
capital program where we use
cash for smaller stuff and for
project development and debt is
saved for larger projects.
Um, and construction ready
things.
So that's all I've got on that.
Would you like to have any
discussion of those issues?
Next slide.
Oops.
They can't text me because they
haven't blocked. Um
Um
You said Kelly. We could be at a
crossroads, right?
And you can scroll down. I think
that was slide eight or nine or
Work. Explain that to me again.
How much slide number because
you shouldn't We're at a
crossroads where
Mr Chair. Do you mean just sort
of in our overall thinking about
how we do this?
Um
Yeah. So I think
You know, we're as a state.
We're in a position that we've
never been in before, right?
Um, And interestingly you know,
you would sort of think that
having all of this money
available to us would only be a
good thing. Um, but it does come
with some unexpected challenges
and some sort of
I guess on obvious consequences.
Um, one of the things it does
provide you all with an
opportunity for is to kind of
rethink. Um, how we've
traditionally done things,
including our capital finance
and bonding program.
Um, in a way that both could
enable us to continue to
support the immediate needs the
state has at significant levels
and plan for the future so that
we continue to have funding
available for us for the state
and local communities over the
long term, Um, to continue
making these investments which
You know, they're kind of
they're they're non recurring
budget. They're not recurring
things in the budget, but also
they never go away. Um, there's
always going to be a need to
continue investing in the things
we've already built. Um, and to
make new investments that meet
future needs for the state.
I'm still not I I understand
that crossroads, right?
And so like if we didn't we
don't bond this year, which
hopefully we're not going to
bond
I think our savings for the
payment is 80 million a year
Correct And you're saying if we
create this capital reserve
account with the payments that
would go for bonding.
Create this reserve account for
capital at 80 million a year.
Um, Mr Chair? Not necessarily.
Um, so we are. We are working
right now to, um, get some more
specific numbers for you on
potential savings that could be
available, um, for a new capital
fund tied to kind of a specific
approach to this that we've just
kind of nailed down with the
board of finances being a good
way to do this that we both
agree on.
Um, so it's not only that amount
essentially.
You know that that sort of
savings that you're generating
now from not bonding at all is
one source of potential seed
funding for this kind of new
Capital Reserve fund.
Um, another would be sort of
savings you generate.
All the time going forward just
by again Kind of ratcheting down
through statute that maximum
level of long term bonding
capacity that is available every
year.
And so that would do a couple of
things. It's you know, it's
essentially right now. It could.
What we're looking at doing is
taking it from kind of going
like this over the time over
time, and then dropping about
here to being more steady and
predictable and extending
farther into the future, and
then what you're doing in the
near term is your kind of
capturing some savings from one
that new line would be here.
And at the old levels, you know,
would be up here and those
savings could be redirected to
that reserve fund.
Um
Another point that I'd like to
make about this is you know
we've we've also been looking at
a way to do that. That would
sort of preserve significant
levels of funding for capital
available right now, and we
think we can do both of those
things.
Um And so you know, one of the
ways that we're able to do that
is going to your point about
sponge bonds. Um, are bonding
program right now has sort of
two components. One is the long
term debt component, and one is
that kind of cash component.
Um and so that would continue to
be available as a source of
capital funding. Um, as well as
potentially at least near term,
some amount of general fund
So
If I go over this again
So at what point are we hit the
crossroads to make longevity?
Are we there today?
Is this the move we need to make
now to keep capital
Sustaining or is, um Mr Chair,
You know, I think both is he and
I agree that you know the sooner
the better.
So is that today?
Um, I think yes.
You're the expert. I mean you
and Linda Kehoe. Yes, The answer
is yes. Okay.
And then so
We either have to and we have to
do that Statutorily. So then
statutorily. What is is a border
finance and you agreeing on them
of what our bonding capacity
should be.
Um, Mr Chair generally, um and I
would like, if you guys would
like is he and I, both and
potentially with the board of
Finance to come back and talk
about this in more detail.
Um, we're happy to do that. Um,
but generally we've kind of been
looking at tying the capacity
more closely to, uh, those debt
to income ratios that are
important for the bond rating.
So we asked the board to find
it. She may maybe on, but we're
having trouble with our system.
And so maybe we come back and
have that hearing and then do
you have a bill drafted Or are
we looking at drafting a bill or
Mr Cherry s? We're working on it
right now. Um and yeah, I think
it'd be great to come back and
have a discussion.
Um, on this again and is he
couldn't be there here this
morning because Craig is meeting
but he would love to be here to
talk with you about this as
well. Okay, Senator, Rob
biggies.
Thank you. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. Thanks for your work
as always. And of course. Yeah,
it seems from the discussions
we've had before that since the
bonding capacity currently this
year is approximately 666.
million is what I have seen on
the on the paperwork we looked
at. It seems like approximately
300 to 350 million would be the
maximum weekend.
Um, engage in debt service
before we exceed the national
debt to ratio as right now, the
recommendation we had from Lfc,
um is approximately 260 year
bonds, for example. I'm talking
about that. And so we're within
the the amount that likely will
be about the right amount.
To go much more above that, even
closer to the 300 million more
in jeopardy because these are
all so I would think probably
50. But that's something we will
be discussing. But thank you so
much for that. And then one
other thing is that talking
about
I think creating a captain
certainly work on. But let's
talk for a moment about the bill
that I sponsored, will be
sponsoring it again this year.
Hopefully, it is merely to
Say the amount that we are
saving necessary. Germanos
mentioned earlier from not
issuing bonds, and last year it
was $92 million per year that we
would be saving if we use
General fund instead of
severance tax dollars. So if you
do that, over one decade, we're
almost at a billion dollar
happens there. It goes much
farther than that.
Because what happens is that
every year that it builds up
with the savings. It's
increasing the amount that we
would get in return into the
general fund will continue
recurring into the General fund.
so this savings goes quite far
this year alone. We are looking
at possibly
Um
Saving approximately under the
budget, but we're looking at
possibly saving about 80
million, um and still moving
target, But we're hoping that
minimum at least that if we can
save that we're still going to
be close to the 1 billion almost
if there's a rate of return into
the general fund automatically
because we have a formula, and I
think it's 4.17.
Percent that goes back into the
general fund from the savings of
this money that we would do
that. So thank you. Mr Chairman
just wanted to make sure Kelly I
don't know if you wanted to
comment on that, or just leave
it for discussion. Mr. Chair,
Senator Rodriguez? Yes.
Everything you said, is correct.
Um, and you know the long term
benefit of that savings going
into the permanent fund is that
it's building that up in
generating more money over time
to the General fund.
Um
I was going to say one thing.
And then I just, uh oh. Okay.
The other point I was going to
make it sort of another thing
Where, Considering, as we look
at all of this is when we're
thinking about potential savings
that could go into a new capital
reserve. Um, we're trying to do
that without having any impact
on what we're currently
expecting to flow into the
General fund.
Um, you know, according to the
projections that is he and his
colleagues do for the long term
growth of the General fund, So
you know, we're looking at
creating this new account
without sort of harming the
benefits were already
Thinking about and planning for
to the general fund, um, from
the severance tax permanent
fund.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
When I first heard of, I'm gonna
get prettier elementary here
because
You have
Gone a long ways out there.
So
We are. When I first heard about
bonding, it was bonding for
highways.
And the highways. The theory was
We only have
This much money coming in a
year.
And if we're going to
Try to build 10 miles of highway
with that.
Before we get the whole highway
built.
The first part four out, so if
we would bond
A multiple year deal. We could
have a big bunch of money put
together and build this highway.
And that way it would all be
built at the same time. Now,
that's when I think of bonding.
That's my mentality is that
we've got a source of income
coming in to make a mortgage
payment.
On that bond.
That we sold
Okay with that in mind.
When when we talk about savings
we talk about $80 million
savings if we do not issue
bonds.
Okay?
I'm thinking about the recurring
expense.
Of all the bonds we have out
there right now.
We have to
Hmm. We've set aside so much of
this.
Revenue right now.
At that we can't spend again
because it's it's tied up in
bonds.
So
To make it simple.
Say that we have $100 revenue
coming in.
And we've tied up $50.
In that that payment every year.
So if we if this revenue stream
keeps coming in
$100 a year Revenue stream.
Right now, for the next site, 10
years we've got $50 spoken for
when you talk about the 80
million
You're talking about.
80 million per year savings
because we didn't sell that
Bond, or do you talking about
Over the length of the bond.
We're gonna save 80 million
Um, Mr Chair Senator would so
that number is what would have
supported like the revenue that
you know, would have been
reserved in the bonding fund for
paying the debt over 10 years,
Should we have utilized all of
our severance tax bonding
capacity this year, So it's a 10
year. Savings is not a one year
savings.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator Woods.
That's right.
Okay. That's what was confusing
me a little bit because I'm
thinking about a mortgage
payment.
Is what I'm thinking of you. So
you're proposing.
To make a
A new trust fund, so to speak.
And this trust fund.
Would be designated for capital.
And if we and if once we
Build this fund up and then
We will no longer
I guess the question I have. So
we're talking about doing that.
Is that going to be for bonding
again? Or is it going to be for
cash?
Capital.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator Woods.
That's an interesting question.
Um, we've been talking about it
being for cash capital.
Um, but I don't know that it
couldn't be for bonding.
But I don't want to tell you.
Yes or no? Because I don't
really know.
We can follow. We can follow up
with you on that, but it's not
something that's actually coming
up in this discussion yet, so
it's a good question.
We always have to have
Instant gratification. It seemed
like
We cannot. We don't want to put
away for the future. We want to
spend it today. And if you're a
politician
That's what gets your vote. What
did I bring home? What's the
bacon?
And so
I'm in agreement with you.
That any future of the state of
New Mexico
You got
All them guys revenue.
That one group says We need to
kill that oil and gas.
We're killing the planet.
And yet
We're doing all these capital
improvements with that.
Along with many other things.
So
I can see why, uh,
Uh, bond purchaser.
My scratch his head a little
bit.
Saying, You know, it's how far
Are these guys gonna go?
Because the only source of
revenue to pay for the bonds
Is exact thing that they want to
do away with.
You know many times we talk
about and
This goes into taxing all
around, Mr Chair. I'm sorry I
left you out of this discussion.
But we we come across this this
uh, this problem. I see what
you're trying to do.
And
You know, and I agree it would
be a great idea.
And I know that
We've set up many funds, you
know, water transport funds and
colonias funds and
And, uh,
Indian funds. Uh
Two.
Out of this severance tax money
that comes in and it just that
percent that goes off and I
believe there's a housing piece
of that, too. Uh, financing.
Part of that comes out of that.
So what you're talking about
creating is another percent to
come off, then.
Is that the way this is going to
be financed? Um, Mr Chair,
Senator Woods. I would like to
sort of like, leave the specific
discussion of the mechanisms
until we can come back, Um, with
a bill and some hard numbers on
What would result from this
scenario?
Um, but we're we're essentially
talking about
Um, redirecting some savings
from the program and we've
drizzly. We've looked at, like a
number of different potential
ways to do this.
Um and getting started on the
path towards sort of
thematically the same thing that
you all have been working on
with the General fund in terms
of reducing volatility and
providing more certainty going
into the future. Um, that
revenues will be available for
these purposes. Um, I do want to
draw sort of a specific contrast
with this idea versus that your
mark programs and how they
currently work for you.
Um, which is that we are not
looking at?
Saving this money and giving
somebody else authority to
distribute it. Um, these funds
in this reserve should you
decide you want to create it,
um, would continue to be
available to the Legislature to
appropriate
So we're talking concept today.
Is what you're talking about.
And the concept is because
We're going to see what one time
that
We're not gonna be able to
extend any capital.
Project money because the
bonding capacity is tied up.
We've got
We've got these mortgage
payments already out there that
we have to make so we can't make
any future payments. Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods? Yes. And
additionally that there is, um
fewer, potentially at some
point, much fewer new revenues
flowing into the bonding fund.
Um and you know, I do want to
say like we should be ready very
soon to come back and talk with
you about, um
More specifics of a proposal,
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
We're gonna
Kind of wrap up, but we're going
to bring the board to finance
She couldn't come today.
And so we'll bring you back with
the board of Finance and then at
some point
We're gonna get the controller
in here, too.
Make sure that things are
correct. So
Uh, we're gonna move on to the
outstanding capital.
You're starting. Correct, Mr.
Chair. I'm starting and then
I'll hand it over to him.
Okay for a meeting, So, okay,
So, um, can you pull up this
outstanding capital funds sheet
and you all have this in front
of you and can follow along
Um So, Mr Chair, you asked us to
come before you and talk about
outstanding capital funds and
also to produce a report.
Um, of projects with balances of
$5 million or more, Um, Antonio
will take you through that
report. And I do just want to
point out that, um, there are a
number of agency representatives
who have come today A and that
can answer questions, either
about specific projects you see
on the sheet or kind of general
things they're seeing with their
projects. Whatever is your
pleasure.
So big picture at the end of the
second quarter of FY 24
outstanding capital outlay bound
balances totaled an estimated
$4.7 billion across roughly 5000
active projects in the state,
And in the second bullet on this
brief, you can see how those
funds breakdown between projects
authored by the Legislature.
The severance tax Bond year
Severance tax bond earmark
programs, Uh, supplemental
severance text bonds for public
schools, So that's essentially
the outstanding balance in the
public School Capital Outlay
Fund as well as, um, some major
special appropriations to
capital projects that we've been
tracking for the last couple of
years.
And in table one on this page,
you can see how appropriations
and balances breakdown between
our major categories of
legislative capital
appropriations, So those are
local projects project sponsored
by the House, the Senate and the
governor through the local
portion of the capital Outlay
Bill.
Statewide projects. Um, those
are the projects funded through
the frameworks we discussed
earlier this week for state
agencies, higher education and
the judiciary.
Um, higher edge. Well, actually,
sorry, I should say higher
education projects are broken
out separately here under a G D
and then reauthorized projects.
Uh, and table two. You can also
see a big picture of outstanding
balances in the severance tax
earmarked programs. Um, the ones
that we currently track are the
Water Trust board, Colonials
Infrastructure Fund and tribal
infrastructure fund And as
Senator Woods mentioned, um we
do have a new earmarked program.
Now, which is flowing money to
the housing Trust fund.
Also kind of wanted to touch on
a couple more big picture issues
in the capital landscape. The
first is construction costs. Um
some of you have already heard a
lot about this. This interim
Um, but it's important to keep
in mind as you receive new
requests for capital outlay this
year. Um, construction costs
remain very, very high and also
volatile. Um, we have seen, I
think you know everyone's kind
of familiar with the big spike
and costs that we saw during
covid. Interestingly, that we
expected some of that to kind of
level out
Um we have seen another really
dramatic increase in
construction costs just over the
past year. Um some public school
projects have seen their
estimated costs double or nearly
double and just a one year
period, and we've seen similarly
dramatic cost increases for
higher ed projects.
You'll turn to page two.
Um, you know, this is just kind
of something to keep in mind.
Um, given that you all are
likely to receive billions of
dollars in additional capital
outlay requests in 2024 in a
very challenging environment to
actually build things,
particularly when, uh, full
funding is not available to
projects.
In the chart on this page. You
can see that increased capital
appropriations from the state
are one source of increased
demand. Um, what we've sort of
been able to, um, figure out as
we've looked at construction
costs more closely over this
interim
Is that the increases we're
seeing now are driven much less
by increases in material costs
or supply chain issues, the kind
of things that we were seeing
during Covid and much more by
just a very, very high level of
demand for construction, both in
our state and nationally, um
It's actually from what we can
tell in New Mexico. Um the
demand is especially high in the
private sector and also high in
the public sector, but the
public sector growth in sort of
funding for construction is
really dwarfed by the growth
that, um
We have seen in the private
market.
Um, But of course, these things
are interacting with each other,
interacting with each other.
And, um again, you know, and a
lot of ways. That's a good thing
that big growth in private
sector construction demand is
indicating an increase in
economic activity in our state.
Um, but it is also making it
challenging for us to fund and
complete capital projects.
Despite all the resources that
we have available to us right
now.
Um, and the next set of bullets
under project developments,
vetting and funding.
Um, one of the big things that
we're recommending that you all
think about as you receive new
Capital outlay requests is
prioritizing funding for
completion of existing projects
before starting new projects in
the same local area. Um, and so,
you know, one question you could
be put into your communities.
Should you be interested in
taking this approach?
Is whether they have funding
shortfalls for projects that
they've already developed and
already secured some funding for
that your capital appropriations
might be able to make whole with
the idea of we're trying to get
things done before we start new
things.
Um, I also wanted to flag for
you that the number of
reauthorized projects in 2023
doubled over the previous year,
And you may be looking at a
similar pattern this year. Just
given some of the challenges I
have spoken to
Um And given the growing backlog
of projects you may also want to
think about
Putting some boundaries around
new author Preauthorizations.
Um, for instance, not
reauthorizing small amounts, um,
for purposes outside of the
original scope of the project.
Ah, a couple other things. I
just wanted to touch on real
briefly, Um, we have been
working with DFA over the
interim to refine a proposal for
a centralized infrastructure
division within D F A, um, that
would be focused on both
streamlining Administration of
state funds on the agency side
and providing enhanced levels of
local support for project
development.
Um, for identifying and securing
financing from various sources
and for completing projects. Um,
for communities that need it, so
they wouldn't have to utilize
those resources. But we're
trying to, um, build up a little
bit more of a robust support
system for those that might want
to need it again with the goal
of not just spending the money
that you all appropriate to
capital projects.
But ensuring that those projects
actually get done at the end of
the day and hopefully in an
expeditious manner.
Um, another thing that we've
been talking about with lfc this
interim, um, that would be for
your consideration for 2025 and
beyond, is considering setting
an earlier deadline for local
capital outlay requests and
using any increase in
legislative staffing that you
all might consider bringing on,
um, to provide some level of
vetting for legislative
appropriations to local
entities.
Uh, if you'll turn to page
three.
Um, this kind of approach could
allow you all to do things like
separate appropriations for
planning and design from funding
for construction and support any
number of targeted initiatives
that the body as a whole might
want to consider or individual
chambers. Um, it was it would
allow also allow you to do
things like in the current
construction market. I just
discussed
Give you a little more time to
know what your requests are and
go through a process of say, you
know, trying to identify what
those projects are that are
requesting funding from you that
do have other funding available
and just need a little extra to
really get them over the hump,
So it would give you kind of
more time to actually implement
recommendations that we often
bring to you like prioritizing
existing projects over a nuance.
Uh, which is is pretty difficult
to do under the very rapid fire
system with little support that
you all
Ah have to make your decisions
and now
Um, finally, before we move on
to the report, I wanted to flag
another issue for you having to
do with General fund funding of
capital projects. Um, so as you
all know the capital bill that
you passed last year was funded
entirely with General Fund and
some other state funds and for
several years, the capital bill
has included a provision that
requires any projects funded
with general funds.
To encumber 5% of the
appropriation within the first
fiscal year.
Um
So I have provided you on the
next sheet in this hand out with
a list of 106 projects from
2023 that were considered
authorized, but on issued, um as
of early this month.
So I providing this list to you.
Um, because any projects that
appear on this list will have
Ah, very high level of
difficulty in meeting that 5%
threshold, um and would be at
high risk of reversion. Um
Projects appear on this list for
the same reason that they appear
on any authorized but an issued
list that we have for severance
tax bonds. Um, it could be that
they're not audit compliant that
they did not return readiness
Questionnaires. Uh, capital out
like grantees are required to
fill out, um, before the money
can be made available to them,
and the grant agreements issued.
Um or that they did submit those
readiness questionnaires. Uh,
but they indicated they were not
ready to proceed. Projects may
also be flagged for things like
anti donation issues. Um, and if
you all are interested in
discussing this issue more, um,
I'm sure Mr Billingsley can
provide some additional details
on
Challenges they see being
forthcoming in, um, getting
projects that might not be on
this list to also meet that 5%
encumbrance.
Requirement. Um and as we get
into additional discussion about
standing funds, I just wanted
to, uh, kind of flag another the
final sheet that's in this brief
and that is a high level summary
of outstanding capital funds by
administrative agency.
Um, you can see and kind of
I would say that top, um
Nine.
Agencies identified on this
list, Um, where the majority of
capital appropriations tend to
flow and where the majority of,
uh local capital appropriations
in particular flow. So d F A is
at the top of that list because
they administer the majority of
those appropriations.
Um, you'll you'll also be seeing
a large number of local
appropriate appropriations
showing up in the numbers you
see for the Department of
Transportation, Indian Affairs,
the Environment Department and
the Public Education Department.
Um with that, Mr Chair, I am
going to, um, turn this over to
Antonio to take you through.
The report We produced on
Capitol outlay appropriations
with balances of $5 million and
more. Um, I just wanna know one
thing as we get into that, um,
that I think as many of you
know, the state has been
transitioning to a new reporting
system for capital projects that
has come with a number of
hiccups, Uh, and road bumps as
many new system implementation
data system implementations do
So you will see one column on
this.
Report for Project phase that
says not reported for all of all
of the projects appearing on
this report, even though many of
them have done some reporting
into the new system, which
you'll see in the next field. Um
so I just wanted to say that,
you know, we think that is
likely the result of this
transition to the new reporting
system where, um, hopefully
those kind of things will be
filled in again over time.
Ah, and now I will give it to
Antonio. Antonio. Okay, let me
ask you one thing such as I
gotta. I gotta run to another
meeting. Um, on these. This list
of the 5% that are ineligible,
right?
This is the total people that
didn't report the 5% in some
way, shape or form or Aaron
eligible because they don't
qualify anti donation.
Yeah. Mr. Chair the ladder. So,
um, these are projects that were
flagging for you because we all
think we think it will be very
difficult, if not impossible for
them to meet the 5% encumbrance
requirement, So this means the
agencies have not budgeted these
funds because, um, projects for
the reasons you mentioned were
essentially not deemed eligible
in the process they always go
through for
Deeming eligibility before funds
get budgeted, and, uh, Grant
agreements cannot be issued to
them yet, which means they can't
proceed with accessing their
funding. Um, and doing things
like encumbering any of it.
So if if they're marked
ineligible, they're just not
going to be eligible, no matter
what and the ones that are
blank, right?
Or not ready? 5% 5% deadline
they could be eligible.
So, Mr Chair? Yes. And, uh so
I'm going to define these
reasons. And then Wesley can
correct me. If I got any of them
wrong. You're dying to jump up
there in that chair. Yes,
answer.
What is e O mean? Mr Chairman,
That means Executive order.
Okay, so the executive order
2013 dash years He was six with
the audit role. Um, and to
answer your question, Mr Chair,
you know if they're on this
list, and they're marked as CEO
ineligible, they do have a
chance of submitting their audit
getting their auditors, state
auditor's office and possibly
getting on the compliance list
to be able to receive their
grant.
Still gonna give them short
period of time. But we're only
six months away from June 30th
so they need to that quickly if
they're going to do that, some
of the ones on here might
already be doing that. And so
we'll continue to look at these
and and get them. Get them
going. If if they are compliant,
we'll get them budgeted and try
to issue the grant agreements
for those as quickly as
possible. And the EO order
you're talking about is that the
audits have to be completely
have to be completed and turned
into the state auditor's office.
Correct. That's
The EU well ineligible.
Correct.
Whichever they're gonna take
Whichever takeover. Thank you.
Yes, Thank you, Wesley. And when
it says not ready, Jarrod, That
means that they have submitted
their questionnaire to our
office and that they stated in
the questionnaire that they
would not be able to proceed
before June 30th with their
project.
I see. So in that case, then it
could be reauthorized to extend
the deadline of the project. For
example, the recovery center in
Santa Fe very important for
substance abuse and behavioral
health issues have been working
on forever and I and we've
literally have, um, appropriated
some significant funding into
that program.
And so we want to make sure they
don't lose the money. They have
requested an extension of their,
um at the termination date. They
should bill so in that case when
it says not ready if they can't
do it, but otherwise by that
specific date, But Madam chair,
I'm not sure I can answer that
question legally, We're not sure
if that would circumvent the 5%
encumbered by June. 30th
requirement. We are working with
Legislative Council Services and
R D.
FIFA council.
To to kind of work through those
issues, but we recommend them at
least do it and try and we'll
see where that goes than India
and this is too important
considering issues substance
abuse issues that still do it
correctly, Of course, But let me
just mention something that, um
we don't know if that would
circumvent, for example, the
requirement.
Well, I think we do because we
wouldn't know that because when
we reauthorize something, it's a
new law.
Then it becomes a new statute.
New law. New appropriation. It
starts all over from that
deadline that we set and so as a
result of that these funds
should be okay, but but let's
look only because these not only
I'm not only referring to that
there's several in here in other
parts of the state that I'm
looking at that I know we have
been really important.
To proceed, but let's put it
this way.
Even considering the problems
that we have with a backlog of
the Capitol outlay projects that
are still there, in a balance
haven't been finalized.
I still think
That
You know, there are a lot of
factors within this that we have
discussed that contribute to
having the literacy Covid hit
back then everything is stalled.
Employee the shortage of
employees.
Didn't help any because
departments couldn't get their
work done accordingly. We're now
trying to build that back up and
continue. Um
So I think that another. Another
point here is that perhaps some
of these organizations that
we're talking about, Um, you
know, maybe
We don't know exactly. They may
be in situations that we don't
fully understand. Always
proposed was called the
Clearinghouse to help
Whether it's a member. We talked
about that Kelly Clearinghouse
to help these organizations to
navigate, help them navigate
through the system, So they know
who to come to. We have a very
UN friendly user system for the
public and so that hopefully we
can get there someday. But one
final thing I wanted to say is
that in doing all of this, and I
thank you because you you do
want to say enough.
But I think we need to have the
mentality that we need to look
for ways.
To help
In this instead of ways.
That not too instead of ways to
put things aside and say, Well,
they don't They're not quite
ready. So let's put that aside
or they're they're not
ineligible and or they're
ineligible and we can't do it.
You know, because last time we
spoke it was maybe a year ago or
so, Wesley. We talked. We had a
list like this that was
presented and the word
ineligible.
When we asked, What does that
mean?
It was. It didn't seem to be an
accurate word. People and
organizations were not
ineligible. They were probably
in the process of finalizing
some remember that discussion,
So thank you for for this now
it's getting better every day.
It's not an easy system. But we
are so grateful that you are on
it.
Your perseverance on this. Thank
you. So that's all I wanted to
just say. Um so we'll see you on
the reauthorization. Go from
there, and we've got Senator
Woods and then we have Senator
Burke. Did you have a question,
Senator?
Oh, you I didn't notice you.
Okay, Center, Woods and center
Diamond. Okay, Thank you. Go
ahead.
Thank you, madam Chair.
The question I have is is on
that 5% and sometimes how late
These grand agreements come out.
And
It's still required to
Get that 5%.
Encumbered.
Before there's two different.
There's a deadline, but there's
not a deadline to get the grant
agreement out.
Um
Do we need
Make a lot to say the grant
agreements got to come out.
So quickly after
The appropriation is made.
You see what I'm getting at
Madame Chair. Madam Chair,
Senator Woods. Um, we could it
would be quite complicated. Um,
unless we took out some of the
processes we have in place,
which would be first the
questionnaire process that does
take time. And it is necessary,
especially with bonding projects
with General fund, maybe a
little less, but it's still good
to know what's going on with
those projects, so we know that
we need to budget those are not
so that takes some time takes a
couple of months. Um then
there's the budget process.
Assess which also takes a little
bit of time.
Getting the information from the
agencies to budget those
projects with those agencies. Um
so we're looking at a good
sometimes 4 to 5 months after
the appropriation is made, Um
and so that does take time that
that does kind of hamper getting
out Some of these grant
agreements timely. Um, we do
hope to have all grant
agreements out. That can be out.
Um, you know, within
A couple of months after July
1st hits, That's our goal.
Obviously, that doesn't always
happen with every state agency.
Um, it didn't even happen with
us this year. There were some
things that fell through the
cracks were going to tighten
some of those things up, but,
um some of the projects that are
not ready to go that did not get
their audits done timely or
we're not ready to proceed with
the project. Those ones still
have to wait until they are
ready to proceed until they had
their audits in so
Um, when we put law language in
the bill that states that they
have to have 5% encumbered by
one year, it's hard to do that
with these grant agreements that
don't go out until December,
January or April. Even so, I
agree with you. I think that's
something that we can look at.
But just keep all those other
factors in mind when we're
looking at that. And and Madam
chair. What I'm getting at is
I understand the amount of hoops
that you have to jump through.
And we're wanting you to jump
through those hoops because we
want that money to go out to
someone that's ready to use it.
But
Would it might not make more
sense.
To tie the 5% encumbrance to
when you received the grant
agreement.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods.
Absolutely. That's something
that Callie and I have
discussed, Um, trying to find a
way to put language into the
bill to allow for that, Um, we
could do that, Um
By doing that it's going to be
different for every grant so it
will have to track it will have
to have a better tracking
system, which is a better
overall capitalist system, which
we're working on as well. So
yes, that would be that would be
something that we could
definitely look at doing well,
that seems like to me that, uh
I agree.
It's a hell of a
Problem to track
But
It's more of a fair system.
Because
When you start trying to
encumber something.
Your your your
You've got to send that request
for proposals. She got to do
different things thinking to do
comply.
And with the as, as was stated
earlier with the total overload
of our system right now.
Of demand. There's not there's
not a whole lot of reason for
someone to get back to you
timely.
To even encumber the 5% so
Maybe we need to think about
that a little bit in there.
I know that we want to
Move these projects on
I understand that I understand
the reason.
We've got a rule for 5%. We want
to move this project on. We
don't want people sitting on the
money and doing nothing so great
idea to say you've got to come
back.
But the timetable
It's really screwy.
For someone getting a late You
know, I get as many calls on
Why? Where's my agreement?
Where's my agreement?
You know, And I've called you
guys and
You. You say we're working on
it. Oh, understood, But I've got
my I've got my point across.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
madam. Sure. Could I make one
point response to your and
senator was questions? Um, I
just want to say that, you know,
I think that we really want to
avoid like a mass
reauthorization of 2023
projects.
Um, to try to get around this
problem, which, um, is not going
to help the projects either. Um,
re authorizations, delay
projects and delay access to
funds and essentially double the
administrative burden of those
appropriations on the agency's,
so it's going to result in more
delays.
Um, you know if it is the
pleasure of this committee and
the Legislature as a whole, um,
that you, you know, don't want
to see this provision in forced
on this timeline, I think, you
know, give us that direction and
let's look at other solutions
because I think that would sort
of be the, um, the least
desirable one, both for the
state and the local communities
that benefit from these funds.
And the only other things that
might say is
I did sign a reauthorization the
other day, and they told me, uh,
Legislative Council.
That actually cost that project
a year. So you might think about
that.
So, uh, timeliness and we want
we all have very good projects.
very important projects.
But the management that
Receives the money has to do
their part. Also
They We we can't
They can't expect us.
To hold their money forever.
If they're not
Willing to jump in and get
something going, Um, total
agreement.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Wilson said,
And if I may just elaborate a
little bit, and I'm going to go
to the and there is a need to
have some safeguards here to
ensure that these projects are
moving and that everyone knows
that if they don't do things by
a certain date, because we have
to get them done right that
there will be some consequences,
Loss of funding or whatever it
may be.
However.
There is the other side that we
need to look at. And that is
that.
Not or if we look at individual
product projects that we have
Not everyone, not every project
should be within that
limitation.
And again, it's because you
know, it's one doesn't fit all
okay, It's in the reason I say
That is because let's take a
look. For example, at a second,
Yes.
Domestic water associations.
These are people in
organizations who have no way of
generating funds they function
and they live by their
membership dues. That's what
that's how they survive another
way to build their coffers to be
able to finish these things. So
as a result of that, they take a
little longer sometimes.
To get things done. And and
because of that, we need to to
look individually at projects to
see which ones are just sitting
there, because just because they
haven't most just not efficient
in the way they're they're doing
it, But there are some that have
legitimate reasons, and there's
always that two sides that we're
looking at two sides to the
story in a nutshell, and we need
to be very cognizant that off.
Projects that are so direly
needed. So thank you for that
information. I'm going to move
on because we've got others but
said, Do you want me to call
you? Bradley's diamonds Still
Okay, You can call me Crystal
Crystal. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I don't care what you call me.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I agree.
It's a broken system here. Kelly
and I was reading here. The LFC
recommendations.
I would agree that we should
consider, um
Identifying boundaries, maybe
like parameters, qualifications
and I absolutely agree with
better vetting not just in the
local capital but statewide
capital. Even with junior money
is we're not vetting some of
these projects. They're not
shovel ready from the beginning.
but on one of these recommend
stations it says the legislator
should consider setting.
An earlier deadline for local
entities for the local capital
outlay.
And I want to kind of just echo
What Senator Woods started on is
is in many cases where
frustrated because the wheels
aren't turning. But its state
government who's driving the bus
for so long before our local
entity even has the ability to
do that. Um, Madam chair just
mentioned the essay Kias. I
haven't Saiki in my district,
who in the 23 session was
awarded money.
That became available in July.
1st. They didn't get a contract
in place from interstate streams
until last month.
In December, and in that
contract, it states that they
have six months to complete a
project and there that's not
reasonable. They don't even have
a car. They have to go out to
bid. They don't even have a
contract in place, and so
because of a delay, it was one
year before they were even had
had the ability to access that
money and we're punishing them.
For not staying within a
timeline. And so we've got to
somehow get these. Maybe maybe
the the clock starts taking a
senator would suggested when the
contract is in place. I know
that's frustrating.
But But another example while
tell you that maybe it is about
timelines for state governments
to get those awards out, is I C
dimming on here three times as
being an eligible because they
haven't passed an audit. It
isn't that they haven't passed
an audit. It is that they are
still waiting from the state
auditor for their audit. It
hasn't been returned to them,
and it's been one year now.
Where are the timelines that
we're putting on state
government? They spend their
money as quick as they get it,
and now they're being told
they're ineligible for this
capital. The state auditor
hasn't returned an audit for
over a year. It's cost are
nonprofits, money who run money
through the city. And so where
are the consequences were going
to revoke money and revert
money?
Joint entity that this is
completely out of their hands.
And so, Kelly, how do we speak
to those case by case issues
before we just say we're going
to claw back all of this? How do
I identify those cases where
it's? It's really not. You know
the local entity isn't even to
blame. Thank you.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator. I'm
sorry, madam Chair.
Um, Senator Brantly. You know, I
think there are a number of
different ways to do it and, you
know, essentially
We just at the staff level, need
direction from you all and sort
of the big picture stuff that
you would like to see. Um and
then we can, you know, give you
a plan for implementing it, and
I don't know the specifics of
the demon case, But if you need
us to try to do any additional
follow up on that for you, we
can thank you, Madam Chair. I
make that point because I don't
know the specifics of all these
cases outside my district.
And I would sure hate to
participate in a conversation or
vote to claw back money from an
entity that had a similar story
that according to this data, you
know I was unaware of and and
and to that point you mentioned
that the system is transition
and the system. I do believe
that this reporting system is
not up to date and so some of
the concerns what happens is the
legislators. We open these We
see some of our entities on the
list.
We're able to connect with the
entity and they have more
updated information for us. That
is not on here. So in fact, the
progress the progress of the
project is further along than
were being discussed here. So I
think that there is a
disconnect also with the program
and I hope that we get that
fixed, so it's a little bit more
accurate and the information the
entity has is is up to date with
what the legislators presented
to Kelly.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Brantley. If I could just say a
couple of things in response to
that, um, so first of all, you
know, the reports that we
provide to all from the
reporting system are always
point in time, snapshots of
projects, And obviously, these
things are continuously moving
Project targets. Um, so yes,
That could definitely be the
case. Um, additionally, you
know,
The The information we have in
the reporting system is only as
good as what's put into it.
Um so we we do try to track some
of the things and account for
some of the things you're
speaking to. So for the
balances, for example, you know
the primary hard source of
information we have on that is
share the state's financial
system and whether funds have
been drawn down in their
reporting system also has a
field and this is prior to this
new reporting system. So this is
been the case for a long time.
Where the entities can self
report their expenditures so
they can report how much money
they've spent that possibly they
haven't requested reimbursement
for from the state, and we kind
of take in those reports. We
send you. We take the maximum
value of those two things to
arrive at an estimated balance.
Um so we we do try to account
for that. But, you know, just so
you know, like this information
as a whole is dependent on
Individuals all over the state.
putting information in, um and
so you know, that creates a lot
of variability in terms of
Whether there's information
there in sort of the quality and
how up to date. It is, um the
purpose of us providing those
reports to you is not to like,
make ultimate judgment on those
projects and whether they're
moving or not, or whether the
entities are, you know, being
responsible with the funds or
whatever. It's really just to
kind of provide you with the
information we have.
So that we can flag potential
things that might be worth your
attention and you can do that.
Follow up and see what's going
on. You know, should you wish to
do that? So, so that's the
intent and I just want to be
clear about that. It's not sort
of us making judgments on the
projects or the communities.
Thank you Sure. Thank you,
Kelly.
And I just wanted to briefly
state that and then we're going
to go to Senator Gonzalez and
Senator Bert, But I just want to
briefly state that you're
absolutely correct. Kelly that
Um
This is the direction that we
gave you and everyone else when
we passed that
That provision about the 5%. So
what you need now is really on
us. You need if we don't want to
get it done this way, and we
need to take the bull by the
horn on because otherwise you're
merely reacting.
To what we are instructing you
to do and I just want to thank
you for for doing that, and we
don't always make the best in
the right decisions, and that's
why we have unintended
consequences. But we want to
work. I just want you to know it
has nothing to do with you. Each
one of you. I just so much
appreciate you. Thank you. Yeah,
and we're gonna move on to
Senator Gonzalez.
And then we verge on that next
one, because we're running a
little short. Thank you. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair. How I
have two things. And, um
And I guess first of all, um
All of us. We always look at how
can we do it better.
And how can we work better?
And the first one is so it's
just a thought.
Yes. So for many years on the
House side
What it was, is, members would
come with their
Request.
And we would actually have a
hearing.
And in that hearing, he always
had the different departments
and the good part about that was
that sometimes you could iron a
lot of questions right there and
then you know, and or give them
advice on technical assistance
to
Who to contact and work with US
members, But it was a very slow
process and he does take a lot
of time.
And, uh And that's just a
thought. Maybe that might work
to go back to something like
that. You know where you can.
Just iron a lot of the
questions, you know.
And and help the members but of
course in those days, so like in
my case, maybe I used to get
maybe, like 1520 request. Now I
get like 130, you know, And so
it's a big difference. You know
where we have come to, Um The
other one is something I was
gonna ask you, um, looking at
this one.
The wonder
The one with the capital Ali
appropriations with balances of
5 million or more and number
item number. 28 0 this one. No,
I have been working with it, You
know very steady.
And for example,
Um, this just cleared
Like I think it was two days ago
that it finally cleared.
You know, between the questions
from D F A and the Department of
Transportation and the Board of
Finance.
So at what point
Do you get the information that
this project is going on going
forward?
Um, Miss Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez. Um, so you know,
essentially on this.
Project. Um, we can see here on
this report that there has been
recent reporting on what's
happening with it, which is that
the entity submitted the
questionnaire, which is kind of
the first step that Wesley
talked about, um, and that the
project is pending the grant
agreement. So you know what that
tells us is essentially that
They were stuck for the year
that you mentioned and now
they're starting to move. Move
forwards towards being able to
access those funds.
Um, you know, we've still
flagged this because that
That's essentially an end. In an
indication that the project is
sort of behind and some sense
and had initial challenges and
again like that's that's just
intended to be able to flag
those things for you all. You
know, I know you already know
everything there is to know
about this project, so you
probably didn't need us to do
that for you, but that that's
the intention of these reports.
I understand that my question is
so
It has cleared. You know, now
they're at the last last part of
issuing out the contracts.
At what point do you get that
information to do?
Your reporting that that project
is
Going,
Madam chair, Senator Gonzalez.
So, um, we should be getting it
on a quarterly basis through
reports that the entity, um is
required to put into the system.
So, uh, we would get it the next
quarter essentially provided
that they are doing that
reporting.
Okay. And Madam chair. Maybe the
parties here is maybe we can do
something or or at least look at
it.
Because a lot of times I go back
to my
Constituents, the ones that have
a request or we have something
going.
And they'll tell me what we
already did that
You know? So maybe the reporting
maybe might
Have to Maybe
Be closer instead of quarterly.
You know that some just
Mentioning this that might help
everyone.
Um Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, so local entities used
to be required to report monthly
and we actually just change that
to be quarterly because many
found that to be
Essentially like
Too burdensome.
Um at the administrative level,
and also it wasn't generating
quality reporting on a monthly
basis. Um, so you know, like I
mentioned earlier, these reports
are snapshots in time from when
they were made.
Um
And you know they're they're
intended to be cause for to give
you an update on what's going
on. And also should you decide
you need more information to
kind of provide an impetus for
you to, um, request that, um,
and again, you know, I think
another thing is like entities
just need to be aware that
Doing that quarterly reporting
and trying to provide current
and
Quality UPDATES is really
important to us being able to
keep you guys informed about the
actual status of these projects.
Okay. Very well. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. And thank you,
Kelly. Alright, We're gonna go
on to Senator Bert. Thank you,
Madam Chair and I'll try and be
as brief as I can. First off. I
want to thank you for
Looking ahead, looking at
changing processes. Um, this is
my 14th year here and rarely do
we look long range planning for
the state, So I think this is a
wonderful thing.
We know oil and gas, oil and
gas, the industry has told us
Around 3233.
Their taxes off of oil and gas
are gonna drop down below the
line of what we need to build
our
Reoccurring budget every year.
So how are we going to do that?
We have
Really some some monies right
now last year this year that you
need to go in the permanent fund
to start generating that
interesting income to compensate
for some of that. So, uh, in
sending up trust like you're
suggesting, for example, Uh, I
think it's wonderful thing. So
thank you for bringing that and
and I hope that
This committee and the
Legislature will have, um no for
with all to look at that and
change the way that we do
business because sometimes we're
a little behind the curve amount
of charity, your point of so
many different levels and tears
and elements that go into
Processing these outlay, camel
outlay and money request. Um,
I've got primarily to counties
and multiple communities that I
represent.
Most of them are very good, if
if they can get the money
released more than because they
already got that wired, But
there are a few that sometimes
get behind because they don't
have enough people within that
department or the person who's
who is doing it has been there
for 2025 30 years of retires,
and the new person comes in is
totally lost. So maybe, um,
getting out into the field.
Maybe once a year and at least
in in area and districts or
areas where you can draw a bunch
of people together and kind of
explain processes and and what
made me new, maybe help to
getting those those issues done.
Um
We had an issue on Tuesday.
We're looking at Camelot Lee $5
million for radio so
And there was no movement on it.
Luckily, within the time frame,
I was able to contact the mayor,
And what happened is the $5
million for whatever reason was
split by the state.
Half of it going to reducing
half of going to Lincoln County,
so the two had to come together
to figure out how are they going
to do this? Because it was a
community wide project with the
rehearsal bridges and repairing
that, so, um, and then the money
wasn't released till after July,
And then there was some
additional questions so these
timeframes may need to be
reviewed.
Depending on the project, or or
the amount of money that's
involved in these things,
Because they're just I mean, you
physically can't get them done.
Uh, under these times, I think
the SEC IA's are the ones that
we talked about.
Um no only have not having time
sometimes to give this because
there
They're really not educated
again on how to address these
issues. Um
But they need the money
desperately. And so I appreciate
maybe
Looking at these tears only.
The the time frame that we're
looking at setting up trust and
all that stuff, but again
educating the people on the
field, who may not
Understand how to do all of
this. And finally, Madam Chair
quick note, which is not really
Directly involved in the what
we're talking about. We we
There's not a community and I
think in the state or even a
county that
We as legislators give capital
to for police cars for emergency
vehicles were dump trucks. I
mean, and they get bonded over a
10 year period and their shelf
life is 3 to 3 to 5 years.
Um there's gotta be a better way
to do that, quite frankly,
because we're still paying for
things that are in the junkyard
somewhere or have been gone to
an aftermarket somewhere. Um, so
as we look at continuing to
Evolve these processes. I'm
hoping that we can look at that
and and figure out a way to
To efficiently dispersed money
to help these people who can't
really afford it, especially
with the cost of vehicles and
technology this this day and
age. If there's a way that we
can manage that a little bit
better, I think that would be
appreciated not only by us as
legislators with appropriate the
money but also by the
communities and in the counties.
Who received this and get backed
up because
Their vehicles cost more to
repair than they can on the
street. And there's this camp
where they can't afford to get
anymore. So anyway, just wanted
to make that point about
vehicles as we go down the road
and we we look at processes.
Hopefully, we can look at that
process as well. That's all I
had. Madam chair thing. Thank
you, Senator Byrd. I think for
the sake of time, let me just
add a little bit too. That was
it, And that's a very good
point. Senator and we have
looked at this in the past.
And speculation with a car
spring. You know they
You can't really borrow money
and a year or two. But one of
the things we're doing, senator
is we're putting. We're trying
our best to put those requests
specials into the specialty. For
example, General fund and so I
see that that ain't also
situations like I T
Equipment. Some of that, too. I
mean, it changes every year,
most almost every year. We've
you know, last year's became
obsolete now, with a new
technology coming up, You know,
we don't want to be in debt for
10. This is already obsolete. So
we're trying to get those pride
bonding with general.
Thank you for that. And and no
Kelly in this weekend. Do that,
for your points are very well
taken. Alrighty. So I think for
the sake of time, we're going to
move on. We've got Let's see. We
were on camp now. Status, Kelly
and, um colonials and the water
trust for did you want Madam
chair? Um, so I think
If it's okay with you, if I
could have Antonio go through
just a few highlights on this 5
million or more sheets and then
Um, we were not asked to present
on the earmark programs. So you
do have a sort of high level of
the overall funds in those
programs. Um, and I think, uh,
Marquitos here from N M F. A,
um, some folks from idea here if
you have specific questions
Like kind of specific or
general about what's going on in
the earmarks. Uh, those could
happen after Antonio runs
through some quick highlights.
Is that okay? That's fine. Also,
let me just ask you, Kelly,
Where is the high level?
Stuff that we're talking about.
For the
Um all of them so
Uh,
I Okay? So the high level on
that your mark programs is on
table two.
Of your brief, Okay, so that's
just super high level. Um and
then your staff should have
provide details. Sheets, um,
which show specific projects and
they're spending um for every
appropriation or award year for
the earmark programs. Okay,
Thank you very much. So
Move on. I didn't realize it's
already 2211. But we want to
discuss these and be transparent
to the math.
This one.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee again.
My name is Antonio Ortego and I
am a new lfc. Fiscal analysts
and capital outlay here to
present the appropriations with
balances of 5 million or more.
Really quickly how to read the
report similar to our million in
greater report. We've provided
color coding. Um
Or red, yellow and green for
each project.
Red, indicating projects have
possibly know, reporting no
spending.
Um
They may be re authorizations or
have encountered other
significant obstacles such as
cost overruns. Um yellow,
indicating delays or obstacles
but project that is still making
some progress and finally green,
indicating projects that are
generally on track.
Um, as you can see, we've
organized the list in
alphabetical order by agency and
then by appropriation year and
provided information, uh, such
as appropriation amount,
followed by expenditures and the
calculated balance.
Ah, all of which was obtained
from a combination of January
share and BFM data.
Really quickly. I just want to
point out that the recent
developments call them contains
information that was pulled
directly from BFM and hasn't had
no technical editing on our end.
So, Madam chair starting on Page
one.
Under the Department of Finance
and Administration Lines 11
through 20 show 10
appropriations with balances
over 5 million
We know that D F a
Um
Excuse me. We know that DFA
administers the largest number
of local appropriations, and we
calculated that they're
currently administering about
1500 projects. Um, which kind of
points or suggests that most of
the projects that are funded at
lower amounts
Lower dollar amounts.
Um, are an exception.
Um
Not to Page two.
Page two lines, 22 and 23 for
the Department of Information
Technology, You'll see two
appropriations for P 25 radio
systems and public safety, radio
communication systems, as well
as updates on those funds.
And on page three line 48,
you'll see an update from GST on
the New Mexico veterans, home
and small home projects.
And just below that lines 53
through 55. You may notice. Uh,
the calculated balances are
actually lower than 5 million
here, but we decided to include
them on this report because they
are 2022 appropriations to C Y F
D that were put into a
reauthorized last year and put
into one therapeutic group home
Construction project.
To wrap up GSD on page four
lines. 58 through 60 show three
major new appropriations that
reporting from the agency
suggests that they are moving
quickly.
And moving on to page four
lines 85 to or Excuse me, Page
five lines 85 to 89.
Uh, under the office of the
state engineer, you'll see
several outstanding
appropriations for dams and the
state engineer should be here to
answer any questions you may
have regarding updates for these
appropriations.
And finally, at the bottom of
Page five and onto Page six,
you'll see outstanding
appropriations for Spaceport
authority.
And Mr Mr
Baby. McLaughlin should be here
as well to provide any updates
on those appropriations.
Um, Madam Chair if I could just
point out some additional folks
that are here. Should you have
questions? Um, we have
representatives from do it. The
New Mexico Environment
Department aging, Um, the
courts.
Cultural affairs GSD, So there
are lots of folks in the
audience. Should you have
Ah, again questions about
specific projects, or just sort
of more general things that are
going on with the projects.
These agencies are
administering. All right. Thank
you, Kelly. And thank you,
Antonio. Any questions from
Senator? Did you have a
question?
We? We have a pretty good
explanation of most of these.
And
So the red
The red shows that the bonds
haven't been sold unless
otherwise noted here.
Um, Madam Chair. Senator Wood's
not necessarily so red can sort
of capture a lot of potential
challenges. Um, it could
indicate that bonds haven't been
sold. It could indicate that
there's just no reporting that
we don't know what's going on
with the project. It could
indicate no expenditures. Recent
reauthorization, which, as we
discussed kind of like
Puts a stop on the project
temporarily and result in a
delay. Um, also, we use it to
sort of flag significant
obstacles that projects are
facing a common one of those
that we've been flagging the
last couple of years is things
like you know the estimated
costs or actual bids have come
in over the amount of funding
available to the project.
It could be things like no
bidders responded for local
projects. Um so it captures any
number of issues and again. It's
It's intended to sort of signal.
It's something you might want to
pay attention to, um, not to
make an absolute judgment that
the project is not doing
anything or failing or anything
like that.
We'll invest. The question I
have is
You know, what are we gonna do
on on some of these projects
that
That we've only issued
Piece of the money they need.
Knowing ahead of time that
that's not enough to do the
project.
And we always talking about.
Well, let's do the planning and
design.
On these things and not issue
the full amount.
But
How much commitment does that
make on us to fund these fully
fund These projects after the
The initial work is done, Madam
Chair, Senator Woods, I, You
know, I think the answer is a
little bit different for
statewide or higher education
projects versus local
Um, generally for the statewide
and higher education projects.
Um, when we do partially funding
request, you know, we try to
ensure that the proposed funding
or the appropriated funding is
sufficient to complete a phase
of the project, and we look at
whether projects can be phased.
Um, for local projects. You
know, it is very challenging for
you all to fully fund these
projects ever through Capital
outlay. Um, so you know, I think
that's just sort of something
you need to have in mind when
you're evaluating these
requests, Um, in terms of
expectations for how far that
money can go.
And you know how that can inform
your thinking is again what we
talked about earlier with the
new money that you will have
available to you this year, you
know, think about prioritizing
that towards projects important
projects in your communities
that already have some funding
where the new funding might
realistically be able to get
them across the finish line, or
even complete a phase of the
project.
Um, you know, it can also, you
can also think about with these
requests. Um, do the communities
asking for funds have other
funding sources available to
them that they've already
thought or secured that again?
Your capital outlay where it's
not able to fully fund things
could complete funding for that
project. Um
And so you know, that's kind of
how we would recommend you
consider these things and think
about it Well and of course, Mr
Chair.
You know the project that I'm
talking about on a senior
citizens.
Deal over and in Clovis were
they was trying to keep a
contractor on the job, and so
they spent out of pocket.
Um
Their money's knowing there was
a grand agreement coming
To fund it, but because the
agreement wasn't there, they
went ahead and tried to keep the
contractor on the job. Keep the
process going.
And all of a sudden
When they can't will not
agreement came in there saying
well
You know, we're not going to pay
on anything.
Because you didn't have a grant
agreement anything before that
agreement was signed.
We're not going to pay.
Wow.
Yeah, contractually, that's
probably the way it's supposed
to work. All right.
But then
We're trying to put multiple
funds together.
To do these projects.
And if you
Have that contractor leave.
Because you don't have those
exact funds right then.
It could call she even more
getting back.
But I know it's a particular
problem. I don't I don't mean to
have you answered any questions
on that.
But
There's a whole lot of things
going on right now.
That I think aren't normal.
That that that
And maybe some of these
Local governments are getting
too aggressive.
Trying to get ahead of the
curve.
And then some of them aren't
aggressive enough to get ahead
of the curve.
White, dammit like like the
Madam Chair said. I don't know
if you want to comment. Mr
Chair, Senator would Yeah. I
would like to make a couple of
comments. Um, first of all, to
this specific project you cited,
Um you know, I think the aging
department My understanding is
that they have resolved that
with the community, and I think
they'd be happy to follow up
with you on the specifics of
that after
Um, you know, you're correct
that there's many challenges um
and trying to advance these
projects and peace together
funding.
Um, kind of to go back to a
couple of things. We highlighted
that we've been working on. Um,
I think one partly that speaks
to the benefit that you all
would have if you were receiving
these requests earlier and had
more staff support and gathering
information on the nature of the
project, whether they do have
additional funding how far along
they are just some of those
basics.
Um, there are things we are that
we always consider for the
statewide and higher education
projects and are just very
difficult, um, to do with the
local projects under the current
system. Um The other thing is
the central infrastructure
Division. We've been talking
with it. D F A, uh one of the
really high priorities sort of
new functions that we envision
with that division.
Um, if you all decide to create
it is that funding, navigation
and coordination piece, um that
some state agencies sort of do
on an ad hoc basis right now,
but is no one's actual job in
state government right now. So
you know, providing additional
support to communities and okay,
you have this project.
Identifying all of the available
funding sources, um, helping
them access those funds so that
we have sort of a better system
for coordinating them and
bringing all the funds together
and then administering them as
well. Um, which is something
that Mr Billingsly is thinking
about? And sort of a new design
of a capital tracking in Project
management system so that we're
managing and administering
projects, not just
Appropriations. And with that,
you know, the
Many of my local governments
talk about well.
We talked about all these
different funds out there. You
know, sometimes I get really
carried away and say the state's
got a lot of money.
Course they're asking me worse.
My part of it, but
That's funded deal.
That we have the group that put
together funded
I keep trying to put that out
there because that's an asset we
have in the state.
To to bring together all these
funds, and I don't know if we
have anybody here. It even talk
about that.
But
That was something new.
That
To me that there was even
available, but it you don't
have that's that's something
else. I do have questions, you
know? What do you do when? When,
uh
At Silver City when they're
saying no. You know, we can't.
We can't keep going because you
know and found
Stuff that we got to do
something about before we can
keep going. Ah!
Was that supposed to have been
picked up earlier in the project
in this
Madam Chair, senator words. Are
you talking about the Highlands
University project? No, that was
that was unexpected. You know, I
mean, this kind of stuff happens
with projects. Um and you know
again, like we're trying to flag
those instances where there are
challenges to keep you informed
about how projects are moving in
the status of those funds.
Um, So with that specific
project, you know, I know that
they are working to address it
and trying to keep the project
moving, Um, within a lot of
constraints, And obviously it's
affected the budget, too. So you
know, one of the reasons we
monitor these things is so that
we know what's going on. And,
um, this kind of tracking and
information sort of informs
additional appropriations
decisions.
Um, that sometimes come up as a
result of some of those
challenges. I don't have any
further questions. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
We have Senator share Euronext.
Thank you for your patience.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I want
to ask questions about economic
development and the environment
department, not necessarily
about the projects.
But on economic development
Um, so the first one is $20
million appropriated $0 expended
$20 million
Calculated balance, and it's
red.
And so we go down there. It's
2020 1010 1010. Nothing's
expended, too are red and one is
green.
Yet.
It all looks the same to me when
we've done it. Why? Why do we
have a green one and two red
ones where nobody spent any
money, Madam Chair, Senator
share so, essentially, you know,
we have guidelines that we
follow in, um, developing these
progress ratings and the 2023
appropriation is green because
essentially, these funds
basically just became available.
Um, so usually at this stage,
uh, we don't necessarily expect
to have seen funding on those
new appropriations expended
right away.
Okay, so then that would explain
with the Environment Department
to where the last three year old
green even though no money has
been spent.
So nothing's happened on the on
any of those, but it's OK
because it's new.
Um Madam Chair, senator share.
So, um, kind of going back to
our discussion with the 5%
encumbrance and sort of all the
steps that have to happen
before projects can start
spending money. You know, all
those steps are the things that
were considering and essentially
coloring 2023 projects screen at
this point, so
Where we expect where we would
expect those projects to be is
to have the grant agreements
issued, hopefully executed and
then they can start moving
forward towards encumbering and
spending those dollars.
Okay?
Right. So if I go back to
economic development line, 33
It says.
Um Roswell Grant Agreement fully
executed.
Zuni Grant agreement sent for
signatures.
But it's still red, even though
we tried to do something there,
But is it red? Just because we
have the agreements, but still
no money is moved.
Um
Madam Chair, senator share Yes,
And that's a 2022 appropriation.
Um again, you know when we
develop these reports, we are
basing them on the information
we have available to us, which
is essentially often what you're
seeing here.
Um, just to give you some
context and the challenges and
doing this right now.
You know, as we talked about we
have 5000 active projects in the
state, so there's a lot that
million greater report that we
produce for lfc on a quarterly
basis. We're currently tracking
like 750 projects just on that
report.
Um And so, you know, we have
sort of limited capacity to go
out on a case by case basis and
try to figure out more
information for every single one
of these projects. So we are. We
are just making you know these
assessments based on the
information that's available to
us and again, you know, as
Senator Brantly was speaking to,
um it's not necessarily
indicative of everything that's
going on with the project. But
it's
An avenue for you to know
something and ask more
questions. Thank you, madam.
Mature.
Thank you, Senator.
So to present
Um, Madam Chair. We don't have
anything else to present unless
you would like to hear Brief
comments from NM fa or I d on
your mark programs and
challenges or progress? They're
seeing what those projects.
Okay, I myself don't have any
questions on that. Um, but if
anyone else or in the committee
has questions for the
Um Hmm. FAA or for anyone else
here. I will certainly defer to
you. Otherwise, their staff is
passing out some information
here, um, on the colonials and
the water Trust board, and, um
Madam chair, So, yeah. What you
should be receiving is, um,
those sheets again that we give
you on a quarterly basis for the
earmark programs.
Um they show the projects by
award year and expenditures and
I'd has also been providing
comments on the projects. Uh and
then? Mm mm FAA, additionally
provided kind of higher level
summary by year of the Colonial
sand water trust board projects,
Okay. For the members. This
information is being handed out
now and and and I'm happy to
To stay longer if you all want
to review it and have some
questions for Fred, the staff
now and for Madame, otherwise
you can proceed. But Kelly, tell
me, Madam chair I could make
sort of just a couple of really
big picture points on that your
marks, um so that your mark
programs have seen big
increases, Um, and the funding
that is flowing to them over the
last several years again, that
money is tied to severance tax
bond revenue.
So the distributions to those
programs has gone up with the
increase in oil and gas revenue.
Um, additionally, with the water
trust boards, specifically, um,
some issues that you might hear
about, Um, despite that big
increase in funding, they had
massive demand for that funding
for the next funding cycle.
Um, I think it was some. It was
over $100 million more in
requests, Marquitos nodding, um,
relative to the funding they
expect to have available. Um as
well as I know, Those projects
have also been seeing dramatic
cost increases. Um, and for that
reason we have included in our
statewide capital outlay
framework.
Um, recommended appropriation
that we have not had not had
before for cost overruns for
those existing projects.
Okay. Thank you. Kelly. For that
information, Senator Woods.
Question. Um
Have you got any information on
on FEMA?
I know it's federal, but
In what I'm asking.
How often is that being used to
supplement some of our programs?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Woods.
I don't have any information on
that. Does anyone else
No, that's all right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Any other
questions from committee
members? Do you need a little
more time to review these or if
not, we will stop.
Yes, I would say that because
you know it's not something we
can review quickly anyway. But
if we took the whole day here,
but I can, but I'm happy to
stay. If there's anything that
you all need to read request
because I realized these were
just handed out, and we want to
make sure you have some time.
And if not, we are going to just
say thank you to the staff to
everyone here today for joining
us for being here ready to stand
up and answer questions for us.
For all the work self. Thank you
very much. Kelly, Wesley and
Tanya and everyone in my members
of the committee. We can go now
and
See you on Monday that thank
you. Yes. Thank you very much.
Marquita. Thanks for being here.
Always. Yeah.
What
You're giving me a choice much
We have to do this work on this.
