County very honored to serve on
this committee thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of course members of the
committee and those that are
paid attention to us as we
continue to go ahead and put
together if you will our state
budget state senator Pete Campos
coming from Senate district
eight
includes the counties of Colfax
well look the Harding Mara quay
and San Miguel County it's great
to be here.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Good afternoon I'm Senator think
what I have felt from some
cities my I represent Senate
district twenty eight which
includes Grant County catching
County and most to serve pro
County thank you Mr chairman.
Good afternoon I'm Nancy Senator
Nancy Rodriguez district twenty
four in Santa Fe thank you thank
you madam vice chair do we have
those guys that I know those
guys are on zoom you can't speak
to us but we'll make sure that.
We should have that fixed in a
minute they're working so you
can ask questions and introduce
yourself I may stop that again
I'm senator George Monero's
I'm from California
representative of all of
McKinley and San Juan counties
in representative of what we're
just waiting for the the link
come up let us offer you some
work
Members in front of you you have
the junior bill language.
And so if you look at that well
we're waiting.
Members online you do have that
and your bill in your email the
language the framework for the
junior bill.
And so
What I want to do is appoint a
subcommittee to to do the junior
bill stuff and make sure it's
correct Senator Campos we've
chair that for.
Center video we sit on there and
then move a.
put Senator.
Hello on the.
To review the junior bill as it
comes across and hit that
Senator.
Sure would you like also Mister
chair I would like to senator
Byrd on that.
You're not be here we realize
that Senator Woods thank you
just one one number.
I think so we will have those
five people on the junior bills
any questions about the work of
language and your bill.
And no members online may have
questions so.
We're just kind of went for
them.
We're discussing that members we
won't meet Friday in here that.
Next week that will listen to a
little bit of a pickle just to
get agencies heard and
especially the big agencies.
However you have a.
PTA force.
And if those members can hear
and they raise their hands if
they have questions because
bills to.
Senator Steinborn Senator
Gonzales of the only two
members.
Representative lieutenant
governor said he had his hearing
on the house side and in that
you guys for some a plane.
Of course.
We're glad you're so generous to
our presiding officers anything
for the lieutenant.
I want to make sure that our
members don't have any questions
on the junior frameworks of.
The.
In about your friend more
filled.
These are due back on.
So by Monday.
So Mr chair on your ex's avoids
appropriations to specific
locations.
would that mean that we couldn't
put the money in the city of
Farmington project or someone
County project.
We are and the problem is when
you put not for reoccurring for
one time money you can put it
into projects but the problem
was with DFA and several people
ran into the last year is that
yes a few more put in
reoccurring but DFA again scored
as we occurring and then made an
appropriate any money and so
then you run into that situation
of.
You know.
I put it there should be there
it's not there the city is not
getting is the counties not
getting this and so as we move
junior along with it's just got
to get cleaner and cleaner
specially for members and then
the more that you earmarked that
way the more you're eligible for
line item veto striking in the
budget the festive one member
has the state I'm just putting
money for Gallup PED for please
car than that very much out
there and so we're trying to
avoid some of that for our
members Mr chair of the.
For decades long before I was
here
the San Juan County delegation
at least those that are only San
Juan County have come together
to fund projects in San Juan
County and it's never a matter
which particular district where
Senate district wanted to house
district one two three it's
never mattered the house or
Senate Republican or Democrat
we've always come together to do
that and so I just want to make
sure that what we're saying here
is that.
A project in San Juan County
could still be funded by the
collective losses without.
I mean I suppose you'll subject
to veto but but that's the way
we were fifty thousand hundred
thousand that's.
But knowledge and so if you have
any members of the San Juan
delegation is for from the house
again fifty thousand for from
the Senate gave it the thousand
right then you have four hundred
thousand.
that's.
You have four hundred thousand
it would be compiled in the bill
as one lump sum for one thing we
could do it for San Juan County
and you could do it for McKinley
County for what I that's all
want to make sure of is that if
is that we didn't get lost in
your one time unable we are
really pushing nonrecurring non
reoccurring and so the repair
money we are really pushing that
within state agencies that that
need help that are always asking
for budget increases and but if
the show or whatever.
It becomes less and less complex
if we try to clean it up here.
Okay all right.
I think we're up and running
right Senator Steinborn and
senator can dollars did you want
to introduce yourself and you
have any questions on on the
framework for the junior bill.
Very well Mr chairman thank you
Senator Wirth will Bobby J. one
so this represents Senate
district six part of some
profitable some almost every one
thousand no I don't have any
questions thank you.
Morning I I don't know if you're
with us or not.
Of.
Not we're gonna go Raul had Mr
chairman I there's time or can
we call on you once again to
make sure.
Maybe he's not there yet.
Okay well yeah I'm gonna move
that we approve the guidelines
in the information hello there
Senator what.
Yes on the on the second.
Check it says a partnership
among legislators.
Does that mean that you have to
form a partnership for you can
you don't have to write.
Senator no no that means if if
you and Santo Daime and put
fifty thousand that you piece
toward dissing project right to
get to a hundred thousand that
will check that we know that
there's other sources of funding
that he talked to other
legislative.
It just helps us match it up
quick.
Understood.
Mr Chairman I'm a do pass of the
guidelines and the information
on the junior bill as presented.
We have a motion for the passion
in the second any objection to
that motion.
You have to kind of tell
anybody's object to the motion.
Okay we have this going to go
out to the member sent today we
we we're gonna send these out to
the members today and so and the
maybe the room tomorrow to your
offices but will will make sure
they're out the time lines are
so constrained because before in
the sixty day now we're in a
thirty day and if you partner
with people in the house we need
to combine that money when we
the bill crosses over and we can
we're gonna try to combine all
at one time so everything's
there and it just goes over
clean.
So that's the reason for the
fourth time in the thirty days.
Representative sorry to keep you
waiting
we had some technical
difficulties step of resolved
house bill one.
And present that to us thank you
Mr chairman no worries I
understand the technical
difficulties in fact we have a
little bit of funding here to
help alleviate issues as well in
the future Mr chair members so
good afternoon thanks for the
time today before use house bill
one which is the feed mill this
is the bill that pays for our
session activities who pays for
per diem and mileage he pays for
staff time its central.
The bill appropriates a total of
five million nine hundred and
sixteen thousand eight hundred
dollars for expenses for the
twenty twenty two session.
That money is broken down as
follows two million three
hundred ninety two thousand two
hundred dollars for your chamber
for the Senate.
Two million four hundred and
sixty five thousand eight
hundred dollars for the house of
representatives.
One million fifty eight thousand
eight hundred dollars for
Legislative Council Service.
In addition the bill includes
one point five million dollars
for upgrades for the legislative
processing system.
Seven million four hundred fifty
thousand nine hundred dollars
for Legislative Council
appropriations for fiscal year
twenty three.
One million dollars for interim
legislative expenses.
Four hundred fifty thousand
dollars for preparation for next
year's legislative session.
Fifty thousand dollars for a
statewide legislative internship
program the council service runs
every year.
Four hundred eighteen thousand
dollars for dues and fees of
national organizations of which
are legislature is a member.
One million seven hundred and
twenty three thousand four
hundred dollars.
Four
for the legislative information
system apologies.
Two hundred fifty thousand
dollars that will come out of
which eight cash balances for
audio visual committee room and
webcasting up creates.
One hundred fifty thousand
dollars for the capitol
buildings Planning Commission.
Thirty five thousand dollars for
the Senate rules committee.
Four million eight hundred forty
three thousand nine hundred
dollars for the legislative
finance committee.
One million four hundred thirty
seven thousand eight hundred
dollars for the legislative
education study committee.
One million eight hundred and
three thousand one hundred
dollars for the house chief
clerks.
One million eight hundred
seventy five thousand seven
hundred dollars for the Senate
chief clerks office.
There's also four hundred
thousand dollars.
For the legislative department
chair of our partnership with
the New Mexico compilation
commission.
And with that Mr chair we Mr
Burciaga the Director of the
Legislative Council Service and
myself Senator questions.
Pro.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the Senate
finance committee I don't have
anything to add but I also stand
for questions thank you.
A question from committee
members Senator Burt.
Thank you just a couple of
clarification Mr chairman if I
made the on the yellow shoes
here in the if I are
that page the in the Los the
interim committee expenses
Have gone up.
What a bit in the PreSession
expenses can you explain both of
those and and why the increase.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee
intermix Spence's.
The the amount appropriated has
remained the same for the last
three years including this year.
We were looking at is the
interim expenses what we
actually spent right and a lot
was not spent simply because
there were so many virtual
interim committee meetings and
so a lot of money just to get
spent Mr chairman and and all
that's this one's.
It seems like we're not spending
as much but it looks like it's
gone up.
of Fairmount
over the last year the interim
committee expenses and then the
PreSession expenses is that also
is that.
Audio video preparation or what
the the PreSession Mr chairman
and senator of intercession
preparation what we call
PreSession expenses.
Includes all the chief clerks
hiring staff before the session
so sessions staff to get hired
as early as November and
December
includes other cost
equipment supplies and the like
we also have to let the council
service we are occasionally use.
Session expenses to to get ready
for the session our illustrious
we use a lot of money for some
of the
virtual upgrades we did
especially for staff we had a
purchase for example licenses to
use of VDI virtual desktop
interface infrastructure also
things like that is what the
PreSession expenses in this
financially for some
clarification I understood
better you know how we're
spending our money and and I
appreciate the last comment
there because I was gonna ask Mr
Chairman about.
We're buying equipment so we can
assume that arm and provide a
higher quality connections also
for so I appreciate your answer
on that as well that's all I
have Mister.
Thank you any other questions.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you moderator we have the.
Representative thank you Mr
chairman just a real brief and
so we just get a little bit of
an outline of what this audio
visual upgrade is going to be as
again this help at all with the
The work being done in the
interim period as well or is it
just is it just inside this
building server locations
outside of this building when
meetings are held we could
potentially go back to you know
at this rate of us from meeting
and we're gonna be able to
broadcast from there.
Mr chair so by the yeah that is
right the ideas for it to help
equip the rooms and then also to
help the committees as a travel.
That's really great thank you Mr
chairman I want to continue to
make bring additional access to
the people in New Mexico as much
as we possibly can in the times
that we're dealing with thank
you.
Thank you at Senator Gonzales
you had a question.
Yes Mr chairman thank you all I
just want to make you for this
service allows us to.
so we're getting four hundred
thousand cash balance.
does that still.
Are you still okay with the.
Mr chairman and senator Gonzalez
of there are four hundred
thousand dollars going to the
compilation commission that is
the money that we send to the
competition commission every
year and the reason we do that
is because now the statutes.
Our including the annotations
which used to be
A for are now public access and
are available to everybody not
just attorneys at a cost but
they're available to the general
public and all attorneys those
are what we call the NMSA or the
New Mexico statutes annotated
and be a part of the reason is
we we spent a lot of many
developing that so we have been
giving them out of cash balances
four hundred thousand dollars
every year and that's not a
problem the additional money out
of cash balances two hundred
fifty thousand dollars is
specific for the upgrades audio
visual upgrades and webcasting
will be done both here and
offsite for upgrades we've
already ordered some equipment
that we paid for but is or we
will pay for when we receive it
but it is held up in supply
chain problems
but we we've got money going in
for both
the the the committee rooms and
webcasting options offsite and
yes we do have enough and cash
balances we use cash balances
primarily for special sessions
redistricting expenses and
upgrades to the capitol building
I hope that answers your
question Senator.
Of Mr chairman yes it does thank
you thank you very much.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for your time for
being here Raul have a quick
question for you it looks like
Legislative Council services
thing a seventeen percent
increase over the FY twenty two
can you just address the
specifics of that difference.
Mr chairman and senator yes
we'll be happy to address that
over the last year possibly two
years I have been in
conversation with speaker the
pro tem for the chairs of the
council my oversight body and
I've explained to them that
because of the increasing
demands on Legislative Council
Service half we needed to
increase that that would include
at this point four X.
approximately eight people I
believe are that would be a
couple of attorneys to people in
I. T. I believe a couple of
researchers.
R. one person for account team
and one individual to be
dedicated as the chief
procurement officer.
to handle all April inspection
of public records act request
contract development and
management because those things
take an enormous amount of time
from myself and the other system
directors
so that's why the additional
funding I would add also that in
the bill and I believe the
leader went over that.
There is.
I'm sorry what it was a separate
of the bill it's it's inside of
that is seventy percent increase
is that we're we were asked by
leadership at the request of
some of the committee chair
interim committee chairs to
simply get additional staff to
help with the interim committees
to help with more policy type
work legal research and so that
I including contracts because I
don't know at this point if that
will be it will be necessary to
hire staff year round for if
that's a short term need under
contracts so those eight
positions and some additional
money contracts accounts for
most of that seventeen percent
increase.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to clarify do you have a
CPO and counting now are these
all new positions are these in
addition to those positions.
Right now then Mr chairman and
senator I am the CPO.
I'm the chief procurement
officer which I can delegate but
we really need somebody full
time on that because.
We not only manage the budget
for the Legislative Council
Service we manage it for the
house chief clerk the Senate
chief clerk the six leadership
offices and buildings Services
and so the one person I
mentioned that would be doing.
Our chief procurement officer if
bra and contract administration
would be a new position but the
researchers the attorneys and I.
T. R. additional staff thank you
that's helpful Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez.
Mr chairman I don't have any
questions or any comments I want
to thank you for your
presentation your work on this I
just want to make a motion for
the past Mr chairman.
Thank you so Rodriguez I do have
a few questions.
Raul are we with what we're
doing here we gonna be able to
hire those attorneys in council
services and be able to hire
attorneys in the pay bands we
need to.
Mr Chairman I I believe we do I
believe we have the pay bands
that that we need to get to to
get
we have been successful at
hiring attorneys over the years
that hasn't really been a
problem
it is keeping people who are
trained and they do a good job
and then they're stolen from us
on occasion or Mexico for if you
will from different agencies
different apartments and just
other opportunities
I I believe everybody knows that
it's kind of.
Staffing these days it's hard to
keep some of the beyond five
years.
Three to five years and usually
what we get but we are looking
at the paper as I think we need
to continue looking at the rate
of pay bands that is part of it
in terms of retention sometimes
it's also why for balance.
And so you know if somebody's
going to go to the council
service the GST for thousand
dollars more do you have the
flexibility to to try to compete
with them sometimes they made up
their mind but if we have the do
you have the flexibility to try
to retain and.
Mr Chairman
when we lose somebody we usually
replace that person at a lower
level so we usually have one
call it vacancy savings I would
call it
retirement or resignation
savings and we use that money to
try to keep other staff on board
we've been successful in some of
those cases and sometimes we
haven't been just because
they've they've got another
opportunity
but Federer said on.
Thank I guess that's I just want
to make sure that it's hard to
train staff someone to get staff
and you can adjusted and they
understand the system and then
you lose them if if we don't
have the flexibility to to try
to keep him at times because she
the number out that five grand
more or something Mr Mr chairman
that's part of the reason for
wanting a couple more staff
number one because we have such
demand within trump committees
we staff anywhere from eighteen
to twenty four depending on the
year which means that our staff
attorneys and other staff
usually double and triple up on
committees and so I added some
more staff we can spread the
word got a little bit more that
way.
At.
Right we the other question
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman as I have gone
through the information a couple
of things that really stand out
and I hope that as we continue
to go ahead and vision bills
that we're able to address these
issues one of course is the
technology for the the capital
and of course the work that
we're doing.
And and I believe that we do
have a good system but but what
is the vision building for the
future and what resources will
it take in order for us to go
ahead and continue to make this
state of the art when it comes
to how we're going to represent
the the general public whether
it be by zoom whether it be by
any of the virtual technology
and then secondly in doing that
do you anticipate that there
will be a need for additional
resources as we go forward or or
these resources sufficient as we
present the feet bill Mr chair
Senator Campos is a great
question and you know this is it
is as long as my colleagues in
the house and trust me with this
position I'm gonna be working
with the old and and our clerk
in your clerk to make sure that
we have the adequate resources I
think the point stated that
you're highlighting respond on
the pandemic exposed a lot of
stuff in society but it also
exposed our own legislature and
not being
tried our best but also not
being equipped with the
technology with the space to be
able to broadcast assuming I
mean I've to be very honest with
you this is the first time I'm
hearing Senate finance in person
since the pandemic it looks like
you all figured out we're still
trying to figure it out on our
side he's or committee rooms my
former committee the tax
committee there is still a TV
monitor in the front the old
school type of to meet TV
monitors that's how much work
remains to be done is this
enough funding to do is I I you
know I think it's it's it's a
step in the right direction but
I think it's going to take
awhile for us to really catch up
and to modernize all of the
systems in the legislature.
The leader I really appreciate
that because those are the
shortcomings that we continue to
have and and I believe that
we've been exposed to that
during the the the pandemic but
but the key really is going to
go ahead and be how are we going
to be able to deal with this
virtually.
efficiently and most importantly
as we deal with a more mobile
legislature so I really
appreciate your efforts and at
the same time let's build that
vision let's ensure that we have
the resources and then
ultimately that all our members
are fully equipped to
participate from the space that
they choose to to participate
from particularly because of
where where they're at and in
their circumstances so thank you
Mr chairman then speaking of
point excuse me
thank you for that and and a
leader Martinez certainly
address the issues of upgrading
what we needed to for this
visual capabilities as well as
webcasting the one thing I also
like to mention that nobody
asked about but I I do think
it's very important there is one
point five million dollars in
here for the legislative
processing system that is being
coupled with a million dollars
that was appropriated during the
special session that is
basically to
Put out a bid for and obtain a
state of the art document
management system that takes
what I called legislative
process and it takes a bill from
requests from when you call us
up and say I want to build to do
X..
All the way through the bill
drafting proofing word
processing preparation of the
bill introduction committee
chamber journal
enrolling in a grossing and
delivery to the governor and
even after that to work with the
compilation commission on
getting that are published and
all along the way to be able to
update the economic
our web page faster sooner and
to give to have a centralized
document management system and
that depending on on
confidentiality and access that
anybody having the ability to
work with that can access
exactly what they want because
right now well it's somewhat
integrated they're still pieces
that are silos and the two point
five I will tell you is the
start because because in
speaking with a number of other
states that have upgraded their
bill drafting software committee
and chamber systems
it has run it very on the size
of the state and what they've
done I would say between eight
and fifteen million dollars.
I believe this will cost the
state if you all agree as we
move forward will probably cost
of the neighborhood of about ten
million dollars over the course
of about four years but I'm
approach it as carefully
cautiously and exacting leave
that as a word as we possibly
can because this this will help
all of legislators the staff and
the public and and move things
along.
Faster but I have to be careful
when I say faster because bill
drafting still requires exacting
work and deliberate work in in
researching the law I appreciate
the opportunity to editorialize
on that issue thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much Mr
chairman of course thank you all
very much for that vision
building because it is going to
take quite a few of our
resources to go to do that
thank.
Thank you Senator Steinborn you
have a question.
Thank you Mr chairman and Mr
Burciaga Representative see all
question about webcasting and I
will surprise you that them and
ask about that but and I
apologize I I got in a few
minutes late so if you addresses
I apologize the money that's
being requests and just
generally speaking role I know
that.
Through the years we continue to
have some challenges the hiccups
on the technology where you know
people lose service they can't
get in maybe it's a band with
issue maybe it's just a the
capacity our pipes are we're not
paying for big about types to
accommodate the demand that we
get is that improving and it is
any of this funding improving
that infrastructure or is that
something already being improved
that you could speak to.
Mr Mister chairman Senator that
is has been improved and will
continue to be improved we have
greatly expanded the the pipe
that comes in one of the ways
that we did that we did this
several years ago is we do not
host the webcasting here because
they would just be too much
traffic coming in and we would
have a big you know pipelines so
the video was taken here and it
is immediately sent out to an
outside firm that posted on
their bigger servers and so when
you click on the webcast you're
not just coming here you're
going directly out there the
public is going out there one of
the things that we discovered is
that there are some user issues
people in different parts of the
state that either that we don't
have with the the band with to
access that and we need to get
our questions concerns and
complaints about that and we've
often work with them to try to
try to get them to do an inner
internet speed test and often is
on the user and unfortunately
but again I know that's an
effort that a number of of you
have worked on Center for the as
worked on expanding broadband
around the state which is huge
but we have expended here I feel
comfortable with that the trick
is with an outside vendor doing
the webcast with sound system
that's been in place for a very
long time and with monitors that
were attaching we don't have it
as integrated as I would like so
that two hundred fifty thousand
dollars to specific to doing
that in the committee rooms and
enhancing the webcast as well
thank you Mr chairman thank you
that's great to hear I mean this
morning I for example before
came in I.
I turned on the Senate rules
committee there was a bus route
right off the bat it was almost
actually hard to hear what was
going on the committee because
there was a buzz so the quality
issue to be sure and I don't
have great internet where I'm at
but I don't think was internet
thing was just recording quality
but the other question I just
want to ask you kind about the
email I was sending you really
today about the storage of our
webcast and just looking at how
modern practices are.
Which is it costs us to store
our web casting files every year
and how is that done.
Mr chairman and senator I I'm
just I don't have up top my head
that the cost of storage that is
probably built into our are your
the maintenance fee with Sliq
who is the outside entity who
does that I can look at that but
there are several components
that because I think the house
the Senate each pay for part of
that for the session webcast for
example session and committee
webcast we pay for a portion
that because of the interim so
it's it's kind of split up in
different ways but that's part
of what I'm trying to
consolidate get a bit better
feel for it at this point
because space has become so
cheap.
We are not being built extra and
they haven't told us that we
reached a Max on the storage of
the webcast so nothing has been
deleted we've been webcasting
for about five years but I think
both the house and the Senate
rules say that they should be
kept for five years it doesn't
say they shall be deleted
deleted.
So I don't know if it's the
pleasure of the house of the
Senate to expand that and make
those permanent an archive those
permanently that would require a
rule change and we have to see
what it costs.
In another few years
as you build up a lot of video
thank you Mr chairman and that's
exactly why I'm bringing it up
is it just occurred to me those
looking through some video about
five years ago and and I rule
the state we have to archive it
for five years that you know now
we're living through a
historical once on a hundred
year pandemic for example five
years from now ten years now we
gonna want to have a copy of
these proceedings I think we
will
so N. as the cost of data
storage goes down a compression
maybe very rarely very rarely
but it could happen anyway but
just in terms of best practices
of the government and and.
I just think five years is not
very long so I would love to
know more about about that but
thank you Mr math I have.
Thank you we do have a due pass
motion and then went into the
second.
We have a two passed motion from
our vice chair Senator Rodriguez
and the second from Senator
Hemphill any objection to the do
passed motion.
No objections thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members for time thank you.
The on the floor.
Let me we're gonna do cap all
the let me just say to the
members and if you have in the
staff conversation.
Just so as a courtesy because
it's rather loud would determine
the backroom are.
To self other members are asking
question and they're not
interrupted
We also that back there I know
you're not doing Chattfield
anymore but.
I have to just make note of that
that I see you back.
Then the
Good afternoon Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
behind this mask is Linda can
you help I'm a consultant to the
legislative finance committee
and with me at the
witness table is your capital
outlay team for with the
legislative finance committee
need a Chavis started with the
LFC is the senior fiscal analyst
on December fifteenth.
Incentive Snyder is a long time
contractor both with legislative
education study committee and
LFC and actually retired from
the LFC.
today we have handed out of
state a packet of information
not be referring to for today's
hearing I know it's for the
benefit of the public of the
projects that I'll be referring
to are either in the STB or G.
O. B. framework that can be
found in the on the legislative
finance committee website in the
LFC budget document volume
three.
so today Mr chairman the purpose
of today's hearing is to present
an overview overview of the
severance tax bonding general
obligation bond FY twenty two
capacity development of the of
the staff framework which will
serve as the foundation of the
STB ended very bills that will
be introduced Senator Rodriguez
says introducing the severance
tax bonds will and the re
authorization bill and I've been
informed that Representative
Christine Chandler will be
representing the general
obligation bond film.
and fall with the system both of
them and this will be
Representative Chandler special.
and so also be talking about a
little bit about the outstanding
state and local capital outlay
bills.
So to begin with Mr chairman of
members I'm gonna go over the
severance tax bond capacity
you've heard the revenue
estimates from August and then
you heard revenue estimates
again in December but we have
received the official letter
that by statute the board of
finance is required to give to
us by January fifteenth and we
have received the official
letter saying that our capacity
for STP is six hundred and
eighty one point one million
dollars and that's seventeen
point five million dollars from
the last at estimate that you
heard so that is the figure
you'll be working with some of
the through the session.
and all of that there's a
hundred fifty two point five
million dollars that is
earmarked for
of water project fund is seventy
six point three million thirty
eight point one million dollars
each for the colonials Fund in
the tribal infrastructure fund.
And what is in the staff
framework is two hundred eighty
seven point three million
dollars of.
And I just want to bring to your
attention that there's also a
hundred and eleven point four
million dollars that is proposed
from other state funds those are
accounts of other state agencies
have such as the miners Trust
Fund educational retirement fund
public school capital outlay
fund game and fish Fund.
in the fire protection fund.
And so after what is proposed in
the framework remains three
hundred and ninety three point
eight million dollars for
consideration by policy makers
that's above our pay grade so I
won't be able to answer any
questions.
That that amount of money.
and then also for supplemental
severance tax fund of
supplemental severance tax bond
is of three hundred and ninety
excuse me two two hundred sixty
eight point two million dollars
and that's your mark strictly
for public school construction.
And then I want to bring to your
attention on January
seventeenth.
The LFC approved an addition to
the severance tax fund framework
of and what it does is it
transfers seventy five million
dollars from the public school
capital outlay fund to the
public facilities authority in
the the purpose of this fund is
to be distributed proportionally
to the school districts
Four
and it's based on their state SB
nine share but it's with the
minimum allocation of a hundred
thousand dollars per school.
And and what we've noticed is
we've noticed huge balances in
the public school capital outlay
council fund.
And not real sure why people are
not apply for but there are many
schools around the district
smaller schools that are needing
maintenance needs for small
projects and so the language
that will be put in the
framework is to allow for
schools that need small things
like an H. back or something
that might happen as we've seen
we've read about that has
happened and so that's what the
purpose of of that transfer the
seventy five million dollars is
if you need more information as
to what the balances are you
know what's up playing that I
could assist with that.
So I'd like to just I know the
LFC members now and many of you
know what the staff does their
what we undertake in order to
develop a framework but for for
the sake of the of the public
I would like to to be able to go
over that with how we start that
because that.
That framework does that does
Serve as the foundation of
capital outlay capital outlay
bills that will be introduced.
So first we start by we do we
have criteria that has been
approved by the committee.
we do site visits to the prisons
to the juvenile facilities to
the hospital's it's been
difficult into the pandemic but.
Stevie Olson was able to to
attend some of them and also to
higher education institutions
so sometimes we're your eyes for
some of these facilities that
you don't get to tour.
to see exactly what the what the
needs are there and understand.
And so we also listen to
testimony that goes on during
the interim at different
hearings as to what some of the
capital needs are and we also
attend monthly meetings with the
majority of state agencies of to
listen to the progress of the
projects and what some of the
backlogs might be.
in and we make sure that the
most critical projects impacting
public health and safety
preservation of the state
facilities and I'm going
projects that need funds to
complete get into that
framework.
In the criteria that the
committee has approved of we try
to eliminate potential or actual
health safety hazards of we
address the backlog of deferred
maintenance to prevent
deterioration of the State
assets of including cultural
historic those of it is stored
in the cultural significance.
we make sure that the the
facilities meet compliance with
state or federal licensing
certification or other
regulatory requirements.
And if future operating costs
are going to be needed for for
the facility because of course
if you do an expansion to
facility or you're doing a new
Philly facility of course it's
going to it's going to affect
the operating of of budgets.
And so we also try to make sure
that these are going to be fully
funded that there's going to be
at least a face in it it's going
to be functional and that is
going to direct the provided
direct service to students staff
and.
And the general public.
So.
If if members will refer to
Attachment eight it's in your
packet.
These are all the projects by
agency that are listed in the
framework I would like to point
out of just some of the the key
larger ones.
Under course if there's others
as you're perusing the the
spreadsheet if you have other
questions I I will be more than
happy to help try to answer and
I would also like to point out
that there are members of the
executive agencies that might be
on that might be able to assist
in more in depth if there's
questions I can't assist with.
so you'll see that there's
twenty nine point one three
million dollars on route five
and that's for the
administrative office of the
courts the largest one on you'll
see on there is on line to
that's the Santa Fe magistrate
court construction that's the
plan design construct and
renovate a new magistrates in
Santa Fe they've been in the we
space for quite some time they
don't have proper holding cells
are property of court room for
for the public and so that's
being built on state property
and in Santa Fe.
then moving down to lined road
twenty five you'll see twelve
million dollars that's for
children youth and families
department of.
One of the larger one on light
line twenty three it is eight
point five million dollars and
that's for actually to purchase
a building for the for the
department it's for the juvenile
Phil Services Division there was
some discussion about locating
locating that in the P. E. R. a
building but
actually it's not appropriate to
be across the street from the
capitol it's a facility when
children are taken in or whether
domestic violence and whatever
and so this is the capital of
campus was not the appropriate
place and so the idea that
they're paying it a million
dollars for lease costs and so
the idea is to purchase a
building to say that on the
lease costs annually.
and then you'll see on line
thirty three is ten million
dollars for corrections and
that's for security fire and
safety upgrades for this for
their correctional facility
statewide.
on page two
forty six.
That's for New Mexico department
of agriculture building that's
been an ongoing project of the
that is going on at the
department of agriculture
actually the space three that
we're getting into now.
next large one is on route sixty
three for the department of
health.
You'll see thirty four million
dollars thirty four point four
million dollars with the very
first project is on row six is
in New Mexico veterans home
facilities.
I think some of you may have
already talked about the concept
that the department of health is
going into is to have
individual homes on the veterans
campus.
Now along with that twenty
million dollars is an additional
forty million dollars from the
general fund operating reserve
could and I like to point out
that that forty million dollars
under the general fund operating
reserve is contingent on the
department of health making an
application for federal match
and also that there is an
agreement that to reverse the
operating reserve what's that
the for the federal funds are
received.
my generally when when we get
into partnership like this with
the federal is the federal
generally pays I believe it's
like eighty five percent of our
sixty five thirty five percent
of of is the match with the
state and the federal.
the others are for the behavior
health institute there's five
million dollars and that's for
patient occupancy it's a new
building.
And also for health and safety
improvements at their other
facility statewide.
The next large one is on line
seventy three it's for the
department of it information and
technology.
You'll notice there's nine of
nine million dollars for the
Sims building where some of the
data and equipment is health now
that serve different agencies
statewide.
It's a really bad shape I've
been there.
And the public and and then
there's also twenty six million
dollars for of modernist mais
modernizing equipment for the
public safety radio Commission
communication systems statewide.
And then under department of
public safety online on RO
eighty two is eight million
dollars and that's for
infrastructure improvements of
the state facility statewide and
then they've got another large
project at all get to when we
get to General Services
Department.
It also will help to renovate
their current safety
headquarters in in Santa Fe.
I would point out there's ten
million dollars for main street
on nine ninety five that's an an
annual.
Appropriation that the
legislature makes in in that's
that's the downtown main street
in different parts of the state
that is of developed by the
projects are developed to the
Economic Development Department.
And then under I'm role one oh
four there's eleven thousand
three hundred and fifty for
energy and minerals and that's
for waters watershed restoration
and forest state park water and
wastewater infrastructure at our
state parks.
And then you'll see a large one
on rural one fifteen is up for
the General Services Department.
in the course you know they they
are they are the oversight of
all the state Philip specific
duties throughout the state not
just Santa Fe their facilities
all over the state.
in its for deficiencies in
renewal us ten thousand four
hundred and then there's another
tool that's this is the twenty
million it's also part of the
department of public safety it's
for metro project and that's to
equip a new administrative
complex for the department of
public safety in Albuquerque.
And also in their is fifty maybe
fifty million dollars there's
been discussion about a new
executive office building in
Santa Fe that has been ongoing
for.
Ten to twelve years that I know
of
This would be just be for for
phase one of the project
We still haven't heard if this
really requires the executives
of kind of stamp of approval to
to move forward with this
With this but we that's a place
holder there in the event that
this project goes through.
It may not be needed now but
we're looking for a head for
space needs when people do start
coming back in into the offices
before the pandemic there was a
shortage of space.
And the square footage per LA
FTE is requiring more state more
state offices and so hopefully
well we have the money something
like this will start.
then you'll also see on row one
thirty eight there's nine
million dollars that is going to
go for the New Mexico housing
trust fund.
And that's of that goes to DFA
but it's for the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority I
think of no Senator Rodriguez I
have a stake in serves are
oversight committee and so it's
for rehabilitation and weather's
ation of affordable housing
statewide.
And then
I already talked to about the
seventy five million dollars
that was added for the public
schools of public to public
school facilities authority.
That's the real one sixty two if
you want to look at the
language.
And then there's some for the
state engineers office you'll
see a on rural one eighty three
there's like is sixteen thousand
two hundred but the minute
majority of that is ten thousand
six hundred dollars for the
imagine what water rights
settlement fund that's the
annual amount that we usually do
for the state match against the
federal of federal match I
believe will be other money that
you'll see that's coming through
nonrecurring general fund but.
That again is above my pay grade
today.
And so the the last one I wanted
just point to you your attention
is of row one ninety.
And that's for.
Eight children to the we have
the only children's psychiatric
hospital in the entire state.
And so this four million dollars
is going towards a new for
expansion and replacement of
that
Thank you at Dicks and I happen
to have been able to of tour
that facility
it would bring tears to your
eyes it's deplorable.
And then there's an additional
thirty four million dollars it's
also in the general obligation
bond bill towards that same that
same facility.
But to give them the of the
forty two million dollars at the
that they need for for that
facility.
So that takes care of the
severance tax bonding also Mr
chairman.
If you'll go to.
We're going to go over the
general obligation bond
capacity.
let's see where my.
Okay so our capacity in this
from what I understand even
though
It's gonna be two hundred fifty
nine point seven million
dollars.
And I know most of you know but
the GOP debt service is mostly
derived from property taxes.
I understand that our revenue
estimators have estimated that
money at a flat mill levy to
prevent the tax increase.
And of course the bond issues
require of of being approved by
the electric at the twenty
twenty two general election.
staff photo that to fifty nine
point seven million dollars has
put together a framework.
This totals two hundred forty
eight point four million
dollars.
Of that of these projects I want
to just bring to your attention
are fully vetted.
The projects for the senior
citizen center projects for
twenty two point five million
dollars those are for projects
statewide you have an attachment
see that lets you know how that
money would be what what amount
of money would go for the
different projects a statewide
so if you spot one for.
Of this in your area.
the agent in long term care
services has quite a vetting
process that they go through
they also do site visits.
Then also in the framework is up
nineteen million dollars of that
was requested from the New
Mexico library association.
And in there is six million
dollars for academic libraries
six million dollars for public
school libraries.
And six million dollars for of
public libraries in the million
dollars for tribal libraries.
And then the the large amount is
two hundred and six point
million dollars for higher
education facilities and that
also includes our special
schools a school for the
visually impaired the school for
the deaf of the New Mexico
military institute and also for
the the tribal schools
throughout the state.
In in developing that we also
use criteria that is developed
amongst the department of
finance administration the
higher education department and
and the of the LFC staff we make
sure that.
That the project is meeting
health and safety liability
completion of the price of
matching that there's matching
or other funding sources
operational savings that it's
critical service to the public
and there's because it's due to
client or program growth and
it's ready to go.
I know you all are tired but I
don't know if you want me to
pinpoint it some of the bigger
ones on your attachment be there
in the framework.
Again I know members of the
public are listening so bear
with me.
on line seven there's the total
project for senior projects of
twenty two point five million
dollars that and it's on your
list and that also is involved
in three.
Of the LFC budget documents.
In the course the libraries are
there and then on
Line ninety on road nineteen of
the catchment blue is nine
million dollars for student
athletes that academic services
building at eastern New Mexico
university their main campus.
Four point five million dollars
for New Mexico highlands
university for eight of
facilities building on campus.
And then you'll see two projects
there for New Mexico institute
of mining and technology the
first one is actually four of.
Kelly hall which I believe is
already been started.
And then there's five million
dollars for the plies research
in in in training center
And you'll notice that there's
institutional matches there are
both under column L..
And for that a place of.
Project there there they have an
institutional match of fourteen
point three million dollars.
On the next page rose six is the
college of engineering Thomas
and brown replacement in New
Mexico State University for
twenty two million five hundred
thousand dollars.
there's also two other projects
with the health and education of
renovations of thirteen thousand
five hundred and for their
nursing expansion for two
million dollars.
there's northern New Mexico
college for four four million
dollars there's universe on line
thirty two is University New
Mexico main campus.
That's forty five million
dollars that's the center for
collaborative art in technology.
And then of course I've already
mentioned the children's
psychiatric hospital so there's
the other of thirty four million
dollars to the GOP.
And then for western there's of
the demi learning center I'm
rules thirty six four four
million one hundred sixty
thousand.
The next large one is on route
fifty seven percent of New
Mexico community college of
fifty million dollars
And their matching it for twenty
seven point three million
dollars it's their trades in the
plight technologies facility
project.
Then on the last page through
seventy one you'll see the
special schools for the
military's to their Berwick's
bathrooms.
For four million dollars the
school for the visually impaired
is three point seven million
dollars.
And then the school for the deaf
is one point four million
dollars these are based on their
requests I I might add.
And then we have the tribal
schools the donate college for
five million dollars at the
Shiprock branch campus in for
Navajo Navajo tech university
four million dollars for their
of.
There university campus in Crown
Point for.
So with that Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
just going to go over a few
things of the local outstanding.
please note I find hesitate to
to get into the weeds with these
because the this data is is as
of October.
The LFC generally does a
quarterly report
In December or January but then
Steve Wilson left this and so
you're gonna have to wait for us
to for this team to have won
updated enough to.
Chairman I think we class and I
have I asked him to come up
here.
You know we don't have that I am
going to go over in our package.
We we we didn't we didn't have
the re this is going to be data
from the October second point
members know we don't have that
data yes.
I did I did put bullets in your
reports so so that you'll see
with with the balances are as of
as of October twenty first the
low the outstanding capital
outlay funds totaled two point
three billion dollars.
Now that included one point
eight billion dollars that was
for capital projects that were
authorized in previous years and
it also it includes severance
tax bonds serve supplemental
severance tax funds for public
schools.
in any we do find out expanding
funds is not necessarily the
money is some of that money is
encumbered and moving and when
we do the quarterly we let you
know how much of it is actually
encumbered in in progress and
then we also commit you know how
much is stagnant and in backlog
did not moving.
we have there's the one point
eight million dollars this is
for three thousand six hundred
and sixty three projects that
are outstanding from all
sources.
and that includes some of the
earmarked funds for the water
project fund the colonias in the
tribal funds.
and if you look at the third
bullet you'll see that the
unexpended balances by
percentage fifty four percent of
it is is severance tax bond
money.
And of course those are years
that we had severance tax bump
that city but we didn't have
general fund.
And then the general fund is
twenty four percent of four
hundred twenty eight point three
million dollars and then general
obligation bond to sixteen
percent two hundred eighty point
five million dollars.
And other state funds a hundred
and one point five million
dollars the smallest that's most
percentages on expended.
The one thing that I would bring
to your attention that is
current that you may want to
take a look at the list it's
attachment do.
But board of finance had a bond
sale in December.
And there were forty one
projects authorized totaling
fourteen million dollars that
we're not.
Issued and that's because the
they didn't need to audit
compliance or or they just
weren't ready.
You may want to look at some of
those of some of those projects
are yours and if you look at the
last column in their expiring in
June thirtieth twenty twenty two
that's the last time before they
can be certified as ready
otherwise those money is going
to revert back to capacity.
Some of you if you don't know
future project and not that of
authorized us to do you sponsor
reports you can contact us.
I I I I have to point out
because this.
One of the bullets right above
the chart is seventy three
percent which is one point two
billion dollars of the
unexpended balance that have not
started construction that was
back in October in those were
for local projects.
Those are projects that you all
sponsor
in in I I think the the key
thing that I'd like to bring to
your attention because of all
the federal money that you're
going to see coming all the
capital outlay money.
Is there.
You know there there's limited
capacity now
in in there's some real
challenges to getting some of
that money out when the money is
not authorized for a functional
face.
And that's been the problem
that's happened with the local
projects is that just a portion
of the money is funded like
sometimes and I think we sent
you all we distributed to all
the members of both the house
and the Senate a listing that
tells you this is how much the
project is it's maybe a three
hundred thousand dollar project
but this is what was
appropriated in its fifty
thousand dollars so naturally
the project can't move and so
that's creating the backlog so I
I just think with the forecast
the strong capital revenues and
the incoming federal revenues
that
I'm a contractor you can fire me
at will.
But I just can't emphasize
enough to members about.
So as you as you get your share
whatever they that may be that
you fund a functional phase.
I watched Senate members and
house members get together in
the lounge or whatever in
together put some of their money
so that they're making sure a
project in their district is
fully function functional and I
just you know I've been at this
for more than fifty years of
twenty four of it with the
legislative finance committee.
And it's really heartbreaking to
see helps how much money is
sitting out there with we have
so many needs around the state.
And so with that Mr chairman
members of the committee I I
stand for questions maybe by the
next time there's a presentation
you know will be ready to pop
more than the key focus.
Thank you the we'll make a list
the.
The dolphins here.
I'll start with Senator
Steinborn.
Mr Chairman I guess this this is
three things in life that don't
change step taxes and let the
kids
which is great I think she was
supposed to retire ten years
ago.
Four years ago I'm glad the let
the Mr Abbey I don't know it's
very difficult to see noting him
but I'll tell you it's seventy
three it is getting a little
tired hi we we we we did we
authorize you to change your
mind at any time continue to
love what you do it virus I
don't go away the a lot of this
about your here Linda and you I
mean this is my fourteenth year
you've always been a very
Berkoff confident professional
here working for the taxpayer
and work legislature so it's
always great to see that you're
still doing it because we need
good people and we've lost many
we lose so it's great that
you're still doing this public
service we appreciate it thank
you so I just have a few
questions number one Mr chairman
this is include the executive
requests this is just LFC
request well Mr chairman for me
Senator these are executive
agencies there administered and
operated and owned by the state
and now at some point I do know
the counterpart with the
department of finance
administration has already met
with the governor but at some
point in the next several days
we generally get together and
try to reconcile the differences
so by the time the bill starts
going to the committee and you
may see some amendments to me
some things come out or
something get increased or
decreased as the process goes
through okay thank you madam
chair yep because obviously
there's some big differences
here and the amount requested
and the amount we're
recommending on some of these
items
Like the veterans health for
example but anyway so I'm sure
these things will be reconciled
over the coming days for sure so
I have a few.
The questions on the.
The facility is on the veterans
home there's there's funding in
STBs also in the general fund
appropriation bill there is a
balance of of what we need to
make up and that's reconciled on
your sheet if you.
Yes how much warming stated.
Yes chairman may I add to that
well let's Senator Steinborn has
a point of that questions thank
you well sorry Mr chairman quite
follow what you're saying but
you will have to spend time on
it now but look at your that
wreck right there on the
veterans center you'll see an
STB amount of I think twenty
million yeah and the difference
that the veterans home we also
see a line on there that says
general fund revenue that
completes the total cost of the
veterans if that is the million
thank you Mr chairman thank you
so present that
So have a question on the Las
Vegas mental facility mental
hospital I guess is what that is
five million dollars.
Thing that we.
Thank you.
And members just be aware that
this is a framework so it's
going to change quite a bit and
yes a long we haven't got the
execs rex and if you're looking
at specific items and why it's
there just be well aware that
that changes are probably coming
I understand Mr thank you and
the so this is a a line sixty
one yes Senator and what that
forensics building I don't know
if you've been to the
behavioural health institute
it's right on the main street
It's what they used to call the
DFA's forensics building is what
they call the building for the
criminally insane.
it's right on the main street in
the idea this is just a phase of
it the idea is to move it to the
back of the main street for
safety reasons and it would be
on property that the of the
hospital already owns this is
just a of of.
The face of it thank you Mr
chairman Miskito to the
application occupancy so I
assumed that meant for action.
To expand IT equipment to be
able to expand correct so it's
kind of leads me to my question
and this is a big issue that
we've been talking about for
years Southern New Mexico which
is that Las Vegas I guess is the
main facility in the state and
so there's a big desire to have
a facility like this in southern
New Mexico that could serve the
southern part of the state I
know we've had we've requested
studies and yada yada yada our
putting more money in there's a
huge cost to the taxpayer for us
to you know transport folks up
north at center at center so I
would love to know for Mr Abbey
this kia whoever has any
research been done to evaluate
cost benefit analysis of of
creating a southern New Mexico
mental hospital.
Mr Chairman just from my point
this is a forensic facility it's
not comparable comparable to the
B. H. I. facility that's a las
Vegas we had a group from truth
or consequences princes approach
LFC in the fall with the public
kind of a an idea and I it must
be that part what you're talking
about but it hadn't at this very
for some in the long run to look
for but that's the problem with
money setting there for so long
if they're not advanced far
enough at the time we hear the
request in the fall.
Thank you Mr I'll just leave I
think this is a big picture cost
benefit analysis study that
needs to be done just in terms
of providing the services in the
state more so than a legislative
requests coming he said Hey
let's build a mental hospital in
Los crucis or or you know
Allison theater through the
consequences or whatever tier C.
Sierra County right now they
said Sierra County so any rate
I'll just put that out there and
have something I'd like to ask
to know if we've done any
analysis on that doesn't sound
like it okay Senator we that we
do have
Representative to the executive
that are listening in especially
with the department of health I
believe
Congo that is a policy adviser
to the governor and George
Morgan is our listening in and
so hopefully they'll take note
of that.
It's widely that talked about
for years the Ana County and get
assists up just asking for the
cost benefit analysis of does
that make sense only have one of
the north for have a second one
for the New Mexico
Final question on our capital
outlay we think STBs for capital
outlay this year.
Chair.
We know that the as I mentioned
there's three hundred ninety
three point million dollars
remaining for consideration by
policy makers but that's above
my part I don't know if they'll
be a nonrecurring general fund
also that's above my pay grade.
I think.
This is always to be of what
we're looking at your bill
there's not recurring general
fund will have for the house for
the purpose of this study.
Decisions.
Right now I I guess I was
referred to the other capital
outlay that we normally get
aside from that the two year
funding.
What are speaking to okay it's
general fund okay good okay my
understanding was this chair
that we're using has to be that
I was going to ask what what
we're not using cash instead he
does describing left that you're
you'll want to figure out how to
divide between chairs of members
and executives of STBs
separately LESC recommendation
left twenty five million for the
US twenty five million for the
Senate have for current half
nonrecurring in the judicial
process from the general fund.
The.
Thank you David and Mr that's
all I have thinking skip Senator
Padilla.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you so much Linda for
all of your work for so many
years and every time I listen to
you I just what I learned
something so this is beautiful
first actually on this committee
so I'm gonna have a lot of dumb
questions if that's alright with
you Mr chairman
I just want to start off with
one that we did submit a whole
list of a whole slew of and
we're calling transformational
projects and some of them were
trained were the capital in
nature to get them done in and
this and that some capital
projects and some of the ones
that I submitted as an example
you know we have the explosive
growth in my in the west side of
my district and what might not
seeing transformational for
other people in the state like a
basic thing like a police
station and fire station or
whatever those would be like
transformational for that entire
U no region of of our state
there where those in this
process here do we do we want to
talk a little bit about this
because I would hate for a lot
and I know that you said Mr
chairman that there's going to
be a lot of changes between now
and we actually probably on the
Senate floor with this item
these items but I'd hate for the
cement to start settling in in
these larger things that really
are going to cost money not be
included here.
Senator those were caucus
priorities they're not built
into the STBs we did that for
our Senate democratic members
reviewing those so those those
have been placed anywhere
because you wanted to game
priorities meeting came
individual member priorities
what we gain is is large caucus
priorities so you won't see
those projects and less those
agencies requested them deal
with key may have that on their
project less but that will be
general fund money that will be
coming through and so you may
want to list the street the
house is infamous for trying to
list projects and where they
should go and solve but that is
general fund money fire
department should come to the
City of Albuquerque and beyond
there I see I. P. list and so as
we can pick those projects as
they come through you can use
our capital to fund part of we
can see how we can match it up
better Albuquerque has plenty
legislators we should be able to
build the kind of fire stations.
Thank you Mr maybe surprised
maybe wouldn't and it will that
this is probably someone could
transfer me professional item it
really is remarkable for
community like that but so I
just want to ask about that
thank you for that background
and and we're going with those
items I have some questions on
just try to be as quick as
possible on on some of these
documents that we looked at
today thank you for the detail
on attachment B. the twenty
twenty two capital outlay
framework for general obligation
bond capacity just looking at
page three as an example when we
say that there's an
institutional match state C. N.
M. as an example the trades and
apply technologies facility
planning so the the school
itself came up with two thirds
of the of the project but then I
see on others that it's not
anywhere close to that point
lopsided in the other direction
is there a strategy behind this
or how did we determine that a
particular project at a
particular school could put in
state.
Ten percent versus the other
ninety percent and vice versa.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
as a general rule the two year
institutions and independent
colleges.
Always come up with with with a
share.
And I don't know that it's it's
not a matter of statute and
stuff it's part of the the
formula that higher education
department comes up with and in
in a lot of these were these two
year colleges are they have
bonding they they they actually
fund.
And so when they go out to the
voters to bond money for their
schools that's where some of
their matching money is coming
from.
In in central New Mexico
university of course they they
they put out of bond and if it
passes heavily in in Albuquerque
and so therefore that Mexico is
from thank you Mr chairman thank
you and then they bring forward
their matched us.
That's fantastic I'm glad I'm
glad we're able to get that
project done because it's gonna
be very important for that
school I appreciate that I just
was wondering if there was some
sort of a form of it you know
why would one school with this
one of the one Mr chairman Mr
Abbey as COVID.
World provides as a guide the
current rules twenty percent
match two year colleges to bring
a match and that's it you will.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr Abbey someone under
the attachment the here I just
started looking at a couple of
these and just you know all the
capital project.
Conversation and debate that's
flying all over the room this
man this evening
the first one to do have do we
have a figure on exactly what is
sitting there unused it's
already been allocated to a is
it in here somewhere but it see
it somewhere.
What I mentioned when I started
talking about the
update you know we only we only
update quarterly so the newest
numbers I had we're we're from
October to the page page three
yes yes I'm page three and
highlights yeah.
The highlight issues.
Act and and and I I hesitated to
to give a report on the
unexpended because some of those
projects may have started moving
since the last report October
second.
I think given that we have
limited staff that we weren't
able to do a quarterly update
for December but we'll be doing
one in March.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
and so does that mean that the
one point five nine one bill
billion is what is sitting
there.
Two point three S. center it's
two point three billion.
Point three billion is sitting
there unexpended and capital
projects right and then if you
read through the notes right for
the three hundred three thousand
six hundred sixty three
outstanding projects that are
fully funded and then you can go
down the line of what's what's
here more for what how much for
water how much force and and
senator
When we do the quarterly reports
we do a quarterly reports that
lets you know everything that's
a million for a greater and in
those large reports and by the
way the reports are posted on
the LESC website.
But we do a million or greater
for all the projects and we
actually give a status as to
what the problem is with the
backlog is as to why it hasn't
moved
I I'll just throw out facil
double cone okay that one has
been delayed because there was a
right away acquisitions that
needed to be done that's an
example of a project that
probably should've gotten going
until we have the right aways
approved in so the money will
state their and but it's a
bigger part of with the highway
department is doing with federal
money so lot of that money is
being asked to be we offer as
this year
but it is.
I I I I hesitated to do the
unexpended now because they're
not updated numbers I mean if if
there is a particular project in
your area if you wanted to know
we could research it I mean you
know we've got the ability to go
to capital project monitoring
system because state agencies
are required to of update the
capital project monitoring
system quarterly but local
entities according to their
grant agreement are required to
update the capital project
monitoring system monthly and
that's how we get the that's how
we get the data in many
legislators call in individually
and ask could you check the
status of this project we just
did a training with some
legislators to teach them how to
use the dashboard of it was
called the Pueblo and the
capital project monitoring
system so you can actually go to
local governments divisions of
database and you can you can
actually put in the description
of your project and look to see
what the status is of your
project.
Thank you Mr chairman yeah I I
just I wanted to know kind of
what's going on with that a lot
of this two point three billion
David is sitting there because
it's it's just you can get the
rest of it so it's going to turn
to whatever so so we adopt this
legislation ever as legislation
and now we have significant
price increases on any number of
things to get these projects
done so.
Because it's adopted in statute
current law.
How do we deal with these
increases now them to they have
to be resubmitted is our
supplemental sort of capital
project needs to be submitted
because one of these projects
are are now going to sit there
because they just can't afford
to build them well and that's
what we look at when we're
looking at the state owned and
operated facilities in the
higher education facilities in
special schools and we are
looking at those things and
that's what landed up in this
bill so far as the local
projects if you sponsor them.
That's why and I don't know if
you're one of the legislators
that is authorized to give you
an update of your projects okay
so I mean it's important for
each individual legislator to
look at those project in to find
out why aren't they moving I
mean is you can you can the
fiscal agent is usually the city
or the county to find out why
why aren't these movie and more
than likely they're going to
tell you there was a sufficient
funding for it so we need
additional money and there's
also in the bill in the capitol
bill some things only the
money's there for two years and
it just keeps going
automatically revert it doesn't
spend other money for larger
project is for four years the
check that you have and and I
think there's
Legislators feel like well we're
going to get a piece of the pie
next year and so I'll just add
to that project to help it movie
but that's up to each individual
legislator to to do that we can
help you research projects and
give you the status of your
projects but it's it's it's
really up to you to see what's
going on with your project but
what will help we can't.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for that on on the the
last thing question I had was on
the
New executive office building we
can take this off line if you
want to would we do we have any
sense for who's going there any
in Intel on who might go into
that building.
Yes actually can I just say
let's move the early education
department there now is there
sort of in a dark closet and
hallway right now.
Well.
I know that ms and a silver that
is the division director
facilities management division
of is is online and she may be
able to answer more thoroughly
for that.
David might be able to.
Four point Mr Chairman server
data or executive agencies hello
a look to the patients the
auditor and the treasurer on
rental space way at the end of
term the capitol building master
plans to close for those elected
officials to be in the port
capital campus of DFA could
expand in there and also the
public education department
could relocate so it's those
agencies as far as early
childhood in this case mentioned
the proposal to buy a building
in Santa Fe for about eight
million million of field office
for CYFD but that also paves the
way for the early childhood care
and education department to be
in the pair Department in full
we believe.
Thank you Mr chairman I really
appreciate the background in the
information I'm gonna have a ton
of questions I'm real size you
can tell so thank you Mr
chairman I have right now.
Thank you Senator.
thank you Mr chair so the that
we just mentioned the eight
million dollars for a CYFD
building
I was here when buying and
selling the building because all
kinds of problems I just want to
make sure that that is not.
It's it's.
It's all over.
Like that.
Of.
On page four line ninety four
for ten million dollars in for
main street but we have any any
specifics on that is what's
Townsend is it going to go to
what are they going to do with
it we.
in again I not necessarily know
this framework but will we get
that are we going to deal with
that in million folks for
Senator Woods I would be able to
give you not not off the top of
my head now but we would be able
to get to
more specifics into what areas
are being looked at in the state
of for this money I I know that
they have quite a a waiting list
for additional money this is the
most that they've gotten in in
in quite awhile but I will get
back to you with more specifics.
Then on page five of line one
thirty seven we're talking about
housing of fund flows of
weatherization and affordable
housing.
I know that in the past we've
had this discussion about this
weather station coming in and
putting plastic on the windows
which then of course comes off
the next year and so it's not
really fixed.
What is with the recession mean
nowadays.
Will this deal with and we're
gonna have NMFA MFA to moral and
that would be a good question
will it'll be the New Mexico
mortgage authority that will be
able to answer more specific
tomorrow the NMFA yes having
both from our NMFA amendment yes
so then on on of the
Public Library one of the I saw
this this documentary I can't
remember you know with it Podunk
you or was it you know and my
teeth can get it
this is something like thirty to
thirty five percent of the books
in our public library for never
checked out but it might be a
different thirty five percent
from Santa Fe to Farmington
welcome to Mexico to California
in so one of the things that
they were talking about with
trying to focus on what's
actually in your library so you
know I might not care about
fingernail clippings of books in
Farmington but somebody in Los
crucis might just look that may
want to check it out every day
it is being a smart aleck there
will but do we have anybody that
they actually look at it will
closing the libraries because if
you.
You could say thirty five
percent for.
Enhanced thirty five percent
with the right folks and then
again I'm not us but in a
framework that's a question that
I'll probably have it in finally
what is wrong with New Mexico
University of New Mexico they
want forty five million dollars
for building for art and
technology the New Mexico state
which is a far better University
only once twenty two million for
a whole college of engineering.
All the UNM people try to
explain that but I do think it's
a framework things why did they
need twice as much money for
half the building.
Thank you.
Thank you senator what.
My question is not political.
Chairman this another on this
subject at all no.
I'm good online seventy two on
attachment a would talk about
public service radio
communication system will that
be
I've got like Union County is
needing some some emergency
radio equipment tires and
certain things like that.
Can is this going to be a
something they can apply for or
is this a completely different
deal that's already planned out
in.
When not for my County well it
could serve your County because
this is supposed to help with
the radio communications between
law enforcement from one
community to another.
And so but department of
information technology is done
it is it's been a massive
project and it is it's they've
been doing it in phases of and
so again I have to find out from
you is when that they can move
into your area for these public
communication system.
Mr chairman and and then the the
this deal.
It's got a.
Pressing because this is a very
high priority for them so I'm
trying to decide whether to try
to fund it with my capital.
Or will they be able to get some
here let us get some information
to see what areas are going to
specifically serving and and I
know it's been really massive
because it can there are some
areas that we don't have the
technology of the we've had
difficulty in some of the rural
areas where law enforcement
can't communicate with each
other and so this is this is the
targeted towards those type of
project but I'll have to find
out from them specifically what
areas are they into right now
yeah we have a real problem in
the a fire a couple years ago
and.
Almost.
I tried to be.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you Senator
Diamond.
Thank you Mr chair chairman and
and thank you guys for
presentation it's kind of
exciting to have money in New
Mexico expresses a new
legislators so we were very
fortunate to have this one time
money coming in and we are sure
thankful for our oil and gas
industry they were able to sit
here and spend this money this
is exciting my first question is
kind of a follow up to to
Senator Pat Woods on mine one
fifty seven it says school bus
replacements and much like the
law enforcement you know
communication requests from my
individual districts I also have
some requests for some new
school buses some imaginary
answers much the same you have
to look in to see where those
where those new school buses are
going to go to each particular
district is that correct yes and
what we have is the for all
public school districts we have
a statute for we have to replace
of buses on the cycle and the
buses that we're looking to
replace are those that have a
hundred thousand miles or more.
And in there again of I need to
find out what districts are
going to be getting.
These buses that have those high
mileage.
The fact that.
With the twelve year cycle The.
Twelve year thank you Mr
chairman could I request that
you could could you send me
those districts up by email
really as soon as possible I'd
also like to get a list of where
the public safety radio is going
is quickly as possible to
because the rest of us just like
Senator Woods are up against
this deadline if perhaps they
qualify for this fund and that
frees up our funds yes to spend
elsewhere so I'd like to get
that
Mr chairman we've had several
agencies presenting before us
their requests and one of those
agencies was the game and fish
department was a very unusual
presentation because they had a
request for quite a bit of money
and when the director was in
front of us.
He couldn't tell us that
mysteriously appeared in his
budget he didn't need the money
he wasn't requesting the money
and so we removed and finance
ironically online fifty six of
this the amount once again
appears and so I understand this
is coming from the game
protection fund to acquire
property for the state game
commission I'm a little confused
because the requested amount is
zero can you explain to me and
maybe it has something to do
with that particular fund can
you explain to me why there is a
zero amount requested and yet
the framework recommends five
million dollars for land
acquisition.
And from.
I'm gonna call Mister Olson.
Mister chairman Senator I
believe what happened is that of
statements to the federal funds
that that came in after the
request came in and it's
supposed to be a match towards
federal money.
But it came in after that second
line area yeah.
This and the.
Yes yes yes so this is.
The executive when you do
specials which are going to do
in the next week or so special
appropriations in the back of
house bill two.
You can see it executive
recommendation request for nine
million dollars for it's
described as a the day not
discerning dangers but a species
protection plan including land
acquisition there was a nine
million dollar requests from the
executive.
That was described as
potentially being matched by
what they call the roll on.
Senator thank you very much.
With the potential three to one
match.
This time of the LFC separately
we were unaware that the
executive was pursuing it and
and we can we come to find that
one in the same thing the
executive has a request for nine
million you see in house bill
two then LFC recommended a total
of nine or ten million the to
start looking at the special
session and so you said what is
that and you sort of heard
testimony we never heard of the
but now it's popped up again
this is a special we spent a
fair amount of time with the.
Between advocates and this and
that the executive trying to
learn more about it determined
that the same thing so the
coming back at two more likely
in the specials.
And LESC will.
Probably recommend not using a
hundred percent general fund if
you choose to do it then using
half of the game protection fund
Wirth executive wants to do it
entirely from general fund so
that just coming back in a
different place.
Thank you Mr chairman I have one
more thing and it's.
It's clearly the L. bar ranch.
Which is one not the only
subject that is being
contemplated the over on the
flanks of mount Taylor being
contemplated for Health
preservation habitat is
currently in discussion with the
game and fish department as a
possible use of that from.
Thank you David thank you Mr
chairman so I if I follow
correctly to game and fish came
before this committee we struck
that from there agency budget
proposal but then it pops up
again and this capital outlay a
framework
I guess a basic question is.
Who who made the request because
during a committee hearing that
could be answered mysteriously
appeared in their budget the
director didn't even working
from so who put this this
request in this.
LFC have a member number that
house member and I want to get
more specific who brought that
to staff the medication for the
knowledge the staff recommended
putting it in and it's come to
this point.
And that's part of why you saw
part of it at the special
session because it was blocked
by a member and member
Representative there's
Department interest when you
have a hearing they said they
didn't know anything about it
but impacted so same thing there
you can see in the exact order
came from one of our members but
it's also clearly coming from
the executive branch no the
special appropriation thank you
it's it's interesting to me that
that as legislators we can tell
HSD what the that they're going
to take the money and they're
going to do something even when
there were even when the
director saying I don't know
what the money's for I don't
want the money so it's just
interesting to me my next
question is if we again if we
appropriated this fund does the
state legislator have to approve
the purchase of state land
through agencies.
Right and David I I believe the
statute clearly says that the
legislature salt prove the
purchase and sale of any state
line.
Definitives has approval to.
Approve exposition property
for finance spoke every case but
in the case of the game and fish
department and their money's at
this this proposed executive
proposal if contemplates that
the game and fish commission
would do the approval so they're
separate from the normal board
of finance approving land
acquisition.
Thank you David I had to
allocate our responsibility over
to the game and fish commission
but thank you that's that
clarifies a lot thank you.
Thank you we're gonna wrap it
up.
You know we have this two point
three billion sitting there we
have a re off bill that's coming
we have projects are under
funded there are over costs
because of what's happening in
the economy we may want to look
at what projects are not viable.
Can grab some of that money and
then when do you guys are gonna
have this kind of scramble and
say you know whatever project
I'll just make one up ABC
building and whatever is
underfunded by million for
whatever in that regard money
may need to be moved to them to
complete the project it may make
members Matt and ruffle their
feathers but those expiring and
the ones that on your sheet that
have no report or are not in
compliance.
Be the first ones to kind of be
looked at.
So we can get some of those
projects off our list.
Otherwise you're gonna be
sitting here.
Well there for a while but the
longer we wait the along with
the bigger the list grows and
they just never seem to move off
and we need to start sending
messages to people that if you
want capital the more make sure
you can simply it and you can
start it in that year your
within the confines of the
project cost so when we start
looking at the office.
we want to look at those
projects and say okay where we
often live in a the off that
when we know it can be completed
in so let's finish some projects
that can be completed they'll be
winners and they'll be losers.
But we don't do this just gonna
grown grown cope and some of
this STBs is not really just the
bees it's general fund money.
That's sitting in the bank
waiting for them to be
appropriated and so we may look
at some of those to paying cash
that you do that but everything
that happened.
Alright I will blame on Stevie.
That's a good one.
Is there for my level even
can't get hired.
So I I will wrap everything up
we do thank you guys thank you
for presentation thank the first
sorry we're late on the floor
but this is one of things we
need to start in the framework
we did that.
My vice chair Senator Rodriguez
and I did have a conversation
that we do need to get the exact
involved if they're going to get
involved because otherwise we
know what happened last year
last minute changes barely able
to print the bill and be nice to
have a correct and have a little
bit of breathing room to to
check to make sure everything's
correct so nobody correct that
nobody gets on the floor I this
is not there that's not there
and so mistakes are costly in so
my advice to DFA in the exact
that are listening is.
We're gonna want to see that
within a week so we can begin to
draft that bills are members
we're going to begin to start
getting capital outlay sheets
out and and so Senator
Rodriguez.
Have you dressed are drafting
the bill and have we have we
talked about the bills Mr
chairman the bill is being
drafted upstairs right now by
the Legislative Council Service
so we'll keep you informed as
time goes by and there's been
some discussion already with the
DFA staff but they haven't
gotten back to us yet we've made
the request to for them to bring
in whatever a number say have so
we can work in the and if we
can't thank you.
And so Linda what's our time
line.
And as you see it for us in the
Senate to build that capital
bill with the exact graphs in as
we send it over.
Well I just I just ask the
council service to give me some
time lines and because they're
actually establish to the
council service a generally for
thirty days session we've
usually pre filed.
The GOP in this TV bill so that
it can start moving through the
committee process of.
But I not been given orders to
when it's going to be ready to
to be introduced all of check on
this tomorrow to see where we
are but showed to us the council
services is working on the time
line for us it moves pretty fast
in the in a thirty day and then
give us guidance it again so
every project that anybody
wanted should have been placed
on the ICAP correct well we
encourage it because if you look
at projects at the on the
infrastructure capital
improvement plan those are
projects that have been vetted
they've been planned they're
ready to go they have some other
money to come with them and the
cities and the counties are the
fiscal agents or other other
governmental entities and they
actually have the the staffing
in the money to to move the
project forward those are the
ones that we encourage.
now and and I know you know that
the Legislative Council services
now teamed up with the local
government division and so those
I see eye peas you're able to
know what those top five
priorities are as your capital
outlay requests coming in so
you'll be able to know through
the council service if it's on
the top five.
I believe that work that's where
our homes are already Chavis is
is also working off the ICAP for
arpa funds and one.
For so what we're gonna timeline
bills we can get that started.
And start working otherwise
we're going to be rushed again
thank you members were back
again tomorrow morning at.
We have department of health I
believe Human Services
Department nine AM.
Thank you thank you virgin thank
you.
