We're ready when you are, C.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, you
have before your house Bill one
which appropriates $211,900.
Uh, for the legislative cash
balances for the legislative
expenses of the first special
session, that amount includes
the following 8.
83,000.
$800.
Uh, for the House of
Representatives, $60,000,400 for
the Senate, $67,000,700 for the
legislative council services for
its session expenses.
It's actually 2 of the bill
makes appropriations for the
general fund for flooding and
fire response recovery and
mitigations as follows. $100
billion to the Indian Affairs
department for distribution to
the Mescalar Apache tribe for
damages caused by the South Fork
and salt fires.
$10 million to the Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department for wildfire
mitigation, watersheds,
restoration, slope
stabilization, erosion control,
and post-fire management.
$10 million to the Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management department to provide
support for application and
claim processes.
$70 million to uh the board of
Finance division to provide for
reimbursable funds.
Uh, Section 3, appropriates to
the administration, the office
of the courts, $300 for the
general fund to uh
fund assisted outpatient
treatment for programs affected
by this disaster.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I do stand for
questions at this point.
Representative to add.
I mean that represented.
Anything to have?
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
sure that um the senator did a
very good job.
Going through the um hospital
one. I'll be happy to answer any
questions that you you.
Um, we're not gonna take public
comment, anybody in support,
just raise your hand or stand
up.
Anybody in opposition?
See no questions from committee
members, Senator Woods.
Real quickly, Mr. Chair.
Where did you come up with the
number on the sheet right here.
Honesty is the best policy, uh,
senator, uh, there.
Yeah, that's the way the, the
bill was designed, they're in
here.
And I can certainly ask Mr.
Broke for
clarification on that. Senator,
the bill was designed off the
bill that we did in Senate Bill
6, Senator Campos bills. It's
got a few tweaks in it between
the difference of where the
appropriation goes, this one
goes to the board of finance
because they're allowed to give
out loans and accept loans back
and payments and the tracking is
there. The money was a little
bit different because this is a
different fire. This is a 75.
by the Feds, 25% by the state
that needs to be caught up. So
that's, this is a little bit
different fire than the other
one in in it seems more.
More damage has been done to
homes infrastructure.
Just one other question, Mr.
Chair.
Um,
Is there sufficient guardrails
on this money this.
On the way it's going to be
spent.
Uh, and Mr. Chairman and
Senator, we appreciate the
question. Uh, DFA is they get
the money. Uh, we put the
guardrails in, uh, which were
worked out from a supplemental
bill that uh sent uh
Representative Harlan Vincent
and I put together and we've
asked that, uh.
DFA take those guardrails and
put them into the process once
uh.
Lincoln and Rigoso request the
funds, uh.
There will be those guard rails,
uh, through DFA is my
understanding.
Sarah Woods, the, the guardrails
are a Homeland Security will
step hand in hand, applying with
each member or business or city,
county, municipality to FEMA.
And, uh, the application will be
made, it doesn't go to DFA, it
goes to Board of Finance. Board
of Finance will then look at
those.
Matches, make sure everything is
in place. They will approve the
loans and the loan money out,
and the FEMA trigger has been
happened and so then when FEMA
pays back,
It a board of Finance will
receive the money, right? That's
25%, that will be the state
match.
The
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you to the sponsors. I
think this is a beautiful piece
of work that we can walk out of
here with. That's 1st, 2nd, the
masterful work that Senator
Campost did, um, to bring that
money to his area when this
whole thing happened, you know,
in a big way there. What I'm
worried about, Mr. Chairman, is
just, and I'm not sure if the
presenters can answer or the
sponsors can answer this, but
how quickly is this money gonna
actually get to the ground and
actually help people because I
think that that really caused
all sorts of
You know, horrible things for
families in the last big fire.
And and that, Mr. Chairman, that
is the key to this.
Uh,
To have a mechanism in place.
Where as soon as FEMA says
Here's what we're going to give
you.
That is given
To the state female or whatever
agency.
And then that money is released
to them as opposed to waiting,
which I think uh.
You know, center compost and
those folks had to waiting for F
to pay them directly. This
expedites that process by
basically coming out of the
stake coffers for time being and
then when the uh FEMA money
comes in, it comes back to the
state. It's uh basically a
dollar for dollar match, so uh.
There's no one's paying any
extra or anything like that is
my understanding.
I'm sure that's a little bit of
what I'm worried about because
um
Uh, the state did everything we
were supposed to do.
And I'm concerned that, you
know, it got so rolled up and
wrapped up into all these other
uh regulations and processes
that monies didn't really get to
the people who really needed
them as quickly. So I just hope
that we're on top of that and uh
I don't sure if we have anybody
from emergency management. Is
that who would manage it from
here? Senator and uh in in LFC I
believe yesterday.
Homeland Security was there.
FEMA is actually checks to
people.
I don't know the dollar amounts,
but
Whether it's housing they need
or whatever.
So as soon as
When this bill signed into law.
Then the money will become
available.
Homeland Security is already
taking applicants for FEMA
matches and replacements.
Office's superintendent of
insurance. OK.
Is now on site and has been on
site to make sure that the
insurance claims are following,
I think Jake from State Farm got
a restraining order in order to
issue money, uh, State Farm is
one of the ones that was
resistant down there, so people
should remember that when they
buy insurance.
Um, and so as that happened,
It it start flowing, so OSI and
Homeland Security in this have
appropriated $10,000.
To help feed the process, so
once they apply, then the state
money can can be triggered
immediately.
If I'm mayor is sitting right
there and he needs.
Emergency water trucks or or
excavators or backhoes.
His application in FEMA says I
need.
3,330,000 for an excavator to do
this and da da and it matches
the FEMA application, it goes
in, the check's written and
board of Finance approves it.
And Mr. Chairman, could I add
too that just um to be clear
that sections, subsections B and
C section 2, that money is
available statewide. It's not
just this gentleman's area, so
that um to mitigate some of the
disaster in the northern part of
the state as well.
I just hope that we have a
complete and total focus on
getting the money out the door
as quickly as possible because
we're getting story after story
now of just complete loss. And
I, and, and we just really need
to help these folks. Thank you
and thanks for bringing this uh
this legislation.
And we also have to remember
that the governor has issued
7055 executive orders. Charles,
correct me if I'm wrong, to the
tune of about 55 million.
55 million. So on top of the 100
million, there's executive
orders of 55 million that's in
in the area right now.
I don't know how
That's handled. I know that 34
million was appropriated the
Homeland Security.
I think that's the number we,
yeah, so.
So Amner
Homeland Security
Those orders are out. I don't,
so Homeland Security has been
working hand in hand and so.
OK, Senator Gonzalez.
Mr. Chairman, if it's
appropriate, I'll make a pass.
Can can I have a second by
Senator Campos, uh, what do you
call the role.
Senator Burt.
Senator Burt votes yes. Senator
Campos. Senator Campos votes,
yes, Senator Brantley. Senator
Brantley votes, Senator
Gonzalez Gonzalez votes yes.
Senator Hemphill. Senator
Hemphill votes yes. Senator
Padilla, Senator Padilla votes
yes. Senator Scherer Senator
Scherer votes, yes, Senator
Steinborn. Senator Steinborn
votes yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes.
Vice Chair Rodriguez. Yes, Vice
Chair Rodriguez votes yes and
Chair Munoz. Yes,
yes.
11 to 0, you have a pass. You
have a pass. Thank you.
Appreciate your time. Thank you
to all everybody that worked on
this, right? This is gonna
start.
Um,
And so, uh, we'll see where we
go from here, but thank you.
Uh, today you're
Retirement is moving forward and
in it, so thank you for your
service to the state if we don't
ever see that in public again,
but we really do thank you. I
really appreciate you, me coming
up as a freshman legislator and
you under Paula and.
Controlling my kids from getting
on the roof and charging to get
on the elevator and all the
other violations they may have
committed horses in the parking
garage, uh, airplanes off the
rotunda
drones in the capital.
It's, it's quite a journey, so I
appreciate you and we'll always
have a special place for you.
Thank you.
