Good afternoon bill birch from
Senate district thirty three the
northern half of what you're
County a good portion linking
can as well as west side of
Chavis county in Roswell.
Senator Pat Woods.
Pat Woods from curry county
where in you Senate district
seven.
Senator share Senator Hemphill
Senator Campos.
bill share state senator from
District one which is
Farmington.
Good afternoon thank you Mr
chairman I'm Senator Siah Correa
himself from Silver City I
represent Senate district twenty
eight which includes Grant
County catching County and most
of our account.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the Senate finance committee
state senator Pete Campos coming
to you live from Senate district
eight to all the parts of seven
counties in northeastern New
Mexico it's always a pleasure to
be here with the people that
continue to not only have the
rhyme and reason in terms of
what we're gonna do with our
finances but as always to listen
to
point so many other requests.
It's great to be here with each
everyone at thank you very much
Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Dianne that
get you in Senator Hemphill to
get you.
Senator crystal diamond Senate
district thirty five which is
the southwest corner of New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman.
When already.
Okay.
We don't have Senator a.
Candelaria were Senator
Steinborn with the so we'll get
started David are you ready with
house bill two.
Representative Lundstrom Mr
chairman I I am ready in.
Right I don't know that she
trying to fight get started Mr
solely and I can do that could
you give me thirty seconds just
to confirm she doesn't mind
starting.
They would let us do senator
Clemente is built real quick and
then we'll just jump right back
to you senator Tom and you are.
You are a.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the finance committee of.
Since.
Mr chair you want me to explain
the bill or just simply state
that those there is no financial
impact Rick regarding this bill.
Senator tell me what you explain
the bill we do have an amendment
you do have an amendment to
strip that so explain the bill
then we'll go to the amendment
and then we'll get you out of
here quickly the longer you talk
thank you.
This bill amends the work and
save act which was the enacted
last year to address the
alarming shortfall retirement
preparation savings for New
Mexico's more than three hundred
forty thousand private sector
workers.
The this bill is a big deal last
year the governor had a.
Bill signing ceremony.
Establish a two track system
whereby citizens could choose a
marketplace plan or payroll
deduction IRA plan similar to
the New Mexico five sixteen
college savings plan.
So why does he think need
amending it needs a.
Because of the pandemic our.
The.
Mexico we're working state board
which was established by the
act.
Had some deadlines to implement
the market safe plan by July of
this year and the IRA deduction
plan was to be implemented by
January twenty two January
twenty twenty two because of the
pandemic they were able to meet
the statutory deadlines and if
they don't need on they'll be in
violation of state law so we
this.
Bill amends both plans to be
implemented the no later than
July one two thousand twenty
four.
So up and briefly Mr chair
there's several other
Other than this one did this
bill amendments to that change
statutory nature of the work in
state program for either
employees or employees.
Mr chair the does it creates a
statutory fund for program
design and implementation but
the bill does not include
appropriation Mr chair this.
The spill at the eight the
requirement for the purchase of
a blanket security bond the
product that the General
Services Department in New
Mexico by is not available.
And replaces it with a duty to
determine and procuring
necessary.
Appropriate liability coverage
finally Mr a Mr chair this this
bill protects the employees the
state.
And the work and state board by
clarifying that they guarantee
rates of return participant
contributions facilitated but
the work that safe.
So that concludes my remarks Mr
chair.
Thank you senator Clemente.
Members we do have an amendment
second I have a motion on the
amendment for discussion
purposes more Mr chairman.
On the administration.
Second so.
So we have a motion and a second
center Rodriguez I believe that
was senator Byrd yes Center
moment do you want to explain
the amendment this is your land.
All thank you Mr chair that.
It simply clarifies fact that
there's no appropriation
associated with Senate bill one
twenty nine.
Sentiment also strikes the word
creating because the plan is in
place correct.
Of correct.
Questions from committee members
on the amendment.
Senator Rodriguez are
contamination to adopt the
and remove Mr chairman we the
amendment.
Thank you.
A second.
I have a motion by Senator
Rodriguez second by Senator
Hemphill sorry having amended
bill or question from committee
members on the bill.
I don't have any questions and I
don't know that there are others
on the list I don't see any so
for the sake of time I'm gonna
move to do past Mr chairman
unless you have other questions
thank you all I'll second that
your have amended Mr chairman.
Thank you thank you.
At the center I just have one
question hello how many people
have begun to use this fund
since it was put in place last
year.
That's a good question
Mr chair at all but I can have
my expert witness stands the
the bunch yeah I'm bored maybe
she can that answer the answer
can you up.
Did you hear the question.
Mr chairman senator Tom and I
did hear the question I am a
member of the of the board of
directors on this program we
also actually have our board
chair on with us today as well
as the executive director of the
program and I'm gonna defer this
question to the interim
executive director cloudy our
meal.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator Tom and members of the
committee
if you there's no one rules or
participating in the work and
save program yet because it has
not yet been designed and
implemented.
I does that answer your question
Mr chair.
Yes that does
And just with a years time frame
you'd think you would have at
least as assigned and laid out
and and can you set and clean up
in the state going up in the
second year so I can answer my
question
so we do have a new passed
motion by Senator Rodriguez and
a second yeah Senator Gonzales
Pat we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair.
Senator.
Yes.
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos.
By Senator Candelaria it looks
excuse Madam diamond so.
Senator Diamond no.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator has.
Yes.
Thanks here is also used I'm
here now you there are very few
Senator
no no no okay Senator here now.
I do not see Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Yes Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez and furniture
manuals yes
yes thank seven yes.
Three no and.
Excuse when it.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Seven yes to get to it.
Regulations are Tommy got a bill
on the Senate finance.
John it's merry way and we'll
see you next week sometime thank
you Mr chairman thank you
members of the finance committee
for your support of this bill
which will help provide a better
retirement for many New Mexicans
thank you.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
with us madam chair you with the
ship this I see there you.
Now we're ready for House Bill
to madam chair if you want to go
and start already thank you Mr
chairman a good afternoon Senate
finance committee members it's a
special privilege for me this
afternoon to present House Bill
to the substitute house bill two
and house bill three of that
committee for the general
appropriate appropriations act
would appropriate with the feed
bill total of seven point three
nine billion for FY twenty two
an increase of four point six
percent over the current budget
year much of the three hundred
thirty two million dollar
increase just to restore general
funds to costs temporarily
covered with federal funds Mr
chairman we have a a she tier
that provides some of the high
level actions that we've taken
on the general appropriations
act.
For public education.
for FY twenty two the total is
three point three nine billion
seven hundred seventy five
million or five point five
percent know what we did with
this is we were looking for
attending eight extra day
extension for public schools K.
through twelve
K. five plus programs and
provided for an extra twenty
five days for all at risk
elementary schools.
This bill also includes funding
for targeted at risk schools and
also provides for
the impact aid issue that we've
been discussing for the last few
years under the higher education
P. is it increases instruction
and general funding by twenty
three million and we have
restored the federal funds what
from last year.
Under health and Human Services
we've increased the general fund
appropriation for Medicaid by
sixty four million and that's
after we re calibrated the two
additional quarters that were
allowed by the federal
government for Medicaid which
equates to seventy five million
per quarter.
Under early childhood the total
appropriation are up twenty two
million to expand pre K. expand
home visiting increase our
provider rates for the family
infant toddler program.
Under public safety the general
fund appropriation for the
corrections department is about
flat but an inmate population
decline of more than ten percent
is allowed in this budget
if we could Mr chairman under
compensation we've provided for
a one point five percent cost of
living adjustment for all school
higher ed and agency employees
costs about sixty four million
dollars and then we added an
additional two percent increase
for judges.
Under special supplemental
another appropriations and as
you know Mr chairman and
committee section five of the
bill in section six of the bill
are not reoccurring.
So we have included five million
dollars for tourism marketing
seventeen point five million for
lead to seven million for J. tip
twelve million for water
litigation.
We have allowed for three
million for state police
vehicles twenty million to pay
school districts for impact Aid
credits and four million for the
state fair as you can see you
can see we've also included some
for the Carlsbad brine well.
We did put funding into the
teacher affordability
scholarships.
for the teacher loan repayment
program and to the college
affordability scholarships.
Also under section ten we allow
for three hundred million for
the state local transportation
programs.
We have a hundred seventy for
state propped up projects and a
hundred twenty five million for
local projects local project
fund would run through the grant
program of the department of
transportation.
They've also allowed for in this
budget
some of our economic relief
measures such as Senate bill one
Senate bill two and house bill
eleven.
Mr chairman and committee with
also allowed within the
supplemental general
appropriations act three hundred
twenty five million to replenish
the unemployment trust fund and
additional dollars for broadband
with all that being said Mr
chairman and committee it leaves
about a twenty four percent
general fund reserve if I could
Mr chairman if we have the staff
to move to the
General fund financial summary.
Mr chairman and committee the
quickest way to get a snapshot
of this bill is the general fund
financial summary.
You can see with the
appropriations account for those
who aren't familiar with how
this bill works the
appropriations account in
essence is our checking account
for the state.
It includes recurring revenue a
nonrecurring revenue.
If you look at the estimate for
FY twenty two you can see the
February that should say
February twenty twenty one
update which is the third line
up.
Sixty nine million so the total
reoccurring revenue FY twenty
two is four point nine and they
what we've done with this bill
is we've allowed for half of
that to go into those federal
swabs we've talked about before.
Mr chairman if you go into the
non reoccurring area Wirth is
federal stimulus funds are seven
hundred fifty million there that
was something that we as a
committee and certainly Senate
finance work done during the
November special session.
You look at the twenty twenty
one non recurring revenue
legislation of the four hundred
and one million that's right
underneath that in that column
that's the economic recovery
bills.
And if we go into the that's a
total revenue when you look at
the Appropration pace.
For twenty twenty one regular
session including the feet bill
yes seven point three billion
dollars.
In the middle column you'll see
the one one four six which is a
which is a hundred forty six
million that is actually the
credit because of the swaps with
taken last year.
if we could go even a little
further down in that middle
column estimate twenty twenty
one where it says transfers to
and from the reserves.
Where it says one billion for
forty two dollars.
Further down if if we could.
Right there which is one point
four two.
Point nine there you go you've
got your marker on that that's
basically what when we look at
these high level financial
summaries that's what we're
short in our checking account.
The page and you look at reserve
the reserve detail.
What we actually do is we pull
from the operating to go into
the up from the operating count
to go into the appropriations
account so this page makes up
the reserve want to talk about
the reserve being twenty three
point eight percent it's because
it's made up of the operating
reserve which is basically our
savings account of the state
support fund which is what we're
going to pull coverage for the
impact aid Senator FY twenty
two.
It's made up of the tobacco
settlement permanent funds in
the tax stabilization reserve or
what we commonly call Mr
chairman and committee the rainy
day fund.
So when we when we see in our.
appropriations total
appropriations reserve of
billion dollars short where we
get that from in a way that
balance the books were is that
it comes from the transfer from
to the appropriations account
under the operating reserve of
one one billion forty two.
This is the easiest way to
understand what's happening with
our general fund and with this
bill is to look at the fund
financial summary.
This is all based on consensus
revenue estimates as you know Mr
chairman we we do a consensus
revenue
report at the beginning of the
session and then we get an
updated February.
West about seventy five percent
of that comes from oil and gas
money and with that you can see
the details we could have the
staff go back on the summary I
HSD.
Committee Mr Chairman a sense of
exactly where everything else
this is a good chart here is the
general fund high level
appropriation summary if you
look at SCG line eight.
In an additional seventy million
dollars into the SCG.
half million for a line fifteen
under other categorical for
higher ed line seventeen what
well that that indicates the
half million line eighteen is
for the courts three hundred
thousand line nineteen is
district attorney's a hundred
thousand and so forth.
One is a little bit about line
thirty three the Medicaid and
Medicaid department the reason
that looks like it's negative
which is actually not when we
get into the balance sheet is
because of the two quarters that
were allowed to spend this year.
So with that being said Mr
chairman and committee we're
happy to present the summary of
house bill the house bill to
substitute which
now before you be happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you madam chair.
B..
I don't see anybody's hand
raised with questions from
committee members
right I think my only question
is David how much not
withstanding language do we have
in the budget.
Mr chairman my first answers
about the same as last year
which is not very much last year
we had about ten instances I I
don't think it's any more than
that.
But I will tell them for you
today but I I think less than
ten.
Okay Senator Steinborn you have
a question.
I I do you Mr chairman and madam
chair appropriation good to see
you again and thanks for all
your work on that doing your
committee I just a few questions
where are where the house bill
to end up as far as I just want
to ask about a few departments
in terms of.
Where the LESC are the executive
well with the daylight if you
will like on.
The energy minerals and natural
resources department I basically
like to ask about EMNRD
the environment department.
And in tourism.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and all I see is your
pictures so it is nice to see
that being a former HSC member
it's good to see you again if
you look at the summary by
agency that we could look at
those account codes I can tell
you that the increased to both
the EMNRD and the environment
department was very good we had
a sub committee that worked on
on both of those projects and as
you know when we take up our
budget we start with both the
LESC and the DFA recommendation
primarily most of what we take
is the LFC recommendation and as
I say we did we did that at the
some funding into that I'm gonna
ask David and Charles tells
exactly how much.
You can also see it on the
general fund high level
appropriation summary so so for
ended energy and minerals and
natural resources department the
general fund amounts totals
twenty three point five million
it is an increase of one point
four percent the house
appropriations and finance
committee added six hundred
fifty thousand to the LFC
recommendation that the top
priority the executive was a
hundred fifty thousand for
program support which happened
dition rose three hundred
thousand more for the
conservation division a couple
hundred thousand or forestry the
environment department are we.
Action of HLC was that a million
to the LFC recommendations for a
total increase of seven point
six percent.
Which is our about a million
because the LFC recommendation
was flat so seven point six
percent increase from majority
of sleep and are you included
the HSA assets include about a
half a million to hire the.
Person in the environmental
protection division we're doing
inspections and it included of
funding almost in all the other
programs a couple hundred or
three hundred for the total of a
million and it also assumed
fund balance of one point four
million for the environment
department contingent on passing
a bill that would lead to
imposing fees on water systems
if that bill passes it would be
R. one point four million.
Mr chairman for the benefit of
your new members if they look at
the general fund high level
appropriation summary that looks
like this.
You will see on the HSC over and
under.
Go to line twenty nine that the
energy minerals and natural
resources department agency code
five twenty one that six hundred
thousand.
And if you go down the line
thirty seven that's the million
dollars that David mentioned for
our agency code six six seven
the environment are.
Okay thank you for those answers
by the way I I would be on
camera madam chair but my webcam
is not working.
It is the image I just attempt
in your honor and to no avail it
was worse it was worse than my
picture in the chilly Phil but.
Okay well thank you and I did
look through the budget last
night and I was just aware that
you guys definitely did plus up
those numbers which is
appreciated and I now to our
chairman I and to the committee
I I know that given the capacity
that was left for the Senate
those are some areas I
personally would love to let me
see what we can do and it was
then chair was it Mr was it also
my observation we've we've
funded about sixteen million for
the tourism that I hit that
number correctly.
Mr chairman Senator the tourism
agency is agency code for
eighteen line twenty six.
but this is we this is the base
operating budget with them the
specials we added five million
dollars and that's for the
marketing piece that they had
requested I think they've
requested twenty five what we
put in I.
Okay thank you I I don't know
where I'm sixteen and I realize
that the I guess thinking of the
twenty five a asked but
associate we're I okay just
wanting to know and that I
appreciated again that's all I
have Mister chairman and I'm
sure there are other areas I'll
be looking into as well thank
you madam chair you're welcome
you thank you.
Senator Rodriguez.
Chairman and I first want to
thank the all right chairwoman
of having Lundstrom for the work
and the good explanation of
thank you Representative
Lundstrom I just have one
question on the back to the
environment department is trying
to leave through it I would save
us all from time but if you can
briefly help me find where the
corrective action fund this in
the environment department I
just want to say that to see how
much we actually cut into that
or if we re appropriated some of
that into another area can you
tell me that madam chairman
again.
Was
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you vice chair I'm not sure if
the bill came across with our
index way about that index was
was provided.
Everything about the environment
department is on page one all
four of our of our bill that
we've got the high level
spreadsheet tonight asked David
to respond to that please.
The corrective action fund is
administered by the environment
part of my comments earlier were
about general fund
appropriations from for the
environment department the
correct action
defection burned I had some
appropriations for I'm gonna say
a couple million for Brian well
and I will follow up but I think
we believe that after these
appropriations or whatever else
about ten million which is about
their annual amount of on going
appropriations for.
Okay thank you want to make sure
we have money on their now
closed tags yes thanks for
Grumman thank you very much
that's all I have madam chairman
thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Gonzales.
Mr chairman if that's
appropriate at this time I'd
like to make a motion for
approval.
Okay Senator Gonzales I don't
think we need any motions were
just reviewing house bill two.
Okay very well.
I don't see any any else on the
list of Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I have a question we've got a a
lot of federal monies that came
in.
So how much of the increase of
the general fund is.
Somehow replacing federal funds
are I don't quite understand
that part.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Wirth
in December December twenty
twenty well we receive federal
funds that are cares dollars and
that was over four hundred
million if I recall and then we
are anticipating federal funds
through president Biden's
stimulus package that's close to
a billion dollars or more we
have we we we do have a
breakdown of what we think each
agency would receive.
Mr chairman and senator when
we're building mass for building
this around our consensus
revenue report with for general
fund and that does not
anticipate.
Things like cares money this is
general fund
Budgeting as as you know Senator
we we budget everything and they
were responsible for all funds
for every agency but what you're
going to see in this bill is the
focus is on the general fund
portion that is that correct
David.
So trump Mr chair and and.
madam chairman.
What you're saying is that we
are we know we've got these
federal funds but we're not
concerning them as revenue which
is that no
no Mr Mr chairman Senator
they're considered other funds
within the departments you've
probably seen those high level
different sheets for each
department you'll see the
general fund transfer pace and
then you'll see other funds
that's where they're generally
captured but our focus in this
budget and those changes that
you've succinct high level
appropriation summary is about
general fund dollars recurring
general fund dollars.
Okay I'm sure that I'm going to
figure this out that is why I
got to it yet.
Madam chair will help you.
Thank you I don't see any other
questions from committee members
of thank you chair Lundstrom
Propecia time for house bill two
and all your hard work will.
Begin to look at our side and
and see what happens already for
thank you Mr chairman and good
afternoon everybody.
Thank you Senator not Valerie
with us for Senate bill seventy
two is amended.
Mr chairman I think.
Senator Novell wanted that
rolled over.
I think you did and then he came
back in okay.
I'm looking for.
I think you saw on the road Mr
Chairman but I'm not sure okay I
I don't see in there Senator
Lopez are you with us.
I don't see Senator Lopez with
this either.
Can someone reach out to try to
call center Lopez.
Not Senator a Senator Rodriguez
one to Senator Lopez has built
pretty simple Senate bill one
eleven.
The packet.
Yes
the
cashier.
We do have an amendment to the
bill center okay all right well
let's move the amendment first.
One eleven here.
I think.
Thanks earlier doing that so the
amendment strikes the
appropriation of one million
dollars and reduces it to one
hundred thousand is what
the amendment does.
Thank you okay so move the
amendment for discussion Mr
chairman.
Thank you senator do you want
explain the bill real quick yes
one does very well as a variety
of this appropriates one million
but of course with the amendment
will different from the general
fund to the department of
finance administration to hire a
professional survey here in
property law attorney to assist
land grants in defining and
defending the COVID lands
actually very good bill Mr
chairman we hear the need for
this in the summer the interim
committees about the need for
this so the appropriation would
be for fiscal year twenty two
through twenty six even though
it's less now with the amendment
enhancement money would revert
to the general fund basically
that's what it does is it is it
just appropriates funding to
hire survey of professionals are
rural property lottery to assist
land grants.
Thank you center in the
amendment was one that the
sponsor of the bill did
recommend to us and so we
drafted that for her.
Questions on the bill.
See anybody.
I think the what's the center.
You'll have to excuse me because
I I never have Senator the land
grants.
internal at all.
But
the settlement.
Madam with I see you down here.
Senator Lopez.
It makes.
Yes Senator.
You're with us now thanks.
we just amended your bills and
Center woods has a question
about the the land grant.
Senator Woods Senator Lopez is
on so you can address her.
Okay okay.
Mr chairman of the Senator Lopez
Lopez I just and I I don't know
this is not own the amendment
but maybe we can go around it a
little bit.
Is this a reoccurring costs that
we're doing here are we.
Gradually working around all of
these land grants in trying to
to get surveyed and and that
kind of stuff you know and and
are we it is kind of reoccurring
legal fees is that kinda what
we've got going and it just kind
in turn around and trying to get
it done.
Madam chair Matt us Mr chairman
and.
Madam whip is that ten what we
got going.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and senator woods and I
apologize I was in as as we all
are doing the dance for
committees today
the if I could Mr chairman I do
have my expert witness R. two to
R. to let them I think you could
also give just a little bit more
of a background your question
Senator words Mr engine.
Your muted.
I thank you Mr chairman.
Senator what Senator Lopez
yes so the lender Council ari
does try to provide legal
assistance as well as serving
services to land grants but it's
in a very limited capacity
there's a greater need than we
have currently the resources to
meet so the intention is to with
this bill was to try to will
provide some of those resources
on at least for that period of
that five year period and then
determine where we were from
there so Mister chairman Senator
Woods that intention would be
hopefully for it to be recurring
for some number of years just so
that we can begin to sort of
addressed some of those needs
that are that are the council
received something that
communities.
Okay all right thank you very
much.
I don't see any other hands
raised.
I think we can we have a new
passed motion admitting past Mr
Chairman representative thank
you.
A second.
Thank you so we have a new pass
motion by Senator Rodriguez and
a second by Senator Hemphill
that we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Senator Burt.
Start a past.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
If you're gonna go with yes
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share.
It is.
Thank you share no.
Thank you sure no Senator
Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manuals.
Yes
yes yes and we did have Senator
Burt pass.
yes.
Senator Burt yes so that is ten
yes one no.
The measure passed.
Thank you Senator Lopez you do
have a due pass and.
Thank you for working on the.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you Senator are you there.
Yes I'm here.
Senator I I know that Dr no
left.
What we're gonna have to let you
like.
Sir Senator share no or
something.
I think.
It's a shorter work I'm I have
to use the fewest letters
possible.
Letters and vows are are just
letters.
General certainly sellable I.
I just wanted to make that kind
of point real quick it was can
entertain today thank you guys
tomorrow we're gonna try to run
a really shortage and that.
It will be our last weekend to
try to.
Get out of the famous Center
share free range chicken coop.
So we can go home and see our
families and maybe spend one
last time for work captured for
the rest of the session.
Appreciate everybody today thank
you House Bill to I will try to
visit with each and everyone of
you Senator Gonzales may reach
out to each and everyone of you
to to talk to you.
What I have been working on.
When we get into agencies and
dollars and where we think we
want to add money for agencies
and and start the conversation
with you individually Senator
Rodriguez and Senator Gonzales
thank you for for working on.
On severance tax and and the
capital bill we got a number it
was kind of late so
I appreciate that Sir Campos do
we need to work on three seventy
seven right now.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
now all of the members have
submitted some of the changes
that they had in the language we
should have the bill craft and
we should be ready the beginning
of next week so that we can have
take action on that and then to
move forward thank you Mr.
Thank you I do also want to
thank our staff John and Wayne
and everybody that's working on
that stuff there was actually
only one mistake that that we
made in Senate finance and it
was no miracle mistake.
And the other ones were were by
members so I appreciate that.
John work really hard to get
that done they grow get three
seventy seven may be out here
tomorrow and then to the for
Monday and we should be good.
So any questions what direction
we want to head sides every
direction the state because
everybody lives in a different
place.
So tomorrow what we will try to.
meet and try to rent a room real
quick so I can get on the road
or if they have built in other
committees and this is a time
here where everybody's going to
start having built crossover I
think pretty quick you'll start
seeing some bills cross over in
the house and so just let us
know where you're at.
if you can't get me make sure I
get you Wayne's number so that
way I can kind of make sure I
got a quorum because.
I got a scroll through my screen
to see who's here and who's not
here so we can contract.
Senator Candelaria would you
touch base with me right after
me.
At the same time Mr chairman
tomorrow.
Yes I think the same time and I
think we can be done in about an
hour I think we maybe have two
bills house bill or Senate bill
forty one which is the impact
aid bill Senator Campos you here
your tax bill the seventy seven
and I think we would be good for
the day.
Thank you one of this.
Always Senator Rodriguez here is
that one o'clock or one thirty I
think it's one.
Yes one o'clock one o'clock is
what our schedule.
Okay.
There is a list of bills but
we're not we're not gonna hear
mall because like I said it's
our last chance to escape.
So.
Okay.
Thank you guys appreciate each
never let me have a good
evening.
Thank you have a good evening to
everyone you.
Right I.
