Then tell tell us if the house
to the exact correct the LFC
record for the.
You.
All right thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst for the legislative
finance committee we're joined
by the New Mexico tourism
secretary Janice prior as well
as Brian Chavez from DFA filling
in for Simon Miller I will go
over the high level differences
between the executive and LFC
recommendations.
Waiting for handouts of all sure
thank you you can go ahead and
start but just so you know okay.
sure so but while we're waiting
on that hand out also directed
to a couple pages in your packet
that you have in front of you
this is agency code four one
nine tourism department your
first page should be bullets and
then right behind your believes
he should have a high level it
looks like this this is going to
show you those kind of item by
item differences yes a good
email all okay.
So this is a the item by item
differences in the
recommendations there and then
right behind that on page three
of your packet you have
something that looks like this
this is a difference between
these one time appropriations so
special in supplemental
recommendations this is helpful
because both recommendations
recommended money especially for
marketing in different parts of
the budget so this is help for
helpful for seeing some of those
differences.
I will be quick over all the
recommendations are about two
point eight million dollars in
general fund revenue part of the
LFC recommendation included a
general fund increase of one
point nine million that's about
nine point seven percent the
executive recommendation
included a general fund revenue
increase of four point seven
million or about twenty three
point nine percent so those
major differences are in just
three items the executive
recommendation supported about
two hundred and eighty four
thousand more for personnel
funding and then the LFC and
that was in the program support
division.
The executive recommended three
million and recurring funding
for a national marketing
campaign and five hundred
thousand for local marketing
initiatives the LFC does include
seven hundred fifty thousand in
recurring funding for marketing
as well as four hundred and
fifty thousand for local
marketing but both
recommendations recommended
additional marketing funds in
one time funding so again take a
look at your special she that'll
show you those recommendations.
Finally the executive
recommendation included two
hundred thousand for the sports
authority that was not included
in the LFC recommendation.
Both recommendations did support
the department's request for
additional personnel of funding
and marketing and promotion of
analyst reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
a so I will let Mr trump is make
any additional comments on the
recommendations and then we can
turn it over to the secretary Mr
chair nothing that.
Member to member Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you so much for having me today
in your packet you have this
presentation right here or well
I.
Sorry and one more thing the one
thing he told me to do hi agency
took the LFC recommendation I
normally always remember
is the higher or the lower which
was the lower one Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for
having me here today I'll be
doing this quick presentation
ten slices in your packet
you know that the first slide is
really just a question that we
ask ourselves at the tourism
department every day how do we
help businesses and communities
become more competitive as a
stand alone of global
marketplace you know this is a
question that we've been asking
for over a decade and what is
happened is we've been able to
have steady growth over the last
ten years of thirty percent that
means more visitors are coming
here to New Mexico spending
money in our retail more hotels
our communities our events and
so New Mexico's really reaping
the benefit of this return on
investment both with our G. R.
T. and also for small business.
The second later the two
questions that we asked
ourselves right before New
Mexico true was much it's how do
we unite the tourism industry
and how do we have a larger
voice with less investment than
our competitors over ten years
ago the tourism department had
for less funds that are
competitive states and so it
really took a collective effort
across the state to with all of
our partners to be competitive
and so that really was the basis
of how New Mexico true came
about how are cooperative
marketing came about and how we
have over six hundred businesses
products that our New Mexico
true certified or communities
that have adopted the New Mexico
true Brandt if you go to page
three agency in detail some of
our success story.
in twenty twenty one the largest
contributor to real GDP growth
in New Mexico's arts
entertainment and recreation
accommodation and food service
the tourism sector accounted for
one point eighteen percent point
of the total growth in real GDP
nine years of year over year
record breaking tourism growth
you can see there just the
amount of money that has come
into our communities across the
state.
Jobs have grown on average two
times faster than other sectors.
And New Mexico's tourism
pandemic recovery actually
outpaced the national average I
really believe because we had
this nation we were able to
bounce back more quickly than
other states for our tourism
sector so just a real feather in
our half leisure and hospitality
now contributes five point two
percent of all private industry
GDP representing a third of all
GDP contribution from the
extraction industry so it really
diversifying our economy and
that's something that this body
has been wanting to do and
continues to want to do is
diversify our economy and
tourism is delivering on that
need seven to one return on
taxpayer investment the tax base
level most recently did in our
on line on our Los Angeles
advertising campaign and that
was fifty six dollars in
spending for every dollar we
spend to marketing.
is loaded drive by residents
near the border local business
communities we have a ton of
different brand partners.
So this light on the slight work
this is for tourism economy
advancement model we introduce
this a few years ago that we're
looking at tourism much more
than just marketing looking at
how do we make sure that we
create demands there are more
than also we have sustainable
growth we're looking at
infrastructure looking at
technical assistance for small
businesses and much more and so
you'll see several these
programs later on about my
request for additional funding.
Slide five these are the
strategic questions that we're
asking now how do we better
connect rural businesses events
attractions experiences creators
artisans accommodations to
benefit more from the tourism
economy.
How do we negotiate better
distributor commission rates for
our businesses for example our
hotels we have over seven
hundred in the state over half
of those are what we call
independence they're not in the
area they're not a Hilton so
they're on their own some of
like love fund is an independent
hotel these independent hotels
when they are trying to get
their product in front of
consumers on places like Expedia
Travelocity booking dot com
they're paying between twenty
and twenty five percent of each
booking the deal online that's a
huge cut of their profits now
the more yes the Hiltons they're
able to negotiate globally to
bring that price down into ten
to fifteen percent so here in
New Mexico actually in rural New
Mexico we have a disadvantage
for small businesses because
they can't they can't negotiate
globally at that scale to bring
down the commission rates.
And then we ask how do
businesses gain some parity in
the global tourism market place
well our budget budget has grown
considerably we still we do not
do international marketing
because the it's just cost
prohibitive and it doesn't have
a strong return on investment if
you think about starting a whole
new campaign is the China you
have to find a kid a company
that specializes in that you
have to their culture you have
to it's not just translating the
ads that you have it's a whole
different market strategy and so
how do we get some parity
though.
Bit about something that's very
exciting on slide six we
launched two weeks ago the
tourism exchange we are the
first state in the country to
launch it here in the US it is
not a website it is a B. two B.
platform it's a market place
we're hotels attractions and
events can enter into the system
and there's already pre
negotiated rates to distributors
that includes Expedia
Travelocity and and on and on on
there's thousands of a so all
those rates are negotiated
globally yeah we're not the only
ones that have done this this
actually began in Australia they
asked the question how do we
connect our rural businesses to
those the big tourism
destinations the imports that
they have and so they want to
tourism exchange fourteen years
ago and on page seventy can see
some of the results that
Australia had a particularly of
how many suppliers have adopted
this new technology the supplier
will be a hotel and event a tour
operator outfitters and guides
and this is a really big deal
and they were able to connect
the rural outback with the
tourism economy in the major
cities.
It was adopted by Great Britain.
They launched in two thousand
nineteen Japan launched in
twenty twenty and even though
the pandemic had slowed down the
adoption rate as soon as things
started opening up to suppliers
just jumped on it because the
value proposition makes a huge
difference for their businesses
their father lines and also
their ability to be on a global
market place.
Page eight you can see a quick
diagram of the the screen it
looks like behind the scenes for
this B. two B. market place up
top or the suppliers they
actually plug their technology
through an API directly into the
exchange so the exchange has
access to live inventory hotel
rooms in pricing seasonally once
is in the exchange and they say
Hey this is where I want to have
my drugs Expedia Travelocity the
trade portal what have you all
of their product is
automatically pushed out to
those different distributors and
those distributors have lied in
the Tory now this is consumers
would never know we are on on
Expedia we put the fun date that
the detective exceeded that over
to you of the fund in so this
technology is really a disruptor
in the tourism sector
unfortunately we are we're
chosen to do the beta for the
United States same company same
technology but we have this
platform first all the other
states we're told that we're
gonna work with New Mexico first
way to get this up and running
and so we're getting quite a bit
of attention and support from
eight a global network for us
here in New Mexico to take
advantage of this in the first
to market.
So with that we just turn
directly over to our.
FY twenty four proposed budget
on page nine.
And what we have on page nine is
on the left side we have
approved programmatic outcomes
we have the executive budget the
next column we have LFC and then
we have what is coming over and
H. B. two from the House
Appropriations and the final
column is my request for
amendments from the Senate
finance committee
Going on the on the right side.
In the base budget we're asking.
And for one point eight million
dollars this will help us keep
our current plan markets we're
currently in seven point markets
media has gotten more expensive
so I'm asking for those funds
going down the special
appropriations are local
marketing cooperative programs
this is the bucket of of where
we work with all of the
communities across the state
This Is are co operative
marketing program this is our
publicity program this is our
event program we need it the
details are on the back of this
on the last page so the three
point five national advertising
we're asking for an additional
five million so we can finally
enter at the San Francisco Bay
Area market this is been on our
wish list for about six years so
we're really hopeful that
because we do have a higher
budget this year that will be
able to do that here with New
Mexico we did a we we enter the
LA market based on our research
and got that great return on
investment of fifty six dollars
and visitor spending to a dollar
spent in advertising the same
study that show those results
show that Sam Cisco is going to
deliver similar results it's a
very strong market for us.
so if you turn the last page
Page ten.
It shows our priorities for
those three requests number one
is a special appropriation for a
marketing our hope the local
marketing initiatives are co op
our national publicity
cooperative program in rural
pathways program priority two is
the one point eight for the base
budget so we can keep our
current point markets and
priority three is a five million
dollar special fruit
appropriation for national
advertising with that chair I
stand for questions.
As.
Thank you Mr chairman I know
have all as much traffic Grammy
today
it's not really a a question but
a comment I you know with.
We have an agency here that is
produced for the last eleven
twelve years double digit
production out of this we talk
about PED we talk about health
care we talk about Medicare
about all the money that we put
into those agencies.
And we get the same results
serve or very little uptick in
those agencies.
And yet we have an agency here
that really is the doorway to
New Mexico if we continue to
fund the marketing aspect of
this more people come into the
state it's really it's really
that simple and by the way it
comes of the state may be some
doctors may be some police
officers first responders some
health care workers who fell in
love with the state because we
believe that's what's going to
happen to think with we get in
here.
that may want to move here is
actually the doorway to this we
need to continue to fund tourism
at proper levels in the big
scheme of things their entire
budget is very small compared to
some of the bigger agencies that
we're looking at and yet this
agency can help other agencies
open the door again to docks and
safety officers and and and
whoever else we may need in the
state so I'm I just think that
we need to seriously consider.
Not just you know the LFC budget
or or what they could do to but
maybe as we go on to some
negotiations if we find some
additional money we really need
some additional money and
tourism.
Because that helps fund
everything else that we get in I
mean lodgers tax communities
communities really benefit from
this tax we benefit again from
people coming to the state if
they like it maybe one move the
business here maybe you want to
come to work here
we just really need to take a
second look I think it tourism
and and quite frankly the meager
amount that they're asking to
continue their marketing
capabilities they've proven that
they're marketing works we just
need to give them the ability to
continue that work expect that's
all I have Mister.
Senator Gonzales thank you Mr
chairman and thank you secretary
of in line with the same thing
that's what senator Byrd
do supporting feeler additional
request but with the additional
request was in place.
How does that do with our
neighboring states.
Mr chair members of the
committee I don't have the the
exact comparison but that would
I know we've caught caught up
with Utah but we're still behind
Colorado and Arizona in so this
would get us pretty close to I
believe Colorado from the state
perspective what's interesting
is that those three states if
you take their three biggest
cities and what they have for
largest tax to promote as well
the.
We're not even close so if you
take their three biggest cities
and the state investment it's
more than double than what our
budget is and we just don't have
as big of cities that have the
local revenue to be able to
promote themselves which makes a
special appropriation for our
our local programs so important
because our local communities
really rely on us not only to
for the funding component of it
but we provide the technical
assistance we're most of our
local communities there's one
person doing tourism you know if
you go to some of the larger
cities in New Mexico Colorado
Utah or Arizona they have a
whole team of ten to twelve to
twenty people it's usually the
locals have a bigger staff than
the state that but it's flipped
here in New Mexico and so we
provide technical assistance we
provide assistance and buying
media and by we get to buy it in
volumes.
Better deal for our local
communities.
Well Mr chairman for more of.
In this that you have for us.
Of make it local.
So remember has for their area.
The the and again just with the.
Following up on a senator Byrd I
mean it really speaks for itself
I'm in the the number of jobs
and you know what it does the
number of visitors but more than
anything is for.
Certain parts of the state.
It's we leave and die by.
Tourism you know the it's
something in the state really
has to really keep on an ongoing
basis and cultivate and just how
can we improve it you know so
also in line with the the
request if there's the funding
to support to increase.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
madam secretary good afternoon
something that which we didn't
talk about today but we you and
I have talked a lot about is
what your department does with
keeping Mexico beautiful and you
manage about a million dollar
grant program to communities to
deal with letter so thank you
for that and all the good work
you all done.
You know
One thing we need to do is a
state that I know Senator
Diamond I are working on
together and you and I talked
about madam secretary's as we
promote our product and we grow
our outdoor economy it's how do
we think about also not traction
New Mexico and cleaning up New
Mexico we talked about it we
have an incredible litter
problem out on our public lands
and one thing our state doesn't
do is spend any money marketing
teaching the next generation
about stewardship about
protecting this product that we
have we're talking about growing
which really more so than most
other states are competitive
advantage is the land of in chat
it is actually our natural areas
and so I just plug that to folks
because and then Senator men are
gonna be talking to the
committee about it and we talk
about a secretary in your really
kind of the premier agency to
help spearhead that through your
keep New Mexico beautiful
program so so I just wanted to
flag them thank you for the good
work you do you know with the.
We keep New Mexico clean
beautiful program thank you Mr.
Any other questions as secretary
each touched on something I want
to know about sports authority.
Tell me what that is Mr chair
members of the committee so
several years ago with us sports
authority it was brought in to
become became an a division of
the tourism department
several years ago it was de
funded this pre.
Of this administration and so it
hasn't been funded for quite
awhile.
But.
So as you.
Mr chair members the committee
if you according to the statute
it is supposed to attract
sporting groups to New Mexico so
that way there's economic
impacts in those communities
where sporting about this.
And has it ever been used.
Mr chair members of the
committee I can't speak to that
because that was before my time
here.
And you have no interest in
doing that Mr chair members of
the committee there with
attracting sporting groups there
is a longer return on investment
because it's going to take three
to five years you bid on a
sporting group to come to New
Mexico they already have three
to five years booked out in
their planning process and so
it's difficult to quantify how
successful that would be we did
get some a special appropriation
last year to do an RFP to do a
study on what the benefits could
be that our of peas actually
coming out here soon this can be
the second time we put it out
because the first time we didn't
have anyone respond so we're
hoping we'll get someone else
someone to respond to that our
peace so we can actually see a
study of what the potential is
because right now we don't know.
And how much is are a P. for.
I think the appropriation is
only for a hundred two hundred.
It's two hundred total but I
doubt it's going to cost that
much Mr chair members of the
committee the current a request
for this point authorities a
total of two hundred thousand
dollars that would be a one
hundred thousand for executive
director and then a hundred
thousand for something like this
R. F. P. I will also note for
committee members that of bill
to reinstate the sports
authority did make it all the
way through both chambers last
year and was vetoed by the
governor which is part of why it
was not included in the LFC
recommendation.
So madam secretary you're
telling me you're sending out an
RFP for of the total by the
executive.
The executive get want and
you're still going to send out
the R. P. so my understanding Mr
chair members of the committee
the governor vetoed that
particular bill because there
were some changes to the statute
that she was not in line with.
That's not that's question
answer asked so you're still
going to send out our of P. even
though you really don't want to
do this.
And we're gonna spend two
hundred thousand dollars because
we just want a piece of paper
and throw in the corner and say
have a nice day see you later Mr
chair members of the committee
the legislature appropriated the
money and it was a recurring
special I believe.
Chair Mister chairman it was
junior money and it's
reoccurring.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of the department of
finance and administration I
apologize it was originally put
in the bill as a recurring
junior appropriation LESC with
the support of the department of
finance administration a look at
that and I believe we ended up
scoring it is nonrecurring so
that's why it was in the agency
requests this might I mean I
don't know if the state agency
was at three hundred two hundred
thousand out the window and just
open the window and thrown out
for never gonna do it I mean
just send the money back to the
budget we really don't want to
do it don't waste our time don't
waste our money two hundred
thousands a lot of money just to
get a study.
And say well we don't have any
process will have any goals and
having nation of to do this to
me I mean I I hope I hope you're
hearing what I'm saying because.
I mean the average person is
making forty fifty thousand
dollars a year.
Two hundred thousand dollars a
lot of money for an absolutely
nothing that we're.
It plan and we had action and
you knew which one do and there
wasn't a video and say okay well
that makes kind of makes sense
but when there's a veto in.
And you can get the first R. P.
on the study and and just to
force the study to do.
Spend two hundred thousand of to
waste of taxpayer dollars and
then maybe the biggest waste
efforts so far during the
session
Let me ask you a Indian
ceremonial.
I know there's a bill out there
you guys tracking that are you
in support of the that bill to
move from agency what worries
agency on that Mr chair members
of the committee and I am
totally neutral party at.
Mr chair members of the
committee we are supportive we
heard the the local community
say that they would like to have
more local control and so the
proposal is to have it with the
local government division over a
DFA it is also my understanding
right now H. B. two there is a
special appropriation for inter
tribal ceremonial that is going
to local division so I think
it's well on its way on moving
that direction.
And then the.
You launch this exchange with no
additional cost to the state
correct.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is that the
exchange is actually something
that I asked for funding for
last legislative session and it
was included in our budget it is
pretty it's pretty nominal that
should that states picking up
the costs for the exchange it is
free to use for all the
businesses.
How much the cost to the state
for the exchange Mr chair
members of the committee I don't
have the exact amount in front
of me but it's it's just over a
hundred thousand dollars and I
can get back to you on the
faster that is.
Because I'm good that's a
perfect example of you take a
hundred thousand dollars in
you're getting benefit from it
rather than taking two hundred
thousand dollars and having a
bunch of words and thrown in the
corners help somebody recycles
at some points and and.
Mr chair members that junior
bills can sometimes.
Request those types of programs
I mean in the thanks Zach has
ability to to tell their
secretaries to do or not do
something even though the junior
bill funding is there there's no
statute that requires you to do
that correct no there Mr chair
members the committee the
statute is still on the books so
it is an unfunded mandate at
this point.
Valentine's call me.
Madam secretary but the statute
doesn't require you to spend two
hundred thousand to do the study
correct Mr chair members of the
committee the statute does
require me to hire staff for
this particular division
flat director as well as a
coordinator.
I guess we need to have that
conversation somewhere else and
see if that's really the best
fit and how we handle that so
continue the question from
committee members
we have other committee members
are gonna leave to do bill so
we're not gonna hear anymore
agencies gonna get some built up
and then we're going to quit for
the day Senator Duhigg gas to
get to her son.
so gonna have built in it won't
have any other agencies today
Senator Rodriguez has to go
somewhere Senator Campos
guns Senator Padilla.
Senator Duhigg in the look and
your bill senators also you
ready but in this.
We are going to do a Senate bill
forty three.
Senator sure.
This
is.
You guys.
Senator Jake you by yourself go
ahead and proceed so we can
right up tears quickly as we
can.
We have a the bill in your book
you have an F. analysis and and
I are so we should be.
Thank you Mr chair.
We have set up their.
So.
Quick as you can go I'll be very
fast Mr chair son is going to be
eating is spaghetti o's by an
order.
Well that's what I taught him
how to use the can openers.
I have for those you don't know
that by those that they actually
have.
I have here with me Mr chair
Linda director Lizzie often for
the secretary of state's office
this is a very simple bill and
you it will look familiar from
last session this is a bill that
currently I in our election code
we have a provision in there
that says that if you try to
intimidate which means us to it
induce fear
in a motor then that is
intimidated and and and do so
for the purpose of interfering
with their free exercise of
elective franchise or impartial
administration election code of
the election code then that is a
fourth degree felony
intimidation we want to expand
that existing felonies also
cover our election
administrators are full workers
all the people who do the hard
work of running our elections
unfortunately since the twenty
twenty election there has been a
sharp uptick in
threats against election
administrative errors and we
want to make sure that they have
the same protections the voters
to.
Thank you I know she doesn't
have any to add we're going to
go to opposition in the audience
and seen that anybody here and
support.
We only have one comment on.
We have one written comment and
he's in support.
Senate bill forty three we'll go
to questions from committee
members.
Senator Hemphill.
Out of Mr chairman and senator
just wanted to thank you for
bringing the car and I think
it's a really important bill and
I look forward to supporting.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
last year this is a beautiful
two page bill that state
something we're just gonna stay
two page bill yeah last year
gained a little weight in the
house that that this year and I
on the good diet that I'm good I
I I I think it is it's it's
committed to its goals this year
so yeah thank you.
Just remember that if it comes
back across the general want to
be appointed on to that diet
election conference can.
Thank you Mr chair and Center
thanks for bring this just does
this include
poll watchers as well and the
folks who are are going kind of
so we have that system of checks
and balances with that also
improve I'm not seeing it
specific in here but.
Would it be under like at the
poll workers or something like
that so it includes anyone who
is an employee or agent of a of
of the secretary of state's
office Canaccord municipal clerk
so to the extent that waters are
considered agents of of any of
those groups I think they would
be covered
but watchers I think would also
be covered just under you have
to the extent that there there
as voters as well okay yeah and
and I'm just try to make sure
because I think this has a lot
of potential but then I'm hoping
that it inning is all inclusive
and everyone is is treated fair
and equitable and and in fact Mr
chair Senator the the existing
language in the statute order
covers challengers and watchers
okay.
I guess in a sense.
It to
me okay thank you Mr that's all
I have thank you and and this is
only for intimidation purposes
of.
I drive up because I live in
rural New Mexico and leave
money.
In my backseat or somewhere it's
only if it's taken out of the
vehicle or intended for use for
correct.
And and Mr chair you'd have to
be seeking to induce fear for
the purpose of interfering with
someone's free exercise of
elective franchise so there's
there's a couple steps that
would have boxes that would have
to be checked for this to apply
as a pocket knife concern
economic.
I don't think it's necessarily
about what weapon you have or if
there's a weapon are not so much
as if you are seeking if I
seeking to induce fear Misbach
and so that to interfere with
her voting
so whether have a weapon or not.
I'm just it's just not me being
super buff seeking to intimidate
her and then disappear but
there's there's definitely an
intention that you would have to
happen you're action.
Senator have you ever been where
there's tension at a polling
site in New opposing.
Opposing candidates parties are.
The Russian to give the piece of
paper and hand out some wanted.
You know words exchanged and so
would that be considered
intimidation if the candidates
poll workers are saying.
I want to vote for Senator
Gonzales and the other guys is
always and pieces the the the I
want to vote for my guy who's an
angel with four wings it and and
then they kind of get into it I
mean are they intending a poll
worker that because our our
candidates are candidates
Poll workers at work pull sites
right are they consider poll
workers in this bill.
So so I don't believe up cans
that Mr chair could be a full
workers specifically but it but
I can't and it's.
A social news there to hand out.
Mr chair if they were doing that
they would be election here in
at the polling place which which
of it all it would already be a
violation of our lection Mexico
and if they're doing anything
that was obstructive they be
obstructing the polling place
which would already be a
violation of for them to
specifically get a charge under
this there has to be a finding
by a judge or jury that they
were seeking to specifically
induce fear for the purpose of
interfering with voting or with
doing your job if you're polar.
It just to build on that chair
Senators
certainly electioneering occurs
outside of a hundred feet and
there are statutes that speak to
when within the what one hundred
feet when I was in the one
hundred yes so within the one
hundred feet if if there if
you're if you're using violence
and it's very specific it says
violence infliction of damage
harm or loss or any form of
economic retaliation for the
purpose of impeding or
preventing the free exercise so
that's kind of that kind of goes
towards
the the the effect that that
Senator the food was talking
about for the purposes of of
preventing or impeding their
ability to cast the ballot so we
are very aware that tensions run
high outside a polling locations
inside the Legislature and other
places but for sure it has to be
for the purposeful intent of of
of of preventing them to vote
and the motion by.
Senator Gonzales there's a
second we have a motion by
Senator Gonzales second by
Senator.
What.
This that we Mr chair Senator
shares my Valentine's.
What.
We have the right to make sure
we
were of the forty.
I'm gonna place on the Senate
floor tomorrow.
Full.
Be careful what you ask for
this.
Senator.
Senator Burt yes yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator share a got a vote no
now.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Rodriguez yeah.
Fetterman yes yes.
Seven.
Some is that we have to pass
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee I'm
serious.
What did you send her for
Valentine's.
What is that what is.
Center this year.
But.
Know during this I'm sorry
Senator Gonzales thank you.
Ready Mr chairman ready when you
are sending us very brief.
Mr chairman and members so we do
have an amendment to and if we
movie of special purpose that is
the amendment point two to four.
Nine eight so point three.
They're passing out the chair
have a motion on the amendment
of.
Thank.
So you moved to make a motion.
Second.
Thanks to the bill then we'll do
the amendment okay very well.
what we have a Mr chairman of
the the members of the Senate
bill twenty six and the system
the oil and gas revenues were
six million in FY sixteen they
were one point five billion in
FY twenty one and there are
expected to be at four point six
four billion in FY twenty four
oil and gas production is
expected to peak in ten years or
less and even though our current
revenues are high our state
economics predict the revenue
that will short declining in the
next eight to twelve years we
can stop the decline in revenue
if we begin to prepare now the
what this bill does it solve two
problems without affecting the
transfers to the early childhood
Trust Fund or affect the budget
process first.
It makes a budget less reliant
on the oil and gas revenue and
secondly prepares the state for
eventual decline on the oil and
gas the third part is the
general fund is currently
receiving a windfall of oil and
gas revenues starting in FY
twenty five this bill would
capture only new windfall in the
investment.
Them to the severance tax
permanent fund this would grow
the general fund with interest
earning more.
In no more stable and
sustainable manner we know this
because of the permanent fund
some that are the most stable
source to the general fund and
revenue Mr chairman I will have
with the state now Mr Taurus
from the LFC also make some
comments and then we can go back
to the bill over to the
amendment.
Both mention this bill doesn't
affect any any other funds it
does set a new threshold with
which the oil and gas revenues
in the general fund cannot
exceed and it sends anything in
excess of those sort of New
windfalls to the severance tax
permanent fund and this really
is attempting to solve a few
problems that were act passed by
LFC and rest up over the interim
and that's one we have the the
winning effectiveness of the
five year averages those are
shrinking over time and so our
reliance on oil and gas is
increasing in the volatility
with that but and so therefore
this bill would help to get New
Mexico off the revenue roller
coaster but it's also a result
of some study that we've done
over the last year showing the
eventual decline in oil and gas
revenues if you'll remember
actually there were some pretty
spirited conversation by Senator
Steinborn and senator Byrd and I
think Senator Padilla when we
presented our revenue estimates
in January showing those big
peak and this attempt to address
that so it invests more into the
permit funds that you get the
out year revenues that offset
declines in oil and gas and so
with that I'll just add that is
Senator Gonzales mentioned it
doesn't affect the the budget
process or or tax packages or
anything like that but it would
affect the potential new money
in FY twenty five we just made
by less than four percent.
Hello Mr chairman of I don't
know if you would wish to.
address the amendment known as
amendment now Mr chairman what
this does is so at the request
of DFA this so amendment does
not change any of the content to
the legislation all the doses of
the difference in the in the
wording within the legislation.
What is a wording change Mr
chair that's a good question so
if they requested that we add
the words above the annual
average amount we think that
that's already implied in the
legislation but they asked us to
reiterate it just so that they
can absolutely be sure.
And then the on the other one
says insert.
Have to come after reserve hi Mr
chair that's the clerk.
Questions from.
Senator share.
So.
Mr chair and senator I'm just
trying to figure out.
I get what you're doing I love
what you're doing.
But I don't understand how it's
calculated.
Well.
Can your expert witness.
We understand this.
Mr chair and senator share it
basically says anything in
excess of the FY twenty four
amounts that are already in the
general fund is the new is going
to the severance tax permanent
fund so the calculation is FY
twenty four oil and gas revenues
in the general fund.
It's our so through Mr chair we
have a number today anything
above that number goes to.
Mr chair it's actually the
number for tomorrow it's next
year's revenue.
Okay.
But that but then it talks about
the five year average.
So then what happens because
that average will change Mister
chairman Senator that's a great
question that five year average
is holding harmless the early
childhood trust fund and the tax
stabilization reserve which
already exist in statute with
the five year average so the
there's a threshold amount and
then there's the five year
average that's up here so
anything above the five year
average goes to the early
childhood transponder the tax
stabilization reserve but
anything below the five year
average and above the FY twenty
four threshold would go to the
permanent fund.
I understand that.
Thank you Mr Senator Rodriguez
thank you yes thank you Senator
for bringing this for the
remember talking about our
during LC meeting but let me ask
you this what number maybe to is
a are we when you said we have
the number what number are you
looking at to make sure we're on
the same page.
Absolutely Mr it's this year's
revenues.
Senator Rodriguez it'll it'll
actually be next year's revenue
FY forecast yes twenty four
forecast that amount we won't
know of course until that money
comes in but we are currently
estimating it to be.
Four point six.
It looks like in excess maybe
close to three billion I can get
that number to you exactly but I
have to.
Yeah okay we're talking about
new money new rivers or just on
Gen general just general okay Mr
chair so three billion that
we're looking at anything in
excess of that amount would be
and you can you give us that
number please whenever you get a
chance yeah okay thank you very
much.
That's all I have Mister
chairman.
Thank you.
I mean the childhood trust fund
which is up here.
The version numbers gonna hit a
maximum rate.
It turns
is there any way to bring that
to more.
Even level so we.
Are making such big transfers to
nobody knew this is ever gonna
happen when they did this right
nobody could ever guests in
their wildest dreams they have
three billion dollars sitting
near level lesson three years.
So I mean is yes anyway it to
reduce that number and the lies
that in this formula for this
rolling averages.
Mr chair
thank you.
What we could I don't know if it
would happen in this bill.
You could do that I think I
think it was you know the
decision of the sponsored to
make sure that we're holding
that we're not touching that
that's not the policy sort of
question attempting to be
addressed in this bill.
But I when the four year rolling
average right.
Doesn't get there thank but but
at one point eight per choose
you know set up fund is to five
billion next year right in the
state no other fund and whether
agency has a fund that has three
million dollars in it and
operational money right that's
investment reoccurring because
if there are other issues right
and that's all point but I mean.
It in in ingesting this number.
You're saying in fiscal year
twenty five half of billion
we'll go to general fund right
and half of the you know go to
to to to the severance tax
permanent right.
The outing diversion to the
early childhood correct.
On the for you of the four year
rolling average I you I you
state.
And then in fiscal year twenty
six one point two billion will
go to general fund right.
Mr chair if there's anything in
excess of the FY twenty five in
FY twenty six that would go to
the severance tax permanent
fund.
The excess.
Okay.
The more the permanent.
Any other questions.
Have a motion from the.
We would like to work in so we
need to this is I need a motion.
Who vote on the amendment right
we need to vote on them and that
right so Representative.
We can make a motion.
Two thousand.
Because you can do passion
second by Senator Burt any
objection to that amendment to
even have a quorum.
About.
I am we we have a quorum.
Yeah I'm sorry.
We have an important any
objection to the amended bill.
Question thank Senator so thank
you very much for bringing the
bill forward Senator and is the
This have a question you know
and I'm not not going to pretend
that I explained I I fully
understand all the brackets and
how the overage goes to the
early childhood and the I guess
the liver Iago Fund.
Is that the tax stabilization
reserve level COVID where any
other okay.
So it's it's some amount of
money that less than that but
above the average I'm not quite
As we share the goal of growing
the corpus of the permanent fund
to spin off the dividend and I
saw the charts in the of our we
should rate but it's like a
billion dollars and twenty
forty and I quite frankly think
that we need more than that.
And and I wonder you know as we
look at the tax stabilization
fund.
You know we look at the overage
when we need what would not be
better served by looking at
restructuring even more to allow
even a more generous.
Amount of money from our five
year average during this
windfall period to go into this
fund so we do get compounding.
Interests and what not to grow
this amount more.
I mean I I I put that out there
because I think this is great
you figured out a good half care
that you know put away some
money but yet so much more is
going to be going this other
fund that we can't touch.
And I just wonder if we should
repeat rethinking that a little
bit.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn
that's a great question and I
think good discussion that the
difficulty with getting more out
of the tax stabilization reserve
is its reserve fund status so it
it it that in part keeps it from
being invested more aggressively
like the permanent funds are
because it has to maintain a
little bit more of a liquid
status in case revenue decline
this type this acetates its use
for you know revenue replacement
but that's certainly valid
discussion.
At the end of this more to add
to that Senator that's that
that's a great discussion but I
mean it's well we're we should
head and realistically where we
should have but that's what not
this this legislation well it Mr
chair I think it is going away
because it kind of gets to the
spirit of what they're trying to
accomplish with the bill which
is invest for the future and so
I say this because I see that as
a potential now I'm I may just
be graph of this for us right to
the truth that that's a
reasonable proposition if we're
talking a huge amounts of money
we're talking about over the
phone if some.
Where is the August fund is now
needs to the extent that.
No longer it's beyond
stabilization as one of just an
inefficient lock box maybe we
should look at another
amendment.
After the form from want to the
fifth that's what Mr chair
Senator Steinborn I should
absolutely have clarified that
this bill doesn't affect the
transfer so that provide and we
actually don't expect that that
fund gets any more money in the
near in the near future for sure
in the next five years so I
should have clarified okay okay
well then see what's grant funds
from you guys at one way thank
you for the discuss and fix for
shift thank you.
a motion.
Secretary
Senator Rodriguez for a quick.
The motion for the past.
Amended and the second from
Senator Steinborn.
Please call the roll anybody any
any objection to that.
Others six of us here Senate
consortium and to pass on your
bill thank you.
Is a good luck explaining this
in the house.
The money real quick.
Of the.
This.
Your.
Okay Senator there we go we have
our police chief Johnson welcome
thank you again for your work we
never cease to thank you not
only for all you do outside of
here but for being here with us
all the time taken care of thank
you Senator your thank you madam
chair and members the committee
Senate bill ninety six just
allow the state police if they
serve thirty years to receive a
hundred percent of their pension
currently the pension fund is
over funded by a hundred and
twenty nine percent.
Correct right one twenty eight
one twenty nine right in that
area they're all will only
fiscal imprint cations will be
in the first year you may see an
uptick in the cost of minimal
but I think the cost about five
hundred two hundred thousand two
million and then after that the
fund regulates itself and in
goes back on that over funded
trajectory in stages over fund.
No Sir madam chair you told me
no to say nothing influence you
asked.
There you go
committee to witness either.
That's the way to do it chief
exactly like thank you.
Okay yes okay we do we have any
questions Senator Senator
questions this.
There's a motion for the past we
have us from service that is in
his second is here ceramide
focus their Padilla all in favor
signify by saying aye.
Most passed and I didn't do it
by show of hands but Hey it's
pass no there's no opposition so
thank you to thank you secretary
thank you.
That's.
