If you have an amendment we have
a couple so the secretary can
you sing the amendment
Senator Stewart using MMS
correct.
Chairman I have and I've the
couldn't connect to was senator
secretary Kenny and so I have
the two oh two number but I
think you have want to and I
think they're exactly the same.
Not.
And.
That is.
And we don't have the one down
from council service yeah but I
did send it senator Kennedy this
morning right.
I'm happy to read the language
if you're going out or.
We can wait to get a.
General I don't you read the
language center Candelaria make
sure we put in the right place
and the right section and I
think you may have the section
of those and if not serve
Candelaria.
Thanks and then we'll just
amendment.
This is not.
Page it's a new section are
F..
The.
Our.
Making required under this
section.
Alright in consultation with the
New Mexico department of
agriculture al develop an
emergency deferral process
temporarily suspend the
implementation of a clean fuel
standard will address market
conditions.
The rules shall require the
department to consider a
provider for the last worry
margin State deferral.
Mr chairman to Janet read that
last sentence I couldn't hear a
few words to all right.
I'm gonna stay six is it well
there's no one here right now
under.
In the last.
Is.
Shall require the department to
consider a providers requests
for emergency referrals.
And we have the Micaela scan it
up real quick.
Yes it's part of the email but I
think it's okay.
Our.
So Mister chairman that is not
the correct version of the
amendment there is a newer
email.
And that was delivered to the.
Morning.
That number is six one nine
point two that is the correct
amendment not the one that was
just read we we do have that
amendment.
Senator.
So we need to stand up to all
to.
Thank you.
Yep.
Questions yeah I do I mean I
have questions on what I just
heard but I don't know if.
So.
We have any questions.
On the bill lower wage down.
I don't.
Senator read it is here just for
clarification we have.
One amendment for two amendments
and from who are those and then
Senator.
Mr chair where one amendment
okay and is that from you
Senator.
The chairman yes Mister chairman
Senator moon Jooss has one I
have one they are the same.
So although they have different
to to numbers they are not what
was just read.
Thanks for verifying that.
So it's going to come up right
now so we give everybody a
minute that's is that the
correct to to number Senator
Stewart is yes it is Mr
chairman.
Thank.
Everybody just.
Review that.
What.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Candelaria.
We on questions on the amendment
we need to move the amendment
for discussion purposes Tom move
it for discussion purposes.
second the motion so.
Questions on the.
Mr Chairman said may.
So.
Chairman I am.
The the the member that was just
written included what I think is
rather important sentence.
Which requires that the
department actually consider.
A.
Addition to initiate rulemaking
so.
Under the state rules act.
In no.
Department including department
of environment can receive any
number of petitions and a number
of requests to initiate
rulemaking.
You know.
And without a provision in law.
Which requires the department to
actually initiate a rulemaking.
Pursuant to a request as
contemplated by this new
subsection the department can
simply ignore it.
They don't have to consider it
they don't have to act on it.
So Mister chairman I'm wondering
from the sponsor of the bill why
that requirement that actually
requires the department to
consider not to requests.
But requires the department to
consider an application under
section why is that on friendly
Mr chairman and sponsor.
Mr Chairman so certainly Senator
then you know send secretary
Kenny has been a trying to come
to an agreement with this for
several days this is the
agreement that they came to last
night and this morning but to
answer your question more
specifically I would like to
turn to secretary Kenny.
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria the the the concept
by which you're speaking of is
not unfriendly in the sense that
we will act on a petition they
came in from a stakeholder of
the the construct the language
was one found in law that we
have to.
Develop a rural we have to
petition the board with a
rulemaking to allow us to set up
a process by which a petition
could come in for us to consider
a.
temporary suspension of of the
clean fuel of a clean fuel
standard so we need to go before
the board Mr chairman and
senator with that rulemaking so
that we can accept a petition
under the rubric of the
discussion we're having.
I hope I'm answer your question
Mr chairman I think with all due
respect you're evading the
question Mr secretary which is
this.
When does your apartment just
object to the notion that you
should be required to initiate a
rulemaking.
And that you should be required
to offer a decision because
again I just point out for the
committee the standard will in
New Mexico under state rules act
is let's assume this is
practiced.
And let's assume in the future
a.
A private individual was system
a low income person comes the
department says I want you to
initiate this rulemaking process
to temporarily suspend these
rules under New Mexico law you
would be allowed to simply
ignore that petition and not
initiate a rulemaking process am
I correct.
Ms without effective action
otherwise.
Mr chairman and senator you are
correct which is why we want a
provision that would direct us
to create rules for that process
Mr Chairman unfortunately I
can't support the amendment or
the bill now because I just feel
like the process and ask is
illusory.
It is a suggestion that the
department take people's input
but it it provides no
substantive right that an
individual who who claims that
the market is out of the
Calabria and that prices of fuel
are sky rocketing out of control
unfortunately the language today
that is change from what I saw
on spend significant time last
night on
simply ignores that and so with
all due respect I I cannot
support the amendment and I
cannot support the bill thank
you.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn thank you so
as I read the amendment Mr chair
What we're doing is kind of
exactly although it.
We are affirmatively creating a
role to address adverse market.
Conditions.
That is a new ingredient we're
putting into this next we're
actually going to create a role
that will manage.
suspending this for adverts will
doesn't say adverse market
conditions I'm up to have that
weird at first but in their but
I think you could use to have
more direction but.
But is that right Mr secretary
of the environment and Senator
Stewart this is a role to
address adverse conditions and
affirmative role that you have
to create at the beginning.
Mr chairman and senator somehow
that's correct.
It so without Mr so Mr chair
secretary number ten.
So rather than say Hey on a
situational basis someone gets
to trigger some rule making
process with this amendment does
is it creates a role up front to
address.
Market changes so I.
Senator Candelaria I appreciate
your coming from I'm not sure
how this doesn't do what it is
you'd like to see C. done Mr
Chairman on that point I'm happy
to answer the Senator question.
Eight so Mister chairman the
state rural rules act not my
point the plan the state rules
act state rules act is very
clear on last state statute
directs HSD.
To act upon a petition that it
receives to initiate rule making
it does not need to.
Okay as very clear under our law
so unless this specific section
of law states that the
department must act on a
petition.
Right to initiate rulemaking it
means that the rulemaking can
only be initiated if the
department uses and the
department can simply ignored
the petition of the public to
initiate rulemaking what I have
suggested in my amendment
Senator Mr chairman and sponsor
is that we include that
provision specifically in this
section such that the department
may initiate the rulemaking
contemplated under subsection
apps and a member of the public
may submit a petition to
initiate that rulemaking and the
department does not have the
discretion to simply ignore that
there is the affirmative as you
said I think correctly Senator
but there needs to be the
affirmative requirement the
department cannot simply ignore
a petition by the public to
initiate this rulemaking.
So that's what I catch it some
Mr chair Senator Candelaria so
are you saying that we have in
statute a requirement that any
member of the public can trigger
rulemaking by virtue of the
petition Mister sinister
chairman we have a provision in
our state rules act which states
that the public is permitted to
submit applications to trigger
rulemaking.
I'm in administrative law world
the disk whether or not that
petition must be heard.
Unfortunately is the decision
that's left up to the
legislature when we establish
certain rulemaking process is
right the rules act as to give
us substantive right to have
your petition heard other states
for example do others are right
in their rules fact go as far as
to say the public wanted
submitted at least has to
trigger the review and the
process.
Mr chair Senator Candelaria
maybe maybe then you'd be
comfortable with language to
track with that saying the
department shall consider
independent put it suggestions
for additional rulemaking as I
mean just something that we
track with.
No more no less than track.
And all Representative Mr
chairman to the center that's
exactly what I did in the
language I submitted to the
department was simply track the
language of the state rules act
but that was apparently not
agreeable to the secretary.
You he rejected language that
specifically state rules that
all right what that's all I have
I appreciate the discussion
thank you Mr.
Mr chairman and I just wanted Mr
chairman if it's if if it's
available to you I apologize if
I'm out of order but I'm I'm not
sure that I have an amendment
from senator Candelaria.
suggested language.
Mr chairman I believe that was
sent yesterday with the I mean
at least I work with your staff
I believe that was going to be
communicated to the secretary I
can re read it for him if you'd
like Mr chairman.
I believe we did send that check
that language over.
Okay Mister chairman I wasn't
aware that that was from Santo
can alert not at appreciate that
I'm just trying to keep track of
the amendments thank you for the
suggestion.
And Mr chairman I was not sent
anything or talked to from
anyone about this I have been
working with secretary Kenny and
yourself no one else has reached
out.
I would like to hear it again if
that's going to be read.
We're on this ammendment.
And and we we I know we sent
that language to secretary
planning trying to get an
agreement center of we just
Senate job for discussion
purposes and there was an
agreement on that language so
this is a language that we
agreed to this ammendment and so
my understanding is secretary
Jenny Landen disuse Gallup as
the example of Gallup's
refineries closed if they do
happen to get a bio fuel
facility back up and there is a
market conditions say it's corn
by or or whatever that there's a
change in the market in courts
held up for the market price
goes crazy that we're allowed to
go back to the to regular diesel
until the market corrects or
until we can get a price.
That makes production
profitable.
And so for us it's just a chance
to.
Look at our refinery and see if
we can change it for awhile and
and make sure the market
conditions don't get out of
whack okay feel good so that's
that's basically what we're
looking at is if the market gets
way out of whack gonna use
diesel fuel if you use of
biodiesel fuel and your corn
process that will well you so
you'll in the core market goes
crazy because something happens
in in the market they're able
Justin and changeable but
government fire department asked
for rulemaking that correct
secretary can pretty close Mr
chairman I just if I could just
you are correct that simple but
let me if could I offer
clarification because I think
maybe we're all talking past
each other
it Mr chairman the rulemaking
that we're talking about that's
offered in the amendment is one
that what what what's that we
would embark on at the onset of
the adoption of rules to
implement the clean fuel
standard act we would set a
process by which a provider the
Gallup refinery could then come
to the Department and say
exactly what you just said the
prices are out of whack we want
the department to do something
so we're we're not going to make
the public aware provider
petitioned the department to do
something we want to establish
the rule that allows the
provider to already have the
means by which they can
I send a require you know a a
letter to the department saying
the conditions are out of whack
we want you to do something
that's the rulemaking we're
talking about with the amendment
the process again by which a
provider within wait invoke that
process would be spelled out in
the rules we we do not want I I
believe we do not want a
provider you have to petition
the department to go to the E.
ID to go through a.
Rulemaking which could take
eighteen months to correct a
market condition that would be
in the in the worst interest of.
Of everyone under the clean fuel
standard act so I think we're we
may be talking past each other a
little bit I told them where I
was going to be.
Mr chairman you put me back on
your list when you're done just
in light of the secretaries
representations.
Senator Candelaria.
Mr Chairman I think just to your
question my challenges and this
is where it's just a dollar and
we can have we can have
different whatever people want
to say but.
There is no requirement Mr
chairman in subsection F. that
the process that the that the
department of environment
develops well actually require
them to consider.
A letter a request a complaint
from that Gallup refinery.
The rule the reason that I
included the provision in the
amendment.
That record that takes away the
department's discretion to just
ignore people that's what has to
be in there if it's not in this
section.
Availing New Mexico law is the
department can simply ignore.
That's that's where we're at
thank you Mr chairman.
So we're on the amendment I
don't see anybody's and great Mr
Chairman.
Senator Steinborn yes thank you
Mr chairman senator Candelaria
so I guess I'm wondering if the
law right now with
administrative rules
requirements or whatever.
Allow.
Somebody to petition for
rulemaking.
If that's already in.
What do we need language in this
amendment that has restates.
Mr chairman yes again Mr chair
for the third time Senator what
the rules access is it gives the
right to ask but it doesn't
actually require an legislative
very specifically in the act the
department doesn't have to do
anything with it.
There's no substantive right
it's pretty completely
procedural the department can
receive that request and say
thanks for playing we're not
gonna do anything with it and
I've had that happen to clients
at the department of health.
Okay I've had that happen to
clients that CYFD okay this is
very prevalent in state
government where you have all of
the concerned citizens we're
talking about today go to their
government submitted petition
and are simply ignored all I'm
asking this committee is if
we're serious about happening
this this this process then we
need to do what the courts have
over over and over again told us
which is if you want the
department to be required to
actually listen you need to read
into the statute otherwise the
department can get all of the
fancy letters and all of the
voluminous objections and simply
ignore the I'll point out
senator.
The rules process that the
secretaries contemplating he's
saying well we will address this
in rural but there's no
requirement in this section that
the rule the department
eventually creates actually
requires them to listen that's
my point there has to be an
affirmative statement that the
department cannot simply ignore
petitions brought under this
subsection.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Stewart.
Mr chairman I I want to offer a
sentence to add to the
amendment.
Senator it would read the rule
shall require the department to
consider a providers request for
emergency D. for all.
Mr chairman that would be fine
that accomplishes what we need
order a direction that they have
to rule one way or another it's
simply that they have to make a
decision.
Thank you.
Senator Stewart Senator
Candelaria center the turning of
the committee you want to place
that in that paragraph force or
does it need to be a new
paragraph or I think Mr chairman
and senator Senator Stewart as
explained it's just fine and I
think that's what we have
proposed to to the Department
was just a final sentence on to
the subsection.
Senator Rodriguez you had
questions on the amendment yes
require for cation here maybe
for Senator Candelaria from a
legal perspective center and
thank you for your comment
recommendations on the
at the word stakeholder for
example on the amendment that
says in consultation with
stakeholders how narrow is
stakeholder does that would
legally with that conceivably be
including members of the public
anyone's myself yourself anyone
who could provide or request
review
Gentleman I would like secretary
Kenny to answer that.
Thank you as I was looking and I
thought it may be encompassed in
there but it is always better to
make it more clear and and I
like your amendment Senator and
that there had a lot of
suggestion also but I wanted to
know about this thank you.
Mr chairman and senator rob
areas we we interpret Sir
stakeholders to be the most
comprehensive terminology to
include members of the public
NGOs as well as industry and
anyone who wants to come to the
table is the term we use for
ozone rules it's consistent with
terminology we've been using
throughout rulemaking process
thank you then my understanding
how when I do the work
stakeholders and there are but
it doesn't hurt you clarify you
clarify even further that the
public in that never consider
what we consider for for
requesting this emergency review
stuff that I stand that thank
you very much thank you Mr
chairman that's all I have
verification.
So Mister chairman I have just
texted you and Janet peacock
that sentence and I can read it
again if you need me to.
This year I am reading amendment
to my cell.
Senator Stewart I'm sorry about
that the rules are required the
department to consider a
providers request for emergency
that's that's the language or
adding to the cement yes at the
end of the Mr Chairman okay.
There that's the right place of
belongs Mr chairman I believe so
thank you.
So we're gonna then the
amendment.
Correct.
And Mr chairman because this is
a a committee set up from your
committee it will just go into
the bill will just add another
point version on to the end so
it's it is it's an amendment to
the amendment but all of that
will be in your committee
substitute okay.
Right so we're voting on the
amended amendment which will go
into the committee substitute.
I have a motion.
Mr Chairman I I.
At I have yes I will bring the
act as as this past basically we
already indicated that do not
pass on Senate bill eleven
Nibert you will get passed R.
for discussion purposes here on
the committee secretary chair R.
Senate bill eleven our mandate
and our I think it's always what
right and you're already
restored that that's the.
That is correct.
We are voting on that mandate
then so I need a motion for pass
on the amendment amendment to
the Senate committee substitute
for.
Senate Bill Levin.
So the question so have a
motion.
So much Mr chairman.
Thank.
Okay so.
Any objection to that motion and
I'm looking for hands up.
Anybody's hands up Mr Chairman.
Senator Burt.
I'm gonna vote no on the.
Okay anybody else at your
tracking this correct.
Yes.
That one voting no.
Mr Chairman
Senator Rodriguez your I just
want to make sure our goal in
with proper the waves that it.
As we are we have a substitute
that is these are plans will be
rolled into the language of the
substitute and I just wanted to
make sure that the way
Representative the motion is in
fact accurate and if that that
weight on the sorry public like
a motion you make a motion on
that so obviously would be.
That is here correct.
We have the correct I know we
have the correct motion because
of the we did the substitute
were rolling into this bill
yesterday so we're we're doing
this special persons on the
substitute for amending the
substitute in order amending the
amendment to the substitute so
we do have the correct option
Senator share your voting no on
the amendment.
Senator.
Senator Burt voting no I so
Senator Woods voting no I see
Sir sure stand up but I don't
hear him so.
Mr Chairman I'm sorry but just
for the record this is a
terrible process.
We're amending an amendment
that's not even in a a a bill
that we've this is.
I I understand we're trying to
get something done here this is
a terrible process and I just
want for the record this is not
the way we should be doing
business in this this is wrong
this bill will be cleaned up and
brought back and full to us and
and let's do this thing right
but this is terrible Mr
chairman.
Senator Byrd.
In a couple days trying to get
an agreement on the amendment
and it's already been
substituted it's in our
community I think the process is
yes correct I don't see anything
wrong with our process and in
our motions.
It's just the way the process
is.
I don't know how to clean up
others and bring in a substitute
back with the correct language.
I will not hi this bill up.
We can we can put it down.
This is
A lot of negotiations to get
where we are today with this so
Mr chairman I would say to you
this is a heavy let this is a
big bill this is going to have
huge impact on the state of New
Mexico and this is not the
process that we should be
taking.
Thank you senator Byrd.
Senator bird voting no
there was a voting no.
Share your.
And I think those are only two
dollars on the amendment correct
path you're being.
Yes that's correct.
To note.
Okay.
Right thank you senator so you
have a amended substitute bill
so we're back on the substitute
bill.
Mr chairman I would move to pass
on the substitute as amended.
That that Mr Chairman.
The motion and a second Sir sure
you would still have your hand
up but I have no voice for me
so.
We're all.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
No.
Senator Burt no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond no.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzales is excuse Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share.
I think that is Senator is no.
No one.
Get out of here.
No on the amendment as well okay
I will add that Senator.
Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods so.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
Senator then yes yes that is six
yes or no and one excuse.
Senator.
Thank you yeah.
Process is a process I'm not an
expert sometimes we try to get
things done so everybody can.
Can Andrew a little bit and move
things along so.
Senator Burt and I'll have a
little truck so we we make sure
we don't get crossed wages thank
you Senator Stewart center
Rodriguez chair I have to go to
a meeting you have one and then
on Senate bill one thirty three
and then the if someone maybe
Senator Candelaria Jacob put on
Senate bill four thirty nine
force.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you and senator Munoz
whose amendment is it and is
proposing that the Senate
finance.
I believe you have that.
The three two point four.
Two point four and admitting
that amendment.
Senator Gonzales.
Okay fair enough knowledge here.
The committee.
Representative Garcia is there
in committee.
I'm sorry.
RCS here or Representative
Garcia is there a committee so
we can put on the bill I just
seen his picture the
prescription out so.
The okay all right.
Okay thank.
We can rely on them to Senate
bill one thirty three that we
have and then we set up the.
I'm and then here we have our
Representative Garcia Senator
Gonzales is not here
We will go to to representative
Garcia Madam chair of you would
Senator Woods this is on the on
the screen right now I don't
have the amendment in front of
me now.
Thank you the representative
Garcia everyone I.
Are you here.
Yes I am thank you senator and
thank you to Nathan for putting
up the amendment on the screen
for us to look at
read it here SO Senator Gonzalez
I understand this is your
amendment is.
Why does
hair will.
Are you.
After the
bill okay can.
And you need to resend that
amendment.
And then consider this in them I
see okay so I'm in that case
Representative Senator Gonzalez
do you would you like to present
the request for removing the
prior amendment was made to the
bill.
In explained that.
This is the amendment that we
have on the screen Act okay.
What is being proposed
an amendment before this bill
was able.
With this man not and I was told
that the procedure is.
Ask them then last.
In order to the cement.
I see so basically that's the
man that I'm a state that on
page one that strike B..
When engine.
Senator prop aircraft I see
right.
Yes and then.
We address that fact.
Okay and
madam chair if I may.
even though this Amendment house
my name.
you know this you know I don't
know how it got that it has my
name but definitely just knocked
not friendly.
Okay.
The amendment without knowing
who the actual sponsor is.
So it's not your Senator gone I
just Representative Garcia.
Madam chair no.
Do you know where this
ammendment came from them.
Let me see if I understand
correctly setting and seeing it
until now that you put it on the
screen madam chair so what do
Janet this would put back again
between terrible.
Janet are you there I think.
I have a question two issues for
coming right here to assist.
Yes
Yes.
It would put it back I'm.
The question I was I'm sorry.
So this back again between the
twin engine terrible.
Know what.
What the.
Is.
And for the fact the in the
language that was regional then
not.
Who for passenger.
Capacity what what not to do is
allow the funds for
infrastructure improvements for
the fund would only.
For subsidies for local
government.
The aviation division will not
have authority to spend the
money or.
Representative sure improvement
yes the amendment does is it
takes the money and the
appropriate amount of the bill
because this bill will be the
money will be and house bill
with what
hello.
So
Is infrastructure.
Okay this.
I'm gonna send them okay madam
chair and the Janet so
this takes out the provision for
the infrastructure correct.
But it still leaves it up the
nine passenger and it takes out
the terrible.
Yes.
Thousand dollars which we have.
Well you know that's fine but I
still find it very.
You know hello I don't know what
to say that that someone would
put my name and create this
ammendment.
That will be fine.
Thank.
Thank you again for the
explanation and thank you
Senator Gonzales and
you know I can understand the
frustration specially not having
prepared this amendment yourself
and having your name self yeah
any further comments Senator.
Madam chair just for the
committee members speak such
find this very unusual the end
of this process and then the
high did ask up from the
governor's office that you know
or did that come from that they
were looking at the bill and the
there was no answer so much the
that that.
Thank you thank you very much so
we need a motion first to to
adopt the amount.
I would move to adopt the
amendment madam chair Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you.
We have a second.
What is that.
State board and there's a motion
from Santo candlelight in the
second Senator Steinborn to
adopt this amendment to Senate
bill one thirty three and it's
called.
I have a before we do Senator
before we go on I just see some
hands up now that is that on the
amendment senator woods and send
this bill thank you I'm sorry
but hands didn't go up lighted
up here on the screen until now
so Senator Pat Woods you have a
question on the amendment yes I
have a question to the to the
well I don't know how to say
this to the sponsor of the
amendment I guess our Senator
Gonzales I would have a question
to you.
Yes Sir.
Do you act as though also you
what factors you stated that was
around from that band but.
Well this is not what you want.
I feel as though I should but
with you know that you're the
sponsor of the bill yeah so I'm.
I'm looking at you as the
sponsor of the bill to give me
direction on this ammendment Sir
if I may interject for a moment
and I will defer to senator
goes on this
chart madam chair I'm so sorry
Hey Senator I just wanted to
mention that the initial of
comments from senator goes on is
incorrect then I'll let you
speak Senator is before he asked
the question of clarification
from Janet but once it was
clarified.
Yeah let him proceed on that
thank you I would like to
respond.
madam chair yes and also to
Senator Woods so at the
beginning well first of all you
know I don't know where it came
from the amendment Task might
be.
The other part is that.
You know I thought that it meant
that he would put back the
terrible but but I just it was
explained by
By a staff all that it does not
the the only removes the
infrastructure part and then the
funding still stays the coming
from a house bill two so in that
part you know it's it's if it
cracks that way you know then I
would accept.
So madam chair.
What.
Madam chair it is Senator
Gonzalez.
So from what I understand.
The way this thing will be
amended.
All the money can only be used
for operational fund these
point instead of any capital
improvements for these report is
is that the way.
Is that what happens with the
amendment madam chair.
You madam chair and senator
what's this this is what it
would be that's why you know.
I find this very interesting
four came from you know but we
can live with that because you
know it is a pilot program and
we can get that going and.
in automotive twelve.
You know what will happen if you
know when he goes to the Senate
side.
Senator Wirth okay.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative on drugs are are
we have senator bill Burke and
then we have Senator share.
Your list of the amendment madam
chair I apologize my hand isn't
working thank you Senator
Candelaria is after so we've got
Senate bill Wirtz Senator
Sheraton Candelaria thank you
senator you madam chair and and
senator thanks for bringing this
forward
and and I guess I I actually I
was kind of a follow up to
Senator Woods question I just
wanna make sure that the sponsor
is okay with this as well as the
amendment this is his bill but
madam chair.
Coming off of the bill we just
dealt with and now we have an
amendment showed up the has a
sponsor's name on it that he
didn't know anything about and
and and
He did not write
locally we're able to again kind
of adjust on the fly to to I
believe accommodate him I hope
that's right Senator Gonzales
but then chair the process is
procedures that we are using in
this committee are really
suspect and I think we we need
to take a breath and make sure
that when we bring things to
this committee then proper form
and that the people who are
responsible for equipment and
substitutes.
And that we ask those questions.
I'm not even sure we had to go
to the to the public for comment
on that last bill then chair so
for this season procedures in
this committee are greatly
suspect and I think we better
find out what's going on before
we we pass in the other of the
bills Senator Gonzales.
What you're trying to do here is
a good thing and I support it I
want to make sure that it's the
bill that you would like to
invest in the amendment is okay
with you and if so that I can be
supported thank you madam chair
thank you senator Byrd well said
I have to augment your comments
in that it is never a proper
thing to say the least to
prepare an amendment for anyone
to repair and then put somebody
else's name on it it is not
acceptable R. and anyway Senator
Gonzalez was that gracious
enough here to look at it and
and accept it as it is presented
though he did not request to
have it done and prepared
he has accepted the the
amendment but I'm I fully agree
with you that this is not the
way to do things here so or
anywhere thank you very much and
I'm gonna move on to next that
we have is that share that we
have seen depending that.
Senator share are you there.
Senator share can you hear me
thank your next.
Okay we're gonna move on to
Senator Candelaria because I
can't hear Senator share here
there Senator one more time yes
thank you are you there Senator
share.
Okay I can't hear if you come
back after then we'll put you on
that senator your next thank you
thank you madam chair for people
confuse me and and my good
friend bill all the time so I
don't blame you.
You know maybe and I'll just
take a deep breath right now and
it's kind of ironic I'm the one
saying that but you know I don't
think the process is on these
committees are suspect I think
you know we.
We are grinding at the end of
session and I am just as guilty
as others of of flying you now
down a rabbit hole at times and
you know I have a great respect
for everybody on this committee
and I know we all have a great
respect for each other and it's
simple mistakes have been made
in their simple mistakes and you
move on and we forget.
the that what I wanted to ask
Miss Mister chairman madam chair
and senator this is Allah's
though is is a comment you made.
But if this amendment goes on
we'll see what the house does do
you intend just to have this
amendment stripped in the house.
Well thank you.
Madam chair and senator
Candelaria I don't operate that
way but I don't know how they're
going to you you know I will not
recommend that I will not make
any suggestions you know but you
know there is so very evident
that you know all the person
that so has been working with
this the bonded with this so.
With this bill in all is also
the chairman no Lundstrom.
So I I hope that your woman
Lundstrom would understand Mr
chair madam chair that you know
this issue should be more than
about programs we personally
like I think you know the
challenge I've had with this
bill Santorum so be honest is
our I mean when I say I really
look forward to working with you
in particular not had a chance
to work together on something
big.
Since you've come to the Senate
is is on infrastructure for
rural airports the challenge
I've always had is in a year
like this it just doesn't make a
lot of sense to me to use
general fund I think with the
amendment that gets this pilot
started that lets that money
subsidize operations.
Still not a huge fan of it but.
You know will will will will
decide I just think that there
are other avenues madam chair
whereby we can do this and
yeah I did disappoints me a bit
check here you know the what
sound like you know intonations
already coming from the house
and I guess it's that time of
year anyway but.
You know I I have nothing
against the bill I've nothing
against the concept I think that
revitalizing and making our
rural airports as accessible I
think making sure that House
airport and bring as many people
in the ski is great.
Again just respectfully where I
have the challenges using
general fund dollars for look
especially with our local
responsibilities thank you madam
chair and thank you Senator for
your for your work I understand
it's not been the best hearing
for any of us but I appreciate
is always your commitment to
your community and I think
that's what matters most today
thank you.
Thank you senator Candelaria
senator share argue back you had
your hand up.
Share K. can't hear him so I
don't know if he's talking maybe
is needed I don't know but
anyway we're going to go on.
Thank you madam chair yeah I am
I believe I I tried contacting
Senator share I believe if you
tried logging out and logging
back on again that may resolve
whatever audio issue is going on
if not and you may need to
contact somebody in the Senate I
do this there appears to be an
issue with the idea that and
thank you for all right so we're
gonna go to center cap what
again you have your hand up
Senator.
I did get a madam chair I did
get a text from Senator
Share and he did make the
comment that the rules clearly
state that every bill and every
amendments should be must be
sponsored by Senator and this is
clearly.
We don't know what senator if
there was a Senator that even
sponsored this.
So you know there I do have an
objection when when the Senator
whose name is on it says that
needed sponsor of amendment.
Then we should have a sponsor to
that amendment.
So.
We may rules here madam chair
Madam chair I may I did not
write this ammendment I want to
make sure Senator Gonzales laws
that I did not write this first
I've heard of it but I will for
purposes of propriety sponsor
the amendment as member of the
committee.
Madam chair it but but the I
appreciate that.
The that would have saved a lot
of time on the front end thank
you.
Miss madam chair I'm not as
quick witted at day fifty as I
am a day three thank you.
Thank you very much for that
Madam chair of a male I have a
text that all.
We have all cabinet secretaries
Mike Santa Fe wants to make a
couple comments yes thank you
senator Mike Sandoval can you
come up elevator makes into the
screen.
I'm here madam chair maybe you
want me to go thank you Mike
please make your comments.
Thank you madam chair just to
provide just really briefly the
history so this bill was for it
was amendment mandated the last
committee that that this was
heard and Senate finance of us
and it was for two things were
done that the twin profits taken
now so that any jet in here plan
nine passengers of less could be
done and then the infrastructure
was put in the reason the
infrastructure was put in is
because you want to make sure
that if you're inviting
commercial service we want to
you know I do all the
housekeeping and needs to be
done for example of the
bathrooms are working or
something's not happening not
very inviting to have.
Coming on a commercial flight
and not have a functioning
operational facility to welcome
them and so that's why these
small portion of the
infrastructure was put in then
the bill was tabled now we're
back here again today just so
you know the department did not
propose this ammendment the
state come from us we this issue
has already been taken care of
in the last amendment will
support whatever the Senator
wants to do I will just note
that house bill three twenty
five which is right madam chair
luncheons bill which is the
duplicate bill to this does have
the infrastructure and they're
not more than ten percent so if
this ammendment were to go
through these to build the two
bills would be different because
hers has it this one doesn't
like I said will support
whatever the senator wants to do
but I just wanted to make those
clarifying points for the
committee as to how we got to
this point so I'll be happy to
answer any questions hopefully
that clears up some some
information.
Thank you my.
Appreciate your comments all
right Senator we have one more
per Adam chair can you hear me
now.
Share
share have you next week then
here you are we are we
understand you're having
problems that I do have
Representative Jerry Garcia is
that Representative yeah who
would like to say something yes
yes Senator share that will
better.
Regards the the president.
You madam chair madam chair
other than my frustration with
the electronics here which is
just about driving me crazy I'm
also just the echoing senator
Byrd here we have an amendment
that Senator Candelaria has now
taken responsibility for what
this secret amendment that just
popped out of no where after we
had another secret amendment the
last bill on a secret
substitute.
madam chair all right.
This this whole thing has got to
stop.
We don't know who this
ammendment from it just fall out
of the sky now I know senator
Candelaria has now taken
responsibility for it but.
But this is this this ain't the
way to run a train madam madam
chair.
So I think we need to take a
breath here again I can't
believe that senator Candelaria
I are on the same.
Using the same words but there
it is we need to take a breath
slow all this thing down and we
can do this this afternoon we
don't have to do this right now
we don't have to Senate Bill
Evans right now.
Let's let's take a breath.
Thank you Senator share for your
comments I'm gonna go to
is representative Garcia I can
see the letters the kind of
blurred here next and then I'll
go back to Senator Gonzales for
his response so okay
Representative Garcia that you
hear on the screen.
Yes madam chair thanks for the
opportunity to speak well the
reason of the members of the
committee I'm sorry the reason I
signed up into the.
Good economic driver for for
state especially our rural
communities The New Mexico as
you all know which part of she's
really struggling with
everything madam chair members
of the committee and the this to
me.
With more people in not just my
part of the country but we're
we're in the state like resist.
Las Cruces uneven how your
service right now and believe
and to me this would be a big
economic driver that's one
reason I signed up into this
bill madam chair and you know
all do a lot of confusion going
on but I hope we can work it out
two of.
Get this thing done madam chair
because it is important to a lot
of people in the state of New
Mexico thanks for the
opportunity to speak madam chair
thank you Representative and
thank you for your hard work on
this and many other issues now
the crucial economic wall.
okay I'm gonna go back to our
side do you have any response to
that Senator.
You madam chair I do but give me
a second I have a call from all
Leader worth let me see what
just give me a second we can
just or yes thank you I will
take your.
Okay.
that's what it will look for.
Okay I think you need to call
you right back.
Okay.
Madam chair.
Well in lieu of the.
Yes.
Half.
Senator Gonzales okay madam
chair all in lieu of well you
know what a cabinet secretary
Michael Santa offered you know
first of all then it's not going
to track with the other bill and
then the other part is he
mentioned makes a very valid
concern it's a very minimal part
for infrastructure you know I
would retract my statement and
just called Sliq and I'm from
the amend.
Thank you.
Thank you senator all right so
I think we we we'll go to week
we had indicated already we have
a motion right somebody made a
motion already to on the draw my
emotion on the amendment madam
chair.
Hey so there's that mandate and
I'm friendly and then right post
at this point we can that have
that.
Here so madam chair I would move
to table.
The bills.
Senator.
No I move to table the bill all.
Well motions to table or non
debatable so at this point we
will go for about half can you
do that.
Although.
Madam chair it's transparent
correct process first you would
have to act on the amendment.
Mr chairman and I mean Mr
chairman and you know what I I
think you are correct eight
insurers withdrew the amendment
there was no motion so the
tabling motion was appropriate
just FY I do I withdrew the
motion the amendment.
One soldier the amendment I move
to table the.
Thank you and in the I think
that most of us the process
brought members to understand
standard setting bodies in the
motion and and then he withdrew
for the men and that he withdrew
that motion so that no longer
stands and now we're on the bill
and he has moved to table the
bill and so we're we'll go for
involved.
About.
Madam chair and senator
Candelaria could I clarify that
the last of vote we're we tabled
there is a table temporarily or
table indefinitely correct
that's actually a really good
point out that I hadn't thought
about we table this bill.
Permanently and no one on the
committee who voted in the
majority of tabling move to
bring the bill back.
So I don't really think the bill
madam chair is actually properly
before this committee I think
that and member who voted in the
majority of tabling would need
to move to bring this bill back
before we could take any action
on.
Thank that is absolutely right I
missed it.
Thank you and and you are
correct there was a in that I
was not here to see that
unfortunately you remember my
computer discretion is frozen on
the screen is my understanding
with these them but I did
understand that the the bill
with table and so to bring the
bill back up for discussion then
we need to bring it back up we
need a motion to so we can
effectuate anything else that
happens on the chair.
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam chair and this was
not to able to definitely this
is just table but madam chair
having voted in the majority to
table Senate bill one thirty
three the rural air service
enhancement Act by Senator
Stewart so Bobby Gonzalez on
Friday March the fifth twenty
twenty one I move that we
reconsider that table in motion
and and that both and make it
the next order of business which
are we already have and then
madam chair of that we consider
if you will voting on Senate
bill one thirty three.
Thank you madam chair and it was
my understanding and
confirmation staff also that it
was able and so I'm glad you're
not temporarily disabled and so
you are bringing this at the
all right you get a second.
We have a second to bring this
bill back up please.
Also the.
It is in the second Madam chair
for point of order the second
has to come from a person who
table who voted to table it
thank you thank you for that
Senator huh all right do we have
a second I'm someone who voted
to table this.
We have a second.
To bring the bill back up.
To proceed with that.
Second by anyone who
But I can hear anyway somebody
else here that I'm not hearing
you don't mind please let me
know but there's no second so
the bill cannot proceed without
a second from someone who was
part of the major to table the
original bill it's my
understanding from the legal.
Response here Senator Candelaria
correct Senator.
That's my understanding it has
to be.
The the majority the prevailing
side has to bring it off the
table.
We don't seem to have a second
I'll ask one more time do we
have a second.
Bring it off the table second
chair on okay and his that
second here bill
there is the second.
Revert to bring this bill off
the table and up again for
consideration as being discussed
okay so that means that and
we're going to I'm gonna go
ahead and put it up for a vote
to bring that off the table so
let's Pat can you call the roll
based on the class yes madam
chair Senator Burt yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria now Senator
Candelaria no Senator Diamond
no.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzalez yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill.
Is excused Senator share.
Know if you can hear me yes I
can hear you Senator that that
is no for Senator share Senator
Steinborn.
Yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes that is
and senator Munoz host is excuse
so I have five yes or no and to
excuse.
We're back on the on the bill
and the and madam chair I move
to table the bill.
I'm okay you have withdrawn your
amendment so withdrawn okay then
at this point we're going to
table emotions are not debatable
so we're going to go for about
half can you call the roll
please.
Yes madam chair the table the
bill.
You could develop Senator Burt
yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
Senator Campos no Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales no.
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Hemphill is excused Senator
sure.
Yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
No to table.
And I'm sorry Senator sure what
was your vote.
Again could you mind telling me
again.
Well I voted to table so yes to
take a test to table I'm sorry
that that incorrect okay and so
it is yes to table for Senator
chair Senator Woods.
Yes the table.
Senator Rodriguez now.
Senator Rodriguez no.
Okay so we have.
Or again I yes for no and two
excuse.
Well so I yes to table.
But that being said the bill was
tabled Senator when I just very
well thank you madam chair thank
you members thank you.
All right.
We will move on let's see what
we have here.
The next when we have it in
everyone us this and as someone
was going to present that one is
my understanding is.
Isn't that.
Your idea can you proceed with
Senate bill four thirty I
committee substitute for I'm
sure he'll give me one second
I'm uploading my.
Uploading my computer.
Thank you madam chair Senate
bill four thirty nine is brought
before the committee.
I think it's just sort of the
right thing to do the
legislation does one thing.
Operates a hundred and sixty
five thousand dollars from the
general fund to the legislature
this is a supplement to the seed
bill in fiscal year twenty
twenty one to provide a one time
three hundred dollar
compensation adjustment for
provided permanent session and
contract staff working in the
state capital during the public
health emergency any
unencumbered unexpended balances
of this amount shall revert to
the general fund at the end of
fiscal year twenty one madam
chair I think it's you know it's
it's it goes without saying that
this session has posed enormous
challenges to all of us but the
branch of trying to make this
sort of extraordinary of
extraordinary sessions work has
fallen on our staff has fallen
on our analysts has fallen on
our sergeants at arms to fall in
on the people who do the mail
and I think this is a a an
appropriate
compensation for the additional
stress and risk that those folks
have taken to serve not us yes
we don't matter related but just
service institution and to serve
the Senate and to serve the
house so I I ask for your
support on Senate bill four
thirty nine thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you Senator Candelaria and
here we have anyone from the
public pro or con on this
Nathan.
Before I move on to members of
the committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee we received and now
request to speak in opposition
or in support to the style the
state and all right members of
the committee we have seen.
And is out.
Madam chair yes Senator in my
hand isn't working either I'm
gonna go on work on this after
this of this meeting.
We put on the list thank you yes
of course thank you your next
Senator no it's not up so I
guess it isn't working Senator
of what your hand this off and
they were going to standard comp
of.
Thank you madam chair.
I just wanted to.
Quickly ask a couple questions.
The staff that is not working in
the roundhouse.
And has not worked in the round
house.
This covers them with three
hundred also is that the way I
understand this madam chair
Senator Woods madam chair no and
and it's a very good question
but let's go to page one line
twenty two the bill requires
that in order to become eligible
for this additional payment
quote that the individual has to
of quote been working in the
state capital during the public
health emergency she.
Thank you madam chair thank you
secretary thank you senator.
Thank you Senator what the
senator from the land from that
response okay we have next
Senator Campos and then we have
Senator shares and when Senator
Campos thank you very much madam
chair and of course thank you
very much senator Candelaria for
bringing forward a committee
steps to percent of the bill
four thirty nine and the I just
have a a quite a quick question
and then from there if you will
a statement and I'm gonna make
if I can combine the two within
this particular line of
questioning the first is with
our law enforcement are are they
being recognized in some way for
the ongoing work that they're
doing during this particular
a emergency situation as well.
Senator Candelaria you happen to
know that.
So madam chair and senator
Campos I'm not going to venture
a guess I don't now I will say
that this this bill before you.
only applies to employees of the
legislature right and so the
state police officers for
example who have provided extra
security would not fall under
this particular bill I think
it's worth us discussing with
the chief of police madam chair
what if any overtime or
compensation those officers have
received to compensate them for
their work and if that is
deficient I think that should be
looked at as well but for
purposes of this bill this would
not cover the state police or
any of the law enforcement this
would only be our legislative
staff madam chair and senator
****.
Thank you very much madam chair
and again I want to thank a
student just about.
I want to thank senator
Candelaria Stewart bringing this
initiative forward it's it's
time to be it's been very
stressful for our employees and
they continue to go to work
under very stressful situations
and so that the comment that I
have overall as we continue to
work through this.
During the last couple of weeks.
It's incumbent upon all of us
not only to continue to express
as we already have through the
piece of legislation but also
whenever we do the so one of our
legislative employees for A. B.
part of the permanent staff for
contractual employees as well
to express our gratitude to each
and everyone of them because
it's it's difficult Senator that
Weren't able to come to work
during stressful times but I
would just indicate again to all
of our employees during this of
this period of time thank you
from the bottom of our hearts
for the work that you do and I
really believe that the
resources that we're
recommending their one time non
recurring are definitely earned
and and truly appreciated on
behalf of our state Senate
course the legislature.
And our chief executive so
that's all I have at this time
thank you very much.
thank you senator Candelaria
thank you senator pumps.
Senator okay we're gonna go on
to our Senator share and then we
have crystal diamond.
Thank you madam chair so the
Senator Candelaria you indicated
that they had to work in the
capitol during this time.
Does that mean they had to work
in the capitol every day how
about the people that tested
positive in one way for two
weeks so the people were just
exposed even though they didn't
test positive and went away for
two weeks are they included in
this.
Madam chair based on the
language of the statute yes
there's for example there's no
requirement that the work be on
interrupt right and I I have
full confidence in their
decision making of our council
service just certainly not
exclude those folks but they're
certainly not excluded in any
way by this bill madam chair
Senator sure.
Okay madam chair Senator thank
you.
Thank you.
Okay we have Senator Diamond
thank you madam chairman I I
intend to support this bill
Senator Candelaria as a freshman
legislator I experienced some
frustrations in trying to
connect with agency employees
that I believe from maybe
capitalizing on a pandemic and
such a reward those here in the
legislature that it showed up to
support especially those of us
for New every single day I
appreciate them I value them and
I thank you for bringing this
forward Senator I will be
supporting it thanks thank you
senator.
You Senator okay it doesn't seem
like we have anyone else on the
list here I wanted to expressed
some big support for this also
as you can see from the from the
number of signatures on the bill
it was the whole hearted effort
and commitment from our
legislators in the Senate to
one to show appreciation and
also to help with the impacts of
this pandemic and in a small way
I know three hundred dollars
doesn't go very far but we don't
require employees to be at the
capitol during the pandemic in
during the times even when COVID
and the numbers were up quite
high
that's pretty serious staff and
they are all willing to be there
in to work not only full time
that sometimes even double time
and so we want to place to know
that we appreciate them very
much so anyway with that being
said I don't know if there's any
such as anyone else here on the
list so can we have a motion
sure I move for a approval of a
Senate committee substitute
Senate bill four thirty nine
thank you diamond.
For the motion presenter Campos
the second Senator Diamond
halfway you call the roll.
Yes madam chair Senator Burt
yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzalez.
And it's not available Senator.
Hemphill is also excused.
Senator share no.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods yes.
Senator Wirth yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
I have seven yes one no.
And.
Three excuse.
Thank you very much.
Senator Candelaria and senator
Munoz on offer this bill and for
the discussion in for all
insurers thank you.
Thank you and the I think that's
all we have on the agenda so
thanks to everyone for debates
today and will move on to the
Senate chamber now.
For today for now for this
morning.
Thank you.
