need to be concerned with please
notify
Legislative Council and of
course that also be
information for now and at the
same time just continue with the
safe practices and and at the
same time if you do have any
to move forward with this and we
just wish everyone the best as
they as they deal with the
possibility of an exposure thank
you thank you Senator Campos
Let's see I guess we'll just our
secretary Kenny here the first
one out of the box and we're
mainly focusing on house bill
two and appropriations the house
bill two that that are coming
and we can move forward from
there the Secretary anytime
you're ready start.
here to answer your questions on
the restored program as we
understand it ten million
dollars appropriation.
as been proposed in house bill
two so Mister chairman.
gate happy to start feeling
those.
I think if you just give us an
overview of the program real
quickly and and then members of
proceed questions we're just
making sure that we.
problems in New Mexico and not
piecemeal anything anymore
that's what we've kind of really
want here's a dollar amount
right and then go over the
program and and tells about all
but also into the thirty day
session as well
we're not piece milling programs
and really having a robust
environmental protection program
for public health.
and the environment so.
the program the legal
specifically let you know that
the river storage program has
been an integral part of
protecting source water service
have the staff to administer the
program we do have a it is a
federal grant program in which
the state of New Mexico matches
implement the outcomes of
protecting source water surface
water and groundwater but also
we would have the staff to
administer such a program as
One should background on it so
you have that sit on your desk
if you don't have to let us know
we'll get to.
The terrorists behind.
Thank you.
in existence in its current form
in the state since state fiscal
year fifteen twenty fifteen and
funded at various levels year to
receive that funding through the
I agencies I see I. T. process
through capital outlay.
And the agency receives those
funding through that R. F. P.
and at avail themselves of a
restored program funding our
watershed conservation groups at
the local level and sometimes
systems our service water
systems around the state to
improve watersheds watershed
health and our surface water
quality and we at the eight we
average about two to three
million dollars of federal funds
that are leveraged through the
appropriation we've been getting
for the program through through
million dollar funding for this
program would enable us to of
course expand the number of
projects that were funding and
the number of projects that are
happening on the ground across
as we understand that this ten
million dollars we would not be
able to use for federal match
for those clean water act
requests that we rely on.
that manage our surface water
quality protection across the
state so we would need to
continue supplementing this ten
million dollars appropriation
over that period from now
that would expand the program
expand the number of projects
that's going to benefit our
local communities and our local
watersheds and how we would need
happy to answer any questions.
Mr chairman thank you guys for
being here I want to first
compliment this program I know
question here we are discussing
federally funds and maybe how
that can help us with the
drought relief here in New
Mexico I just left elephant
Butte lake they said it's it's
seven percent capacity if you
can any of this money be used to
address drought relief.
Mr chair Senator Diamond just a
I appreciate that question and
is directly connected to how we
combat the impacts of drought in
the state so and I I can't find
a specific example right now of
either at the municipal level at
the county level at a watershed
association level and those
kinds of plans very likely could
identify specific projects on
secretaries I would agree with
that I appreciate that you
mentioned kind of our boots on
the ground entities there if if
we were going to roll this out
you know we know that that weeks
one of the quicker ways but I
appreciate you guys I'm using
these funds we know if we could
if we could provide as relief
assistance to anyone it's going
to be our our farmers and
ranchers this season with such
Mr secretary I would like to
know.
You're asking for ten million
this money out to bid.
Two for contractors to come in
and do this work.
So this grab a particular
Senator was are meant Mr chair
Senator Woods thank you for your
your question looming that this
thank you for your question
just just a couple points of
awarded to those organizations
that W. research explained so it
there is an open period where
people can apply to use this
money
outcome you know also the Mr
chair Senator when we're
delighted to see that this body
was proposed in house bill two
the New Mexico environment
a plan for I C. I. P. request in
the money that would be matched
their but in terms of this
additional ten million dollars
it's it's great that were as a
is available for them in terms
of an example Mr chair and
senator woods for on on the Rio
different watershed on to give
you a sample and this is a
project that's been funded
through this river search a
program based on a request for
so one example is for the I'm
toria and awash watershed and we
are fully funded rest right
parian restoration services that
are carrying area around the
the ground and that simple is is
receiving about a hundred and
seventy four thousand dollars of
river stewardship funding and is
you'd like but wanted to start
there thank you.
Tourist chairman are we talking
about the local soul
conservation district being
involved with this are we
is a scientifically approved
practices.
you know all how.
If I come in to you with the a
You revert the the Canadian
river type stuff over there and
I'm telling you that I want to
remove some salt cedar.
trees are are sucking water out
of the river.
So you know those are the kind
of questions on us of the
scientific value of to one
figure out how you determine
what's of value here and and
we're trying to figure out make
sure that you spend this money
that question of writer not I'm
just worried sometimes that we
get a bunch of money out there
that we try to disperse.
water being sucked out of the
river to.
So this.
I guess I don't have any other
questions but I just have I
would like to see if I could a
and when you expect to get this
money spent and that with that
Mr chair I'm through thank you
thank you Senator Senator Woods
I also wanted to list of
projects so what is it and and.
But also maybe in the past two
did the projects so not only
but how for for previous river
river project how do you decide.
Which one to do and which one
not to do.
additional information to the
committee after this morning's
meeting so our request for
proposals process lays out the
eligibility criteria for the
and and and others so we can
find that the details of that
and and some of the examples of
past recipients and the request
for proposal also lays out the
in surface water science and the
types of practices that are are
effective to address different
types of issues in rivers and
projects are eligible and my
understanding is just as an
example our most recent R. F. P.
cycle we received thirteen
applications all of which met
somebody.
With riverfront.
Nexus property whatever so it
could be the city of Farmington
it has a river runs through it
could be my my farm that has
the the rand this the San Juan
river ran through could I ask
you for funding to help.
Take care the.
that piece of the river.
you the of the your generic
question if anyone could come to
the environment department and
say I have a water project that
I need funding for whether we
said the river storage program
sixty three million into that
fund.
into those types of funds.
The we we would strive to find a
solution based on the financing
other program is and that's for
private entities as well as
public entities we we do this
all day long every day
in terms of the rivers stored
applicability certainly
sure that we give you the right
answer before we give you that
answer.
Okay so.
Mr chair a C. said you had
thirteen applications a last
a big picture of of the of our
rivers in what.
Needs to be done or just wait
for somebody to say Hey can you
fix this piece.
are directly connected to our
broader surface water quality
program which includes on the
ground monitoring of watersheds
all around the state where we
rivers which stretches of rivers
on the heel on the Rio Grande on
the at Canadian river which
which parts of which reverse
need which types of of treatment
streams as our resources allow
and bureaucratic leave monitor
and assess water quality across
the entire state and we use all
It seems so you have the the
whole river system whatever the
river is.
Does it make sense.
For your department so okay well
let's start at this point on the
river this point is where the
this project you do it does that
make any sense welcome and you
contracted out instead of
waiting for somebody to ask.
department that is sort of
setting out what are the goals
and objectives for water quality
protection and then are we
soliciting people to implement
those goals yes exactly Mister
The New Mexico environment
department is charged with
protecting our surface waters in
groundwater so that that's a
charge it's given to us by the
legislature through the water
performance measures now focus
on things that you're asking
about you know how are we
performing with respect to
nutrient runoff and water
the public to this body the
efforts were taking to protect
and restore our our waters in
the state of New Mexico so the
to implement the charge we've
been given under those those
statutes.
In in terms of the planning for
what we're going to do in a
I think he I'm just saying this
Mr chairman and senator I think
our efforts to be transparent
and communicative about what
we're doing and where we're
Mr chair is as you've pointed
out we got this we have some
pretty big numbers here.
We want to do something large
revert or at least a big chunk
of river and and fix that so
that's really.
Done in the needs some
maintenance henceforth but it's
done as opposed to a project
Water running all the way from
Colorado to Texas although I
don't think Texas needs but
that's just me.
it to what we said a so far that
the current approach and in that
Sir mention peace now funding
earlier that the current
and in many cases put us in the
position of funding bits and
pieces of projects I'm so a
particular river may need you
funding take many many years
many different projects many
different solicitations and
things gets that get started and
then they stall out when the
funding runs out somebody has to
time that makes things happen a
lot quicker on the ground it
means that the benefits are are
seeing much more quickly and so
there really is a lot of benefit
Thank you Mr.
Senator etcetera Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and
sectarian madam undersecretary
issues for the right reasons so
thank you for that and and the
most my question are to be
answered but I do have one or
two questions about.
supported by the environmental
Department and put up some
additional fencing around spring
waters and so on so forth and
many of these ranchers industry
because it became more
restrictive as to how they would
get to the water for their herds
Any this money and any projects
that you would agree to.
I'm asking where they in no way
water and the ability to graze
within the areas that they have
least.
To make sure that they can
continue to perform and make a
of this money will apply to a
project that would hamper those
those a
industries that industry of of
ranching and secondly.
that these projects or the
person doing these projects
would not hamper the the the
rancher from doing what he needs
to do which is obviously
Thank you Mr chair Senator Burt
I appreciate that that question
and putting it in context at the
local level so the hard part of
the way in which we administer
and there's a certain
circumstances under which we
would need to get a landowners
written agreement for a project
to proceed there's also
could be impacted by that
project and explore options for
mitigation and an example that's
happened in some past projects
to provide an alternate source
of water that's convenient and
I've been appropriate and
supportive of that ranchers
operation to make sure they
water their livestock so the
Excuse me Mr chair and senator
Byrd always good to see you
Eight.
Thinking of the so I agree with
appropriated to the environment
department as as proposed
you know we I will ensure that
they we have those checks and
I was taking a couple notes is
in in your example you said that
this the though this was least
that they had a lease but then
were restricted from accessing
their lease.
examples in order to be able to
talk to people about these are
the unintended consequences we
have to mitigate for now
and we can we can commit to that
problems on the ground like
you're saying so I'm not sure of
those river storage example that
you gave but either way
it is something that would be
that if if you had to mitigate
something that the alternative
for them would not be you know
two miles away from where this
is going on I mean it would be a
or this a clearing of the waters
whatever the case may be so I do
thank you for that
and I do appreciate the fact
that the landowner or the Lee C.
going on and I will tell you
just briefly.
unfortunately the again
efficient for service came and
put fences around that would
only keep cattle out and these
are people who'd least for
that they were going to raise
water a little bit and then get
him out of there and and so and
then they would build a fence
this is that we keep the catalog
keep flowing but then the
natural flow instead of of
bringing that circle around the
twenty thirty feet they took the
fence down yards and yards and
You know the the visual intent
seem to be too.
Make it very difficult for
ranchers to water their cattle
and and grace in those
yet so I just wanna make sure
that the the the lines drawn
that we're gonna take care of
these folks who have a business
it is a business and I like in
the in the business it's the
consideration and be very
sensitive to that I appreciate
that thank you Mr president.
With these questions and of
course it all goes back to
collaboration as we move
forward.
And one of the concerns that
ground how are you going to
fully fund the projects that are
important to us.
But the ones that questions I'm
gonna be asking if all around
the use of water.
And you can buy could bifurcate
the the questions if you wish
how are we going to move forward
particularly when we deal with
is do we have ample Water and
and clean water.
With the federal government with
state engineer with the
appropriate information to
ensure that again we were
providing the balance when it
And and Senator Campos good to
see you do you raise a number of
good points and I just going to
sort of take them in the order
operational funds over the last
couple years it is making a huge
difference in our ability to
attract people to retain people
because it takes time to hire
people and I mean behind the
scenes for something like the
river street program we have our
surface water folks who are the
and fully staffed administrative
services division so that we can
we can put contracts out we can
award those contracts I can tell
you we have one person who does
contract work Joseph who's an
what are called indirect.
Funds so that we can move the
money out as quickly as it's
appropriated to us there's
nothing more frustrating to me
than coming to this body and
use some of this money to a to.
Ensure that we're doing things
from a procurement standpoint
from a contract standpoint from
a legal standpoint we're getting
and again I'll go back to
Senator Diamond who raised the
question of what can this money
help with drought the drought
issues in keeping that water
quality high and available for
agricultural state before and
oil and gas state so that that
water is absolutely necessary to
keep those industries thriving
the game into is nerd because we
all have a segment of that water
management cycle
some really encouraged by how
administer our programs better
because we have the staff in
place
So I'll stop it is a very
passionate topic for me because
it deals directly with our
money that's going to be
available to
it can act if you will some of
these not only programs but the
get some of these jobs filled
get the resources out and most
importantly ensure that we're
going to have water and water
quality throughout the state
of diminishing our transaction
costs for bringing staff on to
the Department in promoting
internal staff with respect to
the river storage program in our
people the that the public would
deal with in terms of the
science and engineering and that
that the folks understand water
quality but if you on the back
and like a business of the
business operations of the
again diminishing that
operational time to bring people
on you know at when I came on to
the Department we had had.
Eight years of budget cuts we
fill a position we now have that
down to less than a few months
which is still huge we want to
break bring that down even
closer but we're building back
Mister chairman the last
question that I have of relates
directly to the collaboration.
In the collaboration with game
and fish and other agencies as
triangulation so that we get
these things done or effective
and the resources then help us
with the sustainability when it
comes to water quality and of
collaboration that's occurring.
I do from LESC to gaming faced
Abner to add a number of us are
collaborating all day long every
day I could highlight the fifty
year water plan I could
highlight or thirty by thirty
discussions that we have at the
cabinet level but it's also the
institution of our staff talking
and working together on that so
Twenty nineteen that is helping
with making sure that the the
there's collaboration and
amongst the data are amongst the
data among the agencies for the
data to get out there
faces are multi pronged and and
there's multi pronged solutions
for that that we're working on
W. research did you want to add
anything okay.
Instructional pieces so that our
general public will have a
better understanding of what is
actually occurring and the
second is going to be the
others thank you very much for
ensuring that water is
definitely at the forefront
thank.
Senator Steinborn and then we're
gonna wrap up as quickly as you
can so we can thank you Mr
Senator Burt in not listening
okay no I'm sorry I'm sorry to
distracted to to interrupt you I
just I think the context I could
be wrong of the situation you
wanted to give a little context
of kind of where where he was
coming from which was an
endangered species issues.
This and Wildlife Service for
the look at the land as well and
So I I just want to make an
observation which is I know from
my community that when we do
restoration projects it's much
restoration projects we increase
and improve the quality of
forage land we improve water
quality so we improve habitat
for people who care about
putting more money into this and
of course
You know.
My thank you know I I think
enhancing New Mexico's
environment quality of life is
one of most important things we
Thank you bye morning next time
ago mouse trap and we'll make
sure we invite.
Mr secretary when asked and
pointed questions and we need to
The ten million dollars we can
use it for.
You can't use it for federal
match are we gonna have the
ability to use it for state
it for the federal match piece
of the ICAP pieces still very
important to us to pull down the
existing.
Federal grant.
they're significant amounts of
money we have numerous
applicants for that money so
with with the the allocation of
staffing there were we would not
state program there's no match
that had after you get you can
fully funded they can have a
match you have the options to
getting the money out of my
correct.
program so in other words if an
organization Mr chair wanted to
apply for the river stored
program.
Yeah they would they would be
able to come in apply for the
time to it the other thing and
and you mentioned this and I'm
sorry I I wasn't in LFC when
you're giving your presentation
we have a compaction issue in
but inside New Mexico we have
this compaction palm of how do
we hire people the right
payments to get him in the right
jobs and how do we keep our our
good guys that that have been
market with the pay bands the
state currently has and so I
want you to think about that as
you come to the session
how we fix that in in every
and just increased the mess we
need to resolve some issues in
New Mexico so I'm glad that this
waters of this money
appropriated there I'm glad
we'll be able to use it my next
that I've blown over from from
here to.
The vada there's no snow
anywhere there's no snow pack
how.
Well are we prepared an
and fifty thousand dollars a day
how can we help you get prepared
for that.
Mr chair that's a great question
and
cutting like you're describing
and one way in which this body
can help us be prepared not only
for the implications of drop but
is again I think goes back to
your the the the the point you
just made is that we have to
fund our staff and our agencies
department.
You know you and others in this
in this body understand that we
have account balances because
we're limited in our ability to
bureau chief present engineer
running projects that's for
people managing five hundred and
sixty six projects the feds just
announced that we're going to
have sixty three more million in
the drinking water and clean
really manage these.
Significant problems the state
is facing
like drought so that you know I
drought issues if we were on
leash to our potential and and
we're not we're not at our
potential because we are vacancy
rate goes back to a function of
well beyond you know puts them
at like sixty hours seventy
eighty hours a week on most
weeks so.
largely our state our employees
that we have in the ones that we
could acquire so that that's my.
Are there other things we could
short term if you hire the staff
of the but the long term is it
if in April of next year the
rivers are low and farmers are
complaining and I can't turn my
gonna need or maybe contract
employees that I should be fully
aware of it when we come into
the spring.
be thoughtful about that
question and come back to you
with it and and please please
know that I'm not punting I will
come back with a list
for sure but at the moment I
have to mitigate.
What's going to happen you know
in the spring of and and I
appreciate that response thank
you madam Mr secretary thank you
for your time here today we
we get these questions but I
just need a comprehension and
make sure where we were at thank
you have a good day.
Thank you Mr me the winning
lottery numbers it sure would
help.
Well we're switching thank you
or switching members I mean some
hear from agency about food
shelters.
I don't hear any any squawking
about it tourism kind of know
what they're gonna do
We're just trying to
this homelessness how's that
gonna work it what's the hunt
what's the local match cost.
Some of those are the important
questions we need to ask is
Senator Steinborn Mr chair yeah
I would love to hear from DOT
about we're gonna hear them on
Friday great things.
And I'm.
get the response but I'm glad
he's here in the awesome closes.
Here.
Thank you shine issues today to.
around and speak to me a.
We're back at.
We'll make it work.
We just and so you know and I I
can run through those real
quickly and we'll try to get you
out of here in thirty minutes.
To go ahead and start.
Mr Chairman can you hear me how
are you right okay thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee us in the Martinez
acting state budget director and
for local government division we
have Mackey Romero whose are
deputy director and CFO in HSD.
We have our new HSD director
little bit closer closer okay on
the World Wide Web really want
to hear me now.
Okay so there are four probation
and house bill two for the
persons and affordable
assistance funding and so as you
know the department of finance
administration is currently
administering the emergency
experience and has gained a lot
of good valuable insight and
I'll partnering with other state
agencies on these programs so I
think this this money will be
put to good use when we get to
administering of this program.
moving onto the next one there's
ten million dollars in here for
the water project fund and of
course this is going to go to
the New Mexico finance authority
the frontier and then be
administered by the water
transport sell off.
I kind of would.
The programs are better on that
and again we can defer to Donnie
on sort of how the
implementation of this but would
work but we could definitely use
the funding the last and most
important one is item J. which
thirty five thousand which is
first off not quite enough
funding for the grants
administration program but the
second piece is we would like
for the funding to go to state
budget division instead of local
government division that's where
T. E. R. we would like to hired
two additional and that's
traditional grant writers so we
would need it has funding for
that we also need additional
information federal funding
information
also part of the funding that's
needed is some funding to
support the development of the
administration program and and
then there's a few other items
that we would need funding for
I. T. support you know just
general operations of the grant
Thank you and and colonel are
you I can't see you but why
don't you come up in because I
think you're gonna you're gonna
get a lot of questions let me
remind members something when
House Bill twos are when the
got script to complete this and
so this four hundred thousand
correct me if I'm wrong W.
secretary leave them very short
on what they need to do all the
requests in the federal stuff
members.
Yes I might not question a
comment thank you all for being
here and I appreciate the LFC
for funding these priorities
have thank you Mr thank you and
so let me ask you some questions
then secretary or Donnie how are
we going to handle this twenty
them to buy you know that my
hotel I mean they they bought
one in Gallup was.
Hi how are the city's gonna get
the operational money to
administer the emergency rental
assistance program is W.
secretary Martinez alluded to of
the one thing that is a
component of that program is a
primary goal and focus of the
addressing housing instability
and homelessness so I think the
the opportunity with the twenty
million dollars is going to be
to be able to leverage the
there's it's multifaceted some
communities need actual
facilities lodging and places
others need the revenue to be
the federal dollars the existing
network and more importantly be
able to really come up with
creative strategies and
initiatives that address the
whole spectrum the whole
of supplement if you will and
leverage our efforts but yeah we
looked really excited were
really excited to be will have
the opportunity to continue to
address the state of New Mexicos
the floor and I know that I'm
again bombarded with questions I
need some type of structure
saying over it you know we have
eleven point eight student
underneath I know you don't have
that today but that's been there
they're gonna be able by a lot
of questions on on the housing
issue in Senator Rodriguez is
gonna go what the local match is
gonna look like we understand
the mental health questions and
in the full service circle that
and that is that included in
chairman and get more into the
staff thank you for your work
and I think that senator Munoz
asked many of the questions that
were on my mind yet one of the
things I was very concerned
from building to affordable
housing to rental assistance to
everything that we can and so
when I saw the words a local
match in their I just thought
I'm happy that you're on that
you're going to bring back about
foot to senator Munoz requests
and maybe give us a little bit
more of a synopsis and and
appreciate you working with our
appreciate that that's all I
have Mister chairman Mr chairman
I just gonna lie to one of
things a over is reminiscent and
mention in is part of our
comprehensively what is the
needs of the state and more
importantly doing some massive
mapping to identify all the key
stakeholders record of the key
holders across the board from
the one thing that we're
currently creating is the
infrastructure that you're
alluding to with your question
is being able to identify an
organization that will allow us
to reach out to all these key
of would be to provide services
of its housing services if it's
a brick and mortar
infrastructure if it's actual
purchasing of land and buildings
I will say that part of the
federal money that the state of
housing in Santa Fe and in Hobbs
as projects working in
collaboration with the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority so we're definitely
have the ability to maximize and
utilize that existing
that they have the ability and
the capacity to be able to
successfully bring those
projects to fruition.
In in my comment that is I mean
we have MFA.
do most of that and probably has
most of that done right.
Mr chairman I think issues
capacity you know when we when
we were looking at how we would
administer the state New Mexico
that magnitude and so therefore
we look at different options and
the option we ended up going
with was a partnership.
Yeah and I'm just.
It.
We can if you took the twenty
million and then I'm just saying
this because MFA into a you know
has another question back thank
you Mr chairman and I'm happy
that this was brought up donning
for your your explanation but
let me let me just say that you
know we all want stand that the
twenty seven which I introduced
and unanimously passed it here
in the house that allows more
uses for the for the the housing
trust fund of funding that we
with you at the FAC you work
very well in collaboration
there's approximately thirty
local governments through
through the DFA have a
department that they work with
that we got and on an average
basis they generate twenty nine
to one in return it's a no
brainer that we work with an
entity that that does that and
dollars was it five or fifteen I
think it was fifteen million
dollars when we came into a
special session when COVID hit
and in it was for housing for
have the expertise they have the
staff there the knowledge.
H. to do it and so we should try
to streamline as much as we can
to local governments and for
home homelessness and for the
portable housing and that's fine
but MFA already works with you
chairman Mr chairman and and
senator Rodriguez to that point
I think it would be important to
me ensure that folks walk away
from here understanding that we
have a tremendous working
relationship with mortgage
portion of it we will DFA will
administer the utility pieces we
have learned and set up the
framework for under the
emergency rental assistance
housing issues but there are key
stakeholder and a key partner
with us in addition to that I us
actually sit on their new
committee that they formulated
with key stakeholders across the
organizations and our abilities
to be able to successfully
accomplish of getting this
twenty million out so we can
address homelessness and housing
members I want to tell you about
a conversation I did call in
this money this ten million
dollars is going to mortgage
finance authority for the water
out so we're gonna have to look
at and changing that another use
or what but the water trust
board is over funding for the
project they have their hundred
what's happening so thank you
guys for your time make sure you
get me that she will do is Mr
chairman chair thank you'll have
a great day and merry Christmas
You should get it.
It seemed gone.
Secretary health when we are.
the.
I know what you're gonna get
their ability I don't know
what's going to get for banana.
You can begin at any time.
You're gonna have to move those
that Mike is close as you can
for the World Wide Web.
Yes we got a thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is John Garcia
secretary General Services
Department
of about twenty four point nine
million both deficiency and
supplemental related to comment.
the state of New Mexico group
benefits plan must cover the
cost of testing vaccines and
treatment.
the fund is is necessary to
efficiently manage the health
care claims of the covered
employee's approximately fifty
eight thousand.
The requested amount of twenty
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you
Mr chairman and the secretary
something else for you to to
what to look into which is a few
years ago we gave a significant
capital.
Appreciation to.
New Mexico owns over eight
hundred buildings and at the
time we only had renewable
energy on like one or two of
them and this was estimated that
it could cost us like a
staggering amount of money in
improvements just on Santa Fe
properties and I think we had
worked on it to try to get
planning done statewide on the
property statewide so as we look
state as well now if you have
any thoughts on that this is
something you would mind looking
at thank you Mr chairman Senator
Steinborn thank you for the
takes care of the Energy for
three of the buildings in the
center part of out of Santa Fe
and so it's a great it's a great
little project
we do have a we're working on a
plan to cover is many of the
state Billings we can right now
we're in mentoring those
buildings what we have and then
also how can we make those
buildings because we really
don't want to forget the
existing building
up inventory stock to to fix
that so I think the esco project
is is is a wonderful project
Excellent good to hear thank you
very much and I would like some
come by sometime and check that
out short the chairman of the
you're welcome any time and
appreciate your help on the
other issues we've dealt with
We are talking about.
The letter in.
On this house bill two are we.
but Mr chair and and and I just
don't understand.
Don't we have public health
care.
one more time sure thank you Mr
chairman Senator right now we
manage the risk the the for the
it's a it's a risk pool
with the state employees and
vaccines and treatment for those
employees so we pay out those
claims out of that that pool so
there was an extra demand on the
deficiency and I expect will be
going back to the legislature in
January for a.
You know for the rest of money
to to get the funded to zero.
to me just real quickly if you
could okay so we're we're self
insured yes Sir Mr Chairman
center yes we in that particular
scale of having a pool ourselves
we manage the funder self.
So why don't we.
Have we ever thought about.
I can't say why it was it was
changed but the best practices
would be that we would use a
self insured fund and a pool it
vaccinations for for testing and
for treatment of those of those
folks that are in the pool.
Mister chairman Senator maybe
vaccinations it was in my of.
My report but the it was it was
Under the policy.
Delimiter liability in the past
we've always been self insured
one hundred percent or is that
before and we had increases in
the past I know that we took in
local government didn't really
Mr Chairman center yes we did
best practice would be to have
in this particular area health
care costs have gone up
prescription costs have gone up
Medical services related to all
things including COVID of us
with the self insured fund or
not
it I in my opinion Mister
chairman Senator it's it was the
right thing to do I think we
just had an exceptional demand
increase premiums of from the
medical of.
Providers including prescription
costs and it adds up quick and
this is got to be a fund that
someone's Pandian and buying.
So if it's a self insurance fund
someone descended money in so
there is that opportunity that
we could the look at increase
the premiums of that would
increase the premiums for
employees and also our partners
signed by the governor to work
on lowering prescription costs
and so we're working on a plan
there that this body and the
governor signed to work on
better faster per prescription
medicine so it's a combination
of a lot of things but Mr
chairman the pool is
asked me to look in to how we
can improve the the pool the the
the medical costs and general
and and make it still good for
putting more state share into
it.
Maybe we need to think about our
overall budget instead of
COVID as Costas on lots of
money.
But it sounds like we were
caught with their pants down
here to.
So thank you Mr chairman.
the state picked it up we're
continuing that that process in
and I have a list will get to
members but we also subsidize.
everybody we're subsidizing
those.
Those cities and counties
employees in the state plan.
And so when we do that.
At some point when we quit doing
it.
that employees gonna see an
eighteen percent increase on
their premiums and and they're
gonna go berserk because we've
been subsidizing that.
But we also need to start
telling the cities and counties
we're not we're not gonna
subsidize you this dollar amount
which we think is about four to
If you if if you retire from the
legislature I retire.
All of sudden you're gonna have
an eighteen percent increase on
your policy and you're going to
But she's going to have to makes
it even small adjustments hell
rate I mean four percent to
percent half of whatever the
increases we're gonna have to
want to avoid because when we
shrink the poll.
Then the health costs go even
higher and so in the long
conversation I mean we should be
continued yes Sir Senator
Steinborn you have a question.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
think we can quite eerie on the
Mike and I'm on I can hear you
I'm only worried about the
understanding you correctly
chairman Senator that's that's
that that was extra pressure on
the fund for sure and and and
leading a lot of the costs okay.
little bit at because we know
that the people who are who are
using all other costs are
unvaccinated people and in some
cases those extra costs are
Of the health care status of
their vaccination status as it
relates to the COVID treatment
you probably don't know those
kinds of us Mister chairman
Senator I can get the answer for
of we don't know when this
pandemic scan and we don't know
if you talk about liabilities
and and the extent of this
liability with new variants of
hospitalizations and someone
So if that if those are if we
see a lot of cost being borne
out by that then it's kind of
like other types of medical risk
people take on lifestyles or
other kinds of coverage that
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you thank you.
Mr secretary I I I I I wish we
can make some adjustments
slowly.
subsidies to the outline of that
our state employees that we're
subsidizing we can not have to
spend that money on them maybe
we can and our employees and
time and graduations look
forward to voting for you a I'm
here employment and
Good luck.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you.
Thank Christmas out today thank
you don't forget your banana.
just grab that we've got the
secretary game and fish we'll
get this table just wiped off to
so we're.
I have a game and fish before us
Mister chairman standing right
Kateri Sloan thank you for being
with us today we are going to
you are in here somewhere I
think it's five million that yep
I made in dollars you were
looking for an access to acquire
property for the state game
commission statewide.
and chairman members of the
committee
I guess I'd first like to begin
by expressing my surprise is the
inclusion of the five million
dollars appropriation for
and the Bach and Katrin counties
we're not currently at the stage
of funding any disease thank you
interrupt for just a moment
can't the the sound system I
don't know why we can't hear
express my surprise is the
inclusion of the five million
dollars appropriation for
property acquisition statewide
given that the department did
stage of funding any additional
acquisitions in fact we are
evaluating the opportunity costs
associated with acquisition
versus funding for other
priorities which include the
the best use of our resources.
But this time I cannot tell you
on what property the funds would
be used if the appropriation
would pass I do know that these
Okay thank you very much for
that I'm going to I am at a loss
for words here too because I I
was under the impression the
are puffins and we want to get
him done in a way that's
meaningful and necessary so
thank you very much I'm going to
go to the members here for any
questions and we have how bout
Senator crystal diamond and then
you Michael I am at a loss for
words right now to with what
you're coming before and saying
this so I guess my first
question I'm afraid you don't
have the answer is if you're not
requesting the funds for this
I I don't even know where to go
with my questions thank you
madam chair and Mike I could
tell you that you know these
federal.
five million dollars to the
state to go purchase private
property lands help you know in
overall it for thirty three
million dollars the ultimate
of the some of the information
that we received as we as we go
through this process that it
seems that there's a desire to
to purchase the L. bar ranch is
totally it completely at thirty
I get this I guess this messages
for whoever whoever's asking for
the requested saw that it's not
from Europe.
She.
Coming here and explaining that
going to go on the next person
on the list was Senator Woods.
Thank you madam chairman.
Representative Lona I appreciate
To give you my two cents on on
several topics.
And but I want to praise one
thing about the game and fish.
operation and the rest of it is
made out of federal funds that
come in.
And with that I will appreciate.
And I appreciate that so much.
Many of my constituents are are
hunters and fishermen.
And you have you have a.
You have gained access to a lot
of private land through
different programs.
And I would encourage you to
Wraps that that I receive as you
know.
Is is not issuing another
funding license in certain
areas.
different things and turn things
up and and they beg for for
relief from that.
And then you know that none of
that.
Because because you know you're
you're demanded to do some
things like you know you can
issue those licenses there it's
not fair you know it's
deprivation is not a good thing
more gripe as you know from our
conversation with the purchase
of private land.
We we.
We have.
And it's it's it's right here in
my trusty phone and you know how
trust to my phone is.
That's what finances local
government.
When when when cities and towns
and counties want.
Roach.
The counties operate awful local
property taxes.
What time you take.
Private land out of private
ownership.
One is is over there in my part
of the world and and you know of
we didn't get finisher are talk
about about why the management.
And and you didn't get that for
that because.
there was untimely for our
chairman to found the gavel at
that moment.
I I I if if the agency hasn't
requested this money.
I'm going to offer an amendment
to take this out of this.
offline directors loan on your
management.
Particular management skill
there.
And our hope to make a good
argument.
Thank you Mr chairman so so
director let me ask you some
questions
I'm just saying this to and
Mister chairman Senator there
has been discussion with the
commission and with the trust
for public lands regarding the
L. bar at this time the
commitments that have been made
sufficient to consummate any
purchase
and so and in fact that there is
a purchase agreement on both of
the pieces of the of our so you
Thank you and to that end Mister
chair I guess I wonder what the
intended goal is of whatever the
Mr chair I mean I I I'm just.
so I'll just cut to the chase
for me I believe we have
modernization work to do with
the country we are in the top
five of the most plant species
bird species
We are really kind of a Mecca
an act in Congress called
recovering America's wildlife
Rolla that would give the state
a massive windfall of money to
do that work but it would
require a nine million dollar
And I think they just ultimately
gave a movie a minuscule amount
of that and maybe the framework
so to me the put five million
dollars in this acquisition but
only five hundred thousand or
because I think rather than
expanding.
Existing franchise.
you know I'm I'm wanting to
modernize the franchise and and
those products to parameters but
that's part of the modernization
that needs to occur self.
So I'd like to see Mr chairman
as we move forward I'd like to
Can you hear me now.
Helped us on.
You know thank you Mr director
for being here and and so let me
give you some background that we
that happened or what happened
let me tell you what I learned
and I talked to a couple
commissioners they talk about
upper thirty six thousand on the
lower is the total cost.
And it says a gaming visual
operated on the entire property
of funding the project comes
Robinson that and in five
million of them are.
Their total request is roughly
around ten million.
but they're there said they need
seven point eight eight seven
with this together and so.
Mr director as the commission
has never discussed this
purchase and how to use those
funds and and asked you to make
public lands for a number of
months as they've tried to
negotiate a purchase in an
effort A. as a month mentioned
earlier to help the trust for
public land source the
percent of the cost with them
federal funding if they could
come up with the other fifty
percent and that's kind of the
last place that I'm aware that
in we cannot use our but funds
for matching funds for federal
projects.
Mr chairman that's correct I'm
looking at I'm gonna look at
the.
Section the bill but I don't see
I guess is a lot of questions
and and maybe you can give us a
should be gather with what you
know and and and what you just
legislature need to know if it
if these funds are gonna get
used and it's my understanding
there still short an additional
five million so on and now we
transfers planted.
There is no no transfers and I
don't see it in capital in so
it's correct are both fund so we
will have to look at this I
Director thank you for being
here we appreciate your time I
appreciate you
Waiting patiently and us not
having on the list in the mis
communication through the mail
Thank you so so we're wrapped up
for today we're gonna try to get
me tomorrow morning again at
nine depending on what we do on
know we may see what we have
some issues inside the bill
NMFA's over funding can spend
that money but it could hold for
and roll over for other years we
afternoon well I said tomorrow
at at nine.
At nine tomorrow morning okay
thank you.
everybody so on this on this on
