Greg can get a rise up. But you
know what? As we hear start
hearing these agencies budgets.
I know Lfc is busy this next
couple of days, racking up
everything over
We're probably gonna go come in
and going in executive and have
our staff brief us on
What the house did and what we
can expect. So we're not asking
questions a whole bunch of
questions that are
Already been resolved.
We may just come in and start
going into the executive get a
briefing from our staff on what
the house did and then bring
them in one by one.
And we'll start you know, just
like yesterday. You know, d f A
was happy with her budget. They
knew what the number was.
We don't need to waste your time
or our time.
Secretary. You happy with your
budget or going to waste our
time?
Right here. You're up in the hot
seat, so I know you're starting
us out.
Simon. I won't call you, Sidney.
That's a that's a joke. Indeed,
female
Calls everybody Sydney That's to
see you.
Starting us off, Sonny. Yes, Mr
Chairman lined out much.
Alright. Well, thank you so much
for my question. Do you have
them lined out, Sonny?
Aligned lined out.
Get him straightened out which
direction we're headed.
We have We have We have
direction. Yes, Mr Chair. Oh,
congratulations on your
engagement to I don't know if I
told you that. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
The new Sonny was a lover boy.
Yeah. Yeah, well, my mother is
very happy man.
Was your mom doing? You're clean
and you're cooking.
No, She's in China enjoying a my
dad's retirement, So okay,
having a good time.
Thank you so much Fire away. All
right, Mr. Chair. We're on
agency 99. 3. You should have a
hand out here. Um, I'm joined
here with Simon Miller from the
FAA, of course, Secretary Romero
from PD and Assistant Secretary
Greg Frosted.
Ah, just to give you a big
overview of the L C. Executive
recommendations. The executives
recurring budget is 283 million,
which is about $40 million
higher than the LFC
recommendation of 243,000,006
0.8% increase versus a 5.8%
increase on recurring General
fund.
The biggest differences are
really in your non recurring
recommendations. The executive
is asking for 328 million versus
the LFC recommendation of 67
million in Section five and six
and seven. The L. C
recommendation also further has
150 million from the gate
appropriation.
Which has been coined the grow.
Um, you may have heard that in
committee as well. That includes
funding for
Ah, initiatives like educated
clinical practice special
education, differential, CT and
steam initiatives.
Overall, the recommendations use
the public education reform fund
to the to its
Largest extent about 50 million
in both recommendations, and
some of the major differences in
recurring are about 40 million,
and Kato plus which the
executive includes.
To address anticipated costs of
the 180 Day role.
There's a 4% salary increase in
the LFC recommendation for staff
salaries. There's a 3% in the
executive recommendation for
that same purpose.
There's a larger differences in
the categorical and below the
line request related to standard
Space assessments Indian
Education fund and universal
School meals.
But I'll turn it over to
assignment. Make a few comments
on the executive then turned
over to the secretary.
They Mr Chair members of the
committee again. My name is
Simon Miller. And I'm, an
analyst at D F A, uh
So like, Sonny said at the
30,000 FT level the LFC
recommendation in recurring is
5.8% increase. Exactly.
Recommendation is a 6.8%
increase, so not much of a
difference at that high level
but digging into the details.
There are a few key differences
in recurring. So like Sonny,
said the LFC recommendation is
Higher for compensation averaged
4% increase where the executive
recommendation is a 3% increase.
Um, the other key differences
for universal meals Bill passed
last session. Uh, the LFC
recommendation is that at 21
Million and the executive
recommendation is at 43 Million.
So there's a pretty big
discrepancy there. Um, 43
million is the projected costs
from the
Program coordinator. So that's
um Ah.
Why the executive recommendation
has 43 million to to ensure that
districts don't have to absorb
that difference in their
operating budgets.
Um and again, as Sunny said,
really. The biggest differences
are in non recurring.
Um and, uh
Yeah, probably better to hear
from the secretary than me so I
will pass it over to him and
he'll talk through some of these
differences. Thank you Thought
you were in the expert Simon.
Some days here.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Thank you for having
me here today. Uh, I do want to
point out that we have a lot of
Aggies in the room today. Really
excited about that, So I just
want to take my opportunity to
say that Go Aggies. Go, Aggies.
There we go.
Ah, Mr I do want I do want to
keep it timely show. How long
would you like me to talk?
Because I can talk for five
minutes so I can talk for two
hours. I think you need to hit
the point and things that matter
to PD not go through the entire
list, but say I mean, we're at
the end of the day, right?
30 Day session is really a
sprint. It's not a walk, right?
You got to get to the things
that we really need.
Things that you think you can
achieve within a year.
And the things that will be
successful in education.
Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um and I do want to thank Mr
Chair and members of the
committee. We We've been able to
continue to talk and how we're
getting closer to some. You
know, I feel like some some good
progress about how things will
look forward to public school
support budget, so really quick.
I do want to start off by saying
that's something I'm really
proud of is that I've been doing
this for about 27 years now.
And there was always been, uh,
the support coming out of the
public.
Public department and that has
always caused some issue in
that just how their capacity to
be able to support public
schools and schools across New
Mexico. I'm happy to report that
we are down to about an 18.5%
vacancy rate. That is the best
rate I have seen since I've been
in this business and by early
February, we should be just
around 17% for vacancy rates.
What that means is we are
feeling positions that the
public Education Department so
that we can do the job better
working with districts and
schools are crossing.
Mexico.
I also want to say Give it a
little plug for the we've been
able to open an office in
Albuquerque and Las Cruces. This
is really opened up a new
markets for us to be able to
hire more people and so really
excited about this. This This
has been a game changer for us.
So now we have offices in Santa
Fe, Albuquerque Cruises.
Really quickly. I want to just
point out some of our major
initiatives that we have. And
you've heard me talk about this
before Mr Chair. Members of the
committee is around structured
literacy. We are asking for
this. This is by far our number
one goal that we have for this
year. If we can do this, this
will be a game changer when it
comes to everything else that we
do. We need students to be able
to learn how to read at grade
level. This will help support
other core areas, uh, that they
have mass science, social
studies everything else. It will
also get us those higher
graduation rates that Mr
Chair you have challenged me to
do and I do that That is
something we're going to do.
And also I think this will also
battle poverty within New
Mexico. This is the game changer
for that.
We're also looking at to
improving our specialized
services. You've all heard me
talk about our office of special
education through an executive
order. We're making some great
gains in this one is we are
looking to be able to create a
statewide I e. P system across
state, New Mexico We have, you
know, 89 school districts. We
have 100 charters. That really
means we have about 189 ways in
which we run apes.
This has been something that
I've been given feedback from
across the state of New Mexico
or something. I think that we
can all agree on and so we're
doing that work. Now we're also
looking at changing our
methodology of how we lead from,
you know, from our pet offices
here in Santa Fe to where we are
actually going to be going out
into school districts to be able
to support them specifically on
their specific needs.
A lot of work is happening or
moving very fast with our
special education Department. Of
course, we want to continue to
recruit, Retain and development.
Excellent teachers across New
Mexico. I want to start by
saying We're having some
excellent partnerships with all
of our hydrate institutions. We
are currently revamping all of
our higher ed teacher prep
programs or aligning the
coursework. So no matter where
you go, and you Mexico, whether
you go and your Lobo or you're
an a G, or you're going to
Highland or northern, whatever
that maybe you're gonna have the
same high quality expectations
and any
Program and also if you move
from one program to another, you
can pick up and leave one
university pick up on another
university.
And be ready to go. We're also
focusing on making sure that
every single person that's in
teacher prep programs is getting
the experience to structure.
Literacy. I know that when I
graduated way back when it took
me about five years as being an
actual teacher until I really
started started to feel like I
knew how to teach reading. I
want to change that. We want to
make sure that every single
teacher that leaves teacher prep
programs is ready to be a
reading teacher.
And they're ready to take on
that challenge.
But we also have some amazing
teacher prep programs that
surround the ideas of pay
student teaching. We've got, uh,
educator fellows, and we've got,
um, tell me, teacher
residencies. Thank you right
now. We have a little over 1100
people in those programs right
now, if we can get those people
to graduate
That will solve our vacancy
rates within our classrooms,
very successful programs. I want
to speak just for a minute
about, uh, bedfellows we have
about 450 people in that program
there. I'm looking at where the
areas that you all represent.
There are educator fellows in
all over your districts that
you're working in.
But one of the stats I'm really
excited about it was we have
about 20% of all of our educator
fellows are from native
communities. That's excellent.
What's great about that is these
are people that are that group
in those communities They want
to be able to work in those
communities and they wanna be
able to do this for the next
2530 years. This is a big
positive.
Of course, we want to continue
to improve instruction. We are
continuing to work with
structured literacy programs
across state, New Mexico or we
have been able to train all of
our kinder 1st 2nd 3rd, and
we're working on fourth grade
this year. We wanna be able to
finish out that next year with
our letters training. We also
have an asking the budget to be
able to work with our middle
school teachers, and this has
really been some feedback that
I've gotten from our public
schools. We want to be able to
one fell swoop finish off
elementary training with
teachers, but also do all of our
Seven and eight teachers all at
one time next year.
Ah Then we'll start to work in
our high schools and really kind
of changed the idea that we are
all reading teachers, whether
your math teacher science
teacher CT teacher or you are a
reading teacher, we are all
reading teachers and so looking
forward to that work, And of
course, you've also heard me
talk about the work we want to
do this summer. Our goal is to
be able to work with 10,000
students across the New Mexico
in structured literacy.
We're already starting to plan
with hired institutions and our
school districts to be able to
make this reality. This will be
a six week program over this
summer Half day program that
will be Monday through Friday.
We want to be able to also
connect with which districts are
already doing with summer school
and out of school time learning
to really start to make some
full day programs across New
Mexico.
And we do believe that this will
be a really a game changer. We
want to be able to make sure
that we're really working with
students K through 12 or whether
your kid a first grader, they
need support or whether you're a
senior. We want to make sure
that you can graduate at grade
level in reading, but we also
want to work with our four year
olds are four year olds are
coming in as kindergarteners.
This is a big group across the
New Mexico.
And we know that
Our data shows that many of our
incoming kindergarteners can be
up to 18 months behind when it
comes to experiences with
reading and literature. We want
to be able to cut that down if
we can get them to grade level
as closest grade level as
possible in kindergarten,
they're going to be on the right
trajectory to be able to stay on
that path all the way until they
graduate high school.
Of course, we will also want to
improve our data systems. This
is this is important. And I get
this question a lot when I get
to talk to legislators about the
return on investment. This is
important for us to be able to
modernize our data systems Right
now. They are archaic. They in
some ways we still do live in
the way of actually hand walking
things over to be signed.
And using email systems to be
able to communicate with each
other. But even our data systems
that we have working with our
school districts are antiquated.
We need to be able to update
those and how important that is
to be able to have accurate,
consistent data that's reliable.
And, um, making sure we can use
that information to make good
decisions as we move forward.
And the last thing maybe I want
to talk about is really
promoting student health well
being and safety. This is
important. We want to make sure
that school that students want
to come to school. Another big
issue that we have is chronic
absenteeism. Part of that is
that we want to make sure
schools are safe. We are able to
address any kind of traumas that
are that students may have, and
we also are looking at really
increasing and improving our
instructional practices, so
students want to be there.
That means that we're increasing
our opportunities with CT with
innovations like stem steam
robotics, all those kinds of
cool things and, of course,
increasing our, um our
relationships with universities
when it comes to, um, dog dog
credit opportunities.
The one thing I really do want
to point out also is
Two supplemental request that we
have
Currently this year we are
asking for $25 million to be
able to fill in the gap that we
have when it comes to the uptick
we have in the K. 12. Plus, we
had many more districts taken
advantage of that with the
implementation of house Bill
130. We are because of that we
are seeing that we are going to
be short when we're asking for
$25 million to be able to fill
that in as a supplemental
request.
The other supplemental request
that we have is for $19.9
million to be able to fully fund
the universal free meals. We are
very excited about this. I've
gotten very you know a lot of
great feedback across the Mexico
every student New Mexico is
getting breakfast and lunch.
We're asking for this
supplemental request so that we
can be able to finish out this
year.
Um, and make sure that we can
continue to feed students across
New Mexico. So with that, Mr
Chair, I'm gonna stop talking
and we can start discussing and
I'm here for any questions. I'm
just doing my center Stein, born
Mr Chairman, secretary that good
morning. Good to see you all
Good to see you guys. Um few
questions for you. And I know
there's others so
Looks like everyone's CPP proof
as possible. I just want to ask
about three issues and thanks
for all your
Doing across the board and
trying to do to help New Mexico
Even the things that are getting
flack. You know, it's trying to
do the best you can, and I
appreciate that you care. Thank
you. But I want to ask you about
absenteeism, You know, chronic
issue As you pointed out, what
is the strategy for turning that
around? What's what are the What
are the policy solutions there
to deal with that?
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator.
You know that This is a hard
one. This is probably maybe we
could argue our number one issue
in New Mexico Right now. I think
no matter where we're at there's
issues, the chronic absenteeism.
We are. We are asking for
funding to be able to do a
couple of things. One is
directly and this is kind of
directly tie taps into the ism.
We want to be able to really
have a campaign out there to be
able to talk directly to
students about why why it's
important to be in school.
How even missing Just one day a
month has has a negative effect,
Much more, much less. You know,
one day a week. We also want to
have a separate really message
for parents and what that means
and how this is a compounding
effect over time. We're looking
at doing this through social
media, also through ad
campaigns. But really the bigger
issue is what I what I really
alluded to issue earlier is that
we want to be able to improve.
Uh, really, the environments of
schools, we are what we saw
prior to the pandemic and what
we see the needs are in schools
now today are very different,
And that means we need to really
double down on everything when
it comes to innovation zones, CT
opportunities, dual credit and
really just improving the
instructional outcomes for
students and and really just
changing what we all thought of
as a typical classroom to make
sure that students want to be
there.
Ms. Secretary Real Quick. Follow
up. What? Why are they not
showing up for me? What's the
route costs Mr Chair? Senator, I
think that those are there may
be different answers to that
question. One is, you know if we
go back prior to the pandemic we
had about 230,000 students in
public schools. We were just
running the figures just a
couple of days ago. We're about
I'm sorry. 320,000 students
across the Mexico We're not a
little over 301,000. So we've
lost about 20,000 students over
time. We do know that there is
an issue with that comes to
birth rates. We do see or
kindergarten classrooms coming
in smaller every single year.
That's been a trend. But we do
also do know that there's still
students at home. We can
attribute some of this to
poverty just to be able to have
transportation getting to school
on a regular basis. We are
starting to wanting to expand
programs to be able to get
school students back in for
credit recovery.
And so if they have been out, we
we need to be able to continue
to find them and encourage them
to come back and get them back
on track to graduate. Mm hmm.
Well, maybe, um, if maybe, I
don't know, it might be
interesting to a focus group
with kids who aren't coming in
and kind of kind of get to
what's driving him? Is it?
Poverty Is it schools aren't
relevant. Is it other issues?
Mental issues. You know that
they're just dealing with they
can't come up. I mean, you're
not going to school has some
pretty bad distance sentence for
them. It's not going to college,
not earning a good income later.
So there's kind of a fundamental
break there, and I think it's
crucial. We all understand
what's really going on. And
anyway, so might consider doing
a little
Formal research on the subject.
I mean, you know
You can do that kind of stuff.
So anyway, moving on to school
security.
Um, where are we at with school,
securing our schools as a
System and how much more is
needed to accomplish that?
Absolutely, uh, Mr Chair,
Senator, This is always this has
been an endeavor I've been
working on for decades.
Probably. I don't know. And I
don't. I don't feel like we are
have solved it yet. I don't know
if we ever will completely 100%
solve it. But there's been a lot
of great work that's been gone.
It's gone into being able to
update the facilities being able
to make sure that
Entry into those facilities are
secure. You can see that through
fencing and sidewalks and how we
can control traffic. You can see
the locked doors. We see camera
systems going in. We do have a
We have been talking about the
last piece that I've been able
to. Not quite solved is when we
do have an emergency because
those things happen is how we
communicate with each other. We
are working now to be able to
solve that problem also and
working with some pilot
districts this year.
To be able to put in systems in
which it allows us to all
communicate together. So whether
your state police city police
Sheriff Border Patrol railroad
schools, you know, school
systems we can all integrate now
through technology. So even
though we're on different radio
systems, we can start to talk to
each other, even though we all
may have different access to the
camera systems. This will allow
us to be able to all see that at
the same time when those
emergencies happen.
So you know, I think you'll see
a lot of a lot of push in that
area this year. Um and I think
also with detection systems will
continue to be well. Priority I
think are I think we would hope
that any technology needs
physical infrastructure needs
that we continue to hear about
that, and that continues to be a
priority.
To make these secure in any way
possible, So that's no we've put
a lot of money towards that. But
I can't imagine we've completed
the job. Maybe we have. That's
really what I'm asking about.
Hopefully, you'll keep coming to
us with proposals while we have
all this one time money and then
finally, just one sentence
answer. I know our teacher
shortage one
The governor got into office was
about 1200 students.
Then I had heard a year or two
ago. It's like 700 students.
We'd like chopped the number and
half. Where are we at now with
our teacher shortage.
Mr Chair, Senator, I would say
we're probably still in that
same 700 range. I think we're
we're there, and, uh, we need to
continue to find those students
that we haven't found yet. We
can see that we went from 233
120,000 down 300,000. So they're
out there somewhere. We need to
find them.
Okay. Thank you, Mr
Senator campus.
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman, members of the Senate
Finance Committee.
Just a couple of questions, and
then from there, maybe we can
get into a little bit more of
the discussion but starting with
the SCG, and I always go back to
this because that to me is the
corpus. The cracks If you will.
We're funding for education
definitely needs to be so within
that is you Prepare for the SCG.
Is that adequately meeting the
needs of our school districts,
or are we seeing more and more
of the resources going below the
line?
For special and individual
projects, and that being said,
how are you managing? If you
will not only the SCG tied into
the budget preparation and in
our audits and then along with
that with a growing request, if
you will for below the line, and
and what's that purpose, and how
do you balance it? I know
there's a lot in that, but maybe
you can help me a little bit.
To better understand what the
philosophy and the direction is
that that you're going in.
Yes, sir. Mr. Chair, Senator
Campos. Thank you for that. I
am. I am proud to say that this
last year we were able to give
out the largest SCG two school
districts. That's that's that's
I've ever known, And I want to
thank all of you for making that
happen. This is allowing
districts to be able to move and
start to make the shift from
some of the federal funds that
they've been using, and to
continue to move over to state
funds and using using SED to do
that.
I do have a worry this year,
though, because what I don't
want to do is ever have RSCG
slide backwards and we are
coming up on the date that were
required to give that final SCG
number that's going to be very
important that I have the
support, hopefully to be able to
supplement those two
supplemental request one around
universal free meals and the
other is around K. 12 plus
Days that will allow us to be
able to not have get into that
conversation about having the
SCG slide backwards. Um, when it
comes to the below the line
funding those are really
programs that we are running
here at at the Public Education
Department to support those
initiatives within those
schools. So a lot of those are
gonna be like our teacher prep
programs that I talked about
earlier but the other one large
area and that is going to be
around school support.
This is where we are federally
required to be able to support
those schools that are
designated as CSC and MRI
schools. We want to be able to
go in there, given that that
guidance and be able to help
create those plans to help them
get out of that situation. Um,
there is also an ask that I have
this year to be able to even do
that, even further. Right now.
We're working with individual
schools schools to do that.
There are m r I and C s. I, um,
designated
But we're also starting to see
now Now we have more data as we
see multiple schools within the
same school district having
needs
Which tells me that there's more
of a systems issue within the
school district, So we want to
be able to also work with entire
school districts to really kind
of turn around the entire school
district, and that really allows
us for being able to go in and
provide a recipe to those
schools, districts or
superintendents and school
boards. And I'm telling you,
this is really the model that I
followed in different paths that
I took a superintendent.
So if I kind of talk about the
story in Roswell, we did this
exact same work there. We went
from an F to an A in two years.
When I went to Deming. We were
the lowest performing school
district there. Within two
years, we were able to surpass a
PS and some of our proficiency
is which was which was our goal
was so I just want to be able to
share some of the experiences
and successes that I've had in
school in school districts to be
able to show the superintendents
and school boards that this can
happen.
If they implement this recipe
that that is possible for them.
So you, Mr Madam Chair as we go
forward. One of the things that
you also mentioned was the
alignment if you will of
curriculum and services for our
special needs individuals, and
along with that, are you
thinking of some of that
alignment as well for our SETI
programs?
And the reason I say that,
because as we're starting to go
ahead and evolve into that one
of the things that I'm not a
seniors, different curriculums
are being created. We can go and
say, Well, there's a specialty
in farming to Nguyen in Las
Cruces, one in Albuquerque, but
but the basics are definitely
there, and it's going to be an
alignment of that curriculum and
and outreach as well.
Yes, sir. Mr. Chair, Senator.
Absolutely. I've been having
some wonderful conversations
with school districts around CT
and how we can start to get to
the next evolution of what that
can look like, and we started to
see some wonderful models. So
when you look at Hobbs, you see
really how they've been able to
work directly with their
community hired institutions
businesses to actually build a,
um, a facility. That's really
for the entire area.
And so I've been able to have
some conversations with other
school districts that they're
wanting to actually start to go
in together to build some of the
and actually model it After the
same way you see Rio Rancho
starting to go down that path,
Valencia starting Valencia
County started working that area
actually having some
conversations with higher Ed and
Western Grant County. They're
starting to look at some of
those same things.
So again, we want to continue to
work with them and build out CT
pathways that meet the needs of
the areas of the state that they
live in. But now we're getting a
whole lot more. Um, um,
responsible and and and have the
know how to be able to build the
facilities in a much more
efficient manner. So looking
forward to what the next 10
years is going to look like for
CTE? So so, Mr Chair as we move
forward, work very closely and
helping to
Develop and evolve the school of
Dreams Academy and I indicate
and I see there that it is still
says the House bill. Two
juniors, So those resources are
recommended by LFC. But is that
one of the programs as an
example where you're using that
as a model for charter schools
for you might say some of the
Other school systems that are
growing and developing and
again, creating the balance if
you will, as we move forward and
education
How do how do we ensure that
everyone is is not only on the
same page even though they might
have specific and separate
missions, But but the outcomes
with the core of what we're
trying to instruct is going to
be very important. It's not just
go out there and learn the
specialty. It's going to have an
understanding of the reading the
writing the comprehension.
The development when it comes to
the technical pieces, so so as
an example using that do you
showcase these schools that are
not only within the direct
public school system, but those
that are the charter schools or
if you will some of the
different schools? How are you
dealing with that? Uh, Mr Chair,
Senator, You know, I I agree
with what you're saying. In
fact, as my last post is
Superintendent
In last illness. We were working
with blend schools and soda.
Also the Valencia branch there
to start to do eggs. I think
what? You're what you're
describing, and so I think what
we need to do is create some of
those models so that we can show
how this is a can be a positive
to be able to bring in all the
educational institutions
together that includes higher ed
charters and public schools to
make that happen.
And then do that in the
efficient way to where we're not
replicating programs, even at
high schools or even within
school districts, But we can
actually do that. Within
counties. I was excited about
that, and they're still moving
forward with some of those
ideas. You mentioned the journey
miners, junior monies for soda
and I I believe that that ask is
to be able to improve some of
their security systems that soda
If I'm reading that correct, Mr
Chairman, and that brings up the
point of if we're not going to
have that, and
Why is that going to be included
in the language, and is there
going to be a way for us to
assist some of these schools as
they go forward with maybe
ancillary resources in order to
go ahead and do that? So I defer
again to you, Mr. Secretary.
What are the thoughts there? If
there, uh, definitely will not
be the junior money, but there
may be other resources they're
going to be available within HB
two at all.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator, I believe
any any resources that we have
available? We'll work with those
districts to be able to use them
with their you know, as
officially as possible, so we
get the outcomes that we want.
So along with that, Mr Chair as
we move forward, we're talking
about improving the curriculum
We're talking about.
Ongoing teacher training, school
based health clinics very
important to me as we move
forward, and we're trying to set
these up. Continue with that
service.
When I was a superintendent, we
dealt with that with many of
these school based health
clinics is that is that one of
the priorities that ties in if
you will not only to healthy
foods to if you will form the
foods these kind of things. Uh
what? What are some of the other
things that are going to be the
emphasis with those school based
health clinics? Mr. Chair,
Senator compose. Absolutely.
We're we've done a lot of work
across standing Mexico with
building out school based health
centers.
That's so in many times these
are these are really the places
not only for students to go but
also faculty and even sometimes
the community to take advantage
of we started. We're continuing
to see that build out, and that
would absolutely be part of that
student health well being and
safety funding that we want to
be able to continue, Mr. Chair,
I could go on and on, there's a
There's several other questions
that I have, but
Mr Secretary and our meetings. I
just want to let you know I I
appreciate the vision that
tenacity and of course, the hard
work. You definitely are going
to go ahead and need the
personnel within the public
Education department in along
with that the outreach as we
continue to take care of our
teachers to continue to build
that teacher base.
Take care of our special needs
needs take care of our
transportation work on the C T e
ensure that the curriculum is
aligned. There's still a lot
ahead of us, but I really
appreciate the vision and, of
course, the experience that you
bring to this process and
whatever I can do to help as
well. Please let me know. Thank
him afford really quickly, and
we talked about at risk and
Students. There's a company I
think they're going to look at
the contract at risk money at
right. Have a brochure from
them.
It's about a million dollars a
classroom, right, but it limits
to 80 kids in a test market.
Um, the program is really
successful, but the cost is
really high and then picking 80
kids is
Who gets to graduate and who
doesn't get to graduate.
This is really concerning. I
just want to. I want to look at
this, but this page right here,
so people that see it.
This is a million dollar
classroom, but only 80 kids.
So we got to figure that out.
Thank you Chair and thank you
very much. Secretary and to the
presenters. Thank you very much,
And there's a lot of work going
into. You know how we're going
to settle on this on the
universal free breakfast and
lunch? That was my legislation
this last year. We think we
started out with about 23
million. We knew that there
would be so we went to a two
year implementation to make sure
that we had You know what we
knew we needed there. Um
So are you. Are you comfortable
with where things are right now?
Because we're going to have to
do some work on that piece. When
it gets over here to the Senate,
the budget you wind up with
about 43, I think for this year
is that about right or 40
Correct Chair, Senator Padilla.
It's been a successful
implementation, I think, And
when we look at the language of
the of the statute requires that
we are able to feed every single
student across New Mexico and
that's what we've done so, yes,
now that we've been able to
collect the data, very
confident.
And that is the number for us to
fully implement. Thank you.
Chair and secretary. So then we
wind up with 43 this year, but
only I believe 30 of it is
recurring.
So then we're gonna have to come
back for another 10 to make sure
that the ongoing recurring gets
you to your amounts. What is the
bottom line? That based on what
we know right now? What is the
recurring amount needed?
4343,
okay for next year, So we're
we're we're on. We're on track
you hold this year and then
we'll have to fill that $10
million gap next year to send it
off into the future, doing what
It's supposed to. Okay, Great
And then in terms of Mr Chair
that the residencies and the
teacher prep and all that, um
How much was
Spare expended or Is there any
any amount left there for other
programs, too?
That are already doing really
good. You know, here in New
Mexico. I know you mentioned a
few in your presentations
throughout this year will have
this last year and into this
year and we have the Golden
Apple found group that's being
done their excellent work that
they're doing.
Um
What is left in that
Bucket of money right now.
Mr Chair, Senator. All those
funds have been able to be
expended. Our goal is to be able
to try to get as many students
as possible to take advantage of
those and teacher prep programs,
and that's what we're doing. And
maybe it's a good problem that
we have because we've had some
great relationships with higher
institutions to fully take
advantage of it again. I know
we're in a this meeting here.
whatever if you if I could just
ask you to kind of sharpen the
pencil. Now, just take a look at
it again to make sure that those
dollars are getting out the door
that they are available for the
The intended purposes for these
organizations that are seeing
great success, you know, and you
and I talked about it, you know,
off and on throughout the year.
the last year I think that's all
I have. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'll try to
make it real short.
Tell me, uh, Miss Secretary kind
of a quick yes or no question.
And I'm not gonna argue the fact
about a five day school week
Have you got adequate funds and
your SED to achieve a five day
school week across the state,
all inclusive transportation,
Everything inclusive. Have you
got adequate money in your
proposal?
Proposal for the SED. Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods? Yes. In our
request, we do have adequate
funding to be able to do that.
Okay. You have a food initiative
in your deal. Many of our
schools do not have the capacity
to cook inside the school.
Are you proposing infrastructure
changes to do that cooking? Are
you still going to do more or
less what you're doing today?
Cooking at a central location,
shipping it out into the school
systems that have close
proximity.
Mr Senator Woods? Yes, The
expectation would be that
districts They all have
different resources to be able
to provide school meals for them
to continue doing what they're
doing. There are some that are
on their own, making those
requests to be able to update
update and create those kitchens
at at at individual school
sites, But that's a local
decision. Okay, the next
question I have may take a
little longer.
I don't see in your budget. I
see some some budget. Uh, for
literacy. Here are some key
points.
Explain to me the governors
asking for a $30 million
request? No, it's the capital
for literacy building in
Albuquerque. How is
P D going to use that building.
To do the literacy training. Uh
and what I mean by that? Are you
going to bring students into
that building? Are you gonna
house students in that building?
Uh, how are you going to be
encompassing the whole state?
Because only 25% of the students
are in Albuquerque.
So, Mr Chair. I'm sorry. This
may take just a little bit of
time and I apologize for that.
But the question is explain to
me.
How are you How p D is going to
use that building? Yes, sir. Mr.
Chair Senator. So first, it is
not made that we do not have a
decision on where it will be. We
want to. We are currently
working with all of our higher
institutions. They are all very
excited about being a part of
what this will become. And so we
are looking at a $30 million
capital investment to create a
facility.
The vision of the government
division of myself is to do a
few things. One is wherever that
maybe we want to be able to make
sure that one it has that
connection to a higher
institution so that we're
working directly with those
professors. They are also going
to be struck, Uh, structured
literacy, trained, making sure
that those teachers that are in
teacher prep programs
Are able to use the facility
also as a training ground to do
that. We also want to be able to
make sure that we're connected
to school districts, and so
there will be students there.
And so what the facility will
look like in general will be a
facility in which we can bring
all the resources that were
talking together when it comes
to structure literacy, there
will be model classrooms in
there.
This will be a place for
educators that get that one. Get
training. They can practice
their training and they can
practice improving their
instruction in those in those
model classrooms on the family
and students side of things.
This is going to be a place for
families to be able to go and
get interventions to be able to
get trained themselves as as
parents and to be able to get
the support that they need to
make sure that they are getting
access to structure literacy.
Today. Typically, what happens
is that if you have a child that
is reading below grade level,
and that is the majority of our
students in New Mexico, the only
ones that have access to being
able to have extra support are
those with the means to be able
to do that, And it's expensive,
expensive to be able to have
those individual programs to be
able to support them in
structured literacy. This is an
idea to be able to make sure
it's available to everyone
across New Mexico.
Now.
Do. We are looking at a central
hub wherever that could be, and
but we are also looking at how
we can create satellite offices
across New Mexico. So it's not
only do you have to go to this
one central place, but we have
the ability to be able to have
the satellite offices when we
look at our foreign institutions
and MSU U. N. M as a as an
example. They already have
branch campuses across New
Mexico. We can also
Take advantage of our RSS across
New Mexico. So you're seeing
kind of the vision of what this
is going to build out to be once
we have that that home site of
that that that central site and
then after that we would come
satellite offices.
Mr Chair. I don't want to be
labor. At this point. There's
many people that have questions
after me.
My only comment is on. That is
I don't see the need for for the
building. As much as I see the
need to get this into the
universities get this
For example, Mr Mr Chair, and I
know I'm not supposed to. I'm
just bringing you the end of the
discussion, sir.
Mr Secretary, Mr Chair.
I asked the question one time to
a college president about
Your education Department. What
do you direct that Education
department to do?
And he told me, he says the den
of the Education Department
directs his own programs.
My question, Mr Chair and Mr
Secretary, and I know I should
be talking to hire it on this.
If this is such an important
deal
And we need the colleges to buy
in on this.
Why in the world wouldn't we
direct our education to say?
These are the programs you will
do. You will include high school
students in these programs. You
will include high score.
Teachers that are that are have
already graduated.
I'm sorry to get loud, Mr Chair.
That I just do that he
Why we need a particular
building.
When our real purpose here
Is to bring kids up out of the
depths.
And we need to get close to
those kids. We can't transport
every kid into a single
location. It's gonna have to be
done through universities and we
have all of these universities
across the state.
So I have heartburn as you can
tell.
But
So be it.
Thank you, Mr Chair. If I may
just a quick response, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, So a
couple of things One is we're
able to visit a number of
programs across the country that
have been very successful. We're
in Pennsylvania were in Kansas
and Florida. Well, what we
noticed and all of these areas
that that they were. We are
replicating successful model
that they had.
And this was absolutely very
important to have the
centralized area to be able to
bring all those resources
together. And so again, we do
see the importance of making
this happen to the other point.
Um, we are directing higher ed
institutions and colleges of
education to change what they're
doing, and that is really coming
from the partnership between H
and D and the Public Education
Department.
And we are working directly with
deans and program directors to
be able to one ensure that they
are. We are working on syllabus
for entire, uh, teacher prep
programs so that we have similar
consistency and high rigor in
all those areas were also
requiring that all of them must
get training and thank you.
Thank you, these young ladies in
the audience right here.
They're from there An A G like
you, Mr Secretary. That's right.
What do you guys studying it in
a minute?
Go Aggies
and see there's no educators in
the room.
Right here.
Senator Sheer No, no, I'm
talking about in that in that
class and
secondary. Oh, secondary. I'm
sorry I didn't catch up.
One out of six.
I got a job for you.
So, Yeah, senators here. I guess
it doesn't matter. Senator
Burger Center? Sure, either one.
Go ahead, find it out among
yourself.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Mr Terry for the
presentation.
Would you say?
Are we, um
Comparing a year ago today to
today.
Do we have more special ed
teachers hired
Do we have fewer specially
teachers are or would you do we
have about the same number of
special ed teachers on the
payroll today?
Mr Chair, Senator, I would say
that we probably have about the
same When we look at our highest
needs. It's going to be special
education teachers right now
What we're looking at in the in
the request is to ask for it.
Pay differential for hardest
staff positions, but by far the
highest hardest opposition,
especially education Now we'd
like to do is we do know two
things.
One is that we have a many
teachers that have their
specialized license, but they're
teaching in regular classrooms,
so this would allow for us to
build the entice them to be able
to come back with the pay
differential to come back in the
special education, classrooms
and the other we want to do is
be able to encourage those that
are in teacher prep programs to
go into special education
programs to be able to fit those
Fill those needs. If we, uh, we
do have enough licensed teachers
in the state to tackle our
problem. They're just not in
Special education classrooms.
Okay. And Mr Chair. Thank you
for that information, and that's
good to know, because that's I
know that's a huge need for ped
number one, then also impacted
our Martin Tina's Yossi lawsuit,
and all of us would like to
resolve that as soon as
possible. Let me double check on
a couple of things you did you
say we're about 700 teachers
short.
This year. Did I hear that or
Yes, sir. Mr. Chair Senator
between 707 50, depending on the
day that you asked that
question, Okay.
Um And did you say that? Uh,
we're down about 20,000 students
and enrollment or did I miss
Yes, sir. Mr. Chair, Senator
between if we look at the
numbers prior to the pandemic,
we were hovering right around
320,000. We were just looking at
the numbers earlier this week.
We're just over 301,000, okay?
And And what do you attribute
that to Mr Chair? Is that
I mean, is that is that more
homeschooling private schools,
people leaving the state? Um
just kind of curious.
You know where those folks are
going, Mr. Chair, Senator, I
would say the first one is that
we do have smaller kindergarten
classrooms coming in every
single year. So that has that's
a direct correlation to our
birth rates. We're going to
continue to see those that trend
happened for the next few years.
So on top of that, I would say
that's probably the number one
issue that we do have students
have moved out of state. We do
have students that I have not
come back to school yet. And
those are the ones I'm really
worried about.
We do have we do see movement
from traditional public schools
and charter schools, But those
are still countered with our
numbers. So, um, yes, I think
that the biggest one that I'm
looking at right now are the
students that have not quite
come back as full time students.
um, after the pandemic that are
still in New Mexico, Okay?
Um And Mr That's a little
disturbing. Yes.
Knowing that
Work two or three years down the
road now, and we're still
lacking those numbers. So that's
why I ask, maybe did they move
out of state, But they're just
not
Back in school. I assume that
will be high schoolers that
you're seeing most of that in
third thing, Mr Chair. Uh and I
think Senator was
Tapped on this. I know it's a
lot of discussion about 40
weeks, five day weeks.
Um
It. I find it interesting that
PD wanted school systems to have
the option to go to a four day
week. Many of them did. It's
working very well for them, and
now we want to move them back to
a five day week. Um
Why wouldn't the individual
district boards be able to make
that decision?
Um
Rather than
Taking kids, You know, four
days, five days Now we're going
back and forth. And, uh, you
know they have enough to deal
with. Quite frankly, rather than
how many days we're gonna go to
school. Just tell me what I need
to learn. That's I think what we
need to put the emphasis
So what are your thoughts? Yes,
sir. Mr. Chair, Senator.
Uh,
When we look at this state
across New Mexico, um
There is great need, so I would
I would debate that these
schools are doing well.
Ah and and show when we look at
the numbers
We have about 3/4 of all of our
students across New Mexico that
are not a grade level in math.
We have about two thirds that
are not a great level when it
comes to reading. That's the
majority of our students, and
when we say that they're below
grade level, they're quite
Quite low below grade level. Now
we have been able to set up a
system with a new Mexico. That
kind of rates are schools. We've
got MRI and C s. I those are
most needed schools that need
support to improve. We've also
got our traditional or spotlight
and are excellent schools. But I
do want to caution everyone and
that if you're a spotlight or or
a traditional school, that does
not mean that you're doing
great. That still may mean.
That you have the majority of
your students performing below
grade level. What that means is
that you're doing better than
other schools in New Mexico, so
we're measuring ourselves
against ourselves. Some of these
four districts for four day
school districts or five days to
the school districts may look
like they're doing better
because of the day designation.
We give them, but she got to go
a little bit deeper. And when
you actually look at the data
The majority of the students are
still not performing at grade
level, shall we? When I you
know, over my time as being a
superintendent of principal, a
teacher that the biggest reason
that we talk about is that we've
never have enough time with
students. There has been some
great work done by the
Legislature to be able to
promote K 12 Plus and we've been
able to increase hours and days
across New Mexico.
And one of the things that I did
is I I kind of mentioned earlier
about some of the examples I've
had as a superintendent. Well,
then Roswell. We increased days
quite a bit, And that means we
really increase days quite. But
I was definitely the outlier of
superintendents. We went to 205
days and I wouldn't say that's
the only reason but that's a
major reason why we improved.
So when we look at research out
there also or we can look at the
surface. Look at 40 districts,
maybe on in general performing
better than under other
districts in New Mexico.
But that does not mean again
that they're doing well. But I
could also argue that they
should be doing better than what
they are doing so the intent is
to really just increased
instructional time when we saw a
house Bill 130 take effect. The
intent was to increase
instructional time, but that's
not necessarily what happened
because even though we saw
school districts that increased
hours and days
Once they factored in the
professional development time,
the 60 hours in elementary with
that, really, the net effect on
that was actually less time with
teachers. So, for example, let's
say we had a district that went
from 8100 and 76 instructional
days to 100 and 84 instructional
days, but once they add in the
professional development time
now they're really at 100 and 74
instructional days, so I
actually went backwards and we
had families that that saw that
and recognize that and really
pointed that out to us.
So again, The intent around this
rule is to be able to just
simply increased instructional
time between students and
teachers.
Okay, Mr. Chair. I guess Final
question is, Do you have a hard
data that
Would indicate that kids in four
day school weeks are performing
less or not, as well as kids in
a five day week school
That
I So yes, There are many four
day districts that are not
performing as good as five day
districts. We have some that are
performing better, but I was
also argued that does not mean
that they're performing well.
They may still have the majority
of the students performing, uh
below grade level in both math
and reading.
Mr Chairman, Mr. Secretary, You
have a big job ahead of you and
and I would say, um, certainly
with with no ml intent that
every school system in this
change of Mexico has a long way
to go.
We need your help and others to
make that happen. And I hope
that we're making decisions
based on
Kids in classrooms with
qualified teachers to get grades
up.
Uh, eliminate as much as we can
have of absenteeism and get the
graduation rates up rather than
four days, five days in some of
the ancillary things that we
have discussed here today. For
me, it is educating our kids.
Thank you, Mr Secretary. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Fender ship.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
What? What's the vacancy rate at
PD right now, Mr. Mr Chair,
Senator. We're about 7 18.5%
vacancy rate, but early February
will be down to 17. So we're
getting we're doing doing well
doing better.
So, Mr Chair, Mr Secretary, So
I've been here, you know, for a
few weeks anyway, few years
anyway.
And
There's a mindset problem that I
think we have under Governor
Richardson.
School district. You shall do
what we say.
Under Martinez School district.
You shall do what we say.
Today. School district. You will
do what we say. And we have not
improved a bit.
Have we thought about letting
him do something.
Because you know you're here
talking about structured
literacy.
And I've seen multiple bills
come through here that we've
passed.
Mandating a particular reading
program.
Or something else.
Nothing improved Nothing.
And so here we are again. We're
going to mandate something else.
In my guess is
Nothing's gonna change.
Because we've been mandating
now.
For three governors that I'm
aware of.
Okay?
And we don't change anything.
When I look at some of this
So we're talking about, um,
science and reading professional
development for secondary
schools. I think we have to get
the students attention first.
If I want to be a welder,
because my family is welded
whatever.
There's lots of math and science
in welding.
So you use welding to teach math
and science. You don't use a
classroom to teach math and
science and then and then send
them to some trade school to
learn welding.
You can learn that.
Those skills while you learn how
to Weld, same with automotive
There's lots of chemistry.
In an engine. There's lots of
physics in an engine.
And if you have to write a
report about how you fixed it
Well, then there's then there's
language skills.
And so now you have my
attention.
But they may need to sit in the
classroom because he wants to be
an engineer.
I don't want to be an engineer.
I want to fix it. I want to fix
engines.
The same with AG.
There is so much chemistry in
modern agriculture.
And math.
So why don't we use those to
teach math and science instead
of math and science and then Oh,
by the way, let me tell you
about AG.
But that also depends on the
student.
So when it's all structured in
everybody has to do the same
thing. You leave a bunch of
folks out.
And now they don't come to
school.
Because they're bored out of
their mind.
They don't care.
So why come to school? All
you're gonna do is make me sit
in a classroom.
Right. Don't want to be when I
want to be outside.
But I'm willing to learn in the
right environment for me.
Now I know you know, you got
what 89,000 students in
Albuquerque. You can't have
89,000 systems.
But we can certainly expand
that.
The what? I don't know what it
is. And Roy today, the 12
students in Roy, They're very
much different than the students
in Deming.
We're very much different than
the students in Hobbs.
Um because of the industries
that are around them.
So
You know, the students in in in
Roy, want one or two things They
either want to take over the
ranch that area or they want to
go to New York and get the hell
out of there.
One or the other.
Okay?
And I think that repeatedly the
same mandate mandate Mandy
And frankly, I think that's the
same thing with the five day
school.
We said No. You said yes.
Because it's a mindset that P D.
Is.
The overwhelming overriding
education expert.
But you can teach me a lot more
about math and science by
teaching me to Weld
Which happened in high school
for me.
I also had some math skills. I
could have been an engineer if I
wasn't lazy.
Because I had math skills.
But because I was lazy.
That's how you taught me the
math skills by teaching me to
To Weld.
I ended up with a degree anyway.
But
But I think that's the biggest
problem here.
We're mandating five days. Uh,
school weeks, even though we
said no, we're mandating, Uh,
statewide reading initiatives.
When I don't think that that's
Right for everybody. We're
mandating science reading
development, instructional
materials, So it's instructional
materials, which means it's the
same in every single school.
For every single student.
And I just don't think that that
I don't think that works.
I've seen it through three
administrations.
Nothing has changed.
Something else. I've seen No,
and they just walked in and back
Navajo Preparatory School.
They know how to read. They know
how to speak Japanese and French
and Spanish.
I don't know what they do, but
go plagiarize their program
because apparently I won't
works.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
You made the lights flicker
centers here.
Senator Brentley. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Mr
Secretary for being here is as
the appropriating committee. We
know that the data shows that an
increase in money does not
necessarily equate an increase
in outcomes. Do you have any
data that would support that? An
increase in, um, instructional
time?
You know, butts and and
classroom seats is a direct
correlation to an increase in
outcomes. So take for example,
over the last 10 years. What is
our requirement?
You know, are either by hours or
by days increased by and have we
have the outcomes improved by
the same percentage. Yes, Mr
Chair, Senator Brownlee? Yes.
Thank you for that. So I think I
want to answer that in two ways.
One is we are looking at
research that has come out and
reference the most recent
research, which is at the Rand
Corporation.
Where they looked at five and 40
districts across the United
States and New Mexico as part of
that study, and the results were
that we need to be able to
increase instructional time and
that they did see that even in
New Mexico that 40 districts may
have a slight advantage when it
comes to current outcomes.
What should be happening is that
they should be doing even better
than what they are doing.
Also, maybe as part of my answer
is my own my own experience. Uh
so I don't want to portray the
picture that increasing in
structural time alone is the
answer Could that's not? It is a
really a multipronged approach
to be able to increase outcomes
for students increased
instructional time with
teachers.
Is a good thing. It's as always
been part of what I've seen in
multiple areas of the state and
in multiple school districts
have never seen where we do less
instructional time for students
is better for them.
Um, but also when we look at
some of the you know some of the
things that we think are good
for all students structure.
Literacy is one of them again.
This is research based. This
isn't This is also coming from
researchers within New Mexico
but also across the country. And
so when we look at what we want
to see is best for students
across New Mexico. Everybody
should be able to have access to
the best.
And that means that gets into an
equity issue.
And so, depending on where you
live in New Mexico, you may have
access to your teachers, more or
less. You may have access to
better curriculum in some
districts or you may not. And so
part of my intent is not to be.
You shall do what I say. But my
part of my intent is to be able
to support both teachers,
principals, superintendents and
school boards to allow them to
give them guidance on how to
best time. Those outcomes.
What I'm talking about. Today is
structured literacy will do that
Increased instructional time
will play a part in that also,
and there are many other areas
that we've talked about today
That are good for every single
classroom. And you, Mexico.
Thank you. Mr Chairman and
Secretary. I agree with you that
increasing instructional time
may not be the only answer and
isn't it might not be the answer
at all, because, well, I don't
disagree with you that there's
probably a number of four day
schools.
That are not performing to the
level you'd like to see.
There's a ton of five day
schools that aren't either
correct. And so we can't say
that those five days or
performing any better. And so
the answer, But we can say is
five days isn't gonna make it
any better, So whatever it is
increasing it to five days
doesn't necessarily improve
outcomes because we're seeing in
five days classrooms.
That their outcomes aren't any
better. And I would argue,
probably worse.
I
It seems like such a narrow
focus target for P E. D.
Very, very selective to rural
communities. How many and maybe
this is a question for sunny?
how many school districts and
state of New Mexico on a four
day calendar? Mr. Chair,
Representative 939 and how many
school districts are there?
Total in New Mexico. Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, Senator. There are 89
school districts and about 100
charters.
It seems like such a narrow
focus, Mr Chair on this and I'll
tell you
If we know that between a four
and a five days, we're not
seeing any different
improvements, and I can say
making them come to a five day.
I don't think we can expect any
better outcomes.
I say this because, Mr
Secretary, as you know, I sat on
the TRC school board and I voted
against a five day school week.
I mean, a four day school week
because in the town of truth or
consequences, while there may be
some some particular exceptions,
Winston whatever.
That is not in the best
interests of that school
district. It's not rule enough.
Those kids need a place to eat
in a place to sleep and isaan
them every day, and it was the
best interests of it was a large
enough city in which they needed
to be in school on Fridays.
But that doesn't work in animus.
And if I were on the animus
school board, I would recognize
that it's not necessary. It
doesn't work in living wherever
wherever these districts are.
And so I think the argument goes
back to nobody knows that school
board better school district
better than the school board.
I knew my school district well,
and they needed to be on a five
day calendar.
But I don't know my school
districts any better than
someone who's arguing of why it
works for them to be on a four
day
And I think on the on the
On the larger issue is it's a
conversation about whether we're
going to look for local school
districts locally lead their own
districts. It's a larger
conversation this and more
And then I think on this
particular issue, it was
Sending a disrespectful message
to the legislator because the
legislator had already taken
action to say We're not going to
mandate that. And then the
agency went through and said,
Well, yes, you are and we're
going to now we're going to come
back to you and have you funded.
That's the disconnect. I know
you have served your school
districts very well. Very, very
well.
I hope I have as a local leader
in mind in the past, and I just
hope that we provide the
opportunity for those who are
elected to those positions to
also, schools serve their
districts to the best of their
capacity by giving them the
opportunity to do so.
Thank you, Mr Secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you to all of you.
Um, I just have a couple of
things so
So on the structure, literacy.
Would you be ready this year
this summer?
Mr Chair Center. Absolutely will
be ready. Our goal is for this
year to be able to continue to
train our fourth grade teachers
next year working to our
elementary middle schools, and
then we will be ready to be able
to work with those 10,000
students this summer for a
summer literacy.
Uh, Mr Chairman and Secretary.
So
Say that
The building is provided and say
that
Everything is in place.
Will this be a full time year
round?
Uh, Mr Chair, Senator. Let me I
might need to, uh, be more a
little bit more specific.
There's really I would say four
categories to this idea of
structure. Literacy. One is to
be able to continue with the
letters training for elementary
teachers.
Second one is we want to be able
to break into secondary will be
able to work with our middle
school teachers, and then I'm
going to go to the I'm gonna
skip third. I'm gonna go to the
fourth one. The fourth one is
that the end result of having
that Capitol building that $30
million request to be able to
have that centralized hub of
uh, structure. Literacy. New
Mexico.
But if we all know it takes time
to be able to actually build
that out, that could actually
take, you know, 2345 years. So
what do we do between today and
actually having this facility in
place? Uh, that would require.
That's where we were asking for
our summer Literacy Institute or
going to be working at it for a
six week program working with
10,000 students across state,
New Mexico to be able to give
them that boosted structure,
literacy.
And that would then phase into
out of school time after school
time programs in the fall and
spring.
We will continue on that cycle.
So the the the work of having
that culmination of a literacy
New Mexico There is the
institute will take some time
Just because it's a capital
projects. It'll take some time
to actually make that a reality.
Mr Chairman.
So will this be on a volunteer
basis or how is it going to
work?
Show. We are looking right now
to really to affect those 10,000
students.
Of course, it's voluntary
because we know that that
parents have or, you know it's
summertime, but we will be
working with teachers and
families now to let them know
that this is a This is a
possibility. This is an
opportunity for them to be able
to take advantage of, and it
will be a positive for them when
it comes to their their
instruction within schools. It's
not only going to affect their
reading ability, but it's going
to have a positive effect on
math science.
So studies you know all the
other areas to do that, Um, we
10,000 sounds like a lot.
When we look at the need across
New Mexico, that's really just a
drop in the bucket of the need
that we have. So we look at how
many classrooms we have in New
Mexico. We're just talking about
one or two students from every
classroom in New Mexico that is
by far something that we can do
We see the need there and we
want to continue to do that. So
this again 10,000 students this
summer will continue working
with thousands of students over
the fall in the spring.
Oh, so, Mr Chairman, so
When it's happening. We will
also have students there.
Or it's just death.
Teachers.
On the structured literacy
training.
Uh, Mr Chair Senator for the
training specifically when we
even look at what we're looking
at for summer program we need
to. We want to be able to keep
the ratio very low, so wonderful
students, So we have 10,000
students over the summer. That
means we need about 2500
educators to do this, so the
next step in this will be able
to recruit those educators.
We're looking at
Current classroom teachers were
looking at pre service teachers
were looking at educational
assistance. We're even looking
at the private sector to be able
to do this. Um, and so once we
are able to identify those
people, then we'll we'll we will
then get them structure
literacy trained for many of
them. That will be like a
another dose of it. And for many
of this will be their first
dose. So if we've got
Uh, somebody that isn't a
teacher prep program right now.
This is going to be a benefit to
them because they're going to
get an additional dose of
structure literacy training at
as an educator to be ready for
the summer program.
Yeah, Yeah, Mr Chairman, I guess
I'm I'm just looking at him
visualizing this and, um and
maybe I'm off base, but if you
do have students at the same
time that you have the training
that's going on for
Teachers.
To me.
That would be the perfect time
to have some some parent
training.
You know, because what are these
parents going to be doing? Or
are you going to have them away
from parents?
You know, I think that's going
into another different liability
and all kinds of things.
But I mean, that would be the
perfect part to work on some
strands, You know to build that.
Parent part you know, to
reinforce. You know what they're
getting and what they're
learning, so it wouldn't be
anything different. It would be
just staying on the same.
Scope.
You know that? That's you know
my thought.
Then, uh, Antonio. Is he going
to provide Busses?
Yeah, Okay. He's smiling
Electric ones, too. Yeah. Uh,
All right. Well, thank you.
Sounds exciting. I have one more
question than I've been working
with Sonny on this.
Uh, for university you and m
towels.
They're willing to do a program
on the outdoor education.
To bring the students and
they're working with a stem, and
this is with having the students
all have an opportunity to look
at telescopes and work with
telescopes and work with that.
So if they were to apply apply
directly to the department for
funding for the outdoor instead
of having towels, Penasco and
everyone different trying to
apply
Yeah.
Uh,
Mr Chair and Senator. So the we,
the agency does this current
year have funding to support
outdoor learning programs and
they can
They can apply directly to the
agency for for Grant funding,
But my question is, can you and
them do it for them?
Instead of having
Having multiple Yes, and they
have received the funding. They
have not received it. And yeah,
that one. I will have to check
on that. I would like an answer.
I absolutely they're trying to
do is coordinated.
And make it a moral visible and
more for
Or
You know, to be able to work a
program like that.
No. Well, the less part that I
have, Mr Chairman is some
And, uh and it's coming to me
more from conversation with
school board members.
You know, how can the department
Bring more awareness more
training into what we have below
the line funding.
They seem to be lost.
They have very says Well, we
don't know about it or how do we
go about and I can't do it for
them. You know, it has to come
from within their part. Mr.
Chair, Senator, I I agree with
that. I think I've been getting
some of the same feedback. So we
are working closely now with,
um with the school board
Association.
And we do have a bill coming
through to really that address
the school board as part of that
bill is around the training that
they have, and it's my intent to
do I think exactly what you're
talking about is how do we
provide them with the training
that they're currently getting,
But we need to also give them a
train around instruction around.
Um, you know the the efforts
that they have in improving
schools.
What does it mean to be an
instructional leader? A lot of
what they get now is around law
around policy and the operations
of a school district. We want to
be able to expand that, so they
get the instructional side of
being a school board member.
Very well.
Thank you, Mr German. Thank you,
Senator Hemphill really quickly.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary for the
Um, for your leadership and
being so responsive. I just have
a few questions. So, um
I'm carrying a school safety
bill. Um, I see that you do have
a request for, um
Safety buttons, the panic
buttons.
Do you feel like the a
standardized approach across New
Mexico would be helpful,
providing capital outlay funds
so that all school districts
have a standardized safety
communication system?
Mr Chair, Senator that that
panic button has been in place
for a few years, and we see
different vendors using it. I
have been able to have
experience using different
vendors and there's some good
ones and some things, and
there's a lot of similarities
for sure. I think that's your
question. If it was my wish,
there could be an advantage of
us having a single system across
the entire state that would help
with communication. Excellent.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Secretary and
I also want to thank Greg for
your responsiveness in terms of
mental health supports for
students across New Mexico, You
know, we spoke at length about
increasing some grants and some
additional resources for
schools. Where are we, in terms
of investing in, like, um,
wellness, or, um
Like Well being rooms I saw I
did a little tour just before
the holidays in silver
consolidated schools, and in
each school they have like a
wellness room where students can
just come and have support to
regulate and they're hoping to
get additional funds to create
something similar for staff to
I'm hearing that teachers and
staff in our schools are also
Really stressed and having a
difficult time just recovering
after the covid restrictions
that required schools to, you
know, go online and come back
and there was a lot of just
disruption in our routines and
predictability that I think will
take a while to really come back
to set point that is comfortable
where people feel calm and and
regulated at school, so I want
to make sure that we're
addressing those needs of the
students and staff.
Where are we? In terms of those?
Um, financial supports right
now.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Senator.
So the, uh the
There are a couple of different
parts of money that we're using
to do that work right now. There
is a, um
$200,000 appropriation directly
for the wellness rooms that is
being used as well. As as, um, A
$5 million appropriation that
has been used to for behavioral
health generally, which also
supplements the the wellness
room funding to be able to
provide more wellness rooms. And
then there are those the mini
grants that we talked about as
well that are going out and are
supporting
Um, uh, variety of social,
emotional learning and
behavioral health initiatives,
including wellness room. So, um,
we We definitely are continuing
to move that work forward. We
have seen a lot of interest from
the from the schools in that
area. Um, the that is one in the
LFC budget recommendation that
is one of the areas that was
zeroed out.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for that response and I just
want to give a shout out to
silver schools and Joyce Barela
for their incredible work. Their
wellness rooms are really being
utilized. They there's always
students. There's always staff
coming in and out, so they're
very, very helpful. Um, in terms
of the four day week, there are
a lot of school districts in my
Senate district that are on a
four day schedule, and my
request to you is just to allow
them to be part of that
conversation so that they can
express some of the unique
challenges and variables that
occur in rural New Mexico so we
could make sure that we're
supporting them and addressing
any of those variables that
could come up that
Could be additionally
problematic for them. Um, Sonny,
Mr. Chair, Sunny, um, in terms
of a rural school index. I know
it doesn't quite supplement the
loss of funding that the small
school adjustment did. Is there
any discussion about possibly
increasing that rural school
index Because I know that in
rural communities, sometimes
there could be additional costs
because
The school is, um, has less
population. They still have the
same over had or they still have
a lot of overhead because you
have to have a principle. You
have the, um costs that incurred
because of electricity and
having a building maintenance
and all of those things. Where
are we? In terms of that Mr.
Chair, Happy to report that this
interim alias he has been
conducting a funding Formula
Study.
One interesting thing that was
discussed regarding the small
school size adjustment. I think
what districts and chairs can
sort of breathe a sigh of
relief is that the phase out has
been completed. So any increase
to the SCG will essentially not
be a penalty any longer because
the phase out has finished.
But from the study, I think
They were talking about the
cliff effect, which is affected
your district as well that after
about 2000 students, the formula
cuts them off.
And they've contemplated not an
adjustment to the rural
population factor that you
discussed, but maybe looking at
a sliding scale that
You know, you use one size
formula that really loved
rhythmically.
Meet schools where they're at
depending on their size rather
than having that cliff at 2000
students, So I think we're
interested to see their
proposals for the 60 Day on how
to address that, but that's
where the work is. Currently,
Senator Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Sonny. I just want to
let you know like animus
schools. We had a conversation
with the superintendent
yesterday who had talked about
like
How many hats he wears, and all
of the many, many jobs he's
doing, including cleaning tables
and cleaning bathrooms in
addition to his administrative
roles, So I want to make sure
that we're supporting our
schools. Cliff schools was one
of the schools that lost that
small school adjustment, as did
elder Leopold and and I know
they have all struggled to make
that financial adjustments so
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
for your responses. Thank you as
we wrap this up with me.
The literacy program, which I
think we believe in right?
30 million this year. What are
you going to ask? Next year, Mr
Chair? Uh, so The question we
talked about earlier is that
this would be a reoccurring
benefit for students across that
we're building in reoccurring,
But what? What is additional
costs for next to answer your
question? I'd like to be able to
continue and scale up exactly
what we're doing to continue to
have those programs summer.
Uh um, summer programs, all
programs and speed programs so
it could be in the neighborhood
of that $30 million.
But it takes you two years to
stand up the program.
The governor has an expiration
date like milk does sure
So maybe Mr Chair I might be,
uh, confuses 2 $30 million, asks
the building. We're talking
about the
The summer program structure
that you've got to put in place
for the programming, Mr Cherif,
If Legislature gives me $30
million, I will make sure that
we work with enough students to
cover that $30 million of its
more. We'll work with more. If
it's less. We'll work with less.
I mean, where are you going to
find 2500 teachers to do this Mr
Chair, For example, we already
have over 1100 teachers teach.
Uh
People that are in teacher prep
programs have already been
working with those dean's. We're
looking at higher and every
single one of them.
We already have over 2500
teachers that already do summer
school programs We wanna be able
to tap into what they're doing
also, so we're using existing
resources to build to make that
happen.
Thank you so
But you have 1100 that are in
teacher prep, but you need 2500.
So you're 50% over 50% short.
I mean teachers on seven or nine
month contracts, right?
Where are you going To get
these?
Mr Chair 1300 teachers that are
left over 1400 They left over.
To do this program.
Mr Chair. We so again. We were
looking at those 1100 that are
in teacher prep programs. But
again, we already have over 2500
teachers that are already doing
summer school programs, So we
want to be able to use that
existing resource to be able as
a as a first step to be able to
do that, Um, with that there are
already many of them have half
day programs. We want to build,
expand that hopefully
And I've gotten good good
feedback from Superintendent to
create full day programs so
again using existing resources
that are already there that are
already doing this some of the
work but now having part of that
day focused on structured
literacy.
So if we're using existing
resources, we won't need as much
money in pain because they're
already in the summer school
reading program somewhere.
Ah, Mr Chair, So many of these
programs are stem and steam
programs. We have summer
robotics programs, some our
engineering programs we won't
want to do is be able to add in
the structure of literacy
portion of that. So, for
example, we may have a school
system that is doing half day
programs around them, and now we
want to be able to add the other
half, so they're using existing
funds to fund the first half of
their
Summer school program will use
the these funds to be able to
support the second half around
structure. Literacy. Um, and
this is a volunteer program for
kids attend. It's not going to
be a requirement because you
can't read it would be it would
be a volunteer, but we would be
working with families and those
students to let them know that
is needed.
And it will have a benefit for
them.
You think you can get a parent
and a kid to volunteer any time
during the summer?
Get even get volunteer
firefighters and giving them a
retirement. I mean, how are you
going to get them to volunteer?
Mr Chair? We already have summer
school programs We already have
well over 10,000 students
participating in summer school
programs across the state. Now
what we need to do is make sure
we're getting the right students
that need the support when you
start doing that work, and that
that work with those families
now to make sure that they know
why this is important.
Aren't they required to go to
summer school program because
they failed and not a volunteer
to go to summer school program,
Mr. Masking both. Those are
true. So we do have students
that are required to go back
because of credit recovery, And
then we have many students that
participate in summer school
programs because it's Yeah, it's
their great and exciting fun
things that they want to
participate in.
Okay?
Um
It was just study. The LFC did
it in 2004 something and 23
pricing is 2309th graders,
right?
Were held back in return the
ninth grade, right
Out of the 2300 only 236
continued on the rest of them
dropped out, right?
The literacy program or the the
growth in ER.
Retention program, Right, Right.
Have the brochure on right. That
can solve that. But you're you
know, it's a million dollars a
classroom.
I talked to Adrian, who did a
steam in his class.
And got three d printers, almost
everything they needed. It was
only 25,000 for his classroom
and you got it through a grant.
Well, the this is the structural
material in the education made
me great, but
We don't need a million dollar
classroom and then to select
only 80 kids.
To to go into that program.
What if there's another kid that
wants to go in number 81 or 82?
Who's Who's gonna tell that kid?
No, We don't want to help you
graduate.
I mean, that's my question.
Who's going to tell him that?
Mr Chair I don't want I don't
want that to be the case. So you
know, not only are we looking at
expanding opportunities for
structure, literacy, which will
have a positive effect on
student outcomes. You will have
a positive effect on they
haven't on all the other core
classrooms. But you're also
right and we also are focusing
on better opportunities for
steam and stem and SETI programs
and expanding innovation zones.
Those are all also reasons why
students stay in school along
with
Uh, band and athletics. These
are also things that we also
support to make sure that
students have everything that
they need to be able to be
successful graduates. I don't
know if if you're just not
getting my point.
If we spend a million dollars on
infrastructure for 80 kids,
right?
In the 82nd and 81st and 89th
kid that says, Hey, these are my
buddies that I
Reason I didn't go to school and
the reason I dropped down in
that little group of buddies
right and they all want to go
together and you get to 8182 and
83.
They say Nope.
We only have room for 80 Sorry.
How do you tell a kid?
I mean, you know how boys are
running a little groups right?
Because that little trouble and
If one turns around, and they
all want to go.
The leader of the pack will lead
him to that direction, right?
And
We're only gonna have a d. I
mean, it really bothers me the
cost of the classroom right?
A million dollars when
Adrian did history 25.
Mhm and their programming is
good, but lemonade lemonade to
people. I mean, maybe a group of
girls to I'm not just picking on
boys, right? The kids run
In little groups, right little
cliques or whatever you wanna
call them, whatever they call
them today.
And if you get to the max
And you can actually get that
number.
What are you gonna do?
Mr Chair. I'm not familiar with
the brochure that that you're
talking about. That's a
turnaround program that Dominic
Cabello and those guys. It's my
my understanding. That's your
your turn around money that
you're asking for.
Ah, Mr Chair. So again. I'm not
familiar with that specific, Uh,
plan, but again, no. I wouldn't
want to limit that to tell any
student. No. And so that's
something we could talk more
about. Curious, accomplish. Just
walked back in the room. He
wanted to be involved in this
comment conversation.
I mean, that's the problem. I'm
running into right.
You want your recurring cost of
Mimi?
Look at this school school food
program, right?
Oh, this is gonna take care of
everything that's going to take
care of everything last year,
right?
In there is kids in need, But
there's places where kids are
the need right?
I mean, there's kids that have
money to buy lunch, right?
We don't have to give everything
away. We should help them once
more in need than help the ones
that really don't need it.
I don't know what school
districts they are, but you
know, I can always afford
My parents made sure I could
always afford my school lunch
because I went to Catholic
school was 50 cents, then and
but I mean, there's kids that
didn't have 50 cents.
Right?
So we expanded this program to
everyone, and we should start
saying Well, if you can't afford
it, right.
Then we should take care of you
first and the ones that can
afford, But we're just gonna
Fill it all up and food may end
up in the garbage cans at the
end of the day, right?
It's a student count that you're
basing it on and the growth is
just growing and growing and
growing.
And our revenues are topping off
for this next year, but
Um, this is this is a problem.
I mean, you gotta get your
agency under control.
With new programming.
Being 50th.
And in this is not on you,
right? I don't want to make this
personal issue. How many?
Cabinet secretaries we've seen
in Justice administration alone,
right?
In the prior administration of I
can't remember how we've seen
this high turnover never sets
stability.
And never lets programming
succeeded because
It takes three or four years to
get it in motion, right?
And then once you get that
motion going to then you can see
if successful, well,
Recently 32 or three cabinet
secretaries in there, and if
they don't want to stay in the
same path?
We lose all the momentum.
And we just have money just
stays there.
Nina asked you, You know, what
can you do without or what can
you cut in your agency?
And that isn't working.
And out of $4.9 billion Nothing.
I mean, there's gotta be
something that's not working and
a $4.9 billion. I mean,
We keep expanding. We keep
expanding and keep throwing the
dice and and saying we're going
to get better. We're gonna get
better, but it doesn't happen.
So
This is Kate from the end of the
road for increases as I see it.
If we're looking at what we
spend this year, 2% overall
increase in the budget for next
year, there's only 230 million.
And if
If the executive and the Cabinet
stick Terry's continue to spend
in this manner.
We're gonna start cutting
230 million doesn't
Keeps the lights on for
inflation over
Over 6 billion error $10 billion
budget, right?
I mean, that's all we're gonna
do is turn on the light
switches.
With this massive expansion.
Yeah. You know the prior
secretary? Can't Kurt staying in
house?
I mean, he told me and I agree.
You know, get the cog wheel
rolling and get the change and
I'm with you.
But I mean, we're in a position
now where it's really getting
We have a lot of Andrea cream
money, but that's not how you
should budget education.
And non reoccurring. I think the
house put some
Food programming and
nonrecurring, which should be in
reoccurring.
Mhm and this child.
Literacy is going to be in
reoccurring on our side so we
can make sure he set it up
correctly.
I don't know how we're going to
fix the problem. I mean,
Eight. What do we need? 1800
more graduates.
And we're within the median
percentile in the U. S right?
Yeah, 1800, But then we're going
to put this
This turnaround program.
At 17 Million, So that's
Only 17 schools and 17 8.
That's only half of those kids
that we need to get its only
roughly 1100 kids.
We're 600 short of getting to
the median.
If we can grab them so
I don't know.
I'm not a educator, but I think
I see trouble ahead.
I mean, you want this literacy
building, right?
You're too and you've got 2.5
years left in your
administration to do this.
No, I don't see it being
successful.
New administration building
administration to come on.
You may not want that building.
What I mean.
I don't know why How much
vacancies do you have right now?
Much office space do you have
right now?
Office space within the Public
Education Department.
God, we have some, but not not
very much. And how much of a
concern you have right now. We
have 66 vacancies were at a
18.5% vacancy rate 18% vacancy,
but she expanded to Albuquerque
and Las Cruces when 18%
vacancies, right
And
Maybe they have to be in
Albuquerque and Las Cruces. But
I mean, you didn't expansion and
you have an 18% vacancy. People
are not wanting to work in the
office. I think overall in the
state, I think we have 44% of
the state.
Vacancies are 44%.
They they office space vacant,
right?
Throughout the state. I mean,
If I was you, I would go back
and
Upstairs and come back to us and
say, Hey, let us find the
building, at least in
Albuquerque.
We'll have a space.
Within six months to a year.
And we'll have that ability to
stand that program up a lot
quicker if we really want
literacy, really want literacy?
You find something? That's
Close. Get the money from the
Legislature. Remodel it and
structurally stand that thing up
quickly as you can.
If you want long, slow term
change.
We've done that for many years
to end up at 50th.
You've got to create some
efficiencies as a leader.
If you want to. You want to move
that literacy program quickly.
I don't have any buildings in
Albuquerque. So let's just make
that clear. I'm not trying to
lease a building.
But if there's a building
Empty school album. I think
Albuquerque A P s, as a whole
building that they use for
teacher training teacher legacy
That is completely Vink it then
I was told right. I was told
that so I don't know, but I
mean, there's there's surely
some availability.
Nope. Don't build a building.
Stand it up. Let's get it
moving. Let's make the change
before
Determine this administration
comes I mean,
You can't bet on who's gonna win
the games this weekend and no,
it's a sure thing, but we need
We need to make a bet on these
kids and make sure it's a sure
thing.
And that's what matters at the
end of the day.
Senator Campo. She wanted to go
back to this.
Structured ministry program that
we talked about.
So just briefly, because I know
it's almost time for us to go to
the Senate chamber. Thank you
very much, Mr Chair and in terms
of the holistic piece that
you're talking about, That's
part of you will of the future
vision building that the
chairman is is is hopefully, uh,
working on and expressing that
this type of support is going to
be important.
I would just tie in Mr Chairman
as you go forward.
How can we go ahead and initiate
this Because of the number of
school buildings over the years
because of the loss of student
population and the square
footage that's available? How
many buildings do we have vacant
across the street where we can
tie in a lot of these
innovations, so I believe the
conversation needs to continue.
It is about efficiencies. It's
about student learning about the
proper utilization of the
resources that we have, both
with the
Facilities, the properties, the
academics, the athletics, the
holistic piece, and I see that
there's great opportunity. 30
days is really difficult for us
to put it all into place. But,
Mr Chairman, I want to thank you
very much for your
thoughtfulness to help us to
move forward as well. And again,
Mr Secretary. Thank you, too,
and it looks like we're going to
be
Thinking outside of the box some
more over the next couple of
weeks. Thank you, sir. I'm
really hating when they say you
gotta think outside the box.
That means they boxed us in
already, right?
But I mean just to to to speak
to senator Compost Point. I
imagine you can go to school
district and stand that
structure Literacy program,
right?
Up in a matter of months.
You have the power to tell the
school district So I'm gonna
take over one classroom where
you're going to do this during
your summer.
Your summer school and and we're
gonna help Bob system costs.
I believe you have the power to
do that. But I mean, you can get
lost Vegas You can get Shiprock
You couldn't get
Newcomb sensitivity.
I'm just thinking all the school
districts, right?
You can mask that thing out and
and see what it does in targeted
areas, right? I'm not saying Las
Vegas is a targeted area. Their
kids don't have literacy.
I'm just saying you could do
that.
Like in a turn of a light
switch.
And say.
You know, Here's give us $30
million for at least money.
Go do whatever you're gonna do,
But here's here's the way I can
just
Turn it on and go forward.
Because if we wait for a
building
You missed three years of
school.
Probably to get those kids.
To literacy. So thank you, Mr
Secretary. For your time, we'll
see what House Bill two brings
over and exciting for you will
probably see you again.
Hopefully you have some good
news and
I really do think we really want
to be successful, right?
Time is the only thing we can't
buy right?
And Children's time in their
educational system.
That
Those years that their brains
are sponges or really important,
So thank you.
