The house did regarding
department transportation you
can look at page three of your
of your packet this different
she looks a little bit different
than you're used to and that's
because the process for duties
operating budgets a little bit
different there is a consensus
process between the department
of transportation DFA LESC and
the House transportation and
public works committee staff so
you can see and then the second
to last column on the right
that's what the house did it for
the department transportation
operating budget it's a total of
one point two six billion mostly
in the
project design and construction
program of the department which
is one where the road projects
for the department live that was
the largest area of increase
over FY twenty three I will note
that there was a particularly
about twenty million dollar
increase in debt service
payments for FY twenty four in
on page.
Seven of your packet you can see
the department's debt service
payments for the coming years
you can see a spike here in FY
twenty four but a pretty
significant reduction in FY
twenty five in subsequent years
which will leave more funds
available for road projects and
with one more thing Mr chairman
I wanted to bring up
also in house bill two there are
section nine special
transportation appropriations
those are listed in on page six
of your packet you'll see the
bulk of the the those
appropriations are in a two
hundred thirty two million
dollars appropriation for state
tribal and locally owned road
projects
I also want to point out for you
because this is a little
different and how it's been done
in years past there's no other
state funds appropriation here
in this section for the wait
distant from the weight distance
tax identification permit fund
so that Mr chairman members is
collected
by from the weight distance tax
that's as essentially an
administrative fee the weight
distance tax and this
appropriation would give the
department funds to make
improvements to point of entry
statewide that's been on the
department's priority list I
will note that that funds that
is coming from has to be used to
it administer the weight
distance tax and ports of entry
or how the department does that
so the secretary can talk about
that anymore have any questions
and with that just asked if if
they have anything more to note
or handed over to a secretary
St.
At thanks Terry Mr chair a
statement that it is satisfied
with with that consensus budget
without headed over to
secretaries are not would you
trade places Diego money trading
places.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee appreciate your
time
I won't add anything the
consensus process as you know
we're we've been on the same
page we did provide you with a
one page handout that
shows a few different tables and
I'll go through them very very
quickly
if you could imagine four table
to the far left that would that
would represent our interim ask
which amounted to a little over
eight hundred million dollars
and we visited on that a number
of times over the interim
when the session started we we
we whittled down that request
that's the table to the far less
the to the far left and we
presented those priorities to
To committee are totaling about
four hundred and sixty seven
million as well as discussed
just a little bit ago house bill
two section nine currently
includes about two hundred and
forty two million dollars minus
that that's that to forty nine
number minus that seven million
for point of entry and the House
Appropriations
house finance included the
projects that you see listed
there under the two hundred
thirty two million the projects
highlighted in blue are projects
that stem from our priority
lists going back to the interim
so you can see you know that
some of those have been picked
up in others have been added.
On the far right we humbly
request from this body some
additional funding to support
a grammar Comanche which was the
design build project priority
for us in the City of
Albuquerque New understanding
the language currently house
bill two gives us flexibility to
also support local and tribal
prop projects we've identified a
priority project in D. three
which is that is that a bowl of
art project we're also
requesting your assistance with
thirty million dollars for
transportation projects fund
that funding as you know is
administered by the department
transportation goes directly to
locals what we're hoping to do
there is secure this thirty
million we anticipate fifty one
million from the distributions
to the transportation project
fund and then we of course have
legislation to add about another
fifty million or so with the
increased distributions from
motor site motor excise tax we
also just for sixty million in
maintenance improvements an
additional ten million and
equipment which would bring our
total section nine request to
three hundred and seventy nine
million which is just roughly
about five and a half million
more than what we received last
year.
Thank you Mr about answering
questions question from
committee members.
let me ask you something no of
the soonest thing showing on
your sheet on page a special
section nine of the on page six
hello this and maybe it says
that district I exit sixty three
and seventy nine but in the
secretary she says district six.
So so Mister chairman there's a
there's a district I Amanda for
bridge exits sixty three and
seventy nine on interstate forty
in transportation district six
so it is in those two exits are
impact on in transportation
district six.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr secretary in team so
excellent information I love it
all the only other question I
had is the actual I see a couple
of items called Rio Bravo
Boulevard
The actual bridge itself is that
maybe I'm just not spotting it
right away.
Mr chair Mr chair Senator that
that is that project to remove
rubble bridge.
I'm sorry what thank I'm just
gonna need to get some glasses
which one is as I want my money
to see in the middle was real
problem.
This revival of our that is the
real rubble bridge.
Chairman Center pretty at that
is five hundred real problem.
That is the bridge itself that's
the one that's our producers
recruiting executive director
department transportation and
what is that so the whole
project I believe is.
Six.
Roughly about sixty eight
seventy that's what I thought of
his so what what portion of the
two hundred and thirty two is
for that purpose.
Mr chair and senator and so it
gives us the opportunity to be
flexible within the project list
okay so we'll we'll small short
up and they were projects are
and all that okay beautiful
thank you Mr chairman I really
this is terrific thank you.
Any other questions many roads
in here that are state roads.
There are Mr chair yes there are
we believe we've identified the
the sale project and the is that
a bowl of our road would be
support for local projects.
So in this current section nine
it's that road right there
that's a state room and then is
let the in the thirty that says
sister to Bernalillo county
that's in my district also
county road.
We we get the money out of the.
When Mr chair looking this up my
apologies for interrupting less
luminous
Of course there's a partnership
there with losses because it
will come up to an interstate
intersection.
That's number in the in and
section nine correct yes Mr
chair currently in that.
So what we put those roads in
the step.
The city the county roads in the
steps to the ninety five I.
Mr chair we would add those
projects to the state.
So.
Question.
Mr chairman I just confirm with
secretary that the Los Lunas
project is already in the step
and it's my understanding there
seventy five million in the loss
of this project.
The federal government and then
we put money in for the Boston's
project that should complete
that bridge right issue we
understand that forty forty
three million approximately
would would constrain that
project.
And so the difference would come
out this to forty eight some
basic performance and then so if
these are city or county roads
why would we put them in the
state budget when we when we
make a step list saying that the
city can get and I ninety five
percent match of their on the
step list in created different
licensing here's a step less
that we see need for and create
a step list and say.
We'll put in ninety five cities
and counties point five percent
when we.
Mr chair the so the projects on
the updated request are all in
the state and state road
projects in house bill two
section nine currently you'll
see that the projects in blue
came from our original list the
projects not in blue came from
members during the budget
development process on the house
side and so they're not
highlighted in blue they want on
our regional list the language
currently in house bill two does
allow for work on local and
tribal owned assets and
therefore these local projects
would be allowable.
Back budget and maintenance
right.
And so.
I
thank them for their maintenance
so Mr chairman the bulk of the
department's maintenance
activities and highway
operations program that's on
page three lines eleven to
sixteen.
Okay.
One one more thing
Mr chairman so I should I should
mention this before their
several pieces of legislation
the your you all are currently
considering to increase revenue
into the state road fund none of
that's accounted for in this
budget Senator Gonzales is bill
which will add sixty million to
the step.
Mr Mr chairman and NAS as
members that's correct and the
step is a local government road
fund soon
Mister chair Mister chair the
the number would be larger right
now what's being distributed to
the general fund is anticipated
to be a hundred and sixty one
million in FY twenty four
Senator Gonzales is bill would
split that up between state road
fund and the transportation
project fund.
At.
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr I
have a question just because I
see here a rather large road
projects in Macon county and I
didn't know why with the FAA not
with D. O. T. and if it's also
on the step this is a carbon co
wrote in the can the county.
The Texas about that is this the
time to bring that up
it Mr GS Mr chair of Senator we
we have finished a portion of
that road is in the state but I
can ask Miss for the to come up
and talk about the next phase in
the project Mr Chairman center
Steinborn dot project is
completely finished at this last
fall
so it is all complete well thank
you but there's an appropriation
and yes to DFA for fifteen
million dollars.
So Mr Chairman and Senator
Steinborn so the that is a
county road it's not it's not a
state road that's why it's to
DFA and and not to D. O. T. I
believe that that particular
projects connected to some work
to for on a multimodal facility
in that area and there's maybe
some utility work or something
that that needs to be done on
that we can
we can talk about that it's it's
part of us it is not part of the
DOT operating budgets one
specials thank you Mr and is
that also on a step too you know
that particular project I do
Mister chairman Senator more to
my knowledge it's not on the
step.
What we're seeing that paid six
Mr chairman one thirty six.
Mr chairman I believe it's in
the specials and supplemental
sheet.
Always looking at specials that
you know we're looking at their
budget.
Going to specialise in some.
That that benefit looking she's
like I think I had a.
I'm as a road to nowhere
anywhere so nobody.
Million dollars thank you Mr
thanks thank you another
question from committee members.
Thank you thank you.
You.
Is that because.
Mexico you're going to start use
hi yes Mr chair just because
it's then analyst for the
legislative finance committee
I'm joined here with Peter man
toss from the US secretary of do
it as well as Kelly cycle the
director of the office of
broadband and Cecilia member
menaces here from the executive
Mr chair you have a adjusted
packet on front of you for do it
basically what HSC did to the
budget as they took the
executive recommendation but
they did adjust up about three
million dollars for
cybersecurity so you'll see that
on your first on page two and
the associated P. code for that
is on page five one thing that I
did not add on the sheet Mr
chair apologize for nonrecurring
we had initially in house bill
to a recommendation for twenty
five million dollars in new
general fund money for broadband
expansion activities plus re
appropriating another fifty
million of the connecting Mexico
fund which is the hundred
million dollars those
appropriated twenty twenty one
that has the opposite broadband
has not been able to access that
funding and so we proposed to re
appropriate some of that money
the HFC adjusted the up to fifty
million from not fun so started
at twenty five new twenty five
old now currently in house bill
two it's twenty five general
fund and fifty from the old
money so that would leave a
balance in the fund of just
under another fifty million
Mr chair and so that is what the
the house did for the operating
budget those are the only
adjustments made on non
recurring was just adjusting
that connect New Mexico
reappropriation again from
twenty five million up to fifty
also if this really has any
other comments otherwise will
handed over to the US the
secretary and the director.
Thank you Mr chair I have no
comments at.
Peter yeah.
Mr chairman Peter Mandelson
secretary designates from on the
department of I. T. here with
the director of the office of
broadband access and expansion
on I would have loved for our
Are some log on our chief
information security officer who
knows all things cyber to be
here he could be with us today
and I'm happy to answer any
questions I think Jessica
explained you know it's
This same except for the three
million dollars.
Thank you for the opportunity
two one one else and committee
members and thank you for having
us here we did have one
Agreement that we made with
director Abbey to try and bring
the executive recommendation and
the House recommendation a
little closer together and we
also amended bill to sixty two
to match that and that was to
change it to the twenty five
million in the general fund and
a hundred million from the
connect New Mexico council so
that we could start doing grant
making on that which we've
already been doing that with our
but funds the connect New Mexico
council is a council of
broadband sneeze but there are
volunteers and have no hands and
feet to exit to the grant making
that would allow us to get going
and go faster on getting out
grant funds and getting real
broadband projects funded in out
there and and starting their
practice.
Thank Mr chair I just want to
make a quick comment on the
sheet that you have from
constrictors legal on this is
our one pager I don't know if it
was handed out of my staff.
Okay so so this shows on the
bottom Mr chair.
Which for changes and health
bill to this would allow that
the director entered the the
office up to five percent of the
appropriation to be used for
administrative purposes the
funding that was originally put
into the connector Mexico fund
is limited in its language are
to be used specifically for
requests however director Slagle
has identified some need for
administrative support to
administer those requests and
right now in health bill to
we're allowing two point five
million dollars of the general
fund appropriation to be used
for avid but the proposal from
director Slagle is to also add
five percent of the connecting
Mexico amount and so that would
allow them some more
administrative support to again
up build up those grantmaking
capacity so again move.
Directors legal noted on some
work that was done kind of
behind the scenes with the LFC
but the proposal would be to
appropriate the full balance of
the connector Mexico funds to
the Department and with that I
guess we'll open for questions
for.
Senator Rodriguez center thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
all your work in your
information just quickly Jessica
did you say that it would be a
total of seven percent that for
administration to the different
plus the I or is that separate
will it tell all Mr chair it
would be five percent total and
that would two seven about seven
point five million would be okay
five percent I see okay thank
you which is that currently it's
two percent the user Bill
currently Mr chair it is still
five percent but it's only right
now it's only five percent of
the general fund part of that so
there's this other part that's
getting re appropriated and so
they're wanting to add five
percent of that Fund.
Thank you very much so these are
the positions that we would
staff.
Thank you so much that's all I
have Mister chairman Senator
the.
Favorite subject.
But.
Chairman cybersecurity well I'm
gonna go they're listening.
So.
I just have one question Mr
Chesterman twenty seven part
so.
So I didn't I don't know that I
saw the document the directors
legal kind of waved over at is
that why saw this so is it to do
are you pro appropriately staff
Mr chairman and director Slagle.
Based on not at the moment but
are you budgeted now to be
appropriately staffed okay.
Based on on what you're going to
be presented with this budget
for this coming year can you
give us a little more insight
there yes Sir I thank you for
the question Mr chair and
committee members and Padilla
yes this is gonna allow us to
really get to where we're
starting to be a lot more
comfortable on handling you know
a billion dollars of requests
and monitoring all that and
making sure people are complying
with all the federal regulations
that they're really doing the
projects and that we're handing
out of funds and we're giving
out all the reports and we're
doing all the technical
assistance that needs to be done
right now we have fifty seven
projects going on in New Mexico
right now for six hundred and
fifty two million and they all
need technical assistance and
the new projects will need it as
well.
Thirty eight.
Okay okay so so so Mister
chairman and and director
psychologist direct these Mr
secretary to to the director of
separate offices and all that
stuff so
I see the midpoint salaries here
do you believe you're going to
be able to recruit the
professionals you're gonna need
for these mid points.
I know it's a pretty loaded
question but I want to we're
going to get.
Committee member to have to let
let's hear my operations manager
who does the hiring Mr chair
Senator thank you for the
question.
So if you know then the next
column over that we've actually
done a mark of fifteen percent
because of broadband is a
special kind of type of of
employment where it's a very
specific field with a very
specific technical skill set so
we've actually tried to account
for the fact that we have to
compete with private sector
there as well so I believe with
some additional dollars we have
designated that fifteen percent
that we can actually be
competitive be able to acquire
some people who are talented as
well as dedicated to to work for
the state so Mister chairman I I
love that the two decided to
define that for us doesn't mean
you'll use it right image and
then you'll have to but I do
think that of say a hundred
fifteen thousand for an IT
project manager three that's a
pretty competitive salary and I
think that's a good move some
glad you're gonna be able to do
that
So that's up to full stop there
thank you very much for giving
us the level of detail there
appreciate that I'm very proud
of the work that you're doing is
you know I think you're just on
the right path and doing the
things you're supposed to be
doing just a little bit Mr
chairman on the right of way
easements who's going to own
that in your office what's gonna
look like you need to have any
sort of and I I know I keep
throwing stuff at you all the
time you know that's how I work
it just like you guys do what
it's going to be the have any
idea frame workers get to the
process that folks are going to
go to to get these rights when
easements resolve for
themselves.
Thank you for the question
Senator Padilla and committee
members and Mister chair very
good question and one of our
biggest areas and that area is
actually good how role but more
even next year we're just
getting started there is the
right so we working group out of
the commitment scope council
that we're connected at the hip
with you'll see on these
positions you'll see our right
to way manager on that we've
started talks with State Land
Office because we have a
detailed
a detailed system also a
software system that tracks
their permitting through through
slow we started talks at the
federal level at the permitting
council our next step is to be
doing like the the National
Forest the state of the state
state parks the BLM's those kind
of thing that we ought to
actually have a member on our
working group but to build a
system that you're talking about
I think that's in statute which
is to me a a large software
system that could be a one stop
shop where people track when we
we have put an architect on the
list of here that can actually
design the whole architect and
we can put interfaces and to the
other systems but we have not
designed it building on an
architect we're starting the
talks with everybody we have a
lot more work to do but bringing
on the right to wait person and
bringing on the architect we're
gonna be able to get those
requirements moving and get a
design in place I'm I'm thrilled
to hear that I think that's
great I just want to know that
you're doing something that's
going to be a big nut to crack I
get it
and then the other thing so full
stop Mr chairman so of of the
budgeted dollars in the current
where everything sits at the
moment what is going to be your
your your money avail your
budget available for.
Literally to start building
things because that that's what
I'm hoping we start hearing left
and right all over the media and
all over the whatever that
things are actually happening so
one thing to build the office
now it's going to be get those
shovels in the ground gets get
working in a.
Would you like me to answer that
yes please thank you for the
question Mr chair committee
members and Senator Padilla
great question so to understand
that it's kind of a
comprehensive picture from the
art of funds we had a hundred
twenty three million dollars we
awarded thirty seven million so
those are five projects are in
the process of getting their
award letters in getting geared
up to actually build okay and
dig.
We will award approximately the
same amount here at the end of
March and then a third amount
after April third is the
deadline probably the beginning
of June so that will come and
get the one twenty three we have
a six hundred fifty two million
projects already started that's
where the technical assistant
comes in network design right
away
the environmental surveys the
coordinating the interconnects
the resilience hearings the
getting into the back all those
are in process those are fifty
seven projects okay
probably will come out of our
performances another around
another fifteen projects if we
get a hundred million if we get
this amendment that's been
proposed will be able to start
probably I would guess another.
Probably twenty twenty five
projects out of that okay so
that can add that together fifty
seven plus fifteen plus another
twenty out of the twenty five
million general fund that we're
appropriate we're starting a I
need project funds so that our
mobile right now we haven't
really addressed the Google
aspect across the state you were
driving down I. twenty five
you're going to lose your
business call your on it we need
more mobile strategy in the
state besides the fiber we also
want to get some alternative
technologies out there to us
Senator my nose is really
interested in starling in some
of our very rural areas and our
rural health clinics actually
need starlink and we want to use
part of the twenty five million
dollar fund for that okay so
when you put that all together
we're gonna have.
You know about seventy five
projects in the works and
starting to get going and
running down the highway running
down the pike are we going to
need more than not to finish the
whole state our analysts say yes
we're gonna be more than what
the feds and what the connect
New Mexico council fund can do
but will be on a good start
excellent thank you Mr chairman
and the so just real quick and
we we want to keep moving
quickly but so in the
in the list of prepositions here
is going to be accountable to
work with local localities like
local political subdivisions
they want to start building up
their local plan and all that
and that's part of the act that
we put that in the past for your
office who does that add to this
list of positions here.
Thank you for the question Mr
tears committee members Senator
Padilla you see all those
project managers there those are
the technical assistance as well
as it is a tech person to see
that engineer tech and there's
an urban and regional planning.
Thank you Mr chairman I see this
as something that is really
working well in a bright spot
for for state government right
now I think you're doing a
phenomenal job keep it up keep
going I want to continue to help
you so thank you very much for
that so that Mr Chairman is full
stop on the cyber security I
don't know sector if you want to
talk to this one but what wound
up being the.
I mean I I've heard a couple of
figures thrown around what what
is going to be available to this
week we lifted the cyber
security office out of the
Senate and it's over the house
now so what what is the
cybersecurity dollars available
for the work that they're going
to be doing.
Mr chair Senator thanks for the
question on fifteen and a half
million where will those.
Set those dollars I know they're
not all in your department there
in other parts of state
government is correct on.
I would like to defer to this
hidden spend less should likely
to blow the answer of Mister
chair so right now the majority
of the cybersecurity funding is
actually appropriated to do it
but it is stipulated that
certain amounts are for certain
in certain purposes so for
instance do it is getting ten
million dollars right now and
the HFC substitute of health
bill two a ten million for just
kind of set general
cybersecurity of which we
dedicated up to three million
can be used to assist RLD with
their cyber tech then there's an
additional three million that is
going to do it but it's intended
to be used to support higher
education and then two point
five that's intended to support
public schools but again the
ideas that we would start to
kind of move towards that
centralization to facilitate
that funding at do it so that
they can make the needed
connections and an oversight of
those buttons thank you Mr
chairman and I think I'm gonna
stop there appreciate you
allowing me Mr Chairman ask all
those questions and I do want to
recognize Jessica for all the
work that she did in the interim
in working with a group of
legislators have put a lot of
different pieces of legislation
together and they're all the
swimming through this building
right now let's see where they
go and I but I do feel like the
office of broadband access
expenses on a path to actual
creation so thank you Mr Smith
for helping us with that.
Thank you let me ask you some
questions are.
On your line ups.
Senator Woods.
Would you Mr chair and and.
Which secretary could you give
me a copy of the statewide
broadband plan sure and could
you give me you've got fifty
seven projects could you give me
a list of those projects with
the
brief description of what is
being done a list of the
contractors and approximately
amount of that contract and and
you so you've got fifteen more
just a general description of
each one of those.
And that's all at.
Thank you for the question Mr.
And senator Pat Woods we sure
could have it all at our
fingertips okay thank you very
it sent right to your question
no you're not going to honor
bill party with that request.
Let me ask you something about
your language seems like your
budgets are right the house bill
that you said you transfer the
money and it seems like it's
going to work for do it DFA
didn't ask for any increase.
For any broadband thing it also
seems like we're in pretty good
shape up the five million dollar
in the language request the only
thing that I'll probably look at
the language is that if you
don't have those FTEs we're
gonna hurt that money.
so that we're not looking at
FTEs down the road when we build
our budget for next year to
December if you don't have those
FTE hired in that system then
they're not gonna show up and so
then we're going to assume that
you're not gonna need those FTEs
we're going to give up.
Yeah so you better iron if we do
do the language the money shall
revert
will make sure that pushes
agencies to get the job done and
that they get the higher rate
and so that we can build FTEs
and otherwise we just giving you
money to sit around state I find
somebody good luck if I don't
find anybody I don't even have
to also those employees Peter
Jensen and Senator thank you for
asking I would like to point out
that being administratively
attached to the information
technology we've had some great
demands on our HSD department
and supporting of procurement
contract review X. cetera and
we're struggling with that and I
if
of the offices broadband access
and expansion is I'm able to
hire some of these people you'll
notice that they do have a
financial coordinator that's not
somebody is going to be doing
contracts that's going to be
somebody who's working with do
it HSD to get the contracts and
and where are they which come so
I assure you that with
respective tease we need some
help and we will find people to
do it.
This should give you the
flexibility that you need I
think we can talk about some
specials and supplementals the
move forward to look those over
the over the weekend with a look
at those but and the shall not
reverse language and make you
provide those employees and has
some up otherwise money needs to
come back and then the other
only language is going to add is
that senator Byrd Padilla gets a
desk in an office somewhere
between broadband cybersecurity
and the what other part do you
have over there that he's.
Telling his way into.
Thank you guys appreciate it the
will there be any cow pies is
what I want well that guy that
was here the other day I made
the point in time I don't see
the tourism secretary.
Hope she's back there.
We have a handout for economic
development.
Remove these pretty quick
because I want to be out here
by.
Five thirty five twenty.
You.
I.
I.
Eighteen I.
Well members were sitting here.
You need to look at the specials
and supplementals so we have
questions but I did find out a
little bit today trying to
figure out where the tax
packages we think it's right
that one billion dollars so
there may not be any reoccurring
money.
In their in that we're going to
specials and supplementals on
the eight fifty thousand over we
think that if they do rebate at
about four hundred fifty million
five hundred million of the
specials inspired of the non
recurring money is spent so that
only was about.
Three hundred fifty million left
we met with the executive they
have a question in the two
hundred mark so that maybe only
like fifty eight so I don't know
what we're going to get from
here but it's like there's not a
lot of money left specially with
reoccurring in the tax package
Sir compass thank you Mr
chairman so so with what we're
gonna be reviewing today that's
just for discussion we're still
still working at we're gonna
discuss the specials and
supplementals somebody flag
something as we move forward
we're gonna play those would
come back in reserve in the
movie just them of their flight
and and have a conversation
tomorrow morning to come in
going to the same thing of
language we're going to view
language in two forms of one is
language that doesn't making
appropriation because we know
that that tax packages a billion
it and.
Think it's a billion and we
think that there's no
reoccurring left so that
language that appropriates will
probably not get added and then
the other language that needs
for direction or in other way
shape or form how we are having
a lawyer turned review all the
language to make sure it's
constitutional and statutorily
correct so there's language in
the house bill two that changes
a statute I'm not withstanding
language well we're gonna flag
that pretty hard.
And see what happens then
Secretary wanna go real quick.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today to talk a little
bit more about tourism and we're
we are between the executive
budget and speak to at this time
you should have your packet here
and I just wanna start off by
sharing how thankful the
industry is for the support the
last several years especially
coming back from the pandemic
because the success that you're
reading on the first page is
really because of the
partnership with the legislature
the partnership with all of our
partners across the state with
the industry and the communities
that are tribal communities
thank you so much for that
continued support we wouldn't
have been able to have thirty
percent growth in the last ten
years if it wasn't for this type
of partnership so thank you so
much.
I'm moving on to page two on the
left hand side there's a column
for programmatic outcomes and
then you'll see Senator comes
there's executive budget LESC
budget the current status of HB
to coming out of the house and
then the last column are the
amendment that we are
respectfully requesting
going through really quickly on
the base budget we're asking for
an additional one point eight
million dollars to the four
hundred which is our marketing
and promotion this allows us to
keep our current fly markets and
adjust for inflation as I
mentioned last time I was here
media is seeing anywhere between
ten percent to sixty percent
inflation depending on the type
of media so we want to make sure
we can stay in our current plan
markets going down to the
special appropriation section on
this sheet our local marketing
cooperative programs and
executive there's three point
five million dollars right now
in H. B. two there is zero these
some of the over these programs
in more detail but this is where
we partner with local
communities governments and
tribal communities to do
destination marketing and we
match them two to one so they
put in ten thousand dollars we
put in thirty thousand dollars
for a total budget of forty and
we support them on not only
developing the strategy but also
buying the media because media's
got extremely complicated as you
can imagine the last ten to
fifteen years nationally with
digital and so we're able to buy
in volume and get a better price
and have those dollars go
further at the local level we
also have an event sponsorship
program that'll get get into it
here in a second that's where we
support all of those fears
festivals and events that really
honor your culture and
traditions throughout your
community and that bring in
tourists it's a great converter
for your local destination and
then.
Finally at the difference
between the national advertising
special appropriation the
executive has twenty million
dollars and the House
Appropriations bill HB two has
eleven with that gap of nine
million what I have on the as a
proposed amendment is an
additional five million I'm not
gonna be able to all the bells
and whistles that were included
in the executive but what I find
most important is that we can to
do the four seasons ality of our
our marketing so we're we're
promoting New Mexico year round
because we have whether an asset
that can absolutely deliver year
round unlike some of our
competitive states and then also
adding the sever Cisco market
which on talk a little bit more
in detail the second.
So next page you're probably
asking really can they spend
that kind of funding with our
local partners so on page three
you'll see that are quite as an
example of one program or
cooperative marketing grant
program we have a record of
eighty one responses for FY
twenty for FY twenty four of
people of communities tribal
communities that want to partner
with us for a total investment
of donor dollars of two point
three million this is record
breaking and then we would do a
two to one match if we had the
appropriate funds twenty one
interested entities reported a
commitment of at least fifty
percent of their budget
I think that really speaks
volumes of the trust that our
partners have in partnering with
us we're we're spending fifty
percent of their marketing
budget and party with them to do
so and then we also have
fourteen interested entities
identified as tribal indigenous
entities and then of the
destination related entities
roughly eighty point eighty four
percent Representative rural
communities this is a program
that is really a legacy program
at the tourism department we
have refined it the and advanced
and modernized over time and
we're just seen credible
interest from communities that
want to put their own dollars
into this program so what does
this mean it would take about
four point six million an
additional funding for in in in
in in need to continue that to
one match for what we see right
now is it the interest if we
don't have that special
appropriation we'll go back to
what we do have in our base
budget which is six hundred
thousand dollars and you do a
one to one match Senator was on
a lot of people we can't.
page for this is just a
description of our tourism event
development program we have
already have sixty seven sorry
seventy six entities that
expressed interest for next
fiscal year for comparison at
this current fiscal year we only
have seventeen so we're seeing
that the budget and and
communities and that producers
are releasing value in this
program where we provide
wraparound technical assistance
to help them grow the event and
increase our profit margins
highlights twenty seven
different communities across the
state eleven interested entities
identified as tribal indigenous
and fifty three percent
Representative rural communities
to know it right now if we do
not get additional funding H. B.
two we don't have funding for
this program in our base budget.
Next page page five the San
Francisco Bay Area market I
talked a lot about how we went
into Los Angeles that return on
investment of fifty six dollars
a visitor spend to one dollar
spent in marketing the same
study really looked at Sanchez
go being the next market for us
to go into that will deliver you
can see the little graph on the
right side
you'll see that sever Cisco has
a lower familiar already right
then overall which overalls our
current fly markets and so we
know that we have eight fourteen
point lift available there to
catch up if we do the marketing
there we know we're going to see
a return on investment.
So finally I'm like your last
page is the proposed amendments
I put them I prioritize them of
what we think is the most
important and number one is that
three point five million dollars
special appropriation to partner
with our local communities our
tribal communities and our
events to make sure that we can
help them continue to grow and
stay on this growth trajectory
Purdy to is the one point eight
million dollars to our base
budget which would allow us to
keep our fly markets and our
final priority is the five
million dollar special
appropriation so we can finally
going to the San Francisco Bay
Area market thank you.
Thank you send questions from
committee members me just some
question I guess the houses of
their voters president doing at
cooperative marketing rural
areas.
Did they say why they didn't
find that cooperative marketing
and their local districts for
the match.
Mr chairman the house did look
at additional funding for the
local coop and they did add
additional funding from where
LESC started which is was it
zero of but the the house ended
up deciding to put the personal
three point five million into
tourism development instead of
into the local marketing program
so there was a discussion there
was an ad and that leads me to
of one note for members if
you're looking at this page
shows kind of the total a
recurring and nonrecurring
appropriations for economic
development and tourism there is
a pretty major typo it says that
there is thirty five million for
that tourism development it's
three point five million so just
say no.
I did catch.
Tell I was going to be a big
cut.
Everybody.
I don't see anybody as a
question of senator Senator by
your arm now thank you.
Mr chairman I don't have a
question I just want to remind
the committee this department is
doing wonderful things.
They in comparison to have.
Quite frankly small budget.
And that these guys are the door
to New Mexico.
This is why people come into New
Mexico Food tourism they come
here and they like what they're
doing then they got economic
developments yet they can move
their business or something like
that this is this is a no
brainer and so I'm hoping Mr
chairman and the rest of the
committee that we can find ten
point three million dollars to
cover.
Those things on the black list
over here or same thing on the
back page it's it's ten point
three million in a budget of
nine point four billion dollars
and we have three point six
billion additional to to to come
up with a to spend we're finding
great ways to spend that we
can't find point three million
to cover the bases on this
backsheet need because returns
fifty six one fifty six to one
folks.
Think about that.
there's no better investment in
the state than doing the same so
Mister chairman I urge you to
provide three no.
Mr chairman I don't think I've
ever seen separate so excited.
It was excited all day today.
I'm like you have a tale of the
hearing about.
if you look in your special
appropriations you're looking to
see what the house did they
spent about a billion dollars
and special supplemental there's
probably room to provide ten
million that's what we're going
to review these.
The thoroughly when they spend
that amount of money we can
shift things around have other
agencies Senators juggling more
thank.
Thank.
Mr chair madam secretary do you
know.
Kind of as a distribution how
much tourism dollar comes in by
congressional district.
For.
The cat Mr chair members
committee Senator Steinborn I
don't have a by congressional
district we can find that by
county I don't have that data in
front of me here but I can
provide that to you ask the
question because I know that
years ago we start working on
outdoor recreation we knew that.
Gosh well it was funny because
they were discover number thrown
around there was a nine billion
dollar number that was thrown
around that was maybe not
accepted number but for example
they're saying nine billion but
only like one point two billion
of that was spent.
Visitation in the second
congressional district relevance
of the New Mexico and I bring
that up because.
While I know a lot of people
want to visit New Mexico.
Under.
Where they when we spend our
dollars where they coming are
they coming all over we spending
it all over.
And are we promoting all over
and and I asked this question
because you know a few years ago
during the pandemic I was really
focused on getting rid of the
cooperative marketing spend so
that we can help all communities
and we we work on language so
that that funding would be
spread around by tourism
district so would be kind of.
Insure that they all got a piece
of it right it was spread
around.
So I'm just curious.
And you know and I I think that
**** question of the committee
like how much of our marketing
was focus that waivers just a
macro Hey come The New Mexico
message.
And I guess so why don't I just
ask that question how much
Michael advertising do we do
targeting specific regions and
how much of is it is just come
The New Mexico.
Mr chair members of the
committee that's actually a
really excellent question
because when we talk about the
marketing funnel for marketing
strategy you have to start at
the top of the marketing funnel
doing brand awareness we still
have challenges here in New
Mexico where people think they
need a passport to come here
that they can't drink the water
they ask us about beaches and so
we still have a lot of work to
do on the awareness site and so
that is where we put a
considerable amount of our
funding however because of
special appropriations that the
legislative body has been able
to appropriate to us in the last
several years we've been able to
increase our cooperative
marketing program exponentially
and so last year this fiscal
year was a record breaker
breaking here of the total media
value of around six point five
million dollars we partner
together and that's all over the
state we do find it very
important that local communities
to put some skin in the game so
that we we could have one voice
because one of the problems that
we've had and the reason why New
Mexico true was originally
created was so that we would
have a unified voice to we can
compete against our competitors
who have a budget that's much
larger than ours and so by by
having our partners come into
that coop program we were able
to put more dollars and align it
to our awareness strategy.
I appreciate that Mr chair and
madam secretary you know one
concern I have is.
I can understand skin in the
game but I worry that some small
communities I represent hatch
for example may not I don't know
what kind of cooperative
marketing dollars they have and
I worry that the program is
tilted towards frankly more
sophisticated higher means
community communities who can
participate.
I know this last year for
example hatched try to get
cooperative marketing dollars
for its fiftieth anniversary the
hatch Chile festival and was
unsuccessful I don't for the
life of me know why they're
unsuccessful for the fiftieth
anniversary the hatch Chile
festival
people come from all the world
but you have your grant process
all respect that
I just you don't I know we
talked about eliminating
that the the cost share
requirements of the coop
marketing program did we ever do
that to ever actually eliminate
those cost share requirements
for communities with over a
period of time where we took all
comers are we kind of helped Mr
chair members of the committee
Senator Steinborn no we did not
we kept it was a one to one
match and what we did is we did
a two to one match so we made
their dollars go further.
Okay but I guess I would just
love to see maybe kind of how
those dollars are distributed on
that program and see.
Yeah that would just be helpful
for me I just want to make sure
you know as a southern New
Mexican that you know we're
promoting places all over the
state and that were yeah because
I know that a lot of the tourism
dollars that come back and set
up.
In the more well known
destinations which stands to
reason but I think the other
places also the more attention
so just yes I have Mister chair
members of the committee Senator
Steinborn I think one of the
things that is absolutely
fantastic about what we've been
able to do the last several
years is that our national brand
awareness has really expanded
geography across the state so we
had a Carlsbad caverns national
TV spot we had a ski Apache TV
spot we had a tour the that he
left
national TV spot so this is the
first time that we've really
made a
A very intentional effort of
making sure that we're featuring
stories across the entire state
and so just so happens as last
year we featured southern New
Mexico a lot right.
Would like to hear that we can
correct that but anyway that's
good to hear because you know
New Mexico is a special place
all corners of it that's for
sure thank you Mr thank you of
course everyone knows he's out
so I don't have anyone on the
list here from committee anymore
make any final comments are you
done with your presentation
thank you madam chair members of
the committee I just wrap up by
by sharing that you know in
addition to the money that you
invest in marketing for our
particular agency we also go
after what we called earned
media at that national publicity
because we want that third party
validation that New Mexico is a
beautiful destination and this
is been a program that went from
almost nonexistent to and and
has just grown exponentially as
well in FY twenty two we got
nine point two million dollars
worth of earned media at
nationally and that's
representing every corner of the
state and then to date this
fiscal year and we still have
another quarter to go we're at
nine point eight million dollars
in this is us working directly
with communities and we say Hey
we have this travel writer
coming to Hatcher coming to Los
crucis are coming to Roswell we
say Hey we would like to take
you into that community we work
with our partners and give them
an incredible experience down
there so then they go back and
the right articles the show
pictures or their influencers
they're all over social media
talking about how beautiful this
places so as you think about you
know investing in you know the
economy this particular industry
is now a third of what oil and
gas springs and from GDP
standpoint and we know how
important it is to grow the
economy but also diversify it so
I want to say thank you again
for your partnership and I look
forward to continuing that thank
you thank you Secretary
Schroeder I do have just a quick
question you and I visited as
you recall just a couple of days
a.
Go and you gave me some
information and ice sheets very
nicely done.
And so on I had to step out for
a phone call a moment to go did
you review that with the
committee did you mention your
needs to the committee and that
she meant a share pretty
important yes thank you madam
chair I did it's over the packet
that's here okay thank you so
much for all your work thanks to
the staff okay we have the
the Economic Development
Department and we have secretary
Alicia keys.
With us.
But John Clark hi secretary
keys.
Thanks.
Hi good to see John and of
course the Mandan Simon again
Hey Hey I got your name that at
this time of the day I can't do
this again no excuse for me.
So thank you Secretary keys I
can't tell you how much I
appreciate you yours truly such
a hard worker and your amazing
daily and of course John what
can we say John was our main
person here helping David Abbey
and Charles at one time and we
still look to you John thanks
for your work we continue to
appreciate the staff so Alicia
tell us what you think about
your budget thank you madam
chair in addition we also have
more growth here are director of
economic no there's hi I'm and.
so in front of you due to the
chairs instructions we won't
really talk about the FTP needs
the first point because this is
appropriation special
appropriation language that we
are currently working with
Representative small and Dixon
in addition to as some of you
know we've been asked to take on
six different new divisions our
offices so that's all just kind
of playing out during the
session but one thing to really
think about is we would need
FTEs in order to do that in
terms of our recurring needs
I'll just go through the HFC for
the New Mexico media academy as
you'll see here
appropriated seven hundred
thousand we would love to get to
one point five which is the
executive recommendation the
media academy I can bring
everybody up to speed up the
fifteen schools that teach film
and television that want to have
participate in this have agreed
on a core curriculum we are just
going through the last parts of
the RFP process for the director
and should be able to announce
someone soon we've announced a
satellite facility that we're
hoping is going to be bilingual
in Los crucis and so a lot of
really lovely collaboration
you're seeing an eco system
start from the very beginning
from training the students to
getting them paid
apprenticeships to getting them
jobs on sets so we're very
excited about that program a one
point five million for marketing
HFC give us zero for this we
have never really had marketing
budget at EDD we do believe that
it is important to do very
targeted marketing specifically
right now in Asia one of the
suggestions would be to have
film crews come up to the next
spaceport launch for students
and and news crews from Taiwan
so that we can get some really
great process that way so not a
lot of money for that one point
five.
And and then if you could jump
out to J. tip this is also
recurring HFC gave us seven
hundred thousand we have two
million that we're asking for
two million and the executive
recommendation as everybody
knows need tip is just critical
to New Mexico.
and training and training New
Mexicans in terms of our
nonrecurring needs
we had asked for thirty five
million that was the executive
recommendation HFC gave us
fifteen million for Lita you all
know how importantly it is to
New Mexico we have been on a
real tear to be honest with you
we've had a few great years of
over five thousand jobs due to
lead a so really looking to jump
back to push that number up and
then the next for the media
academy for nonrecurring HFC
gave us five hundred thousand so
we were asking for a million and
then in terms of business
incubators HFC gave us two point
two million we're really looking
for five million I think I said
that since the last time that we
were here but companies are four
times more likely to succeed if
they go through an incubator of
the incubators in New Mexico are
fantastic but we've done an
awful job of supporting them and
so we'd really like to step up
and support them this year thank
you madam chair sure thank you
very much any comment or do you
want to say anything before we
go on John or anyone Amanda
Simon to give you some time if
you need to.
Madam chair I will just point
out for members you have a high
level on the second page of your
packet you can just see what HFC
did from the LFC recommendation
thank you and we will look at
that and all the other
information you gave us any
comments or questions from the
committee Senator Steinborn
anyone else okay fair and then I
take it to see if there's always
and your whole team and then the
quick question couple questions
I want to note that for the
money for the media academy SB
twelve which is waiting on a
hearing here that
comprehensively film film bills
doesn't include also some
funding to help augment that so
that we have kind of a
supplemental recurring revenue
source to help support the from
academies madam chair members of
committees Senator Steinborn
that's a fantastic question
we're actually going to do that
in the letter with with the
studios and with the production
companies when they sign up with
us we are going to require them
to actually put a certain
percentage back towards the
media academy so that it could
be potentially self funding in a
few years right on that's great
and that's great to see those
partners giving back to New
Mexico in that way and then I
just want to ask a question
about the advanced energy
special appropriations yes I
think was fixed then jacked
thank you senator but just
thinking out loud here yes thank
you for that I think was fifty
million but I'll let you
continue.
Well there's language in house
bill two fifty million for that
yeah it's kind of what that is
and while we start with that.
Sure so madam chair Senator
Steinborn so we've been working
with representatives and Dixon
and small on that language and
adjusting it because the
language that's in there at the
moment really doesn't reflect
the full legislative intent it
was one small part of what they
were trying to do so
Currently the language is still
being worked on to make sure
that it fits the needs of the
Environment Department and
energy minerals and natural
resources department because the
intent would be the EDD would
give some of that money to those
two departments to help with
these advanced energy projects
but basically the the main point
of the changes to that special
appropriation language would be
to make it for fiscal years
twenty twenty four through
twenty twenty seven so that we
would have a few years to use it
instead of it expiring at the
end of one year and then it
would also allow us to use that
money for staffing and allow
a limited percent of the money
to be transferred to these other
state agencies and they could
also use it for staff and it is
still nonrecurring we would not
be able to hire permanent
positions with it but we could
hire temporary positions with it
and it least give us and you
just legislators a couple more
bites at the apple in the next
legislative session or two to
take a look at what we're doing
with the money what are the
formal staffing needs are at
that point and then you can make
the the determination to give us
the recurring funds for a
specific number of positions so
this would be essentially three
years to get it up and running
and then see what that level of
permanent funding is needed is
along with the permanent level
of for recurring staffing.
Okay maybe you can give me a
little more detail on this
particular item the leader I
appreciate it.
Paul and then finally madam
chair secretary down the
creative industry it's good to
see that in there and obviously
that's the bill that's moving
through its funded I think what
this committee needs to do that
I'll be asking for is to create
a little recurring funding if we
can for that and I think that
would be a great start to a new
initiative so thank you madam
chair it's all have thank you
thank you senator before I
forget all want to add a little
bit or elaborate a little bit on
that fifty million secretary
keys that we're talking about
for the advanced energy I I
think it was supposed to be tied
to house bill twelve is what I
see here but there doesn't
there's no contingency language
on that house bill do you know
what that's about John right
madam chair we can do probably
about eighty ninety percent of
what that bill would ask us to
do without the bill passing our
statute existing statutory
authorities pretty brought
brought when it comes to
economic development supporting
businesses in the state so there
are certain things that we would
be able to do without that bill
passing but again we can do
eighty to ninety percent of it
so the what what we really need
is that funding to be able to do
it rather than the bill itself
so The appropriation should not
be contingent on the bill
passing because we don't need
the bill passed to do the vast
majority of the work C. okay all
right thank you for that
explanation and Senator Burt
thank you madam chair just
couple quick questions at the
end as H. B. two sets now.
What how much money do you have
an J. tip and how much do you
have a leader.
Madam chair members of the
committee and lead we have
fifteen million is what HFC gave
us an and J. tip we have is it
three million in non recurring
three at the at three million
and non recurring and three
hundred and seven hundred
thousand four right thanks Madam
chair representative six point
seven five million total
recurring for J. tip that's an
increase of seven hundred fifty
thousand which is what the okay
I'm sorry six point how much by
six point seven five million
referring to go to and it is
recurring.
The question correctly yes six
point seven five million
recurring and then three million
non recurring appropriation
madam chair and senator.
Special supplemental in fifteen.
The fifteen in in leader is
recurring correct.
Mr chair Senator for no that's
nonrecurring the legislature has
typically a W. probation of
these big nonrecurring I just
have to ask the and I just.
Every year we have to yep the
common fund those two very
important projects one built
into the base budget as
recurring I just that just
baffles me.
So thank you.
Madam chair and so
Yeah I I think you make an
excellent point and we have been
working over the years and
gradually moving need to funding
into recurring again that is why
we're asking to bump up the
recurring piece of J. to we have
not had that opportunity to do
that with leader but that
similarly would make sense for
the same reason that we're doing
it would need to because we
typically use a specific amount
of data in a given year and
we're trying to get to that base
level it it would be reasonable
consent to consider doing the
same and madam chair just what
year average yearly expenditure
for J. tip and Lita.
What do you average on here
you're basically coming out J.
tip and coming up later madam
chair US senator Byrd I'm
actually gonna have mark answer
that.
Madam chair mark Roper Division
director of economic development
for the economic development
department members of the
committee senator Byrd.
on J. tip or are average over
the last five years has been
twelve million dollars per year
for your.
Leave us a leave it has been a
little more of an of of an up
and down over the last five
years are average on a lead it
would be thirty thirty million
dollars per year right.
Thank you all right thank you
senator Senator Diamond.
Thank you madam chair more I'd
like to follow up on I'm I must
be missing something here you
just set up a follow up on that
on on senator Byrd's question.
If I understand this right we've
got six point seven million for
need to up another three million
in one time money and you're
saying which is about forty
eight about nine you're saying
on average you spend about
twelve.
Madam chair members of the
committee centers I mean that's
that's that's correct what we
have seen in this past in this
past eighteen months cycle
is we've had more reversions
come back on J. tip meeting that
the this is money is awarded to
companies and that is reverting
back to us because they're not
able to fill the positions that
we but one of them we've seen
this phenomenon post post
comment to where the reversions
are now running in the fifty
percent neighborhood instead of
the traditional sixty five to
seventy five percent usage rate
so we have seen higher reversion
so we do have a higher balance
coming into this year than we
typically have in the past but
the awards have been on average
twelve million dollars thank you
clarify staff and then secretary
to your point I think you make
an excellent point when you when
you started off with your FTE
needs some of those offices are
actually for setting or or an
office that at that Senator
Steinborn are sitting over to
you from energy we're sending
over to your outdoor
practices to Rio Grande trail
because we know you guys do a
good job and get it done so and
we and we recognize that we need
to fund those positions only to
fund the projects and stuff so I
I want you to know that will
champion additional funding for
that we recognize that we can't
just give you more work.
You know without finding that so
thank you guys I also wanted to
say that both in states have
have been very beneficial for my
rural New Mexico counties and I
appreciate the to the effort to
play down there to make sure
that everyone really gets a
piece of that pie and and I said
I've seen first hand how
beneficial they are so thank you
guys we could work.
Thank you Senator Diamond all
right does seem like we have
anyone else on the list so I
want to thank you unless you
want to make some final comments
secretary keys and if not we'll
just move on to specials as
we're gonna discontinuities as
thank you all your some of our
biggest advocates and tell you
know how passionate we are so we
just wanna really thank you for
for all that you're doing for us
thank you thank you very much
for your work all right then we
are going to move on to the
items next item which is a
special appropriations
discussion we're gonna have a
usual hearing here and I had
requested that one of our staff
from finance come and help us
track these if there's any
questions from the committee on
the specials that maybe somebody
can track them so we can follow
up with them but no one has come
in they're probably busy but if
there's Donna Donna can you see
of Adrian somebody can help us
track these is I just want to
make sure that the questions or
comments from the committee on
any of the specials that we can
follow up on and I know there's
a lot of them I'm sure we can
help with that as well again you
focus in finance that that's
fine but we that good I
appreciate that thank you yes if
you do now it seems like the
purpose of this hearing today
having to do with specials is to
take a look at them each one I
know there's a lot of women with
a little time we have that to
look at them and if you have any
questions or for any suggestions
or changes you want to offer
whatever it is will fly that and
then we'll come back and make
some decisions I think that's
the main purpose we're we're
discussing these thank you your
yes.
Yes tell me was that we.
Talking to senator Munoz minute
ago he's running around like
crazy but.
We can take in that can we just
say you know page one lines from
so I get in that settling just
that for exactly that's fine
yeah that'll be good yes I'm
sure yes I like the senators
suggestion but I just want to
remind everybody the agenda
calls at a discussion would be
acting on anything right now but
there's a lot here so I I'm not
sure that we're going to get
through we plan to get through
all the today well Mr chair I
mean that would Senator Padilla
the chair had requested that we
go through these and just like
each one of them that's too many
question the problems or
questions or concerns we have I
just here is that Mr Chairman
they were asking if if you
intended to do each one one by
one because of the time I think
we could probably just
summarizing pages in doing pages
so just start in summary are we
going to Mr chair are we gonna
act on this right now we're
gonna do it this is discussion
on the agenda thank you and if
you feel like something that you
think you want us to look at and
that's why I told you review the
earlier Representative if you
want to make something then next
to that so on page two.
All all all of this.
Three is of what anybody has to
stop me.
Thanks for.
The public defenders in the item
taxed we have.
K. five is DFA.
Chairman but let me ask a
question for clarification here
this a special we have these are
specials from from all that have
been include here from I the
specials in the governor's
office requested from us from
house Sir we we haven't got to
the governor specials with a
looking to see what the new
current in the tax package has
on our side this is the specials
that came over from the house
okay I want to make sure we
clarified the for the look at
page five on that large one for
the.
That was that's for the law
enforcement protection fund we
know that the exact is still
asking for another sixty million
on top of that.
No one out in the future I'm
only five out of the top thank
and I'll tell you exactly what
from the money.
We'll do what we do that's just
kind of go from I when you have
a and and there is a bill for
this on where the bill is Mr
Chairman yes just a quick
question so.
With this being the.
The old amendments that we would
use to submit this is something
completely how special that came
over they spent one point one
billion inside the specials yeah
so that's why we need to look at
him if you see something you
need to flag I mean I think
senator Byrd made some comments
about tourism and and money and
if you look at some rack of
shoes members can Economic valve
for minutes there is a hundred
sixty five million and I believe
back ups and economic
development tourism seven having
and spend that amount of money
in the air
We're on page five so may I
stop and ask me questions we see
something that of bills coming
through on page eight is all DFA
of sarcasm back to six Mr
Chairman month
eight six six Senator star Kate
but it's six.
Senator Steinborn on page six on
thirty eight we're gonna flag
that because that was a road
Gallup those cost thirty million
dollars that nobody lives on
there's no businesses nothing
there so we're going to fly that
number thirty six six thirty
eight thank you thirty six I'm
sorry thank you Representative I
got glasses eight.
Thank god we go now now we're
now we're cooking with gas.
I wanted something six also want
to take thirty seven foot I do
that one.
Of what is thirty three.
Thirty three.
That is if there's capital
outlay project that is not
complete and have a cost overrun
that gives DFA the capacity to
to finish that project.
This.
Roger it could be anything it
could be.
Going to flag it may give a
command structure and I'm
advocating for I'm sorry yeah
let me just re going on on yours
San Juan us when you mentioned
to thirty seven flag that for
what reason again.
That.
For animal shelters and animal
shelter it was going to go the
animal shelter for some point
anyway everybody's gonna want
one thank you that was a prior
LFC house members add.
One of any of the vehicle okay
well I can start.
A dark dog dominion.
It has gone page seven.
Thirty one changes flat rate
six.
A common explained everything
actually yes because I I would
like to know thirty four what
the I was just like the whole
pay half.
Yes this is the if the flag.
Then be careful of the FHA
project manager that.
We'll look at forty one.
You may want to fly a line
forty.
There's a bill to transfer that
out of tourism.
We're on page eight
the service.
One forty one.
Yes that would be one I think
yes yes.
I understand a new.
I don't know but you know
currently that that that is a
plane all the kids from a model
from the.
That the desolate.
The law school for the blind and
and they take them home on the
weekends and then they bring the
Max let's forecasts and that
question.
I don't think you want to flag
anything and forty four forty
five forty six forty seven
Senator hello.
Secretary of state.
On page eight question.
In on page nine.
One of flight fifty four right
for G. tip because there's forty
eight million right main
balances and need to.
There is eighty eight million I
believe if we look in the spiral
deal for leader how much the
balances unexpended balances are
Lita.
Mr Chairman on these questions
likely to and and job training
need to be are we gonna bring
the department to us or that
when we get into we're gonna
look you if you look at their
balances were looking yesterday
hi balances and not allowed to
use.
Right.
Mr really respond our versions
to.
Back.
On page nine with nine fifty
four fifty five we should have
given an opportunity to explain
if they're going to if we're
going to do that thank you in
New page fifty six Senator need
to find that one six also sixty
two and sixty two cents yes.
Anybody else
Page line is good.
Those Page
ten center for.
Sixty two what I said to.
Sixty two I can tell you what
that is.
Anything else on Page ten.
Mr chair I have a quick question
you probably know the answer
this just reminded me on sixty
nine they're asking for exhibits
but I remember during their
presentation they need to
contract for janitorial services
in any part of the budget did we
add that to their base.
We
Whether.
Kok who I don't know does that
conclude you flag that and
guess what Mr chair will get you
into Sierra.
Well I that one just in case on
page six.
Sixty six.
All I can tell you that one
really quick
we are.
Finding the over the amount of
money because this is the
patients compensation fund for
the increase in and provider
rate and so we think that it's
six point eight million dollars
that we need to add to the
provider rate we had a meeting
and LFC this morning and the ten
two million that covers overhead
costs and the other one is just
a cost increase so we're looking
at that pretty hard well should
know in the morning we're gonna
head of but they just need six
point nine to complete that.
Page eleven if.
That you Steinborn the the the
the house that was but I support
it.
Because they need it.
That was a I think the chair
appropriation.
Ellen page eleven page twelve.
Early childhood needs more money
on the line eighty three.
Like that one the one up above
we're gonna flag to because
we're going to at we're talking
we're talking about shifting
that to Medicaid so they can get
a higher reimbursement rates on
tribal hospitals includes one to
Gallup so that that rate
increases can go up September
third number eighty two that's
number eighty two the.
The three somebody flanked
I know eighty five we're still
working on.
That's eight million in the
funding that's thank you madam
you've heard about that she
testified that.
Page thirteen.
Ninety two is the
rural hospitals.
Thank.
In total correct me if I'm wrong
Julie maybe maybe notice Boller.
In rural hospitals we think we
can get the Medicaid match to
get to the two hundred and.
agent here so that's that's one
will need to fly can discuss
tomorrow.
To make sure that we have the
right amount of funding right.
Page fourteen.
Ninety eight Mr chair.
Ninety eight.
I have no idea what that is.
The.
This member this came from the
house.
page fifteen.
Someone remind me that that from
secretary I think has she in our
office he short somewhere that I
haven't seen a list at that to
let the veterans secretary that
is for things for disabled
veterans services for travel or
something you have to reach out
to.
There's some shortage came over
from the house house member the
dollar amount that I talk to
Donnie there two of them in the
and so he mentioned some to me
and I haven't seen a list I just
need them to make sure.
We just need to I guess.
Everybody's good on page fifteen
page sixteen.
I have been with us for the.
The the early childhood what.
What.
Well.
Mr chairman we can go back a
little bit in here somewhere
under economic development if we
can flag to find out where that
fifteen made and we were talking
about for advanced energy was
going to go to this feeling more
clarification from the secretary
but it's in here somewhere I
think I'll in the house is house
bill twelve you have left so
okay that was hydrogen.
We now got locked
in to the advanced energy money
and sell.
We
are going to try and language
for the sale of nation plants
in that what does that mean Mr
the south what what would.
We are not built in our
community solar here in just.
There's two wells drilled in Rio
Rancho for desalination right
and there's one in el Paso being
built and so they're pulling
this.
All the water up in that and
then the self appointed in we'll
have the state environment
department at water safety
vertigo air for that one okay.
So that Committee.
On the
here's what we're going to use.
On page fifteen.
Everybody's good on sixteen.
Page seventeen you're on.
That is
The money at Joey's convert PST
C. correct so no Mr chairman of
that state's the PCC monies in
addition to this so there's
twenty million in general fund
and twenty million from the
public education reform Fund so
it's a total forty million from
two different funding sources.
For career technical education
just to.
I so I I don't know the limits
of that I don't know if it's
potentially for middle schools
as well but we can get more
information on it specifically.
Mr chairman it would be for PED
to to do money given the program
statewide.
So.
So.
Speaker yes Mr chairman and
senator Padilla this would be
for the operational side my
understanding is there's
additional money
for PSUC for career tech
facilities but that might be
some information we need to get
back to us all right all that
information down and we'll try.
That
does not center but what will
get you more information I want
to say anything wrong.
Get.
Six.
The sixteen line one one focus
on.
It's raining if.
With more than million both.
Who are both.
Basis to.
just one page seventeen I I
forty three one
L. seventeen.
Eighteen I'm sorry Mr chairman
would just I.
Senator sure thank the bullets
by the state police one one nine
as a club what locked up in a
box or with the.
Intending.
On page sixteen to eighteen.
These are all PED specials
right.
Yes Mr Chairman off from the
public education reform.
Age twenty eight.
Public education.
What is the.
One thirty one.
One twenty nine point.
Eight.
Thank.
One page eighteen then.
Age eighteen.
Nineteen.
Public.
West winds for twenty million
yeah.
This is for demolition probably
okay.
here we go I knew there was one
here twenty one the two eighteen
one thirty seven percent.
I am not even with us.
Moving to fast.
Would you say eighteen one
thirty seven.
Thank you for teachers to teach
English but that's just all we
did.
We have to have a special line
for teachers to teach.
Thank.
Nineteen.
The non nineteen.
In.
This is.
Okay well for that one.
Things haven't usually every
year.
Nine one page twenty one.
The thank you page twenty.
Slide one forty seven ask.
Forty sure.
Opportunity yeah.
Whether strike one forty nine
completely.
This is for discussions.
on page.
And increasing the.
Yeah yeah I think that's a very
good point Senator I agree with.
On page twenty two so one point.
Yeah.
Campos.
Fifty five pretty high.
Kids.
Stirs our doctor.
Ten million I don't know how
many kids could there be in high
school getting their masters.
Your.
One.
You
Mr chairman I would also note
that is a three year
appropriation so.
Okay.
At as a graduate student what's
that let me let me offer some
insight on that this is a big
deal and.
Mr chair Senator one fifty five
this actually is the number that
would work up all of our
universities and graduate
students this is a very
calibrated number.
and it it may not even be enough
but I think it might be barely
enough.
And this was a right to know
graduate this is something we
all want to elevate yes.
Take care of it right now is
probably right I'm sorry.
one fifty six I'll tell you.
Makes a lands the agency
secretary is going to take that
over until we can figure out
who's.
Who's gonna run the show and so
that one point five is to cover
their losses which nobody really
knows what it is but there's a
projecting the right about a
million dollars a Mason lands
that HUD secretary's gonna take
them over and then see if Clovis
Community or or whoever takes a
motion that can be discussion
but that is that money for that.
Yeah as the money for them to
go.
Senator thank you through the
issue thanks.
I just wanna also I apologize
they go back this is also
something asked for by the
universe one fifty I just a
little language tweet this.
We can talk about it.
Later like that one yeah all
right.
Twenty three are on page twenty
four now.
Mr chair I'm sorry I'm running
so far behind on page on page
twenty one forty fourth it talk
to us about looking into those
panic buttons if we need more.
What we want to look into that
but they were saying that was
pretty well for security.
On.
And.
On page twenty four now right.
The increase that.
Thank.
One sixty five.
At least it was sixty three.
We're going to page twenty five
right and I have an immediate
question there I noticed maybe.
Yeah we can you explain to me
why is that that not the first
additional district isn't here
can you explain this all the
districts are here but not the
first one wasn't a mission yes
so Mr chairman and senator
this one was for magistrates the
magistrates one we're places
where there shortfall so these
are based on the request so the
first judicial this new request
anything presumably they don't
have a shortfall.
C..
The magistrates got a big
increase last year because of
the governor's vetoes so we may
want to look at striking all
those.
you Mr chairman this is not
about the magistrate this is
about that District Court that
this is you notice on page one
of one sixteen ninety starts
immediately with the second
judicial district not
magistrates so
just wanted to make sure that it
wasn't a mission so Mr chairman
and Mister chairman Senator
online one sixty eight we begin
moving into supplementals so
this is current year in short
for those so there wasn't a
request from the first usual
district there were these other
requests that and as senator
Munoz pointed out a lot of them
were related to the magistrate
judge so it is I see just didn't
say supplementals from their
doubts exacting thank you for
telling me I'll write it down so
these are these days.
From there down yes
it Mr chairman Senator
everything that says section six
in the first column.
Is is supplemental or
deficiency.
So these are all the audit
findings on their point because
the deficiency rate was so
Mister chairman I believe most
of the vast majority of these
are supplementals and so if you
appropriate for them they
probably won't be on the audit
finding because they will have
an appropriation for those funds
that's not my understanding if
they needed supplemental and
they had a deficiency so they
should have an audit finding
even lower back pain the
supplemental because otherwise
it would have taken out of the
next year's budget.
we're back filling the
supplemental anyway but that
part of funding should still
exist.
So.
Never seen a doctor go ahead
maybe Mr so it can only fits a
deficiency but those are part of
section six okay deficient only
if it's a deficiency yeah okay
okay so we can't shortfall
deficiency.
So Mister chairman the is the
shortfalls for a lot of these
are current year so FY twenty
three so if this passes the
governor the becomes effective
you know the the governor signed
up before the end of the fiscal
year so they would have that
budget.
Right thank you.
Twenty five twenty six.
One thousand three.
So Mr Chairman one eighty three
as we were just discussing
that's deficiency appropriation
so the General Services
Department audit for FY twenty
two just came out with an auto
there was an audit finding that
said the health benefits fund
ended the year with thanks
actually little less than sixty
five million here sixty four and
change million so that's a
deficiency appropriation the one
on page twenty seven line one
eighty four would be a
supplemental for the current
year.
I.
Issue were state workers and
even municipal employees are on
our benefit plan and we have an
increased premium rates and so I
believe it's at ninety five
million it's a statutory
violation on the exact
for not raising those rates and
it's going to get bigger and
bigger and bigger it's grown
remember food back fill that
last year not David but it's
going to get bigger and bigger
but at some point we projected
two hundred eighty five million
in and in a repairs but the big
issue is at some day when we say
we're gonna increase your
premiums and never look back and
say how did I get an eighteen
percent rate increase and never
paid anything just seconds
stated Justin and how they're
gonna pick it up individuals and
their own it's it's going to be
a nightmare for state employees
if we don't increase those
health care premiums.
Every year because this is our
third year so eighteen percent
increase in health care you've
never seen on your on your
paycheck and also you're gonna
get another one and you can get
twenty four percent increase in
they're gonna
go berserk.
Okay so then like those.
Twenty six twenty seven.
Twenty seven twenty seven okay
it's a supplemental to the state
fair commission for their losses
in nineteen but then it says are
from suing for recurring why
would that be recurring.
So Mister chairman Senator
Diamond so I think that the R.
so because this is related to a
recurring expense and so that's
why it's are I think you're
probably correct is a
nonrecurring it probably should
be listed as nonrecurring but at
some point in the process
someone said this is part of our
recurring budget and so it just
got checked as recurring but
you're probably right.
Yet Mr chairman Jerry just like
that so no that's going to be
rate card.
In
order to.
The.
So Mister chairman Senator I
believe that is more technology
than furniture but I'm not sure
what what what specific
technology we can get more
information for.
I don't think it's a bit like a
computer like we would think of
it but like maybe like a key
Oscars or something let me give
you more information Mr chairman
Jerry I think she had come
before us and explain the need
for that the last time she was
here so good idea however come
in at least explain it before we
take it out there was.
Hello.
Well we'll ask LFC to go back
and get the answers and staffing
agencies back in yeah the
answer.
We just heard DOT's budget right
so that's the two thirty two
everything when was this.
I'm Mister chairman Senator this
was printed I believe Monday.
So so much Mr chairman I'd like
to go and take a look at that
because there are the deal to
stop yes one eighty nine.
They were just in that there's
and stuff that we agree to have
a pencil that in.
So Mr chairman section nine is
special transportation
appropriations that's only DOT
section ten is where we begin
fund transfers so this is not
appropriations but this is
transfers from the general fund
to others state funds.
We work late tonight and we get
to one ninety four.
not let the house in the
eight hundred fifty million
dollars.
Passed house bill two.
that one may need to be adjusted
as we up just enough.
Center if you cut all the sheets
you can just up all you want.
One one ninety four.
Thank.
Do that.
I think the state is David do
you have Madam.
This is.
This is using tricks.
There's about thirty five
funded is generating revenues
for MFA to hate to water so this
is building something that
exists.
In order to hear that built the
tomorrow center a services emit
a water trust for for commercial
question.
No I'm just to enjoy listening
to Senator Woods.
Can.
A lot of.
page twenty nine oh one ninety
seven and two zero.
Also Mr chairman I should point
out beginning on the where it
starts saying eleven this is
opioid settlement funds.
So settlement funds is being
used for in mental health.
So I mean it Mr chairman Senator
that's correct.
Mother and as an opioid problem
and has a baby.
If the baby of.
I think chairman David slowdown
but Mr court drive according
those five percent of the babies
are.
Chair which is.
Okay.
the.
Thirty.
For these the total the total
what I see at the end here
that's a total of everything
that's in here Joe he Mister
chairman Senator that's correct
the sections okay thank you on
the second federal funding is
eighty nine million testing the
two point seven billion.
Yes.
There
want to go back and I wanted to
say but.
Eight point seven.
So yeah ninety five okay good.
Thank.
Mr chairman that she is your
language only appropriation so
these are re authorizations of
prior special appropriations.
Section five but we're going to
review all the language.
I guess Mr chairman again these
are just this section five items
there's additional throughout
the bill.
Mr Chairman but you wouldn't.
If you what we can bring these
back with the that was nine when
you had a language hearing it
was more revising language
elsewhere in the bill not the
section five items that were
language only because of radio
we we kept could bring this back
at the I guess with all the
language combined immense you
may be a good idea Mr tend to
think.
Which.
Among the other look at.
Not.
Under fifteen.
Fifteen.
That's that's the work in state
program that's over there and
I would be putting four
thousand.
The program when it's.
Everybody's opportunities saying
that.
Mr chairman so the the the work
in state programs part of partly
my and comments deal and they're
saying that they because if it's
not a mandatory program that
they shouldn't even start it
because it won't be able to fund
the.
In a way to do the work.
I don't support it being
inventory that's how we sold to
the legislature got done so.
I'm not sure what that that's we
should hear more about that.
Not that this is not that able
program Wirth say for the
disabled this is for us okay.
This item allows the treasury to
use a prior appropriations to
address their general shortfall
in operating money so give some
flexibility otherwise you'd need
a four hundred thousand dollars
supplemental for the treasures
of the supports that at times
with the program that I'm
concerned four hundred thousand
even done anything I mean what
what would you know have got
anything up off the ground so.
So fifteen is it up sixteen is
because the racing commission
the money and now the federal.
stated long term but it type
other this.
This is the that that's money
for instance so they can come
into compliance under the
federal.
So we can you can either use if
we have questions we can get
thrown in the.
The language tomorrow.
And then come back and kind of
this list again.
Questions that leave everything
here more down.
Everything here since then we
have this chart real quick
committee before before we wrap
up.
Before we wrap up Alex this is a
billion dollar left apparently
I'm wondering does this exist
online I mean is this all just
basically part of HB to there is
a three to four if this are.
So Mister chairman Senator yet
these are all items in H. B. two
so it exists online as part of
HB to vote so is part of the
other language I mean it it I
mean for me personally it's
really tough on when we get
handed a Leslie said on we have
to suddenly make decisions like
I realize it's a work in
progress I think it's also work
in progress for everyone out
there who's connected to these
dollars and so is there a way
that we can maybe emails even
tonight the less we're going to
be reviewing in the morning.
Even though knowing they're
moving just so we can have some
time to prepare and then.
We could put him online tomorrow
so that the public can view and
that system for another if we're
just doing the stuff in a vacuum
two quick mistakes will be made.
As all that sound.
I don't know the language list
because executive hasn't sent us
their total us tonight so we
don't know what that list is
going to be you just heard from
language that I never seen from
do it right but I don't know if
that's an ongoing resistance
we've got that language on on.
A lot there Mr Chairman we're
really challenging because for
all the.
The more with some
recommendations we'll try to do
the best we can to show you all
the other items.
So maybe maybe then we can just
commit that I mean we're gonna
have a couple days well we
review them they come in and
wait for their phone online and
then we make sure we get it
right before we finalize things.
We're gonna be on tomorrow
meditators gonna be two sections
one for language in one that
appropriates money some of your
language appropriates money or
their language appropriates
money we have no idea what are
at between the house tax package
and the rebate and if they
overspent under spent until we
know what the tax packages and I
don't think they're doing that
till Monday.
then we have no idea what we're
just building everything we can
right now and then if we come
back in Monday in the state the
tax package is a billion than we
know we're done.
Mr chair I don't know with all
due respect the process leaves a
lot to be desired.
Was on you but I'm saying like
for this committee in our
responsibility in the Senate the
budget coming over here and just
being able to make good
decisions not in a vacuum we
need to have all the information
we need to have time to do to be
transparent we need to make a
decision about so Senator if if
anybody wants language in house
bill to the shooter ran a bill.
They want to affect the budget.
In the field of fact the budget
for what the what they wanted
out of the budget and not try to
to do statutory change or amend
something the budget that's what
that's what the processes for
languages for me is mainly
clean up in that where agencies
need language to me use their at
at I mean is do it to add to
that million to it for FTEs
right that didn't happen in some
of the money's there the
languages there so that's kind
of the way we're gonna do it
Senator Woods.
Yeah all in there for businesses
with.
Yeah for my comment I'm talking
about the new stuff is coming at
us that's do I just want this
one to have more time to build
review because we we have not
seen that and the publishers.
Right I'm not talking of the
argument about new stuff this
legislation including in the
chair reference stuff new stuff
from the house has a movie
factored and it's like how can
you make decisions in a vacuum
you don't know how much is being
spent how much capacity how can
we do our job Senator Campos
thank you very much Mr chairman
so with that we're dealing with
our for the new items that are
coming through here in the
Senate and I believe that's what
Senator Steinborn one is
referring to the other issue
however is that we need to start
to put a stop to the kind of
request that we're getting and I
realized that I can just go on
in.
Indefinitely but I hope that
over the next couple of days
that we really have time to
review the the language take a
look at the resources are there
and you're doing that properly
in terms of developing the two
two areas
but again we we need to start to
go and get this bill ready for
for preparation.
Okay.
Well let's start on language
