A hundred fifty thousand dollars
the attorney general's consumer
settlement fund the UNM border
regions right demonstration
project to assess the
feasibility and acceptability of
an injectable opioid treatment
program at the UNM addiction and
substance abuse program madam
chair the study will take eight
months to complete upon
completion we will come back in
the twenty twenty two provided
legislative session two one fall
the statewide intractable opioid
treatment program that focuses
on opioid addiction treatment
prevention and abatement madam
chair the Attorney General has
committed to fund this
initiative in its entirety using
settlement funds from lawsuits
filed against opioid
manufacturers whose payments to
our state should number in the
tens of millions of dollars
madam chair the main opioids of
abuse are heroin oxycontin and
fentanyl.
Madam chair we would be the
first state to implement such a
program which is producing very
favorable results in other in
seven other countries where it
has taken ground chair I will
share some positive social
consequences of implementing an
injectable opioid program in my
experts will elaborate on the
nuts and bolts of the study
perspective on what the program
might in general fund
implementation madam chair
positive social consequences of
such a program one eliminates
chaos of the subset user
stabilizes his or her lifestyle
madam chair.
Treatment of injectable opioid
is conducted in the clinical
setting with medical staff and
licensed physicians it is the
license docker ministers the
opioid
and while in the clinical
setting madam chair there will
be wraparound services to help
stabilize the social needs of
the substance use are for
example access to housing of
homeless access to food stamps
Medicaid Madam chair of the
substance user is essentially
remote from street life under
this program it also reduces
criminal activity assess and
user no need for the Tennessee
of drug dealer.
There there would be no need for
the band State of the drug be
learned or need to engage in F.
or break ins to sell items on
the black market for gas to get
his or her fix for the date
madam chair share this program
but also public safety prices
for example the elimination of
disposing of oranges in our
parks and parking lots in our
businesses it also reduces
overdoses its residents also
relations with family and
community how it allows
substance users to hold down
part time and full time jobs it
allows educational opportunities
for these individuals to get
their GED go to any college to
sign up for college and because
of a stable lifestyle madam
chair you can restore family
bonds with parents grandparents
and siblings and extended family
and madam chair because of a
stable lifestyle it allows a
subset user to win back his or
her kids from CYFD custody it
also allows for the first time
in many years of these
individuals leisure time leisure
activities madam chair I would
like to yield so my first expert
Dr Kimberly page the further and
I'm right on the significance of
legislation.
Thank you representative
Representative the act are
making you come up to the act.
To the proper place.
Elevate that Kimberly Kelly C.
eight I'm here thank you
Kimberly hi.
Chair and members of the
committee thank you for having
me Representative Garcia did a
great job summarizing the many
of the benefits drug use and
misuse yes independence is a
very very complex issue New
Mexico has instituted many
important ones including
medication for opioid use
disorder in the form of the been
our friend now taxed and
methadone there are patients
however.
Who fail at that and there is a
need to enhance and capture
these folks who have more
complex problems and provide
them with innovative models to
address their problematic drug
use this is a particularly
innovative programs which is
group will be primarily targeted
to people who have found who
have not found success with
methadone or suboxone or other
treatments and it would be still
conducted with in the safe
confines of the medical system
thus eliminating potential for
overdose due to
I'm no dosages or hidden
Sentinel or other up opioid
during this.
This program has been
implemented and seven other
countries with great success
including our neighbor Canada
and we would like to be the
first to do here in New Mexico
thank you.
Thank you.
We also have a family called
them back with the drug policy
alliance but she's just on board
as a technical expert questions
arise that we cannot answer so
with that madam chair we stand
for questions thank you
Representative here's the and
thank them for being here in
case we have any questions thank
you for your continued
commitment I'm gonna ask for any
comments from the public Nate
and do we have anyone in the
public pro and con read this
bill before we go to committee
members madam chair members of
the committee we had that we
receive never requests to speak
and either opposition or support
for this bill.
Thank you all right committee
members.
What the we have center share
your hand up I don't see any
other hands up so for each year
yes Senator com thank you this
so yes the madam chair of course
Senator Campos had to use a real
hand I've just got to settle for
a point here.
actually interviewing a lot it's
strange because on the list here
he doesn't shall Senator Campos
hand out buddy.
I don't know one hundred.
That we don't.
So you.
So madam chair and
representative
But what is that why this is the
state has to be involved in this
I'm sure that this is a
pharmaceutical company that to.
Has this drug right now they're
going to make money off of it
what they do the the study on
their own with their own money.
Representative Garcia can you
respond to that were you
witnesses generally.
Madam chair
This.
This effort involved no no
company.
This is an initiative on the
part of.
The legislature to kind of
Hello initiate a program dealing
with real creative aspects
dealing with opioid addiction
treatment prevention and
abatement and there is a they
are programs in place madam
chair worldwide that have been
very effective in terms of
grounding opioid addiction and
creating prevention measures and
abatement measures and the
the funding for this initiative
is not coming from general fund.
It's coming from the consumer
settlement fund in the attorney
general's office of who is in
line to receive tens of millions
of dollars on lawsuits that he
forty nine other eighties in our
country waged against opioid
manufacturers for their over
prescription of opioids leading
to vast amounts of overdose
deaths overdoses in our country
so this is not about the company
it's about an initiative our our
state in dealing with this real
dire crisis that we have before
us.
So madam chair and
representative I I get that but
this is an injectable of.
What to call it the drew an
injectable drugs somebody made
that thing I mean we didn't make
it state in Mexico to make it so
it came from somewhere it's
coming from somewhere.
they're using it in other
countries so it's already
manufactured somewhere.
Who's doing this.
Sure this is Kimberly page and I
apologize to the committee in
advance I'm a professor in
internal medicine at university
of New Mexico and.
And I've been doing research
area for a long time the the
okay good crisis is a public
health crisis yes and and that
crisis it was created by the
medications that have been
distributed throughout our
response to that crisis has
always involve these companies
and all of the medications that
are currently used right now our
administered within medical
settings and with medical
providers who are well trained
in this this is not the purview
of the pharmaceutical industry
but the purview of the clinical
and public health industry so.
Madam chair and drive
Representative I get all that.
And I'm not debating that we
have a problem.
What is the name of this drug
and where does it come from.
Madam chair and
and Senator
that's a good question because
we are using an injectable
opioid as part of the treatment.
And
and that is in opioid known as
hi Joe Marshall and I would like
to yield to drive rate to for
the lab right on how that how
that opioid will be utilized in
in the unfolding this this
treatment program Kimberly Madam
chair representative
hydromorphone is a generic drug
also known as to what it it's an
opioid pain reliever studies
have shown that hydromorphone is
just as effective as I see the
morphine which is another word
for heroin for individuals with
severe opioid use disorder who
have not found success with
methadone suboxone or other
treatments hydromorphone is a
relatively inexpensive drug and
it can be used in those for whom
the other treatments are
contraindicated.
Well that's what I was trying to
get to this.
What's the name the strugglers
come from so do we have a
contract with any the particular
company to provide this.
Madam chair and senator share
not to my knowledge madam
speaker in Representative this
is something that would be
prescribed by.
Of physicians.
Okay so madam chair and drive so
it's prescribed by physicians so
how do you how do you even get
somebody into the.
Into the doctor's office to
begin with so you've got
somebody on the streets.
How did they end up in your in
your office or clinic.
To begin with thank you for that
question madam chair and again
this this initiative house bill
forty six is about a state
feasibility and acceptability
study.
demonstration project and all
those intricacies.
Will be developed through the
course of eight months in terms
of what the specifics are but I
will yield to drive page to kind
of maybe give a generalization
of what that criteria might be
in terms of the clients that
would participate in the
program.
After page.
Madam secretary representatives
I may have missed the question
because my your books went out
for a minute could you please
repeat it.
This Madam chair and Dr how does
somebody end up in in in your
office how do we get them off
the street into your office so
that they can so that they can
get this treatment again
medication the program is going
to be a demonstration project
that will target people who had
failed other evidence based
treatments and so we will be
reaching out to people patients
who still want to find solutions
to their opioid dependence but
haven't yet succeeded the
demonstration project will
assess the feasibility and
acceptability of the program
look at what's needed in terms
of setting up the infrastructure
and of what kind of person are
needed to make it successful we
will measure success based on
the retention rate of those
patients.
Madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you center.
Thank you is that fair share.
Thank you we're gonna move on to
Senator Campos you're next and
then I have Senator Diamond
thank you very much madam chair
members members of the committee
I representative Garcia for
bringing or house bill forty six
is amended forward for many
reasons and Representative I
have Senator Mario fifteen and
Senator Mario three which in
essence also asks for a lot of
the same type of information so
as we move forward hopefully
we're gonna be able to prevent a
lot of the overdoses and deaths
that are occurring.
Cross the state so you're you're
efforts are well noted and I
really appreciate that I really
don't have a question I just
wanted to indicate that within
that.
The members of the committee
there's a lot of work that is
going on and a study like this
and you will this demonstration
project.
Will definitely help us as we
move forward particularly during
this so pandemic period
I directly have dealt with uh
Senator Woods or to assist you
dealing with
many if you will of the illicit
drugs.
And so as we go forward again I
just want to go ahead and thank
you representative Garcia for
your initiative in your efforts
and course for finding the
resources from which to go ahead
and conduct this project thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee thank
you Senator Campos okay we're
gonna move on to Senator crystal
diamond are you there crystal
thank you madam chairman I just.
I have a few quick questions
about the financial cost of this
the one hundred fifty thousand
dollars to fund an eight month
study you mentioned.
Okay.
Thank you for all that that we
can't hear you.
Something happened to the screen
there.
Senator Diamond are you there
can you hear me.
Madam chairman I'm gonna try
turning off my screen I have
poor connectivity in my office
but my question was that we were
signing an eighteen month study
at a hundred fifty thousand
dollars to the sponsor how much
do you anticipate the program to
cost.
Madam chair and senator that's a
good question and that's the
purpose of the demonstration
project.
And
and keep in mind the madam chair
and Senator Diamond that this
initiative in terms of this type
of role specific program
injectable opioid treatment
program will be funded in its
entirety what it on fall
statewide after the eight month
period funded solely by the
consumer protection fund.
Of the attorney general's office
and that fund will be basically
increased by these tens of
millions of dollars lawsuits
that are AG filed against opioid
manufacturers.
And
the end of which the settlements
will be forthcoming in the
future and the so that's that's
the big that's the basically the
revenue source for unfolding
this initiative statewide at the
end of the eight month period
when a demonstration project as
fully identified and established
the protocols of what this would
look I in our in our many
communities throughout the state
and madam chair is also point to
mention that there is an network
in place already with the
addiction and substance abuse
program at UNM with almost every
community in our state it is
assisting these
clinics in terms of of their
needs regarding substance abuse.
Throughout the north throughout
the south throughout the central
part of our state.
Senator Diamond I hope I think
close to answering your
question.
Thank you representative madam
chairman I understand the
revenue source.
The revenue totals of what
possible program like this the
total operational annual costs
would be to the state even if
even I understand that it's
coming out of the consumer
settlement fund but do we have
any idea of what those annual
costs would be for the fund
program.
Madam chair ideal to a doctor
pages see if he can kind of.
A further hone in on
approximation.
Dr page.
Madam chair representative I
hate.
I think it's premature to say
what the costs will be until
we've actually examine what it
will take to put this into place
many of the changes that we've
made in our.
In our treatment for drug
dependents.
In the last year have reduced
some of the costs associated
with treatment and it's really a
good time to assess how to
better reach folks who have more
complex problems who have been
previously unreachable but we
would have a better idea of that
to be perfectly honest after
we've had a chance to put this
project into practice and
process that so I'm I'm very
sorry to not have that.
It depends on how far we expand
we would definitely want to see
something like this in rural
areas.
Thank you doctor and
Representative and one final
question is a hundred fifty
thousand dollar cost and this
study already in H. B. two.
Chair and Senator Diamond.
It is in the consumer settlement
fund.
how that connects to HB two I'm
not sure.
No there's
DFA folks in attendance
that can maybe help address
that.
The funds are coming from.
Attorney general's consumer
settlement fund
Madam chair okay thank you thank
you both for your time I you
madam chairman.
Thank you Diamond we're going to
move on to Senator Burt taiseer
hand up Senator.
Thank you madam chair and
representative thank you for
bring forth a bill just a few
questions if I may um
Representative you mentioned
that to the money for this comes
out of the attorney general's
Fund.
and it will and then the program
will also be funded out of that
same fund is that did I
understand that correctly.
And madam chair and senator
that's correct that you're
twenty general just kind of got
come on record as making that
commitment.
Okay well that was my other
question is he committed
actually to paying for this even
if we don't know how much it's
going to cost.
Madam chair senator Byrd that's
correct.
Okay and madam chair and
Representative have we wanted
these lawsuits as yet or when we
expecting some results from
these lawsuits I'm very good
question madam chair in fact the
in
In February that first week
there was an announcement of a
six hundred million dollar
settlement with.
The
it'll be.
are not the big boys.
Of it was a consultant for in
our state was granted two
million of that six hundred
million this is a consulting
firm that was basically
promoting the further expansion
and use of oxycontin.
And the attorney general's
office madam chair ensures is
that this is just a spit in the
bucket.
Or address in the box.
Sorry for the.
We will be with me for a little
while Representative thank you
I'm sorry no no that's okay.
This this two million dollars is
is is it's from.
The little fish so you can
imagine when the when the when
the AG says madam chair that we
can expect tens of millions of
dollars from the major leaguers
then we are talking about two
dollars from the
opioid manufactures settlements
have still not been finalized
but this one is two million has
been finalized.
And okay in in and I appreciate
the answer madam chair and and
Representative.
It I assume that all the
lawsuits in other states have
been filed have any of those
been resolved as yet with the as
you said the big boys.
I didn't to my knowledge madam
chair I don't know but this one
involved forty nine attorney
general's forty nine states and
the and the other ones I don't I
don't know I think
and I don't know if doctor page
can answer that as well but the
for sure the Attorney General
would have that information and
I can make it available
promptly to the committee the.
Fund.
One final action on our our
bills Senator and and thank you
representative madam chair I
just I I'm I'm always.
Overly cautious about kind of
betting become if you will I
think that we can fund this
program at a much higher level
and for years
and yet we have not seen any of
that money nor do we know that
we're going to actually win
those I'm not probably there's
been suppressed that said that
we probably will win some of
those but but the money is not
the bank yet so I'm very
cautious about making those
commitments.
Without that and I I feel
concerned about doing a study
and and getting prepared to
launch a program that may or may
not be able to be fully funded
and then and then Representative
we kind of go to the point of I
guess my last question you
mentioned the UNM system might
be the facilitate or of this
program and they have
It makes or or some kind they
work all around the state can
you basically explained to me do
they work out of local hospitals
do they have local bands or or
or vehicles that go around to
communities like say Silvercity
Deming.
Alamogordo
you know at communities like at
how does the UNM system work in
and are we sure that rural New
Mexico will see their fair share
of this program should it go
into effect.
Chair and Senator Burt you know
one of our experts Dr Schmidt
have bought.
was not present today he's
basically.
The guy on the ground in.
He could get the skinny on your
question you know and he's he's
got a stomach flu and wasn't
able to participate with us
today but I feel it madam chair
and senator that doctor page
good maybe.
Address that to up to a smaller
degree then drive by.
Kimberly can you address the
madam chair.
Yes madam chair and
representative thank you yeah
you and doesn't itself have the
clinics all over but it UNM is
extremely well connected
throughout the state and the
community of providers in the
addiction medicine spear are
also extremely well connected
throughout the state and of
those connections sometimes our
our our business connection
sometimes economic and sometimes
are professional but the
connections are there and the
network is there so that it
could be expanded
and and it could be leveraged to
make this available everywhere
and yes I think making sure that
this gets to rural communities
is essential even if I have to
use my own personal mobile van
that we have for our work at
UNM.
All right dead madam chair and
and drive will will hold you to
that set up.
But and that's all well and good
I just want to know and and feel
comfortable were kind of betting
on the come with regards to a
year and we're also.
Understanding that you have
connections and that you have
good working relationships but
has a a an application program
like this ever been used before
through the UNM hospital process
what would can we.
Could we do this by mirroring
something that has already
happened and been successful.
Chair Dr page.
That is exactly what we would
try to do we don't want to
reinvent the wheel and there are
programs throughout the state
that are highly late I am
personally involved in several
of those that work with co
occurring mental health
disorders and substance and
opioid use disorders throughout
thirteen clinics in the state so
we would try to leverage those
same relationships for the
success of this program.
Okay well I appreciate that
answer I'm glad to know there's
a template out there that we get
we could possibly lose use
rather and and I madam chair
just a comment I I appreciate
what we're trying to do here I I
still have concerns about making
sure that we're gonna be able to
fund this the study may go forth
but but then to fund a program I
think that is on this scope and
size that would need to be used
to that and and that kind of
bending the come on the money I
and I'm a little reluctant to
support that but I appreciate
all the answers and appreciate
the time Representative good
luck thank you.
Thank you Senator Burt we're
gonna move on to senator Jeff
Steinborn your hand up Senator
thank you madam chair I'm
mastering the hand thing that I
just like to move to passenger.
Thank you nine born there may be
passed by the recycling back in.
Chair well there's a motion that
means is that Campos yes madam
chair thank you there's a motion
and a second half can you call
the roll.
Can you call the roll with well
Pat get the ready here to call.
Sorry I was muted I apologize.
Senator Burt.
I'm gonna vote no thank you.
Senator Burton no senator
Clemente.
Is.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Cappelletti.
Okay let me just spoke with yes
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
No Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzalez.
Yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share no Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Woods no.
Senator Woods no Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
And senator Munoz also you
there.
Thank you still for that excuse
so Senator.
Then yes one excused.
For yes and spending for no and
six yes six yes for no one
excuse.
Thank you have Representative
Garcia you have a due pass on
your health bill forty six of
them and then I want to thank
you for reading in the sport I
remember in the summer for at
least two or three years we have
discussed this during the intern
and and I'm pleased that you are
bringing it before the
legislature share thank you very
much thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you all right we're going
to move on to house bill one
twenty commanders as Amanda
military thousand expedited by
work do we have Representative
about on here with us.
Here madam chair.
Wait in the back.
Please wait is eight finally
one.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
There were internet I'm ready to
go with.
Madam chair of yes to start off
with I have a problem gas in the
requires chairman with McCorkle
these are just with the bass
Planning Commission and they are
money expert witnesses who will
pretty much explain the bill for
me but I will start off madam
chair yes the house bill one
billion and provides for fee
waivers expedite a licensing and
certification for certain
occupations are professionals
school personnel and
construction industry licenses
insured certificates of
qualifications for military
service members their spouses
the dead children and veterans
and.
Madam.
Share I will turn it over to
Mister Jesse do to give you the.
Rusty Taos as fast as possible.
Thank you madam chair this
Senator sure can I interrupt and
make you do passed motion.
We can we always think as we
haven't have public comment or
against this Senator give us
just a moment here.
And I will hold your motion
until we do that the public a
chance as we do with every bill
okay thank you senator.
All right so
Representative I'm calling you
have that you have someone you
wanted to set up to say a few
words.
Thank you madam chair I does
does my prayer.
Thank you representative will
come and madam chair and members
of the committee on Paul Cassidy
with the current partnership
committee as well as New Mexico
military these Planning
Commission we have two other in
individuals are very interested
in this we we thank the the
Senate and the house last year
for passing HB thirty which got
this process started subsequent
to
the passage of H. B. thirty last
year and signature by the
governor of the military up
produced a best practices piece
and identified additional
professions that they see as
necessary to be covered to
improve the quality of life of
military families as they move
from state to state this bill
adds ten additional professions
in chapter sixty one it also
adds
licenses from the construction
industry division to ease the
burden of for these folks when
they're in the the community to
get to work very very quickly
we've had very great cooperation
from the building trade unions
from
RLD and from the Legislative
Council Service be happy to add
to address any questions the
committee committee then.
Thank you all create your
comment we are first going to go
to the public or if you have any
comments or.
Public input they can do we have
anyone before we go to the
committee madam chair members of
the committee we received no
indication of opposition to the
bill at with us in support of
the bill first we have JD
bowling ten.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair members the
committee this is JD Bullington
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
Montoya sector of our economy is
second only to the oil and gas
sector in the chamber wants to
preserve and protect what we
have and grow that military
presence the Air Force has a
green yellow and red scoring
system for all states with air
bases that evaluates the ease of
military personnel getting
licensed with this view
obstacles as possible with the
changes proposed in house bill
one twenty we will score great
and that reciprocity and
expedited licensure area we want
our state to be as military
friendly as possible and this
legislation helps us get closer
to that objective thank you
thank you.
Anyone out there madam chair
members of the committee yes we
do at next is Ashley Wagner with
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce actually.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm actually
Wagner director public policy
for the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support house bill
one twenty because it expedites
the process to getting a
targeted skilled workforce into
our economy and that will only
benefit New Mexico additionally
it incentivize you Mexico
veterans military service
members spouses and their
children with the fee waiver to
pursue a career in education and
we are I'm at a teacher shortage
of that benefit us thank you so
much thank you Ashlee the next
neighbor madam chair members of
the committee that concludes
public comment on this bill
thank you very much okay
committee members now any
questions or comments on this
before I go back to Senator
shares motion.
I don't see any here so we have
a motion from Santo share or do
passed we have a second.
And there's a motion and a
second by Senator the second
that.
you Senator Burt
that can you call the roll.
Yes madam chair Senator Burt.
Yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
is Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria.
Is excuse Senator Diamond yes.
Thank you diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes or Senator share
yes please Senator share yes
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator then yes yes that is ten
yes and one excuse thank you
very much Representative on
university passed motion on for
help thank you very much thank
you madam chair members of the
committee and I can go back to
sleep price.
Law thank you all right senator
Munoz that back yeah I am back
and one of the I'm important
some people of of what we have.
We have some amendments on bills
we're not gonna go through this
again and we don't know who they
are where they came from so let
me go through H. R. one there's
an amendment from
Representative that that we
don't know we got.
We're trying to see that and
then we have one for our finance
committee
There is another amendment on.
I am looking at the.
That we have doesn't have a
signature we don't know who's
amendment it is
so we may jump around all
through the to the schedule so
we get this figured out
Center souls are are you with us
what you do Senate bill fifty
four and then Senate bill one
thirty you have Senate bill
fifty four that we have to have
it zero zero six one every
members of management.
I'm not sure sure I mean it's a
pretty simple bill and I don't
know if the New Mexico public
school facilities authority had
one other little thing they
added that I had to do with some
that I'm here the years the on
it.
Your expert witness here because
we don't know.
That gentleman or not Jim but it
would have been my amendment yes
but I think Jonathan Chaplin if
he's on but he is the one that
drafted that amendment.
so he's not on so you want to be
your next bill Senate bill one
thirty.
either one or we can do that
when I'm my understanding that
amendment only wish I knew who
the man Mintz's whose I don't
want to go through that makes up
again some of the state Senate
bill one thirty and then I'll
give me a few minutes to figure
out what.
That B. by we knew what one
thirty of.
And so Committee Senate bill one
thirty.
Most of the relatively
Short bill what it does is
indicate that by twenty thirty
that seventy five percent of the
New Mexico need a vehicle I
would need to be in there are
electric vehicles or plug in
hybrid vehicles what that would
do is to reduce the the faster
operation within the state and
move the state toward a cleaner
energy economy currently the
transportation sector is one of
the most of our areas that was
the most carbon into yes.
What hybrids and all electric
vehicles would reduce all of
that I want to point out there a
couple of errors in the current
FIR I have worked with Mr Ortiz
with General Services Department
on changing but I doesn't appear
to have gotten into the FY are
your FIR indicate that would
have a four million dollar plus
cost per year
that was calculated on replacing
the entire fleet with electric
vehicles the entire is
essentially going to have to be
replaced in the next ten years
any how so the FIR should
represent the differential
between electric vehicle
replacement and an internal
combustion engine replacement I
believe that the that makes
somewhere around seven hundred
thousand dollars per year over
the next ten years in order to
do a total replacement of the
week to a seventy five percent
electric vehicles or plug in
hybrid electric vehicles I would
point out also that electric
vehicles plug in hybrid vehicles
have much lower operating costs
they average somewhere around a
hundred miles per gallon
equivalent so that are much
lower fuel costs with operating
them and electric vehicles have
much lower maintenance costs
they have no oil to change the
engines are much simpler to
maintain that all pose no
maintenance whatsoever you don't
have to replace breaks very
often because they all use
regenerative braking instead of
brake shoes and brake pads and
so they've got significantly
less operating cost of there is
one study recently that put over
the life of the vehicle the
operating costs for an all
electric vehicle is about twenty
thousand dollars per vehicle
over the life of the vehicle I
know some issues or concerns
people often have is what the
ranges on electric vehicles
that's why we.
Looted the plug in hybrids work
as well Appalachian hybrids
typically have a battery that
any and all of these depend on
the weight of the vehicle but a
battery that allows going on the
order of fifty to sixty miles on
a charge without needing to be
recharged that covers about
seventy five percent of the
driving of both vehicles
but once you have to go further
than that a plug in hybrid
functions just like a regular
card people of the gas station
you fill up with gas and hybrid
motor continues and so the
concern about traveling all the
way from Santa Fe to Los crucis
for instance or down the halls
or or some other place the plug
in hybrid certainly covers that
electric vehicles and if you've
been watching the news I think
it is supported indicated that
by twenty twenty five that they
are going to make their entire
fleet as a lector vehicles we
have numerous new ones coming
online and just in the last two
years I think every major car
manufacturer now has an electric
vehicle and plug in hybrid
option for their vehicles
I guess what a lot of the rest
of it this does not have any
penalties if we don't get there
this is aspirational this is
setting a target goal for the
state of New Mexico that by
twenty thirty seventy five
percent of the we will be
leaving or plug in hybrid so
that we start moving and be a
leader in the country we're
doing best plug in hybrids also
arriving out of electric
vehicles and plug in hybrids are
very but it also absorbing some
of the indeterminate interstate
from renewable resources that we
often hear concerns about many
times you can charge them when
there is excess energy on the
system for for use later so that
they don't add to overall to the
base load in many cases with all
of these require a little bit of
modifications as to what we're
used to as far as traveling long
distances
with that.
I'd be happy to just start
answering any questions that
people might help.
Thank you senator you.
Do you have an expert witness
for this bill.
Mr chair I don't have any expert
witness directly much of the
information that I have comes
from a report that doctor peach
put out in two thousand and
nineteen dealing with electric
vehicles and the technology is
rapidly since then and he was
very optimistic about the state
and state in general moving to
that and so I've got lots of
information and data about the
reason why it's important for
states to do so but no I don't
have a specific expert witness.
Public comment on this bill.
Senator members of the committee
yes we do have that public
comment on this bill first in
opposition we have Paul gassing.
Good afternoon members of the
committee Mr chairman can you
hear me yes we can thank you my
name's called guessing on
presidents the Rio Grande
foundation we oppose this bill
simply because if money comes
when it does for elector
vehicles.
Be the best option for New
Mexico we don't need top down
mandates whether it's for the
state fleet or for New Mexicans
as a whole in order to get them
to purchase electric vehicles
one of the challenges of course
with electric vehicles right now
is that according to the
environmental Department there
are just fifty one electric
vehicle charging stations in our
state getting a full complement
needed for other kind of travel
whether it's state officials or
average civilians that's needed
will take a massive investment
in addition to the investment in
the fleet vehicles so we oppose
this legislation and encourage
you to as well thank you.
Members of the committee have
you have no one else in
opposition in support and we how
Gary need more.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name repaid in
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico our coalition is
comprised of the elected leaders
of the cities of Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Santa
Fe County constituting about
forty percent of the state.
Representative strong support of
SB one third.
You are member communities is
actively implementing their own
plans for electrifying major
portions of their vehicle fleet
recognizing their decrease
maintenance costs and decrease
greenhouse gas emissions for
example the City of Santa Fe as
a goal of transitioning its
administrative and non emergency
fleet to all electric or hybrid
by twenty twenty five Santa Fe
County has anyone targets for
easy adoption and build out of
its entire Evey charging
infrastructure.
Of course this is a stretch goal
for twenty third which stretch
goals promote new thinking new
ways of doing work and in this
case the expansion of the
charging network across the
state.
It's appropriate for the state
to have this goal for the
purchase of the committee as one
more step in the transportation
sector to address reduced
emissions decreased lost in the
impact of the dancing climate
change our coalition forces you
to vote yes on SB one thirty
thank you very much for the
opportunity to comment.
Next we have.
T. any people corner.
Mr chair members of the
committee I am teaming people
corn was southwest energy
efficiency project and one will
be a common sense piece of
public policy the state was that
climate goals and meet those
will need to see massive growth
in the market over the next few
years the state lead by example
by purchasing EV's for its fleet
it's important to note that the
state like all fleets has a
replacement plan for vehicles a
certain number of vehicles
replaced each year all this
legislation does is make those
replacements be electric
vehicles for majority of the
time the only costs the state
will be the small and quickly
decreasing incremental cost of
buying Evey instead of a
gasoline vehicle the state
police should be primarily
electric vehicles in the bank
Senator souls for bringing for
the support legislation thank
you.
Next we have.
Louis Carrera with the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter.
Thank you so much good afternoon
Mister chair and members of the
committee my name is these got
out of the legislative and
political organizer with the
Sierra Club you're gonna have to
representing over thirty five
thousand members throughout New
Mexico
we strongly support this bill as
it was stated earlier this bill
is great to meet our state
climate goals we will have to
grow the even market their
medical relates to here SB one
thirty will help jumpstart that
market transformation records I
think you purchases by the state
of New Mexico can absolutely be
a leader in the way that
electrification of
transportation and the best way
to do that is the lecture I the
state all the vehicles so
strongly urging you and I want
to thank senator sold of my
constituents it is for but in
this bill Ford please vote yes
on SB one thirty thank you.
Next we have the greatest
Sonnenfeld with three fifty
Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr chair committee on
grace Sonnenfeld engineer ward
winning Asalem this and climate
organizer I'm speaking about
half of our organization three
fifty Santa Fe three fifty Santa
Fe stands in strong support this
is a top priority bill some of
you may know my goal is to
transition true renewable
infrastructure in the most
profitable most profitable way
possible and I generally oppose
legislation that is a poor use
of resources this bill is one
those best use of resources bill
allows us in incremental
transition to the future cost
effective standard electric
fleet if we wait on this
transition New Mexico is going
to be stuck with expensive
legacy equipment reports to
expensive all at one purchase
additionally there opportunities
with this bill for revenue
stacking in the form of
utilizing current state so
infrastructure in the near
future use of vehicle to grid
technology to to bid in as
emergency reserve margin this
usage would allow the state to
recover thousands of dollars per
vehicles and provide stability
to our grid I'd like to bring
project like that in so starting
in incremental transition now is
the most economical way to move
to the future standards please
support this bill thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee that concludes public
comment on this bill.
Question from committee members
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator of souls.
Alright so.
So I guess I have a question I
remember.
Yeah I remember a few years ago
you voted against legislation to
make all the state buildings.
Move them towards a plan of
renewable energy and it's good
to see kind of a change of heart
on on the state resources and
assets let me ask you may ask
you that at.
This plan you we say it's
incremental we at the same time
it's.
I see a big fiscal impact this
coming fiscal year what is a.
And I guess I'm a little bit
concerned so what this what this
through that has the state
giving you a schedule of when
they would be I assume that
fiscal impact we're looking at
for this year has to deal with
that.
The replacement vehicles they
would ordinarily be replacing
this year.
Mr chair and and senator and I
think it.
It's going back to looking at is
somewhere around four million
dollars per year over the next
couple of years is that correct.
Yes.
when that fiscal impact that is
what the cost would be to
replace.
The entire fleet.
And not an incremental cost of
we're working with Mister Casey
as read that to where it would
be about seven hundred fifty
thousand because it would just
be the difference between the
with the the over an internal
combustion engine the cost that
you have is the total cost to
replace that portion of the week
regardless of whether it's
internal combustion or not the
state is going to encourage
somewhere around three million
dollars of replacement cost of
the vehicle regardless of
whether their internal
combustion or electric the the
actual cost for electric over
that is on the order of the
seven hundred thousand and again
as I indicated the the
maintenance cost for a vehicle
estimates are about twenty
thousand over the cost of the
vehicle if you took even half of
that all it makes it a whole out
of total positive for up with
electric vehicles and out plug
in hybrids over the life of the
vehicle for the state.
So Mr chair Senator so it
actually says here that the
fiscal impact for this coming
fiscal year four five million.
And then it says that for fiscal
year twenty three as well as a
three year cost of eight point
nine million.
Actually what it says.
Mr chair Senator and again that
that is the cost to replace the.
So again replace the entire
fleet not the differential the
state has to replace the week
one way or another whether with
internal combustion or electric
that's the cost to replace the
not the crust cost to replace
the fleet with electric over
internal combustion.
So Mister chairman Senator I
guess my question is is the bill
as aspirational because you just
that.
You see the data out there.
We see this projected costs in
the FY are are these is the
numbers that we're looking at
are these the costs that they
would ordinarily have to.
Placement schedule that we're
looking at in the I. R. this
what's forced upon them through
the legislation.
Mr chair Senator you out of some
interesting information as to
how this move forward is when I
talk with general services
department in the store case
there is no replacement schedule
for the currently.
I kind of raised eyebrows for
maybe like what do you mean
there's no replacement that
whenever we replace vehicles we
have to get a special
appropriation that you're for
the vehicle there is no plan and
so when this was put into the FY
are it was put in to try and
force the state to have a plan
for.
Or replacing vehicles and so
we've got a very large FIR two
because there's no plan to
replace a vehicle that all right
now which I think is something
we as of late this doing so
that's why the difference that
makes sense sure well it it's
part of an answer secretary
Ortiz is actually on the Mr
Chairman indicating that to
answer this if we can't.
Mr Chairman Senator Steinborn
members of the committee thank
you for that question was
senator souls.
At
Ministration the vehicle
replacement fund that GST had to
replace vehicles was swept so
there was no recurring revenue
source to replace vehicles in
the last couple of fiscal years
we relied on legislative
appropriations to actually
purchase vehicles for example
the two thousand and nineteen
session GSD receive one million
dollars exclusively for electric
vehicles with that we are able
to purchase thirty five electric
vehicles so our initial FIR
because of a nonrecurring
funding source indicated that
the total cost for a seventy
five percent replacement is what
Senator Steinborn alluded to
however the we have amended the
F. I. R. it doesn't look like it
was updated where we took the
difference in cost per vehicle
between a conventional and
electric vehicle and multiply
that by by the seventy five
percent so walking through that
the regular vehicle we typically
purchase for about seventeen
thousand and electric vehicle
that we were able to purchase
was at twenty eight thousand
there was a difference of eleven
thousand dollars between the
conventional and.
So with that we times that by
but we wait to six twenty eight
yes.
And that gave us a seven million
dollar
total cost spread over in fiscal
years with that the annual
fiscal year price to get to the
school is actually seven hundred
and ninety five thousand per
year which is just the
difference between the cost of
the conventional and electric
vehicle.
Thank you Secretary so I guess I
would really wonder I mean.
Senator what is the
appropriation in the bill
itself.
Mr Mr.
Chair Senator there is no
appropriation this has to be
covered over the next several
years and so there is no cost to
this year.
Budget this is something that
through General Services
Department needs to be able to
their budget again out your as
we are looking forward that's
why that racial.
Mr chair I I really thought you
like policies that were funded.
This that's that's the stepping
outside her.
Not on this one I see
well Mr chair Senator you know.
I'm all for the concept I guess.
What I wonder on this one is a.
I must be appropriated for
obviously replace vehicles ready
to be replaced be with.
charging infrastructure out
there.
The state might be forced to buy
cards were maybe there's no
charging infrastructure relative
to their mission.
This this creates a long enough
time horizon the you don't have
to have answers to all those
questions it's here.
So for that reason I'd probably
be so you know I it's it's a
concept that the state without a
collar is a timelines to back it
up.
So this so Senator let's agree
that sometimes that's okay to
get things started.
If you don't have a check up
front.
we can we're giving a mandate
without the chat but
Any rate I'll just leave it
right there thank you Mr
chairman Senator.
This week but.
I'm glad to see that you start
looking at the checking account
with check but to see what
checks of their Senator and
we're really appreciate that
Senator sure you're next.
Thank you Mr chair.
First the question is what about
a previous a previous you don't
plug it in but it's got a
battery it's it's phenomenal gas
mileage depending on what you're
doing with it so with that
qualify and if not why not.
Mr chair Senator I do drive a
Prius
the Prius also makes a plug in
Prius and it makes an all
electric Prius in the bill it
requires that they have another
putting find where it says the
actually a lot less work what
hours that's what makes the
being a plug in hybrid as
opposed to just a straight
hybrid the hybrid battery in my
current yes has the capacity to
carry me about five miles that's
not sufficient for what this
bill is doing the plug in Prius
has a capacity that will carry
the vehicle somewhere around
sixty miles or so the all
electric previous obviously has
no of gas engine to recharge the
battery.
So Mr chair and senator reason
reason I ask about the Prius is
certainly in New Mexico where
there's a distance issues and
and charging station issues of
it certainly runs on its battery
run you know charged itself as
it goes along
and so you can get.
Phenomenal mileage out of that
thing but if you need to get gas
you can get gas and keep going.
and so I just wondering in this
particular bill yeah you seem to
have intentionally cut them out.
And not and I think that.
Go ahead.
Mister chairman Senator we have
not on page two
Why eleven section it says use
users sexual lector de it will
be the motor vehicle or in a
hybrid electric vehicle with
four wheels and then underneath
that has a capacity of not less
than four kilowatt hours that
we're kilowatt hours is the plug
in hybrid that has a range of
about fifty miles the total
electric.
Previous has about a two hundred
mile electric range.
Okay hybrid fifty miles on just
battery the engine starts to
cover the rest of it so it does
allow the range I'm just a
regular car I think with that
phenomenal mileage did you talk
about.
So Mr chair and senator of my my
real concern about this is
picking a technology well it
wasn't that long ago when we had
to do away with the we had to
just all have those Seefeld of
the new year relevant light
bulbs that were terrible of the
ten LEDs were invented and so
now we all go to LEDs and we do
it because we want to not
because the law says we have to
well before while the loss that
we had to use those CFL things
in in in so I just want to make
sure that we're not tripping
over our our own law when new
things come online thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Thank you Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee and of
course centers so thank you for
your ongoing and vision and the
positive things that you could
bring in for us to to consider
want to get started with a
little bit and and most of my my
question will be geared towards
Having the GST secretary R. T.
so happy to respond.
many years ago we were working
with CNG or the compressed
natural gas and of course that
was the.
That was the thing to do we
started to go and set up CNG
stations across the state we had
buses converted and we thought
that was going to be the thank
you for for all of us we found
out that that didn't really pan
out the way that we anticipate
it I really think Luis Martinez
many years ago for for her
vision there but it's in I
always go back to.
The commitments that people make
without legislation.
Part of that has to do directly
with
The commitments that we've made
with the innocence goes back
twenty years ago when I was
working with the state auditor's
office with our full suite.
In state government and within
that I have requested that we
would have a replacement plan at
that time.
what we continue to do is
Senator source code in one
resource and we are sweet those
resources but in order for a
plan like this to work
particular community moving
forward between now and twenty
There really needs to be
planned.
Really if you will.
The GST and and so my first
question
Senator is going to be in terms
again the commitments without
legislation.
To this type of.
Initiative.
By our chief executive by our
our government.
what percentage are we using
today.
we would replace vehicles that
through our own initiative
would be related to if you will
our.
Vehicle replacement.
So Mr chairman I would revert to
the mixed Ortiz who deals in
this this realm on a daily basis
it is able to.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Senator Campos
As I mentioned in the last
administration our vehicle
replacement fund was swept since
then we've had to rely on
special appropriations in the
course of the last two fiscal
years fiscal year nineteen and
twenty we have received a total
of four point five million in
special appropriations as
follows one million four elector
vehicles and two separate
appropriations for three and a
half million for low emissions
vehicles with that four and a
half million total appropriation
GST was able to purchase forty
five electric vehicles and a
hundred and fifty three low
emission vehicles so based based
on the wording of the
appropriation specifically the
one million for example was
specific for a lecture and the
other to see us special
appropriations
the wording was low emissions so
we've been able to purchase
following the wording of the or
the mandate within that special
appropriation.
So thank you very much Mr
chairman and the secretary Ortiz
so the indication is that the
mandate.
Was for that break down in terms
of the.
Different types of vehicles and
so if it is not going to be a
mandate let's say for example
this year is is the priority
going to be to move more towards
the electric vehicle.
Or is there going to continue to
go ahead and be that level of
balance.
Where you would go ahead and
have a low emission vehicles and
possibly an equal number of the
electric vehicles.
Mister chairman Senator Campos
that's a really good question
because right now due to the
lack of infrastructure around
New Mexico what I mean by that
is the available budget vehicle
charging stations we had to.
Provide the tools to our motor
pool in our state agencies the
balance approach one other
special appropriation GSD
received in the twenty nineteen
session was one and a half it
was for electric vehicle
charging stations in Santa Fe in
our Santa Fe campuses so what
we.
Mutation we installed a regular
as well as fast charge electric
vehicle charging stations and
five different campuses totaling
thirty electric vehicle charging
stations I understand that there
is some capital outlay in this
year providing for some
additional funds.
The.
Charging stations.
My understanding is D. O. T.
department transportation may we
see that and and secretary Santa
already been communication about
identifying in the.
Rest stops other state
facilities outside the Santa Fe
area that we would identify to
install additional electric
vehicle charging station all the
infrastructure if you will is
catching up we have in place in
Santa Fe and looking forward to
a hopefully receiving that
appropriation or I should say
DOT and working closely with
them to identify areas
Infrastructure.
with that Mr chairman and
senator if I may justice last
week that housed a planned to
put it eight thousand electric
charging stations across the
country as the country is moving
towards more of elector the
goals and recognizing this is
objective than anna that you
have to grow together.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course so Senator souls as we
move forward and that's exactly
the point.
Because if if there needs to be
if you will legislation in order
for us to continue to follow
through with what the plan is
even before we get there again I
go back to the the replacement
plan if you will a commitment
without legislation.
So as we move forward and I I
take a look at the number of
vehicles that.
Purchase their electric and in
those if you will a little
missions and then of course with
the the the state the fueling
stations or the electrical
stations as we move forward and
within that if the indication is
that we're catching up.
And for quite a few of these
vehicles if it's going to be a
sixty mile radius
and this goes back to the
planning and that's that's why I
want to continue to emphasize
this so Mr secretary as we move
forward.
Is there a plan that is going to
be put into place are there
resources that are needed in
order to coordinate that plan
not only with our governmental
agencies I also or educational
institutions.
Because as we tie it all
together transportation of
course in New Mexico is
essential.
And in doing that the plan
that's something that would be
first and foremost it always
goes back to that in that way we
know not only the resources in
the assessment.
What was needed but then how we
can continue to balance if you
will so there's not a disparity.
We make purchases then that we
don't have a need in order to
stay in those vehicles.
So.
With this question.
Secretary repeats.
Will there be resources
available in order to initiate
the transportation plan to help
to meet the modifications that
are going to be our important
incumbent upon us so that with
federal resources for the
president's plans and with
future transportation in New
Mexico we don't fall by the
wayside as we have with other
plans like the CNG plant.
Because we want to be efficient
we want to ensure that there's
planning and we have three
people now they're bringing
forth if you will Division order
for us to make these changes but
they can't be meeting less we do
have a plan in there is going to
be the analytical assessment in
order to provide the data.
That will show us especially in
New Mexico if you don't want
someone to scrap it.
In a small community where there
are not resources in order for
them to
continue along their journey so
with that again rural secretary
Ortiz if you can help you better
understand is that initiative in
place seeking resources.
And then secondly in order to go
ahead and develop if you will
this plan for the rate change
is.
It happened here in New Mexico.
Would.
The.
Mister chairman Senator Campos
another great question.
To read the state can act you
you mentioned federal.
Plus the yeah would would build
infrastructure currently work
there is a capital outlay
request for additional electric
vehicle charging stations I also
know that the environment
environment department is the
trustee of what's called the VW
settlement.
Where
agencies local public bodies in
separate can apply for grants
out of this VW settlement what
to build.
So there's a combination with
sources to build infrastructure
in New Mexico.
Electric vehicles so we're good.
Continue to need to rely on
additional supplemental
appropriations all right we can
start.
The that is to an agency to
build up the vehicle replacement
fund and that's our vision at
one time it had an adequate
funding to purchase vehicles and
replace older model model
vehicles until it was flat and
now as we're rolling out for
example the hundred and eighty
eight vehicles that I mentioned
combination of electric and and
conventional loan missions we
are assessing.
A lease or or a or a monthly fee
if you will that starts to build
up that vehicle replacement fund
I hope I answered your question
with the different types of
funding sources if you have no
it just flows with this because
there's just the one point so
Mister chairman Senator so and
the secretary or teens who is in
charge of the.
The plan to help us to get where
we want to go with the.
This type of weight by twenty
thirty it's important to
firemen's GST R. P. D.
who who who's in charge of
putting together this plan for
the future of our
transportation.
Mr.
GST owns the majority of state
vehicles but there are other
agencies that own and manage
their own vehicle fleet for
example DPS.
I'm gonna transportation
the game into the state parks
all manage and purchase their
own vehicles so within GST we
have the transportation division
that runs our motor pool that
choirs either third party lease
vehicles are purchases it calls
and then we find a lease to the
agencies where they pay a
monthly charge that covers the
vehicle replacement and any
maintenance of that vehicle so
our our vision is as we will
we're gonna need to rely on some
additional supplemental
appropriations to start
replacing our vehicles for
example about a third of our
vehicles have over a hundred
thousand miles currently and we
all want to replace those as
quickly as possible so that way
we ensuring that we're providing
safe and reliable vehicles to
our state employees so over time
that vehicle replacement fund
will be starting to build up
where we would no longer have to
rely on any type of special
appropriation to replace our
vehicles.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee.
The reason why I bring this
forward is because we need to
coordinate the way we're going
to find or transportation with
our our state transportation
fleet.
The second part of that if this
is the initiative direction
we're going in.
We want to ensure that the
resources that we do provider
going to be very we expanded.
In the only way to do that is to
ensure that we have a
collaborative effort that it's
well coordinated in and of
course that division will be to
to data analytics how this is
going to do and what I continue
to to see in this to this point
is that we don't have that full
coordination so as we do move
forward particularly towards the
need we want to ensure that that
every dollar that we do generate
that it's going to be maximized
for the particular purpose of
that we.
That we spell out so with that
Mr chairman members of the
finance committee Senator souls
in the course of Secretary keys
thank you all very much for the
time.
Mr chair I move to table.
This move to table Mr.
Senator share so we do have a
tabling motion non debatable.
We call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
do Senator Campos no Senator
Candelaria no.
No.
Senator Candelaria no Senator
Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
sure yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn.
Are you still there well I'm
sorry I was needed no.
Senator Steinborn no.
Senator what yes.
Senator Woods the yes Senator
Rodriguez no no to table.
Senator Rodriguez no and.
All done at this Senator
Candelaria I would like to
change my vote from no to yes.
Senator Candelaria will change
to yes to table.
And senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator then yes yes so that is.
Seven yes.
Three four no.
Seven yes and for no to table.
I think that was just a little
bit early before have the
charging stations.
The bill fifty four is your next
bill we did.
It is.
Well should have it in your
email.
Have it changes the language is
is here yep Senator.
I do not know whether he is on
at this point let me look and
see in.
I am Mister chairman Senator so
the okay okay.
But John can we can have very
easily explained what the
amendment.
We need.
We know you want to introduce a
bill that will the goal.
Mr chairman and committee this
bill is been before you several
other years it is a bill that.
Practical purposes it changes
the funding for the the
administrative work of the
public school facilities
authority and changes there
funding problem a rolling
average of three years for the
percentage that of the projects
to a five year what that does is
it does levels out when we got
large changes in budget and how
many projects.
Is there funding stream tends to
be more stable rather than have
the whiplash of up and down that
you have from a three year
average so just levels that out
of the work and certainly I dad
to purchase my expert Mr
Chairman who is the executive
director of the New Mexico
facilities supporting.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
souls the as I mentioned the
amendment is very simple for
this it just sets the
implementation here beginning
with fiscal year twenty three.
so the change as suggested in
the bill would be implemented or
take place beginning in FY
twenty three and from that point
forward that's that's it.
Thank you so.
Motion to.
Your question for.
I'm on the amendment Mr
chairman.
You Mr chairman.
The second any objection to the
motion on the amendment.
These hand race Senator
Steinborn your hand is working
now.
Any objection to the the man
Management see none we're back
on the bill center you have the
additional questions from
committee members Senator.
Mr chair I've tried to read this
and understand it.
And really the meat of it is
striking out the words the
methodology in subsection B..
And then it goes on of section
twenty two twenty four I.
So I I I had no idea what that
means so I pulled up section
twenty two twenty four I in I
don't see anywhere in that where
it says three years five years
or a hundred years it talks
about all school districts are
eligible priorities for funding
should be determined using or
advocacy level of law but it
doesn't say three years or five
years or anything else so are we
amending the right part of law
to achieve what we want to
achieve.
Mr chair and and senator of the
critical pieces on page four
lines of eight and nine.
We'll go Mr chair I didn't even
see that little scratch out one
work okay thank you.
Other questions from committee
members.
I don't see any so.
Senator so this just where
legislative authority for them
to get to increase their
administrative salaries.
That we're we're done.
Mr chair I'm not sure I quite
understand what you're asking
there are administration costs
are based on the proof of
percentage of the total projects
and this just spread out the
that cost over five years
instead of three years I think
Mr chairman if I misunderstand
please jump in.
Mr chair Senator souls that's
right this is a.
Bill would change the way that
our budget cap not our actual
annual operating budget that so
reviewed and approved by the
council and then it becomes part
of a.
Budget request to review all
over here but the budget caps
that were subject to is
calculated currently based on
the previous three years of
awards this would set the budget
cap for operating budget that of
the previous five years of
awards and the intent there is
to provide more stability for
our operating budget so that we
don't have an imposed cap.
simultaneous with the an
increase in workload what we
have for the last couple of
years.
because so we've been in this a
little bit of a pothole for a
fiscal years nineteen and.
Twenty twenty one because of
three consecutive years of very
very low awards maybe sixteen
seventeen and eighteen fiscal
years.
service the proposal would
insulate our operating budget
from that kind of an anomalous
reduction in the number of
awards in any given year so this
this is a this is a statutory
provision that puts a hard cap
on our operating budget but each
year we generate and us submit
our budget request for actual
budget apart from this whole
mechanism.
So.
I'm looking here at your number
projects over the years and
they're already in line and then
you have to two years of anomaly
and then drops back down and
into twenty one back to a
hundred thirty nine projects
you're trying to pick up those
two years difference but we
don't know what the projected
increases are for the next
couple years that's correct.
Why were those years if we have
three hundred sixty nine
projects and in nineteen in two
hundred seventy thirty in twenty
and twenty one drop back down to
one thirty nine we got to normal
years and.
We're asking for nay basically
pretty much a budget increase
because of the way it's set up.
In those early years to adjust
that so why you can expect that
your and have a lot more
projects in the future here.
So
Mr chair Senator souls of the.
The last this last year even
though the number of awards was
not as great as a the years two
years prior as you mentioned the
this calculation is based on the
dollars awarded and the dollars
awarded for FY twenty one even
though there were a lot of
awards made the total dollars
awarded for a smaller number of
projects that are larger.
Each one of those projects is
larger
the dollars awarded for them the
last three years have been
relatively steady.
And the based on the projections
from this is the proceeds and
the our conversations with
districts we do see that the
there will be funding available
for projects for the next
several years.
and the same time
we think that the many the
districts will be.
Forward in the next few years
so we're expecting a relatively
high rate of request and
potentially relatively high rate
of one point for the foreseeable
future what this is a change
would do would be to insulate
our operating budget from.
Any short term downturns in the
future like we just experienced
a few years ago.
The negatively impacted our
budget for a couple years.
Looking through all the
extraction would ask about all.
Page five you research you
struck.
Every student succeeds that why
is that structure.
Higher rate.
Mr chair by good because that is
no longer of the where the
federal grants come from for
this particular thing.
I think that's cleanup why
Mister chair I think that's just
cleanup language and things I
don't think it's our.
Inherent to the this bill it's
just this particular section is
getting some of the words that
are no longer appropriate about.
Thank you for that.
Education so I don't know that.
So Mr chair and senator souls I
I agree I think it's just
cleanup of obsolete or.
No longer relevant language
provisions.
So then how does that money come
visit.
Right
We're gonna find that with
grants are and how you know so
that.
If you remove that section.
Mr chair the on I guess I'm not
quite sure where your question
we always
yeah the the funding for the
public school facilities
authority invest public school
capital outlay Commission
commission
The funding that they've gotten
through the state grants to the
other mechanisms that they
always had.
Yeah this doesn't change at the
of that.
But I think there's a problem
right there and then we'll take
somebody ask you a question what
what removing methodology on
page eight in rate.
Right.
Those.
We're just asking for.
Yeah I'm not sure I can answer
that is this was drafted by
council service these were areas
where they felt that they
cleaned up the language in the
things those were not the part
of the intent in writing it
grafting it or point or purpose
of those sections of not change
the last at least two years that
this bill has been introduced in
got through this committee this
has no other additional changes
other than that one the
extension of the start date that
is covered in the amendment.
Trying to get some answers
Senator Campos you have right
it's Mentzer so that that so
Senator Campos great.
Thank you Mr chairman in the a
couple of things of course are
very supportive of this piece of
legislation and if I can go back
a little bit so with the SFA
innocents are what they're
looking for is the extended time
and and part of the reason
especially who deal with the the
legislative appropriations and
the offsets.
In essence that gives if you
will yes if a more resources in
order to continue to address the
the essentials when it comes to
school construction so within
that and I really compliment of
course Mr chair when she moves
forward with providing the
assist the assistance to our
schools but they're short handed
they're trying to take care of
the on going needs ensure that
resources are expended in very
efficient manner so the question
that I would have is that
with the process and it
basically comes because we as
legislators and capital outlay
would appropriate resources for
let's say for example some of
our cities improvements when
that is is hello the state
against the district but it
serves as an offset.
And finance those reserves we do
appropriate.
School capital outlay then if
you will can be extended and
utilized more for some of the on
going construction who wants to
wreck the within schools so much
so my question directly is.
The administration itself and
with the FTEs that are available
a do we have of vacancies that
need to be filled in order to
continue to
administrative aspect of.
If a and then secondly as we see
the growing number of resources
is there an estimation of the
number of additional dollars and
be available to continue with
the school improvements so I go
to the sponsor and of course to
the expert there is any any
conversation regarding that
question.
Mr chair yeah I'd I'd have to
refer to
Mr Chairman.
So Mr chair Senator Campos to
your questions first on staffing
yes so as a result of the low
ward years and sixteen and
seventeen particularly with the
three year methodology to
calculate our cap we did have
for a fiscal years twenty and
twenty one
have to operate in a lower
staffing level then we would
have wanted and much lower than
our historic levels of staffing
for the agency for the last
twenty years.
we averaged about forty eight to
forty nine FTE filled positions
in any given year over that
twenty year period.
For the last two fiscal years so
because of our budget cap we had
operated no more than forty two
or forty four at the.
Now we're able to staff back up
to forty eight fifty.
And we're looking to do so right
now
for fiscal year twenty to and
the six eight succeeding years
so we do have a few vacancies
that we're looking to fill right
now we've got about.
Forty.
Two forty three IST we have a
few new people coming in right
now Mexico for weeks but will
hopefully be up to a staffed at
the level of forty eight again
as soon as we can.
Thank you.
Mr chairman we move forward
particularly with the the offset
server you will resources that
are.
If you will not not used by the
district excuse me not by the
district but that are not
appropriated or.
Are taken back if you will what
what happens to the to the
offset to those resources when
the school district receives
what we appropriation from the
legislature and then that's
deducted if you will from the.
Public school capital outlay the
award in the amount it's use.
And fulfill the construction of
a project.
Mr chairman the chairman.
Thank you so Mister chairman
Senator Campos
Offsets are applied to a school
district if it gets up and when
it gets the legislative
appropriation.
In any given year from you all
through the session for capital.
Rejects capital expenditures PED
calculates the offsets.
Each year based on the direct
appropriations
that were made and accepted by
the districts and the
legislative appropriation of a
given amount to a specified
District
then there offset balance is
it's called which is the you
think about simply as a that
that the district would be
obligated to repay to the state
to through any project
as a result of the.
Evening that legislative
appropriations that set up a
disincentive for districts to
use that mechanism rather than
coming programs through the yes
yes he's programs for for
funding.
Mr Chairman etcetera so some
course a.
Thank you chaplain as we move
forward the the issue then
becomes so so here's the offset.
it's the assessment district
either has to pay it back Rikki
what what's this estimate is
made but what happens to those
resources does it go two
Mexico's capital outlay is it
health advance and it rickets
reverted are those resources use
them by USFA.
The ongoing projects.
Mr chairman and senator propose
I again I'd refer to the Mr
chairman.
So Mister chairman Senator
Campos the direct appropriation
of the district receives the the
funding of the district can use
the full amount of the offset
balance that is calculated by
the district as a result of
those appropriations stays on
the books so to speak stays and
the table that PED manages for
each district.
Until it's paid off by some
project that's funded through
our programs in the future so
those offset balances don't
sunset for districts they remain
on the on the ledger the PED
manages
and they'll be applied to any
future project that is funded
through our programs yes yes
these programs so so again thank
you very much Mr chair thank
centers so thank you very much
Mr chairman that the.
Basically makes the point that
as we deal with the the staff
resources with the offset and
with don one word
if a.
He has reached the time on
something this is going to be
needed especially as the SFA
continues to monitor so many of
our statewide education projects
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Mr Chairman.
Let me just make one call it
real quick four equity so so on
page five that line twenty you
are striking federal law.
And so you guys need to look at
that real quick Senator
Candelaria go ahead.
I move to table.
So we have a motion by Senator
Candelaria.
Do we have a second.
Mr chair I don't think you need
a second but I will second I'm
sorry right so table
undependable
We call.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes to
table.
Yes to table Senator Campos.
Senator Campos no Senator
Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond.
As a diamond human donor Senator
Gonzalez nope Senator Gonzales
no.
Senator Hemphill.
He is no longer here Senator
share yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn now.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez how.
Senator Rodriguez no and senator
Munoz.
Yes Senator.
Yes.
So that is five yes for no and
two excuse.
So I think you need to go back
and review on page five it and
one seventeen and make sure
we're not violating federal law.
That's where I have real
concerns.
We did bring in statute book and
some of that other stuff you
know methodology is occurring
but the Easter or the every
student succeeds act still what
it is we need to know what that
really does so we you go check
on that course.
Get back to you.
Mr chair yes I mean you're
asking me to come back to this
committee and you would call the
table off is that what you're
requesting.
Want to know if that federal law
needs to be struck or not I mean
you're striking federal law
that's current basically this is
allowing.
Charter schools to get requests
for lease payments when you do
that but my main concern is it
your striking a federal law that
still an active I don't know
that she intended to do that
that's.
Jonathan intend to that nobody
ever answered that question so
find that answer out forced.
What should I chat okay.
Okay thanks.
Senator Burt let's get sure.
The Senate bill fourteen is
amended.
We get that done.
Thank you Mr chairman and
appreciate the time
Sen bill for ten is is a fix it
bill
Yes this allows a large
Partnerships in the state of New
Mexico.
During the audit to and and
accounting processes to come up
to the new national standards
for that it simply lines New
Mexico's large partnership tax
our process with the federal tax
on the process and procedures
the CPAC accounts archers are
all us I believe that this be
done so that they know exactly
what direction to to take the
the large ship partnerships in
the state of New Mexico that's a
large portion by the way is is a
partnership has over a hundred.
Members of the partnership and
Mr chairman if I may on the.
In the same meeting with this is
my expert witness hello impact
from the multistate tax
commission and that basically is
is it in a nut shell so we would
stand for.
Comments Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman sorry mate then ask
if this had to the if she has
any comments that she would like
to know because.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator Byrd so my name is Helen
act I am the uniformity counsel
for the multi state tax
commission.
And the reason I'm interested in
this bill here today is because
of our organization which New
Mexico's been a member for many
years I want to thank you for
that.
to draft this of the provisions
of this bill along with a number
of different groups including
the and I CPA the national
association of CPA's of the ABA
the American Bar Association a
number of taxpayer groups and
others in the provisions in this
model
that we drafted are being
impacted around the country
right now and the reason they're
necessary is as senator Byrd
mentioned is because the federal
government is changing the way
it's going to audit and assess
large partnerships and right now
most states like New Mexico
don't have a hook they can say
in in this case when you have
this kind of audit of this kind
of assessment and you related
state taxes you would also be
required to pay the state taxes
work the if the adjustment goes
in your favor and you would get
a refund you're also able to
claim refund of state related
taxes so that's the the point of
this bill is to make adjustments
to the statutes The New Mexico
already has on books to
accommodate this new federal
process.
Any questions thank.
What do we have anybody in the
audience.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee now we have at the
received indication of neither
opposition nor support for this
bill.
Thank you question from
committee members don't see
anybody's chair and moved to
pass.
Yes yes but will check that
don't have anybody's hand
raised.
I'm trying to get my hand trying
to get my hand up but I got to
change the configuration of my
screen can I ask a quick
question someone right.
Thank you Mr chairman and I you
know just one of those complex
built at
I'm curious if our state tax and
Revenue Department.
Has a position on this bill and
I was looking to see if the
secretary was online.
Mr chairman I don't believe that
the sector is online but I it's
my understanding that the she
and the department are
supporting this issue It should
give them clarity in the way
that the.
Partnerships are within the
state of New Mexico.
Mr Chairman I'm here yet I
The FIR says that there is a
who.
Twenty five point eight million
dollar fiscal impact.
Estimated additional operating
budget impact this year and then
it says below that sixty four
sixty four million.
So for our PED.
FTEs.
So that's significant can you
talk about that Mister chairman
Senator.
Mr chairman and just a just a
senator on my FIR is saying
there's no fiscal implications.
Through the year of twenty
twenty five.
Well.
Are you getting the shipping
ask.
Just on the legislative website
at.
This bill.
This Senate bill for ten year
yes.
Yeah it's interesting it says
revenue.
This is C. fiscal implications
but then there's another chart
below it is estimated operating
budget impact then there is a
huge fiscal impact.
We're Senator Burt so if you
look underneath that section so
it's twenty five thousand point
eight hundred and sixty four
thousand and so the three year
cost to implement changes so we
match is twenty five thousand
and in over three year cost it's
a hundred twenty eight thousand
so we don't I just got a copy of
it thank you very much yeah
that's what I meant to say Mr
chairman and congratulations to.
You cut you you were about to
give me a heart attack as in one
so.
Yeah that was a big number you
go.
So I I obviously feel better
knowing that difference okay.
And I'll just leave it that Mr
chairman thank you thank you
Senator thank you senator.
This is mainly the model what's
happening in other states so we
we are in sync with them on
certain issues.
And so the adjustments I think
we did this like two or three
years ago we've cleaned up a
bunch of the stuff in it and so
will match Senator Rodriguez you
have your hand up thank you Mr
chairman and I the sales let me
just that but in in looking into
this before the meeting it seems
like it was just barely a
technical correction that we are
that we do every so often in
that at this time this is the
likely would have a any kind of
detrimental impact.
Yeah to the statutory wage.
Sure we match.
That.
In the negative or anything like
that Senator Byrd is that kind
of what I.
What you what you know about
this Mr chairman and senator you
are correct it it's just a
cleanup bill to fix it build
catching up with national levels
once again thank you this is
there thank you.
I think you are correct the so
match or federal tax returns are
states this report and so we're
all kind of one page.
Yes question from committee
members the past year so we can
Mr chairman.
By Senator Rodriguez
sent a second by Senator Campos
folks that we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
Is.
Not here Senator Diamond yes
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
share yes yes your share yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Is not here Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Steinborn EDS
Senator Woods yes Senator Woods
yes Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator annual.
Yes.
Senator then yes yes so I have
nine yes and to excuse.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee.
Yes so for everybody listening
it it is that you have members
that are out of the room I do
want to vote on certain bills
and so I'm trying to get that.
All lined up and and back in so
we can move on to some of the
bigger staff opportunity
scholarships is one that
everybody wants to vote on my
committee so we're gonna make
some adjustments as.
Senator Gonzales lists to Senate
bill forty five.
So the DFA secretary will lead a
long.
Very well.
In the Los.
It.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes
yes we can it is a sectarian
expert witness today Mr chairman
yes yes.
Darn it we are lower your this
bill.
Well.
K. L. very well chairman and
members of the committee
With the Senate bill three forty
five S. amended.
there was a memorial that was
done in two thousand nineteen
and DFA department of finance
and administration was charge
with convening a per diem task
force providing recommendations
to New Mexico legislature
related to the reimbursement
travel faster public the
officers and employees of Mr
chairman of members so we do
have our secretary with us but
on what all has been brought to
this attention is that all.
it has been quite a few years
since so this has been read by
has not been revised and you
know as from to the attention
that the most of the employees
anymore what they do is the.
They claim on actual and so it
takes some more time on staff
and more time on the county you
know to reimburse employees sent
officials on this so with this
so you know we bring this back
to being updated.
Appropriations will would be L.
done by L. meaning guidance with
the.
With our department of finance
and administration with federal
general service department so
what with that all Mr chairman
and members just want to bring
one part to your attention is
set up this does not include
legislators this is not for our
other state employees and state
officials so with that I'll ask
around witness so which is our
cabinet up.
Missile.
Mistral medal from the
department of finance and
administration provide you with
additional information.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to come and
talk to you about
the per diem actor that we're
asking to be amended just
Senator Gonzales mentioned it's
been a lot of years since two
thousand and three that these
rates have been updated there's
a couple of issues with this one
yes that the rates are actually
step in statute.
So that every time we we need to
make adjustments we gotta come
back to the legislature which
you know creates some issues and
so it also doesn't allow that
flexibility to to for that the
department to be able to you
make adjustments is as necessary
as time goes on so you know the
task force identified
discrepancies between the
lodging the mill rate and also
recommended that these rates be
tied to
To the GSA rates and and and my
understanding is that's what the
is used for legislators are are
the rates provided by GSA and
it's also we believe the best
practice to use the GSM eight
rates for both meals and mocking
this also this addresses again
for board members and what we
did never expected is that there
was going to have to be a need
for having DM to deal with
virtual meetings and so we're
there's language in here now
that talks about virtual
meetings
and so basically every July one
DFA will step the range based on
the information risk that we get
from GSA and they'll look it'll
it's going to happen board
meetings and it'll cap we had a
couple of boards that would meet
in the morning charge right and
then would.
The gentleman and then they
would meet in the afternoon have
a the right so so we've we've
critically that the language so
that can happen any longer
Senator Gonzales mentioned it
also doesn't affect legislator
rates legislators set their own
rates so I think just for some
perspective the average lodging
rates for Albuquerque in two
thousand eighteen point ninety
three dollars
Santa Fe was a hundred forty six
our rates currently are capped
at eighty five and a hundred and
fifteen dollars and so you can
see that there were instances
where employees could
potentially have to pay and get
attention to pay out of their
pocket when they traveled
for the submitted actuals which
is a major administrative burden
on the employee the agency and
financial control that house
review every single receipt and
document that submitted for
actual Mr chair that is
basically the bill in a nutshell
thank you very much.
Mr Chairman will stand motions.
Do we have anybody.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes we received now
indication of opposition to the
bill.
With us in support
we had cabinet secretary Michael
Santa.
Thank you Mr chairman Mike Santa
Fe DOT I just want to stand in
support of this bill is here
where a lot of our lower paid
workers at UT have to travel
they leave Monday morning and
come back on Thursday evening
and spend three nights other
surveyors maintenance workers
traffic counters and they're
usually not paid very well
anywhere around fifteen to
twenty Bucks an hour and if
you've ever tried to find a
hotel in three square meals a
day on eighty five dollars it's
it's very difficult almost
impossible to do we feel this
will really help them at least
break even be set at a
reasonable rate we have
confidence in our DFA secretary
that she'll make things fair for
the state employee so for that
reason we support this bill
thank you.
Next we have Jason Weaks.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico hospitality association
we stand in strong support of
this legislation in reality per
diem hasn't changed in a very
long time a lot of the rates are
being you know born by members
of our industry because when
government employees travel they
stay at our hotels and sometimes
it tells offer lower rates to
government employees just
because they want to try to keep
him fall under the current
pretty and in the Permian just
hasn't increase a long time this
increases that per diem creates
a point of fairness with respect
compensation of the.
You who tell industry and it
also implements a mechanism so
that the rate can increase
without the legislature happen
to approve it every time we need
a rate increase because of
inflation or otherwise so we
stand in strong support of this
legislation think it's great
public policy thank you.
At Mr chairman members of the
committee I believe that
concludes.
As a public comment I do believe
that secretary Schardin has her
hand raised.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee engines prior
secretary of the tourism
department and I stand in
support for this bill New Mexico
has not increased the state per
diem rate since two thousand and
three since that time in New
Mexico's hotel right average has
increased by fifty one percent
from seventy six ninety six and
two thousand and three two
hundred sixteen and nineteen
cents in two thousand nineteen
per the rocky mountain lodging
report this market increases not
been reflected in New Mexico's
government per diem right
because that that the statue
includes a flat rate also the
current statute does not take
into consideration seasonality.
This bill allows this bill
allows pretty right to reflect
actual expenses and market
realities current average daily
rates for hotels around New
Mexico are considerably higher
than the current per diem rate
as it stands now well this bill
might seem insignificant it will
greatly support economic
recovery for the tourism
industry thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee that includes public
comment on this bill.
Campos.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you very much Senator
Gonzales for bringing this bill
forward this definitely is long
overdue question now.
Directed towards server or DFA
secretary of Romero if you can
help me with the is going to be
if you've already thought about
it the calculation in order to
recreate if you well with those
for DM rates would be we
continue to go ahead and see the
disparities around the state and
the I'm just real curious in
terms of what that calculation
with the would be as we deal
with oil highs and lows some
communities so very affordable
others in the even quite costly
if you were to go ahead and make
a reasonable adjustment so we
can help you with that to better
understand but that calculation
to.
So Mr chair Senator Campos the
nice thing about the GSA range
is is they break it out by area
and so there are there are there
are calculations for safer Santa
Fe versus the southeastern part
of state which which their rates
are a little bit higher and so
that's one of the things that we
will use when we make our
determination I you know I've
been trying to think about how
best to put something in
practice and we don't have
exactly how this is going to
work out but you know the task
force did a really good job of
studying this in identifying
what the where the weaknesses
were and what needed to happen I
would envision engaging does
that same task force and and
having them help dispatchers to
the range so that they will be
available by July one of every
year and we will again GSA rates
have regions and have just at
different rates for different
areas not just for watching but
also for meals.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator Gonzales one of the
other issues that.
we always deal with the
seasonality and so I'm going
forward with that calculation
you will have an the task force
look at a computation the the
other aspect of this and we know
within organizations how they
can plan if you will their
conferences and if you will a
lot of their travel and so with
that
The some of the ways to help to
discourage if you will deciding
that the it is uncertain on
certain.
Region that that's going to be
the optimal amount in the place
to go and as a result the per
diem rate would be much higher
but how do we how do we create
if you will to savings for
government within this process
as well thank you very much Mr
chair Senator Gonzales if you
care to defer to a the DFA
secretary appreciate those are
all Mr Chairman Senator Campos
also with that is still.
It also depends on the
availability and all well and it
also depends on timing like
there's some appropriate time
you know for own state school
staff and they're still so while
school administration there's
also some for county so a lot of
it depends around the your point
is well taken I think that
that's something that we can
always keep an eye and keep all.
In a low moral checks and
balances that you know it's not
being skewed you know by a
certain.
Parts of our government that all
some of those so we don't have
control you know it just a.
Depending on like
for example like if you're
trying to have something right
now it how ski belly probably be
very expensive versus if it was
done in the summer and so in
different areas you know.
Your point is well taken and
I'll have all sectors from
middle school address the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Gonzales and a secretary
Romero in terms of that is to
have that experience over forty
years of experience in dealing
with so much of this maybe you
can also interact with it in
terms of what what the formula
would look like given what
Senator Gonzales is talking
about we want to ensure that our
of government employees are
going to be able to travel and
and we definitely don't want to
see them left out because with
these adjustments even if
they're going to be made on an
annual basis we definitely still
leave our public employees out
where they can have to use
resources out of their own
pocket in order for them to
build responsibilities.
DFA secretary please.
So Mister chair I think that's a
really valid point and I think
it probably the first year is
going to be a learning curve for
us on on making sure that we
capture all of those
you know things that that need
to be considered such as
seasonality and and and we out
you know I'm always mindful of
cost that's my job is to make
sure that we are getting the
value that we should be getting
for what we're we're looking at
and so I will definitely keep
that in mind as we move forward
and again I think that's going
to be part of the role of having
the right people on the task
force help you to
hash out all of these details
and these differences.
Thank you and Mister chair
Senator Gonzales one of the
other points that there
continues to be raised by our
public employees is whenever
they have there income taxes
prepared so within that that's
going to be another one of the
variables that's the very
important because often times
they end up losing whenever it
comes to a a tax reimbursement
the end of one of our the school
years review of the tax year so
within that extended full
support and again thank you very
much Mr chair thank you Senator
Gonzales thank you madam
secretary for the responses.
Campos Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr chairman and that.
Senator Gonzales and cabinet
secretary for reduced or
remember you and I speaking
early on about this bill and and
I was very grateful that you
were up pursuing this because
approximately two years ago as
we talked the association of
counties in fact came in during
that time with this concern and
wanted to see how we can get it
fixed and it came the request in
the concern came in just a
little late in the session so we
couldn't person with them but
I'm happy that we're doing that
today and data I think this is
not only over do it has been
said but it is also a result of
the study already that it needs
to be done it needs to come out
of this legislature and finally
a lay out the per diem rate in a
fair and equitable manner for
all our employees and so I am
very much appreciate you doing
this the discrepancies that we
now have will be will be taken
care of the the workload that is
not unnecessarily being handled
by you and your staff won't have
to be there we will have a much
more streamlined system to get
this done and a system whereby
the employees can know how much
they're going to be reimbursed
in their per diem rates every
year so hopefully they won't
have to pay anything out of
their own pocket now to be able
to qualify and get reimbursed so
thank you Mr chairman and I
think there's one more person to
speak otherwise I will make a do
pass after Leicester someone
else thank you.
Senator Rodriguez thank what's.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Gonzales I was wondering
how much money has state saved
through the stay at home order.
We must choose a lot of money
and travelers.
Diem on that you know just what
that order loan is there any
idea how much we say during this
year this last twelve months or
so.
Mr chair Senator Woods all you
would have to refer that to our
secretary Romero.
Mr Chairman center with that's a
really good question I can't and
I don't have that information
but I'm happy to get it insured
with the committee.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Senator Woods I just
have a few questions.
Our secretary.
Thank you I'm glad you recognize
that the legislature's
appropriating body to.
Problems like this in pay.
I'm glad that that you guys like
this bill and and you realize
you have to come us come to us
to appropriate money to change
statutes and to make sure things
are done correctly.
Can you tell me.
If you have incidences where
employees were paid and pay out
of pocket when they when they
were they were out of town and
in the state reimbursement
anyway shape or form.
There are short.
So Mister chair I can say
personally I've done that you
know it is so much easier just
to sit in that
your flat rate per diem than it
is to submit the paperwork
that's involved you know for
tracking all your actuals you
have to save every single
receipt they've got to be put on
that document in just the right
way and it's got to be reviewed
not only by
are by your.
The county staff by the HSD and
then it goes to financial
controlled also reviews that if
you do actuals so I can
personally speak to the fact
that it it it for me I chose to
do the easy thing but I did lose
out on a lot of money when I was
traveling.
All that to add the in my part
with the.
With the public schools so for
thirty years so often on the
same thing you know it was just
a lot easier just to you know
let it go.
Thank you.
So
madam secretary.
Those.
State employees.
Now we're shorted or into the
receipts is there any care for
that because I mean you go
anywhere hotel rooms are we
going to stay in motel six which
is not always a state this
place.
Was there any attempt by the by
the executive took care of those
problems on travel.
Mr chairman if I may of part of
full also being here with this
today yes because some.
you know there is a prohibition
there or you can be paid on
actual.
This is the one for actually
prefer study takes more on the
accounting part of the time you
know for work in that sector you
might want to add to that.
It's.
So Mister chair that is
absolutely what the alternative
is if they don't submit flat
rates then they can choose to
submit actuals which requires
tracking of every single receipt
and even at that they're limited
on state tips they think they
can only give a certain amount
of chips they can only skip
there's only a certain amount of
travel are over taxi cab of
these that can be applied to
that so if you're in DC and you
have to take a taxi cab you're
you're capped at the amount of
of of there that you can can
submit even actual so even at
that there's an opportunity for
them to lose out on
reimbursements.
Really got my mind turning so
what happens if someone isn't
over.
But on their personal card they
justify that that was a receipt
for government travel or.
They're using the you know
different methods I mean.
To make those payments coming up
for example I know my employees
hate going into the gas station
expression during the COVID to
get a receipt to get reimbursed
imagistic card and and they will
go back in to get the receipt
how we balance you know the
actuals and.
In the technology difference
that we're gonna have today is
that account for in any way
shape or form.
So Mister chair at the no
unfortunately we rely on the
employees
getting receipts and so they
cannot or choose not to get a
receipt then we cap reimbursed
them
you know I think that if that's
something that definitely we
will have to look at to see how
we're going to be able to
average all of those expenses in
so that we can set rates on July
one so I think it's going to be
a learning process in the
beginning but I I'm I'm hopeful
that with the right people again
that will be able to get up
fair rate for all employees
that flat rate from one place.
I just wanna make you guys aware
of this bills got a stop on the
floor and I know we're missing
are turning in our.
In our committee but we need to
probably look at that it is if
they use the words on that
chronic let the travel how do we
get the receipt in and out of
the account that I just.
It's the way the world is
turning we just don't want to do
something for the twentieth
century when we're in the twenty
first century so.
I think that's it Senator
Rodriguez ready for a motion yes
would you madam chair well
before you go into that Mr
chairman of I just want to
acknowledge that all this
legislation should of had a vice
chairman bill senator Nancy
Rodriguez system sponsor also
and we need to correct that.
Senator you can correct that
with the clerk's office they can
have her signature to it so yes
this screening center Rodriguez
you want to promotion thank you
thank you yes we will proceed
with and with the senator and
yes Mr chairman I move a do
pass.
Six seconds to check.
Have a motion and a second.
How we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
yes.
Senator Burt yes Campos
innocence and go three forty
five is amended yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria is excuse.
Senator Diamond okay yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator shared yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes when my doctor.
Chairman yes yes so that is ten
yes and one excuse.
Thank you Senator Gonzales for
doing that specially for for all
the employees are it really
matters especially when you're
traveling but.
Do our money to DFA secretary
that we are the appropriating
body in the legislature in order
for our employees to be treated
fairly the legislature does need
to make statutory changes.
Thank you so dollars thank you
all Mr chairman thank you
members.
Thank you yes Representative
brown with this.
Mr Chairman I'm here okay you
want to do your house bill two
twelve point yes Sir thank you
very much Mr chairman and
members of the committee on
house bill two twelve is
identical to a bill that you've
already heard that bill was to
Senate bill two thirty six it
was sponsored by Senator Kernan.
And this committee so was is
really already heard it I think
you had a fairly long hearing on
it and it did pass the Senate
floor so Mister chairman I'm I'm
willing to take it from the top
if you'd like or abbreviate this
in some way for the sake of time
so whatever the desire is of the
chair and the committee.
The longer you talk the more
votes you're gonna lose.
Okay.
Well Mr chairman if there any
questions I'd be happy to take
them but other than that I would
just ask for support for the
bill and ask for it to pass.
Senator accomplishing up but we
have any public comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes we do have some
public comment and with us in
opposition to the bill we had
Ricardo Ralph cram in New
Mexico.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I will need to so
rather briefly since the
committees already debated the
bill as a Representative Brown
has mentioned is that the bill
has been heard in this committee
already well what we do continue
to maintain the position of the
administration on the regions
that we want to ensure that this
is in the best interest of the
students we also want to ensure
that that we're doing our due
diligence to ensure that our
students will not be impacted
negatively Mr chairman also want
to take this time to thank the
sponsor of the bill
Representative Brown for also
taking the time to meet with us
on a couple occasions in regards
to the bill and I also want to
thank the the chair and the co
chair from the Carlsbad Task
Force for also meeting with us
as well but I don't that's all
of my comments and thank you Mr
chairman for providing me the
time to speak on the bill.
Mr.
Hello I hope you stay on for
just a few minutes.
At Mr chairman members of the
committee we also have Dr can
van Winkle.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee.
can we go executive branch
director for NMSU and I just
would like to add real briefly
that you know we feel that the
students in the southeast part
of our state would still be best
be served as graduates of NMSU
but however there's no question
better support communication
would be necessary for the
campus to remain as a member of
the NMAA you system but that is
possible we also understand the
result that has been shown by
the city of Carlsbad in the
campus and we'll do our very
best to maintain positive
collaborative and productive
relationships with all concerned
this in turn is what we must do
to best serve the students in
our state we have a great deal
of respect for the city of
Carlsbad the NMSU Carlsbad
campus in this committee is our
wish the Carlsbad stay in our
system but we also have made it
clear that if that is not the
will of the stakeholders we
would not stand in the way thank
you chairman.
Yes now Mr chair members of the
committee that includes public
comment.
Thank you Senator Campos you
have your hand raised thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the Senate finance committee and
very supportive of this measure
but the question that I have the
relating to the financial aid
for students if the bill is to
pass to be signed into law in
the transition curves my concern
is going to be of course student
financial aid if someone can
help me a little bit to
understand will there be a break
in the time
if the change does occur where
students will lose financial aid
have to reapply for financial
aid
I I'm trying to understand that
that portion of it.
Because again what we're doing
then is greater students and
want to ensure that that's not
going to happen if someone can
help me with that response
please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Campos so
the higher education task force
has done quite a bit of
background research and that to
get into account and putting
together the preliminary plan
for the transition and it's our
goal and and our almost that the
transition would be seamless for
student financial aid
I have Wendy Austin who is one
of my expert witnesses if you'd
like additional detail about
that I can ask her that it's my
understanding this will be done
correctly we've allowed for more
than a year for the transition
to occur and that during that
period of time know that certain
things would have to be done to
ensure that everything continues
and that there is language in
the bill that sure if the so
we'll take the transition in
terms of our contracts being
assigned and things like that so
Mr chair Senator if you'd like
to drill down a little bit more
on that I do have this Austin
here
right willing to consult with
her.
You very much Representative
Brown and of course I would like
that because in working directly
with the HLC we want to ensure
that those things at different
they're going to be seamless and
and part of that would be for
their.
Would be up to a six month break
whenever it comes to financial
aid if there isn't a few of the
over arching is to ensure that
a all of the.
The accreditation guidelines
we're going to be math the that
as a Chelsea takes a look at
this that the insurance is going
to be in place and again in
dealing directly with the
funding formula with capital
outlay all of the other
components and then dealing with
the academic record we want to
ensure that there is a
curriculum alignment all those
things really need to be in
place and I'm not hearing much.
In fact I haven't heard any
comments directly from any
member of the higher learning
commission regarding what.
And how they would handle this
so so if I could at least get an
understanding of how the
financial aid with seamless so
for students so that they would
have to reapply under a
different form in order to
continue to finish their
educational program across.
Thank you.
Mr chair yes thank you Mister
chairman Senator so the higher
rate commission does have a role
to play in in the transition and
that is one of the reasons that
legislative success so but let
me at this time just go off the
microphone for a minute and see
if this Austin would like to
give me a little bit more
information I appreciate that
thank you Mr chair.
To let her in.
See our name up their needs and
we have heard in answer.
I believe she yes she is there I
believe so we can bring her in
directly.
Chairman.
We get.
Chairman.
Yeah we can.
Okay thank you and thank you for
allowing me to speak with you
today and I think those are all
very important questions that
the task force has taken a lot
of time and careful
consideration to review we
actually have a very extensive
checklist that covers
accreditation and financial aid
from veterans just a federal
financial aid and
we've already you know begin to
look into the process is and you
know just if this bill passes
and the governor signs the bill
it's not that we're an
independent college we come July
first there'd be a transition
period so during that transition
period is when we would make
sure that the name change and
everything was put into place
with the new college in addition
to that we've also hired an
attorney to help us with this
process to make sure that
everything's done appropriately.
So again Mr chair
in the Representative Brown go
back to the question.
As you've checked into it is
there going to be a seamless
approach to financial aid for
students and and I'll continue
to reiterate that because
within these transitions through
the higher learning commission
if it needs to be approved
through them if.
This is not Orton's verification
then from there your financial
aid is directly affected
indefinitely I do not want to
see our students financial aid
affected in any way especially
as they continue to overcome so
many hurdles in education so I
ask again
Has anyone checked and they have
any affirmation of
financial aid.
What to look like and be
seamless in terms of making the
transition.
Mr chairman.
So I I'm sure ms Austin can say
a little bit more than that but
I believe that my other expert
witness John PED's I believe is
in the queue has also done a lot
of work on this question and so
we could bring him again I would
appreciate that.
Thank you thank you
Representative Brown and.
Senator Campos.
The financial aid as you know
and higher education is a major
issue.
We recognize that two title for
approval for grants and loans is
a process with the federal
government that will take
probably somewhere between six
and nine months to occur and
that is why we have this this
spread in the bill between July
first and April tenth to give us
that opportunity salt some of
the long poles in the tent two
others are the HLC accreditation
which will probably take us
around six months to do this is
from their explanation when we
had communications with them is
related.
Simply to a change of name
basically we're using the same
facilities the same equipment
same professional staff and so
from that perspective they will
probably want to do.
Come in and do a site visit but
we have been in contact with
them and expect that that would
be a six month process we have
all of their preliminary
information for us to make that
make that change.
We also have the same issue with
the nursing program it has a
separate accreditation process
and we will go we have all
already investigated that and
that's another process that will
probably take between four to
six months to accomplish but we
are poised to do both of those
things so that there will be no
interruption in terms of grants
and and loans that students have
the those will we don't expect
to actually.
Go live until the fall semester
of twenty twenty two and so
given a just a given that time
we believe from our
conversations with the the title
for title for people as well as
a Chelsea and the nursing a C.
E. N. that we have know the
process is to go through and
we'll do that as expeditiously
as we can so there is no
interruption in student support.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Representative brown
of course street it's always
good to hear from you as we deal
with these and other issues so
so we totally understand in
terms of accreditation talk
about the AC and we'll talk
about HLC we talk about all the
medications that are there on
the the one issue when you're
dealing with nursing directly
with your state nursing board
have you been in touch with them
as well because I know as we
deal with them they want to
ensure that there is going to be
sustainability that is a very
costly programs just wondering
if the some of the initial work
has been done if you've been in
touch with state senators for
that Mr Chairman Senator Campos
we have been and we know that is
also one of the accreditation
steps that we have to take as
well.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman again I'm stand full
support of this particular
measure thank you very much
Representative ground for your
responses and all the others
thank you for your cooperation.
Mr chair this is Cheryl moved to
pass.
Thank you Mr.
I just want to just make some
comments and other questions.
The end of the day everybody
says all we're going to take
care of the students were gonna
help we're going to get a
graduated.
And it seems to me that and I
have had this situation before
with me at UNM.
That issue has been corrected to
hear the community and what
their needs are and then it's
we'll do everything we can once
they get in the fire and it
never seems to work out I do
believe that that Carlsbad was
not given due process
when there was comments made
about making sure that the.
Study was fair and equitable to
them.
I do believe that Carlsbad had
our mission of putting a chance
to resolve this with their
students they did not.
And I think you're gonna see
more more.
Community colleges separate from
universities because of the need
that the community has and have
have diverse Carlsbad is and
I'll give the example of dell.
We did run into that situation.
There's one school that we're
sorry that we lost and that was
Western because they graduate
more students with master's
degrees and master's degrees
then the UNM campus and dell and
so we lose a good one and we we
keep a one that continues to
haunt thank what are from
different states while working
and getting paid with New Mexico
tax dollars so I think that is a
big concern so we do have a
motion and a second.
We call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Their yes vote yes Senator Burt
yes Senator Campos is Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria is
excuse.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzalez
yes Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manuals.
Yes Senator then yes yes that is
nine yes one no and one excuse.
Thank you Representative Brown
you're on your way I hope this
never works out I I imagine
they'll be a lot and Armstrong
after this bill if passed off
the floor so.
More for that.
Thank you thank you thank you
members of the committee thank
you just so people again so I
can say this again I am still
waiting for for one member to
members to make sure before we
get some of these big bills that
they want to vote on.
We do have to go to the floor I.
I'm trying to stall but there is
members at you want to vote on
bills so I want to make sure
that my members are taken care
of.
So we'll jump around a little
bit Senator Hickey are you with
us.
Mr chairman I am with you.
they are etcetera
you want to go ahead with Senate
bill three seventy one consider
this we've chair for a minute.
You yes Mr chairman and bill
three one seven thank you no
worries Hey we're with long day
long day and you know what I'm
glad you said three seventy one
divided is that two seventy one
the way of going I think you
we'll move on Senate bill three
seventeen Senator Hickey Senator
Steinborn you're on.
Thank you madam chair it's my
pleasure to bring before you a
bill that I believe will have
significant concrete consequence
for literally a plague are
pandemic statewide is playing
New Mexico and that is
behavioral health that is not
being treated
and also substance abuse
disorder and just to give you
I'm gonna give you a little
context and then go through the
particulars of the bill which
are small and then the rationale
for it I'm gonna speak to the I.
F. R. now make this as brief as
I can I would ask that
proponents
just cheer me on but you don't
have to wait and and also I have
one expert witness my a Peterson
case we get into any financial
questions so given the fact that
about one in four fine in the U.
S. have a behavioral health
disorder New Mexico is
significantly worse worse off I
did send each of you or pass out
to you a yes said the fact
sheets around this and you are
free to look at them but I'm
only gonna have a couple of
highlights one is the suicide
death rate New Mexico is twenty
five hundred thousand people in
the average in the US is almost
fourteen is matter of fact New
Mexico has the highest suicide
rate in the country.
the fact that not only forty
four point two percent of adults
with mental illness in New
Mexico we see any form of
treatment from either private or
public providers the reigning
fifty five point eight percent
receive none and that's a
problem with this bill is going
to deal with our according to a
national telephone survey by the
American psychological
association eighty one percent
of people are when you to cost
concerns as a barrier to getting
mental health in this bill it's
a moratorium on off cost sharing
and I'll describe the details of
it for a period of five years so
that this does not continue to
be a barrier
and one other both points here
and diagnose that depressed
insurance cost on average about
thirty four hundred for patient
more over the two year period
prior to their depression
diagnoses in a group of
insurance was similar age gender
the state of residence at cetera
without evidence of depression
and one of the clinchers that
I'll give you evidence about is
that the share ET costs the
resulting.
hospital for people with mental
health and substance use
disorders
for all the visits are those
with them is a nineteen percent
higher
than than those without so what
are we going to do to address
that
we want to.
Look at the fact that.
The the behavior health and
substance abuse is associated
with the two to three times
increase in costs well more of a
chronic diseases this is really
important because this is a
dynamic financial scoring
situation another words what we
will show you is that if we
identify in the street these
individuals two thirds of them
do have chronic disease their
chronic disease costs will fall
substantially and the money that
the insurer or in the case of
the I back the state acts up
because they're paying for the
caution sharing the copay
coinsurance or and did you
doctor will
will be far far outweigh buys
the savings in product disease
because people understand people
with these disorders who are
stable see a dramatic drop in
their chronic disease process
this will apply to all
outpatient
behavioral therapy regular are
seeing someone for for an issue
and also very importantly to
intensive outpatient treatment
therapy for substance abuse
which is one of the keys of
treating people with that
disorder it will cover inpatient
that is a hospitalization for
some mental health that
detoxification for substance
abuse what we call residential
treatment care which is where
someone lives on site for a
period of thirty sometimes it
goes up to ninety days and
partial which is a another name
for it but it has a little less
restriction and what's
critically important all
medications all medications have
no costsharing no deductible
major barrier for.
A lot of people and and that
includes the very small use of
the anti psychotics it applies
to large and small group which
in the state is about three
hundred thousand people
the self insured and fully
insured all the exchange members
and we'll show you data on the
the automatic impact on exchange
numbers when this is done and
also all of the members of the
I. back which is about a hundred
and sixty thousand beneficiaries
are in the self insured program
it does not include just to be
clear Medicaid where there is no
cost sharing chair because we
have no jurisdiction no federal
employees it doesn't are to the
high risk pool and we've already
done that for the high risk.
So the rationale essentially is
that the
costs picking up the car sharing
by the health plan turns out to
be and I'm gonna use a little
insurance is here and if you
have questions I'm happy to
answer but in a a premium state
three hundred four hundred
dollars a month.
The insurance company is going
to get stuck with somewhere
between one and three dollars in
cost by picking up this posture
essentially not.
generic drugs the part that an
insurance company to get back
with ex is a co insurance or
more likely copay is about forty
cents per member per month in
the total premium.
So the the point is that when
you spread all across the land
putting the costsharing on the
plan or in a self insured
situation is essentially minimal
how this bill also calls for
reporting and the reporting will
be based upon data that already
exists in what's called CDS and
NCQA so that the talks about the
OSI and the LFC collecting that
reporting and it does in the act
in the FIR said is going to be a
cost that there is no cost would
it's merely getting data that
already exists this map that I
was in the office some of my
junior money and everyone sat
nav that we can do that that we
can do that ourselves the
And.
And then I'm just gonna finish
up with them and for those of
you who have looked in the
sheets and I can't it's hard to
show here but here's here's the
kicker.
We have done this experiment
when I was at to help New Mexico
and they continue to do it but
we eliminated all costsharing in
behavioral health visits
outpatient and medication and
what was the result but you it's
probably hard to see here is
that the emergency room visits
or
then New Mexico health
connections with the came
through out what's about one
twenty five per thousand members
three year those numbers up on
the top for like one eighty one
one eight six one sixty eight
national one ninety six
emergency room visits and these
are with health plans here in
New Mexico except of the
National thank you and what it's
demonstrated to when people have
access to drugs and therapy
they're not visiting the
emergency room and when they get
to the emergence is the well as
I said they have a about a
hundred percent I'm sorry
another ten percent increase in
getting admitted and if you look
down at the bottom it shows you
the admissions now this is for
all patients across the board R.
for New Mexico health
connections back in twenty
sixteen this data continues to
today and the higher levels in
the thirty I thirties and
forties for the other plants so
it is a major cost savings it is
in fact the majority business
proposal our business tenant
through which to help New Mexico
was able to thrive on the
exchange and bring lowcost now
I'm just going to read you two
more things and then I'm going
to stand for questions
I have included in this package
articles from the journal of the
American medical association and
the conclusion of one and this
is about chronic costs going
down substantially this study
suggests that mental health
disorders are associated with
substantially higher.
Resource utilization and health
care costs then patients with
chronic disease these findings
have when I go in health policy
implications.
And then I'm going to again
spare you
but the one in there that has a
from element basically showing
that if you do this if a health
plan our.
Makes it easy and removes a
barrier that's the care there is
about a
R. seven to twelve percent
reduction in all overall costs
so my proposal is for a five
year period
and when we really need it now
is that we remove this
costsharing from inpatient
outpatient and medication and
it's also very interesting to
note that yesterday the American
house I'm sorry The New Mexico
Hospital so ciation came out and
said they support this bill four
and that has to be very
important implications one one
of those systems is Presbyterian
that's a health plan and in fact
they did not oppose this bill on
the other is that the hospital
system see that if this barrier
is taken away and so that
basically the health plans are
paying for the insurance
insurance a lot more people are
going to come in to get treated
again I want to remind you the
potentially half of all people
with mental health disorders do
not carry a diagnosis as I
mentioned in one article they
are almost twice or more
expensive in the two years while
the run diagnose them people who
are come from the same sat who
have no Gallegos depression and
with that my a Petersen is my
our expert witness but in the
interest of time I'll ask just
to stand by for questions and
all those we had about seventeen
proponents.
I think everyone here that's the
idea there may be a couple of
opponents and force their there
are.
And speaker only to in fact and
so with that I and my
presentation thank you madam
vice chair.
I'm somehow muted here thank you
very much Senator Hickey okay
and with that person.
Senator.
Continue.
Senator Steinborn you have a
comment just make sure the
public.
So.
Madam chair Mr chair colleagues
yeah this is just a really
exciting bill it's it's kind of
it's not as a collaborative care
model and when you include
behavioral health in coverage of
folks in you in you not only
make that accessible and
affordable but you then building
screening on top of that you
actually health systems either
costs go down if you Google
collaborative care model first
article you'll see will be from
the American psychiatric
association with this study on
this but I mean multiple studies
have been done and it's it's one
of those rare win win situations
where we can not only an active
policy it will greatly help the
well being of New Mexico the
mental well being the economic
well being the social well being
but but it will actually help
contain costs within health
systems particularly from
chronic conditions and help
people
maintain good health treatments
which will lower costs for
health systems this is what the
research shows and I know often
times we just look at short term
impacts but this is really would
be profound of policy for New
Mexico and one of the most
impactful bills before us this
legislative session I truly
believe that so thank you very
much Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman just a couple of
things to add on to what Senator
Steinborn said Presbyterian
it has a collaborative care
model they charge no copays and
there are I believe having great
success with that the the other
he's is that about the scoring
is static it's not dynamic it's
not considered the pay back
so some ways it's a little over
the top but I understand that
that's the way that it's done
that money is a matter of fact
the I. back as a whole we'll be
able to save money the first
year this is in place and once
that once the system start
getting around in the health
plans and it's going to become
very dynamic in terms of savings
to the state the well being of
all these people who are
suffering and their families are
the providers providers not
having to collect copays
coinsurance that will attract
them to the state and that this
bill we will start to get health
systems building much bigger and
stronger behavioral health and
substance abuse and.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Hickey okay
let's see we're going to go to
public comment next before and
then I got the call go to
committee so any public comment
nation yes madam chair members
of the committee act in
opposition first we have more
let's have.
Okay Marla want to come up.
Yes madam chair can you hear me
yes we can hear you Marla thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shirts
registered lobbyist for Blue
Cross blue shield of New Mexico
behavioral health services are
critical to our members
especially now we have expanded
access to telemedicine to ensure
that our members are able to
receive these critical services
throughout the state removing
all out of pocket costs for
behavioral health we have a
large financial implications and
we would result in higher
premiums for our fragile
commercial market this would
have the most significant impact
for individuals on silver and
bronze plans the like to.
The land those plans because of
the lower premiums.
We have concerns with the broad
definition of behavioral health
in this piece of legislation
which would include outpatient
inpatient brand name
prescription drugs we appreciate
the Sanchez intention expertise
and commitment to healthcare
delivery but we believe that
health plan should have
flexibility to design plans that
meet the needs of our members
not all health plans that
Presbyterian have a delivery
system for these reasons we CPAS
we respectfully stand in
opposition thank you.
Thank you are right now than
anyone else yes next we have
Brandt more.
Grand Cherokee
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brent
war I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's health insurance
plans and our members are in New
Mexico and what we don't down
the down the intent of the
sponsor he definitely wants to
help the help folks and that's
that that's a great goal we also
want to make sure the folks in
the state of New Mexico get
behavioral health services
that's not not the debate here
the debate is really about how
you pay for that care and what
you do in the area of getting
health care through health
insurances you have costsharing
you have premiums and then when
you suppress one you inflate the
other and so that ultimately is
that the consideration here we
look at costsharing limitation
bills this doesn't make the care
free what it does is it
eliminates a costsharing push
everything in the premium so
that should be part of the
analysis as you're looking at it
you see that cost shifting
showing up in your FIR it is
quite significant and that is
the underlying debate I would
note also and Dr Hickey as a
readily acknowledge this there
is a player in the market place
who has done yet who has
eliminated cost sharing true
health is by a doctor Hickey or
Senator Hickey's admission is
doing this that is their choice
on how they want to offer
products some folks may not want
to want to pay lower premiums
and have some higher cost
sharing so we would argue for
options in the market place not
the state coming in and
restricting the approaches are
the options that are available
to folks really appreciate your
time this afternoon thank you.
Thank you very much grant okay
next Nathan no one else no we
have no one else in opposition
madam chair at in support first
we have Bill Jordan.
J. bell you want to come up.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I want to thank
Senator Hickey for bringing this
legislation today this is one of
those bills where you wonder why
we haven't done this already
behavioral health and substance
abuse treatment it's so many
barriers including the stigma
and copays we end up with a lot
of untreated conditions.
You may remember that it was
senator Pete Domenici who helped
get some parity for behavioral
health many years ago this bill
kind of brings that focus back
on the behavioral health and
brings it more to completion as
a state we need to do more to
help more people get access to
treatment and we think this is a
brilliant piece of the solution
and I want to thank Senator
Hickey and I urge your support
thank you.
That we have act meaning
careening.
Hi Kathleen come up your next.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you so much for
this opportunity to speak in
support Senate bill three
seventeen my name is Kathleen
Carey and co owner of New Mexico
based behavioral health care
needs of your teens institute
also board member of the New
Mexico behavioral health
providers association and here
today representing the only
agency as well as the providers
the station both of which
strongly support Senate bill
three seventeen we provide
medically prescribed treatments
boxes inspector disorder public
I can get right now says I just
think that there is based on
medical necessity and can be
quite that especially for very
young children research with the
best results are achieved when
patients start young and
received and there the
specifically many young patients
receive up to forty hours per
week this outpatient therapy
most commercial health plans you
know charging annual deductible
as well what vehicle insurance
for this therapy the family has
a copay of thirty dollars per
day in a child receives six days
that there are we families
responsible for just under ten
thousand dollars an annual okay
in addition to any deductible or
monthly premium.
Due to the rising cost of
healthcare many employers and
employees are opting for high
deductible high out of pocket
and keep those monthly premiums
low that's not unusual for our
agency to all commercially
insured then we responsibility
and fifteen thousand dollars the
point is the single year and
let's point out that this is
nearly twenty nine percent of
the next those two thousand
nineteen median income as you
can imagine these are out of
reach for most families New
Mexico and ultimately serves as
a total barrier practicing here
failure taxes medically
necessary care often results in
children falling behind
developmentally and you're
escalating sometimes to the
point of losing placement and
small daycare or
hospitalization and costly
readmission as well as costly
residential care I'm the
individual autism and their
families New Mexico my agency
and.
I use the ciation strongly urge
you your support for Senate bill
three seventeen thank you.
Thank you Kathleen okay next
person Nate then do we have
anyone else madam chair members
of the committee that includes
public comment on this well okay
thank you very much may and
thank you to the public for your
comments we're gonna go on to
committee now and we have
Senator Campos you hand is not.
Senator you're next thank you
very much madam chair members of
the Senate finance committee and
Dr hit the Senator Hickey thank
you very much for bringing this
forward well it's very
appropriate and very timely we
know over the last
decade or so there have been
serious issues that we have not
addressed in this is been one of
them so as we deal directly with
behavioral health we do have
facilities that are supposed to
be treating they're doing the
best that they can when it comes
to treating if you will some of
the addictions and then also
that includes the.
Issues like depression as we go
forward of course it's not
enough and so with this a few
questions that I do have we
start with the rural health care
and how we're going to be
treating this as we move forward
because as we all know we are
working with the exchange as we
move forward to take care of
residential treatment in the
actually thirty to ninety days
is not enough time to take your
these addictions because in
reality a lot of these people
return right back to their
communities in a very short time
continue with the addiction
short period of time and then
commit suicide so we know that
when it comes to how we're going
to address this in New Mexico we
definitely have a deficiency and
so Dr Hickey as we move forward
help you better understand how
this plan is going to affect
rural New Mexico and I really
applaud you for this out of the
box thinking because it's
incumbent upon us to truly
address that issue because we're
seeing the.
During the pandemic period so
many people that are being
adversely affected that not only
with behavioral health mental
health.
But again because of the
addictions as of service and
madam chair Senator Hickey
points.
Thank you madam chair and
Senator Campos and Senators
of the it is even it's a scourge
everywhere and then and in rural
health and you're absolutely
right I think many of us have a
lot of personal experience and
families extended family friends
were individuals go away and get
some treatment thank I'm back in
the falls apart again and the
problem is there's not enough
extended out patient interaction
of what we call intensive
outpatient therapy
and one of the reasons that that
therapy fails is because it can
be anywhere from twenty to sixty
dollars a day it's usually three
days a week or half a day so
they can keep working at the
same time but when you take that
barrier away they tend to go
much more and going much more
they will get reinforcement to
attend Alcoholics Anonymous
which is kind of a hero that we
didn't bring up here operates
independently but it is there
are chapters all over the state
and Alcoholics Anonymous is a
very effective day in day out in
Alcoholics Anonymous our
individual has to have a sponsor
as a person you called when you
get that craving and so the
substance abuse side that is
very important
Representative Hochman Vigil as
a bill to allow telemedicine and
the first the anecdotal and and
some studies although not quite
a time for them he is rigorous
as we would like are showing
that hello behavioral health is
very effective and so it can be
set up much like project echo
and I think they've done some
things in this area they
certainly have done with opioid
addiction and it can be very
effective number three we're
learning as we go through this
epidemic that here.
Therapy which is individuals who
are also in therapy but a little
further along who are are not
paid necessarily but because
they're in here are the therapy
is to spend that time with the
new patient and it's they are
getting much better results so
that a social worker a
psychiatric social worker or
someone who's doing the
outpatient therapy seven our the
only do half an hour in the pier
does other half hour that lowers
the costs that spreads the
abilities of the social worker
so it's a whole new approach to
both
particularly to substance abuse
but also mental health and so
that's how we're going to
address that and then finally I
was so I didn't even ask for
because I think that they would
not the fact that the hospital
association represents the
hospital all of the state they
get it wow if this barrier gets
taken out I will invest in
bringing people in to do therapy
so that that and and and there's
payment for and again you
Senator that so much is going to
raise the cost.
Step back.
Once they are in their chronic
disease for more abilities.
The cost goes way down and
that's what pays for this and
the people who oppose the bill
said
always just going to go into the
building in no it doesn't as a
matter of fact to health as
every year essentially and the
the the lowest or second lowest
premium in all the different
levels of all the different
plants in the state yes because
they have so few ER visits they
have much less chronic disease
three and hospitalization so I
hope that gives you a sense that
this is the first step in to
really getting extensive there
thank you for that question
seven thank you very much of
Madam chair thank Senator Hickey
and then as a follow up as we do
move forward in fact in Las
Vegas where you're setting up
the at the rand recovery center
and of course that serve in
coordinated of state level as we
move forward with the O. H. DHS
enforced with many others one of
the other issues is in terms of
the professionals that provide
that these type of therapies and
systems
psychiatrists psychologists and
so forth.
We do have issues in keeping
them here in New Mexico or
extended periods of time and a
lot of times if those two of
their own quality of life and
how we can deal with that do you
have any idea in terms of the
shortage when it comes to other
professionals that would provide
the necessary services in order
to enhance the behavioral health
services here in New Mexico.
I you know perhaps a what one of
the of people who is a proponent
to give a better idea but my my
kind of the.
Swag on that having lived in
having practice in the state for
and health care administrator
Randy huge behavioral health
Department that love less back
in the nineties and so forth
that's pretty much it gone from
where west anyway I'm I'm saying
that we probably got a third to
a half of what we.
So that's pretty staggering but
again the beauty yes we're
getting so much more creative
out of the boxes you said thank
you have approach this and again
if the hospitals are
incentivized to start hiring
these people into these programs
Hey that is a professional
isolation that by many of the of
those health professionals April
health professionals out of
state they'll be more of them
around be able to share with and
it's stressful on them being
able to share their so again
this gets the ball rolling and I
know that we will all want to
work and getting more
professionals in the state
keeping them here and again with
the hospitals who do have money
are becoming interested in this
they can make the up front
investment and I think we will
see much more diagnosing and
treating and again for the
health plans we're paying for it
they're getting that premium a
and B. there are there is that
so much less I think disease
they're going to make money.
You madam chair and senator
Hickey as we move forward if
twenty five percent of the
resources would go into treating
and dealing directly with
behavior health and then we have
a huge number of people that are
on Medicaid
as a poor state how are we going
to.
Develop if you will a long term
plan to re integrate in get back
into do you reckon behavioral
health we know over the years.
As we gave up on it and let
The the problems.
If we're exacerbated the
enormity of the problem has
grown to.
Crisis situation and within that
in dealing with direct personal
health and hygiene now we're
dealing with the behavioral
mental health the phones they're
leading to a lot of other issues
when we start talking about
crime we talk about
the the just the stature of how
a person feels about themselves
are we definitely need it's it's
the urgency and from the federal
level are you in communication
one one that is on question if
you will is part of the state
once related to behavioral bone
that would definitely
assistance.
To not only develop this program
to expand behavioral health
services Mexico.
Thank you Mr Senator and
mispriced here are during the
Obama administration I was very
involved with CMS the centers
for Medicare Medicaid studies
and knew a lot of people there
in the intervening for years
before the five ministration and
then
there was not a lot of attention
because we were working with CMS
at that time as well and I'm
still employed
I do believe that I can't give
you the specifics I know I I I'm
gonna when I get some time
and dissect that bill and look
for it but here's the wonderful
thing about that building so the
start is there people who do
have mental health disorders may
very well with his two year
additional I think it's of
forty some odd billion dollars
that's coming into the exchange
at eight seven lower the prices
so a fifty five year old on the
silver plan who will be paying a
thousand to eleven hundred a
month will not be paying for
fifty a month because of the
supplement.
Into the plan from the federal
government subsidies and that
and it goes all the way up past
four hundred percent so a lot of
people who may be saying I know
I go get some therapy that in a
cost get at it to get insured
because this does apply to
commercial insurance now have so
much less of a very so that's a
start but I will after this
session is over I do have
friends who are in the by needed
ministration CMS and I will be
talking with them how can we
direct more money's and if we're
the first state in the country
to do this we're gonna get a lot
of attention way up the ladder.
Madam chair and Senator Hickey
and one thank you for your
vision and in to help us to move
forward when it comes to this
and unfortunately when I took a
look at the relief package there
wasn't enough in my opinion for
behavioral health but again I go
back to this hello have you show
that you are able to go ahead
and do things without
legislation or if you all if you
will without resources what
happens is those that do have
the ability to assess realize
that you are going to go and
have some skin in the game and
you definitely want to address
the issues that have plagued the
on population so madam chair and
of course Senator Hickey thank
you very much again for your
ongoing efforts to help us to
all units.
Thank you thank you senator
thank you have a problem with
and Senator Hickey okay I don't
see anyone else on the list if
there's anyone that hand is not
going up on this list please
raise your hand or bring.
Do whatever you need to do to
get my attention.
Yes.
Hand right I just want to ask
Senator he was a little.
Yes.
You thank you maybe you can help
me I think we emailed every
member and even every member of
the Senate we we got a break
down of of the of what's
happening at.
This.
They call this.
Is.
Hello you breakdown of the of
what's happening but the federal
money insurtech you did you get
a chance to look at that and see
if there's any many mental
health of money in there.
Mr Senator
and share I I have not as of
this point I am literally
jumping from one committee to
the next but when you made when
you told us the other day that
one point six I want to dig into
that and look for it the other
component as I said the one
piece that will help is that
health insurance in general the
premiums through the exchange
anywhere are gonna go way down
and and so that will of the
people who need and and can't
buy in the lower rate some
affect there are even I believe
gold plans that have no freedom
at all that's how much of an
impact but in terms of
specifically relating to it I
will take that as an assignment
from you and Dawn as soon any
time I can come up for air I
will investigate that and I will
certainly do it after the
session.
Thank you I just happened to
glance at it you should have
this in your emails
survey but there's four point
two five billion for substance
abuse and mental health services
administration and grant
programs that allow that breaks
down to us but I guess we get.
Hello what that is somewhere
along the line of the figure
that out I just wanted to make
sure you saw thank thank you Mr
Senator I'm working closely with
the division of behavioral
health that's a joint program
between the department of health
and HSD and we will we will we
will dig into that money and
figure out where is best to
spend that and how to keep the
ball rolling not just a one time
impacting gone but how do we do
things you know instead of
giving them the fish we're going
to teach him to fish our.
Thank you Mr Senator thank you
madam chair thank you senators
of all right well it doesn't
seem like I have anyone else so
what are the wishes of the
committee chairman we do pass
motion for the past we have a
second well second up in
promotion presenter Campos
second by Senator Gonzales that
we want to call the roll.
Yes this Senator Burt.
I don't know.
Senator Burt no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria is excuse Senator
Diamond no.
Senator Diamond no Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share no.
Senator share no Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods Wilder no.
Senator would know Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yeah Senator then yes yes yes.
That is six yes or no and one
excuse me here you have to do
passed thank you your favorite
yes partners time for.
Thank you all for your time this
evening.
Right senator Munoz thank you
madam chair I just want we're
still waiting for Senator
Candelaria stuck in there so let
me just go everybody has a I
don't want to start H. chair
wanted and then I just have to
go to the floor and thirty to
forty five minutes.
I'm sorry that it happened but
there is an amendment that that
we have for that I want to make
sure everybody's in the room the
same thing with the
Senate Bill by there's a there's
a substitute for that that we
need to deal with and make sure
that everybody's in the room
we're gonna try to do a house
bill forty one and and.
And try to get.
The opportunity scholarships
General Mills bill done but
we're gonna try to go for a
little bit before I
Representative street
Representative Garrett are you
this.
yes Mr chairman is there any
other.
I want to start yes I do have
one expert witness Thibodeau
Millia C..
Thank you Mr chairman the
purpose of house bill one forty
one is to mend the definition of
education technology
infrastructure using the public
school capital outlay act to
mean the physical hardware and
Services used into connects
students teachers school
districts and school buildings
necessary just but support
broadband connectivity and
remote learning as determined by
the council.
The proposed amendment broadens
the definition to include
services like wifi hotspots in
prepaid subscriptions or service
plans in addition to physical
hardware it extends the
recipients of the education
technology infrastructure to
students and teachers in
addition to school districts and
school buildings when necessary
to support broadband
connectivity and remote learning
as determined by the public
school capital outlay council
the bond counsel saw no issue
with the proposed language
amended language the amendment
uses part of the ten million
dollars from the public school
capital outlay fund deficiency
correction program initiative to
temporarily cover the cost of
infrastructure and services for
remote learning.
The issue we ran into with the
pandemic was that this funding
could not be used for personal
connectivity devices like wifi
hotspots or the things of that
nature that could help students
during the pandemic because of
the statutory limitations around
programs this legislation would
clear up the statutory
limitations and make the ten
million dollars dollars eligible
for personal connectivity
devices for teachers and
students who do not have access
we are using the top ten million
dollars in state funds to match
federal E. rate funds and we are
left leveraging quite a bit of
the federal E. rate at about a
ninety to ten
ten right now but as you know
Congress promises American
rescue plan includes seven point
two billion for E. rate programs
and expands the programs to home
connectivity this means house
bill forty one could leverage it
right funds which typically
create a ninety ten split
between federal funds and state
funds respectively the great
news is this is great news but
yes and they said we need house
bill one forty one to pass to
leverage the state funds.
In this bill also addresses the
difficulty students experiment
experience in remote learning
when they lack of computer in
quality internet access at home
and as a teacher I've seen it
over and over where kids cannot
get into the classroom were
could not do their homework due
to the lack of connectivity and
even though our kids are going
back to school and we're very
excited as a teacher I'm very
excited there's still a need for
wifi hotspots and connectivity's
for kids to do their homework or
to fill out college applications
it's still need all of our
state.
And just one statistic over
sixty six thousand school age
children in New Mexico live in a
household without an internet
subscription.
And the need for connectivity
all of our state is still here
in this bill will help alleviate
the problem with that Mr
chairman I stand for questions.
Thank you representative
Representative Garrett got.
Hello.
I have nothing to add to it Mr
chairman.
Thank.
Thank you Representative making
do we have any public comment.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee received at another
request to speak in opposition
are in support.
Questions from committee members
Senator Campos.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I stand in full support of this
particular measure this is been
duplicated or of reflects a one
forty four is amended and as a
representative has indicated.
One of the keys it's very
important particularly now we
know what the federal rescue the
bill includes with that language
in this is the part that's very
important that's what this bill
needs to pass.
Right now we're going to be able
to take of that connectivity
directly to the homes of our
teachers and our students so
again I applaud the
representative of the bill for
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee.
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
Rodriguez thank you very quick
Mr chairman thank you to the
sponsors for bringing this bill
for it good to see you I I think
this is the into actually it
seems like a very complicated
bill from the onset that it
really is just bringing
definitions up to date up to the
latest that we have now in this
current test century so that we
can be able to access the the
adequate in the appropriate
technology that we now live with
every day and so it's really
enabling legislation to use
those technologies that we
have an with that in mind of I'm
gonna make a motion but they're
Senator share who wants to as of
handout so I'll wait district
German.
Senator.
Senator sure you have a
question.
Yes sure I do so I could see and
understand why we're doing this
so we're running.
Fiber to every house of course
least giving them the.
What what's the word the
stipends so that they can do
this for every house is that
what we're doing Mr chair Madam
up Senator Senator Mr chairman
and senator we're we're giving
kids or and students and
teachers wifi hot spots until
the pipers run when they need
something so wifi hotspots or
subscriptions so that they can
do their homework or do their
work they need to do in the
education process.
So.
There's a couple issues here
first
I know so I live up there Navajo
Nation area and.
It's miles and miles between
where the fiber is and where the
house is that's always been the
problem if you have to run
anything electricity water lines
sewer line anything it's it's
millions of dollars just because
the distance.
So this wifi hot spot how.
They beat each other how would.
How would that work out there.
Mr chairman and senator at the
wifi hotspot would be
individually for the home will
be given from the school to the
home
and I would actually like to
defer to my expert witness
timber though to explain the
technique technology the
technical issues if he's here
hopefully.
I'm here Representative
Mr chair and the center share I
think what would happen for
areas like the one that you
Representative is that schools
would distribute students
laptops that that have three G.
or four G. connectivity
leveraging sort of satellite
cell surface and and trying to
use that to connect to the
internet sometimes what we what
to the colloquial tern is hot
spot but what has been happening
is schools are handing out
basically cell phones to to
families and then you know what
the expectation that the cell
phones are returned back to the
school district when when the
student is in rules from the
school.
I also know that there's another
technology this it's a Roswell
company that's getting ready to
put some up over the Navajo
Nation
this this is this is work with
this service to compete with
this or is one better than the
other hunters I can't remember
the rules will company's name
but I know they get ready to to
work over the Navajo Nation Mr
Chairman Senator I don't know
I'm in a different in do you
know what he's talking about I'm
not sure Mister chairman Senator
I believe you're you're talking
about a company name sky yes you
you Y. E. which has been doing
some really interesting work
with limps that will be in down
I need service I I believe that
would be.
Allowable expense here although
I don't understand I don't
really know how the cost
arrangement would work with that
technology whether maybe any
school district could set up the
that the.
Contract with sky to have a
certain amount of bandwidth from
from that went for something
like that during T. for students
something like that I I believe
would be allowable expense under
under the broadband proficiency
correction program.
Okay thank you.
And you don't think that there's
any anti donation clause the
problems with the.
With given family some money to
to pay for this.
Mr chairman Senator no because
it's going through the school to
the just like barring of the
macbook you are the macbook you
chairman this is going to the
school to the family.
I can refer to my expert witness
at that if you'd like to no no
Representative I I we got that
win said math book I was just
thinking well back in the olden
days we could let kids take
books all and then they can read
but now we don't do that of.
So I I've had this described
here that's been bouncing around
my head literally for years
But I think it's appropriate
today so.
What we really need is is
internet for the teacher the
students all want to go to
school the students apparently
are safe at school so let the
students go to school and leave
the teacher aware of the teacher
is so we only need one hot spot
and
But Senate Mr chairman Senator
being in the classroom with the
teacher is really important that
that
Insure action we have with our
students but I can look is doing
in the eye and they're having
trouble with math I can tell you
can tell if having trouble for
this internet it though it's
been great I teach science now
and it's been great I've had my
my kids are in and they're
enjoying it my mentoring and I
can't wait to meet him but being
in the classroom really does
make a difference so what I'm
all for that I brought like you
to go back to school to but if
but if the teachers are going to
go back to school with the
students go back to school
anyway
for a couple reasons a I think
the students.
Want to interact with each other
and I agree that being there
that this I have no idea I mean
I see little tiny you on the
screen here I have no idea what
your body language really says
So I can get how this is a
terrible way to teach science.
Billion impossible way to teach
reading
but
I just throw that out there is
is is is a thought that if that
is something that's less
expensive and maybe even better
than having everybody an ism
class because at least the
students can can read each
other's body let language in
sure you probably need an adult
for crowd control in the room of
the bill doesn't necessarily
have to be a teacher can be any
any parent that shows up
whatever but anyway that's not a
of the an education plan that
was kind of a random order but I
also thought that it might work.
Financially to to hook up the
teachers and the kids go to
school as opposed to trying to
get internet.
Out into the hinterlands because
that's really where it's not so
what.
Mr chair of Representative thank
you.
Thank you.
I keep clicking on the wrong
button
Senator.
You know Mister chair if you
wanted to talk another two three
hours I'm certainly willing to
do that but yes that's all of
the of the real questions I
have.
Thank you for sharing the still
standing I don't see anybody
else's hand raised have a motion
from the committee to Mr
chairman Mr chairman.
The motion and the second we
call overall.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt.
Hello yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria is excused Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator yes Senator
share if I get to talk longer
although yes full disclosure
here
okay Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yeah.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Yes yes and yes and one excuse
the state.
Of our.
Thank you Representative gotta
get past thank you Mr chairman.
Sorry representatives to.
Thank you we need a motion on
the consent calendar we talk to
the senior member on the
opposite side and so could have
a motion.
Consent calendar on house bill
two thirty.
Mr Chairman thank I'm sorry it
was somebody else moving.
Senator Campos so.
That Mr chair.
The motion and the second.
We call the roll.
I didn't get.
Yes No it's Mr chair Senator
Burt yes Senator Burt yes
Senator Campos yes.
Yes Senator Candelaria is it
still Senator Diamond yes
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes gross Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill
yes yes Senator Hemphill yes
Senator share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yeah.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz
one
Yes that is yes one excuse.
Representative thanks.
Got there might go but but
somebody does I think we're
gonna call it day because
Senator Rodriguez has a long
ways to drive to get to the
capital.
The on the floor at five o'clock
so.
Members of the committee were
probably gonna look at House
Bill to stop tomorrow make sure
languages is all good.
And we'll try to talk for about.
What are what we're gonna do
tomorrow we will hear H. R. one
I just got to get everybody in
the room it and at the same
time.
Same thing with opportunity
scholarship so I just need my
members to be able to vote on
before you send them on their
way
I do hear a little bit of
chatter about a short one I mean
I'm not going to be put in the
same position that senator Smith
was.
Those groups want to start
belittling people or are making
fun of whatever you wanna call
it doing ads we'll have a long
shot for the rest of the week
about H. R. one.
Thank you guys the committee
have a good evening we'll see on
the floor Mr Chairman are you
meeting tomorrow and the
committee.
I'm.
Yes.
Senator Rodriguez.
The chairman said he's meeting
tomorrow he's just doing for our
Mr I think he's already out but
what I heard him say that we it
seems like we are going to meet
tomorrow I just don't know what
items he intends to here for
tomorrow.
but he did say that it was very
conceivable in his words that we
would meet tomorrow so maybe
he's just trying to look at the
items that are left here and see
what we can hear not hear that
Representative but can I ask
them he's already I think he's
gone and I will get back with
you.
Well thank you Representative.
