Good morning.
I noticed you guys called in the
news media today.
We do have an amendment for your
bill, who called in the news
media. What? Assuming somebody
that's political called in
Make sure your string that
tight hard hard to imagine this
is one of the newsworthy don't
want any of the Supreme Court
justices senior in a crooked
takes center have an amendment
We stripped the appropriations
killed center Vontaze. You want
to explain the bill for us?
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr.
Chairman Effectively this bill
passed this committee 8 to 0.
Last time it passed the Senate
floor overwhelmingly in the
house. This is to increase
judicial salaries.
To try and make a state judge
salaries competitive with the
federal court judicial salaries.
The when there's a vacancy on a
state court vacancy in any one
of our districts, you might get
one or two applicants. Maybe if
you're lucky.
When you get a federal court
vacancy the last time there was
one was 80 applicants, something
along those lines here in New
Mexico, the there there are some
differences, namely how you get
elected, so we have a huge part
of it's the salary and so were
we have consistently ranked for
years as 50th in the country and
judicial salaries were trying to
get more experienced judges on
the bench.
Um right now, if you're a public
defender, district attorney
getting a salary increases you
too pretty significant salary
increase from those those
salaries. But if you're in
private practice, we're not
attracting people with
experience. So that's the goal
of this. This committee's
supported this strongly in the
past. The only difference this
year is that one of the
hesitations of this committee in
the past was automatically tying
the state salaries to federal
salaries permanently.
I think there was legitimate
concern that that was
restricting are appropriating
authority in the future. The
automatic salary increase every
time the feds would do so. I
still think that's the right way
to go because our competition is
always going to be the federal
judiciary. But I also understand
the concern of this committee
and all of us as legislators to
not tire hands.
Artie, are you there for your
looks today or yes, Mr Chairman.
I'm just here for my looks. I'll
be happy to answer questions. If
you have them for me. We
This is the time of year that we
strike all always out of the
bill.
The money will come in back of
house Bill two, so the bill can
statutory clear and and that's
all in
Senator Montez chairman. I
understand the practice of the
committee and Mr Yes, I can back
Consider Gonzales
Call the roll only adopt them in
Senator Gonzales? Yes.
Sharer.
Woods.
I guess. Yes. Anthony Back on
the bill. Senators. Thank you,
Mr Chair and welcome Mr Chair.
Question for you. This bill only
seems to deal with Supreme Court
justices. Is that it?
Mr Chairman, Senator. Good
question. The way our structure
works is we set and fixed the
chief justice of the Supreme
Court. That's the highest
ranking member of our judiciary
and then by statute, the
salaries of the other judges are
set as a percentage of that, so
the chief gets the highest
salary than the other members of
the Supreme Court justice get a
percentage of that or lesser and
then
The Court of Appeals gets a
percentage of that that's
percentage lower than district
cord on down, so it's it's kind
of a stair step, um, salary
structure, Senator, but we only
fix the highest salary that is
actually not for the
And I did I misspoke. So this
sets the salary of the justices
of the Supreme Court. The chief
gets an additional additional
2001, which is right here. Um,
so my question is how Mr Chair,
Senator Hammond.
Given Mr Pep and give you the
salaries of District Court
judges. Court appeals in Supreme
Court chair Senator Stein born
191 5000, and it's the Court of
Appeals. In 95% of that request,
95% of that I don't have it in
hand. But the district but
salaries are currently about
100.
Gonna remember now anyway, it's
90, 95% and 95% so roughly
little less than 90% of that
salary. District Court challenge
Percent increase in salary? Yes,
21%. Yes, translate? Yes, sir.
Okay?
Um, And that number is what is
is that
Index to the federal judge. Miss
Chairman Senator That was my
concept and and remains still my
opinion the way we should do
this because again our
competition is the federal
judiciary. But as I said
earlier, I think there's
legitimate so. So. So we're not
indexing it anymore to either
the federal judiciary worked
even a C P I
Hmm. So the 232 would be the
salaries paid by District
Federal District Court judge
Federal discord, judges kind of
the trial judge level, So
there's even two layers above
the federal level. There's two
layers above them. There's the
Court of Appeals at the federal
level circuit courts and then
the U. S Supreme Court, So we're
kind of taking the lowest level
just about the lowest level of
the federal system and
Making that essentially
equivalent to the highest level
of our state. Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinberg. I do have the salary
numbers in front of me now if
you really want them, But it's
the 95% on down the line. Well,
I'm just really looking
Designing the strategy. Let me
ask you a kind of an often path
question, but it's important to
so the premises.
We should pay them, Um
And that will get more judges.
Do you find that the nominating
commissions work?
Mr Chairman, Senator of Yes and
no. I think it's an important
step and we that we've adopted
her New Mexico to require
candidates to go before that
vetting. I know where you're
going with this, By the way are
so wait one second. Those kids
right in the back from FAA. You
better pay attention because I'm
going to ask you some questions
here in America.
They're Steinberg. Go ahead.
okay questions, So the vetting
process and procedure is good. I
will tell you when I say yes and
no.
I've watched those committees
and process of procedure center.
It all comes down to who sits on
that vetting panel and
procedure. We we sometimes have
appointees there that
Don't have background in the law
or do not have experience
working with judges, and they
usually do not do a good job of
vetting those individuals. Those
individuals sitting on those
commissions don't do a good job.
So much chair. You gotta you
gotta have a good process for
setting up the right nominating
committee but generally
Interviewing candidates. It's a
good idea. Alright, well and I
was just curious for this
because I guess the whole good
candidates come through and we
might want to apply the same
thinking to other things like,
Yeah, I would have thought
tested. Alright, That's all I
have. Thanks for answering those
questions. Express chair Senator
Rodriguez. Thank you. You know,
Senator that I recall from way
back even before your first bill
was introduced on this matter.
How you were always so intent in
China, and we appreciate that.
You know, our judges truly are
the lowest paid when you think
maybe now we picked him up a
little bit. I don't thank you,
senator for this. Just
clarification on if we're not
going to index them, for
example, we're going to take
them to the beginning. Salad.
Federal District Court Judge,
Federal District Court or
federal district? Oh, yes. Okay.
And so if we do that, and we
don't index them, then
The automatic kind of index race
that this federal district
judges get doesn't flow or
trickle. Two hours There were
that is that part would be left
to the we decide, and so on. Is
that the way it is, That's
right, Senator so we'd find
ourselves back here repeatedly
or after you're trying to keep
that salary up with the federal
level. That's why I thought
indexing it to the federal level
made the most sense.
Because the federal government
will increase that from time to
time in year to year. But I'm
repeating myself with our
competition is ourselves. Our
competition is within the state
and we get extraordinary
candidates for the
chairman, Senator Woods.
Be a Supreme Court justice.
What is the process? Do you work
up through the chairs? You start
as a district judge and then
gradually move up to the
appeals and then I know it's an
elected position. But I mean,
uh, what is the normal process?
How do we recognize the talent
to become a Supreme Court
justice?
Mr Chairman, there really is no
fixed path to becoming a Supreme
Court justice So you could be a
civil practitioner in private
practice. You can have a small
um, wills and trusts practice
and run at a statewide level and
get yourself onto the Supreme
Court. We're fortunate that the
people that we do have on our
Supreme Court here in New Mexico
now all have
Experience, I think without
exception at lower court levels,
so some of them have started in
Metro court in Albuquerque, I'm
from Metro Court in Albuquerque
City level to the Court of
Appeals and onto the Supreme
Court. There. There's there's no
fixed way to do that. You can
get onto the Supreme Court.
And the concern we have here
now. Is that again These
salaries are high. I'm not gonna
I'm not gonna be little that
these are still high salaries.
All of these.
But but we're competing with the
privates.
Well, I guess what I'm getting
at is, you know, we think of a
judge is being
Impartial. He doesn't
Lean one way or the other, and
you know that's what we want and
You know?
If there if they haven't been a
judge and don't have a record,
and we don't see if they have a
particular practice.
Of a plaintiff's attorney, or a
D a, You know, and then they run
for Supreme Court. Well, in my
eyes, they're little purse. Umed
biased.
And I know that that's all then
the integrity of the person I
understand that, uh, I just
wanted to bring that up, and
that's why I was. I did have a
interview today about a certain
bill that got table a couple of
days ago in
The governor made some remarks
about it and
And it was interesting as a
research that that I found out
that the main driver of that
became a Supreme Court justice,
and he had never been a judge
before. All names go any further
than that, But a lot of things
we hear after the fact that
might have influenced our
decision before the fact.
So
Um, thank you, sir. Thank you
for the opportunity. That too.
To talk to you today.
Yeah, thanks. It's not like I'm
trying to get back at you or
anything I got. Ah, yeah. No,
You shouldn't have said that.
I'm not trying to. You know,
we'll see how the vote goes, Mr.
Um, but, Yeah, the only thing
that I can you know, we all come
to life with biases based on
whatever they may be. Just tell
you the most probably inherent
bias to our court system. We
should do better.
Is that you don't get don't
think there's anybody on the
Supreme Court right now, who
doesn't come out of Albuquerque?
Santa place? I think our entire
Supreme Court is Albuquerque.
Remember the last time Dan Sosa,
I think was the last time we had
a Supreme Court justice from Los
Cruces, the second largest city
in county, So it's it is very
insular, and some would argue
there's a bias to a Santa Fe,
Albuquerque.
Senator Rodrigues again real
quick. Thank you, Mr Champ. But
in the past all your bill, this
one here I thought was taking
the judges to the system We have
here to the beginning salary of
the quote again, as I said
earlier, Magistrate, Federal
magistrate, But I would just
What I see is consistent with
all you've been doing all the
time that
Federal district judge to get it
to right. It's a federal
magistrate.
Beginning salary, or is it
different this year? Because
this doesn't say that here? It's
different this year, Senator
that there that is different
than last line item somewhere
here because I didn't want to
make sure that you're into here
because it says that it would.
it would require the salary of
the Supreme Court to be that of
a of a fat man. Federal
district. It is Federal District
Court judge the number that
you're looking at the $232,000.
Would make the Supreme Court
justice our highest court salary
equivalent to the trial judge
level of the federal court
system, which is the district
court from the Supreme Court,
Down to the federal not I see
what you're saying he wouldn't
make her district judges there.
the district judges would be at
the beginning would trickle down
to the to the federal dismount.
So okay, Mr Chairman, Senator,
it's still this is still not
ideal to me. We would in my
mind, we should still be even
more competitive with the
federal level. But we're really
not. What we're doing is we're
taking our highest court salary,
very highest at the Supreme
Court level and essentially
making it equivalent to a
federal District Court judge
which is not, which is not the
highest level. Sure we're in the
ballpark, But we're still not.
We're still not competing at the
federal. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thanks for bringing the bill, I
am
I'm in favor of what we're
talking about here Just
recently. Mr Chair. I don't know
if you noticed, but Section one
subsection C begins with your
favorite term notwithstanding,
so I just wanted to bring
That to your attention if you
had missed that.
I have one question, Mr
Chairman. Actually, I noticed in
here that
If there's money left over, it
doesn't revert.
Um
Is that unusual? I mean for
salaries and things like that.
Why? Why wouldn't we revert that
money back?
So, Mr Chairman, Senator, if I
may know one thing you you made
a statement before you don't
like to notwithstanding
language. I understand that
Please understand that's
existing language in the
statute, So we're not
introducing that and I would be
pretty reluctant to come in here
with adding notwithstanding
provisions in the law, but all
that existing Mr Chairman and
senator that
That was just to bring that to
the attention of our
Chairman here because he loves
that term so much, You know, I
think we all understand why we
dislike just like that. With
that game is played. So Yeah, I
was just wondering about why why
it would not revert and And if
it doesn't
What would that money be used
for down the road?
Let me Mr Chairman, if I can Mr
Pepin probably answer that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator
Byrd. It doesn't revert because
by and large, the jobs are
always filled because
We don't. We're not. Um we're
not allowed to have a gap of
more than 30 days between the
vacancy on the nominations that
go to the governor who selects
right in the in the district of
world, Actually, all the judges
that this still applies to you
so generally, the salary is
spent if it's not spent because
you have a vacancy, and you have
savings on the salary and
benefits part.
Ah, that is often used for pro
TEM.
To fill in, so we'll take a
retired judge and have them come
in and do the caseload if it's
significant enough.
Um, in order to be able to
handle that we'd have a pro TEM
fund. But often that's where the
Sally and the district will go.
Otherwise.
Yeah, it's in the salary and
benefits appropriation of the
district court. It could be used
for other things, but it's often
if it's exists at all, because
vacancies aren't that common.
It's it's usually for the pro
TEM
And Mr Chairman, and I
appreciate the explanation on
that. I
I always get a little concerned
about not reverting money back,
but I think that's I don't have
a problem with that, because I
know that probably is not gonna
be much money in that budget or
in that hold over anyway, So I'm
sorry, Century we're gonna add
something, and I didn't want to
not be paid attention to senator
so I understand, Senator
Rodriguez asked question
Finished with center burger
you've done and then Yeah,
that's all I had. Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the clearing. Your
staff came up to point out the F
I R that says the salary would
be equivalent to a federal
measurement. It's what I was
getting.
The information so just and it's
understandable why the staff
made an error on the fire. The
reason is because the federal
salary keeps increasing every
year.
So we're we're chasing a moving
target, if you will. So what was
true last year in trying to make
our salary equivalent to a
federal salary is no longer true
because the federal self
Thank you Confused now. Thank
you, Chairman and Senator and
already, um, I love the concept.
I've always liked the idea of
always liked what you're trying
to get done here. I guess I'm
and And if you already talked
about here, and so you get to
vote on my bill over there,
that's horrible.
So I am here to vote on your
bill. You got out of the
committee. I had a successful
outcome. Yes, I'm very happy
about that. But that
notwithstanding, um I guess I'm
surprised if you've already
talked about this. I apologize.
Just walking in here. Why would
you put an actual number in the
bill? Because then I would
rather you just continue to
chase that.
I'd rather you do that as a
business person. I look at that.
I just simple It's clean. You
already have the 5% 5% 5%, You
know, deals going on here?
There's no
But then we have to come back
here and do this all over again
And this whole exercise again
and
Causes you another three years
or whatever of grief and I don't
want that for you, my friend.
Well, Mr Chairman, Center. I
agree with you. I agree with
you. I think the original model
and design that I had was
superior to this. So why do you
do this then? Because there's
been concern throughout the last
several years on principle on
this committee and the staff of
this committee that we're taking
away our appropriating
authority, and that's a
legitimate argument. I have to
accept that as an argument, but
but we should be chasing that
federal salary because, as I
just pointed out, the federal
salary will increase every year.
And unless we do we we we almost
last time we Mr Chairman as
senator, and, uh,
Senator Padilla.
Usually it occurs when you do.
Section eight of House Bill two.
and you do an appropriation for
judicial salaries alongside
Employeessalaries, so you'll
increase it two or 3% the
appropriation we take as a
direction from the Legislature
to reset the salary, so
You don't you haven't passed a
bill that said we're going to
pay you 190 or 195 passed bills
that give an appropriation
That's higher than the previous
year's appropriation by
Two or 3%, and then the judges
get raised that way.
Mr Chairman. The problem with
that with what we've been doing
is we've been treating judges
like all other employees have
been giving them the two or 3%
increase. The problem is, we
started out so far behind the
federal salaries that we're
never going to get anywhere
close, and we're not not
anywhere close and before you
got here, I pointed out when
there's a federal vacancy in New
Mexico for a federal spot, we
might get 80 applicants.
If you get a state making Thank
you, Mr Chairman, And so I guess
I would just say I agree. And
the we are the appropriating
body. Where this or that, um
But if the Legislature felt like
that was the wrong approach, the
opposite is true. Someone could
come and take us off of this
track of the federal whatever.
So I'm in favor of what you
originally had proposed. But
I'll stop there, Mr Chairman,
but I was really surprised when
I did. The early Education
department created that thing.
They wanted me to put salaries
in there for you know, early
education courses. There's no
way we can, You know, change
that and through statute. What
have you and now we have it, you
know here and we're going to
have to
Come back again and when we're
behind again, and I just I think
that's a really thank you, Mr
Chairman. The earlier way was
superior and I'll just tell you
we're trying to get the governor
satisfied this past the floor
Last time 3222. It passed the
house 64 to 3. We're not only
having to satisfy ourselves in
the legislative process, but the
governor has repeatedly trying
to thread a needle and see if we
can get her to sign.
You know, we shouldn't worry
about. We have to change its
statute. That's where she
Hmm. But I mean,
Reason this didn't get a Supreme
Court added us to the and so
that's why we're
She also made a big mistake
currently higher than district
judges. Correct, Artie.
Mr Chairman know their 123,000
but district that has got to
raise percentage raised, but
there are 100 and 23, and they
would
Except with few adopt this bill,
they would get the 21% increase
That's in
That's in the statute.
So then let me go to some
questions. Just page two line,
16 explained to me.
I think I get them to do what
they needed in the strike on the
magistrate. Er, that's right.
Well, I've I've used the word
for now. Two or three years.
I've used word decoupling. In
other words, as we talked about
that stair step process that
Senator Steinmeier was talking
about. The managements were
along for the ride, too. And
you're right. You have now have
magistrate salaries very, very
high because the governor had
not
Tracked that all the way through
in the earlier veto. So you have
Magistrates who really only
don't do not require a law
degree, do not require college
degree really do not require any
formal education and they're
making very high salaries. As a
result, that's pretty good.
These are, um
Their their their own branch of
the taxpayers.
And his employees of the
taxpayers. But right now, many
cases they currently
Mr Chairman. I don't know about
them don't have the numbers at
hand about what's pending.
Um, they have decreased their
pending caseload by didn't have
pending. I don't know the
number. I can get it to you, but
I don't have that at hand start
started texting. We have this
crime problem in everybody s
aren't charging and enough.
But if you go into southeastern
Mexican judges, kids were gonna
go
There. What? My yes or no vote.
Get him back, Sergeant. I mean
performance matters in courts,
right?
And in southeastern Mexico.
We're here.
We don't have a problem that we
get to burn a Leo and other
And the judges are interpreting
the lit.
We have a crime problem we have.
We're spending but of the
quarter appeals.
How many quarters judges on the
Court of Appeals Miss German,
There's 10.
10.
The current salary of a court of
appeals judge is, uh
180
To so million $820,000 salary
and benefits would be a little
higher.
Why didn't we not have
performed?
Um, Mr Chairman. It's a good
question. I don't know
Historically why we haven't done
that. I think that the judiciary
does do this internally. Um, and
there is quite a bit of data
that's available to that. But I
agree with you and with you and
I have spoken about it, the
Legislature should be doing a
better job of evaluating those
metrics. And I don't think Mr
Pepin or the court would
disagree. There's room for
improvement. I think
The Supreme Court's made great
candidly. Supreme Court's made
some efforts to try and crack
the whip on the court of Appeals
in the past, and it's I think
it's been somewhat effective,
but I think there's still room
for improvement.
Mr We do have metrics. Report
lfc on performance measures for
the district courts. The
appellate courts are different.
That is different, and we've
been working really hard last
year and a half two years to try
to to try to develop repeatable,
measurable, useful.
That a measurement for the
appellate courts, according
appeals and the Supreme Court,
We're certainly open to further
discussion with the Legislature
with your staff, the LFC
On what measures would be, um,
workable for you. We do have a
lot of data, Senator Cervantes
says, and we can probably answer
questions if you have them about
the performance in different
districts around the state and
that kind of thing, But yes,
we're very interested in that
And we have no problem being,
um, transparent and answering
any questions you have about.
How we're doing in terms of case
time to disposition.
Um, average age of cases, those
kinds of things that we do
measure Mr Chairman of a main
rep. We also have a procedure
called JPEG, which probably
merits some introduction here as
well, too. So we do we do
independently. Try to evaluate
judges. Um
We do that by surveying
attorneys and staff and others
to evaluate judges for their
timeliness and opinions and
evaluations, and there's quite a
bit of difference in that as
well to look at the court
appeals. You're going to see
some of those judges on the
corporal's turnout, rulings and
decisions and you see someone
who must so that she may want to
add subsets.
The performance. We see who's
overperforming.
Do they just pay? All will know
because you just said it.
There's there's judge or
performing very well and there's
there's a well and I think the
public has, we don't know and
for the public, I think there
How many did you get text back?
Last number I heard was around
700 cases sitting in the
courtroom did not. I did not.
Mr Chairman. I'd be surprised if
the number was that high. But
I will get you an answer for 10
judges and one
Appellate case, There was a high
number
Are serving panels of three but
yes,
Her judge. Mm hmm. So
Very tempted at performance
measures in here.
And then I think for the Supreme
Court.
I mean, we should pay people
with experience.
More than we should pay people
with Lieutenant Governor But
justice, be hell.
Has been in the court system.
I'm sorry, Mr Chairman many
years has justice be held been
in there.
On the Supreme Court in the in
the because he was on the court
feels I don't know it's over 20
years, so 20 years. How many
years has, uh chief Justice
Thompson been?
When you become see Justice
Justice Thompson. It's hard
because he was on and he was
off.
1215 years.
Justice. Bacon was also on the
district court. She's been
judged for
15 years, 18 years, something
like that. And, uh,
I'm trying to. I will. I will
say the wrong name but the
others Rihanna, chief justice.
But what's about 15 years?
I do have a response. I'm sorry
that the finish Oh, sorry.
I mean, you have a senior judge
20 Quart.
The rest are pretty
And why are we not paying work
higher rate than Mr Chairman?
That's a policy question that
really is probably beyond us at
this discussion. I don't know
that that would be workable, to
be honest with you. We could use
the same analysis throughout
state government. Why don't we?
Why don't we look at the Cabinet
secretaries and pay a Cabinet
secretary with more experience?
Higher salary than a Cabinet
secretary. He doesn't have any
experience. We don't do that.
but the arguments would be the
same that we do that we got
upside down in the state system
because we did a pay increase a
couple of years ago and spoke
just completely messed it up and
new hires were make years.
And
Experience matters, right? And
so they They messed it up. And
then why? I mean for for all
these performance metrics years
of service.
Allowing them to have the
experience and to get that's
where we should you does the
does the L. C score magistrate
ER all the judges on years of
experience and time and court
and hours in court. Are we
tracking any of that?
Uh, Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Uh, we know how many
years of experience they have
when they come. We know how many
years have been on the bench and
all that. That's a really
involved discussion about
whether we should pay Judges
Differential E. It's a practice
that's not followed.
I'm trying to think of a state
in which that's actually done
and I can't think of one
further, a lot of reasons that
would involve a long
Discussion.
Um and they are elected
officials. Yes, I hire an
employee and I might pay them.
17,000 more or less, depending
on the level of experience and
all that kind of thing, but
their employees. I can terminate
them. I can do lots of things
that I have performance plans
for them.
And the judges are elected
officials and we respect that
The election process applies
uniformly. I'm sorry.
It's both really miss Chairman.
I mean, there's initially
there's initially an appointment
by governor winners of vacancy,
but then they have to stand for
election initially on an open
election to any comers, and then
after that, on a retention just
a yes or no. Every other state
employee has to do that. We're
not doing it to one brand. Our
staffs have legislative again.
Mr Chairman, we do report
performance measures.
That we've agreed to with the
Legislative Finance Committee.
Those are available to you. We
haven't They're not included in
your
going to give us the bad ones.
We're going to show us the
mediocre ones, and I mean it's a
matter of fairness if a state
employee
Has to have it.
And we're funding that. Why
doesn't other people have it?
The judicial branch has always
held them. Sure we can't judge
because
Every judge and
They have a different
determination. You have to have
that leeway.
But I mean performance Metrics
are
Are gonna be where we're going
to push the hardest over the
next couple of years. How many
hours is
Yeah. What time did they leave?
Do they clear dockets on Friday,
but I hear it all the time and
hunting
Includes the docket.
Except case.
I don't. I don't think we should
allow them to do that with but
You got a big problem with crime
in performance for Judge,
Hatchet or building come across
but performance.
Needs to happen.
You know, you see it every day
in the news.
I don't The courts don't
disagree with you that we are
subject to performance measures
and should be when I said
negotiation. I'm sorry if that
word didn't sound appropriate. I
mean, we have to be able to
generate the data they want. So
if they ask for something would
say well.
Yeah, You can do that, or we
can't. We could work on
developing a way to report that
measure. If you think that's
important, we talk about why
it's more. There are national
standards. Um, that that we we,
that's usually what we report
on.
Tell FC and you know we're
Qualifications. Bills are fine
you have you have them for
various officials, and that's we
be happy to talk about that How
many cases are in the appellate
court? You said you have the
answer. I did not get an answer.
I did get a clearance rate for
last year in the Court of
Appeals was 99% in the Supreme
Court was 132%.
Phelps, Can you find that for
me?
Judicial, Miss German May I just
respond briefly? I think it
would be an error for us to
paint.
All judges with a brush.
I'll tell you I I know Some
judges are extremely extremely,
extraordinarily hardworking,
very committed and worked very
hard and just like any other
part of life.
In the office. Any law firm? Any
business there? There are those
who will work harder than
others. And so I I'd hate to
paint them all with with one
brush. The other thing, too. Mr.
Chairman is again the goal of
this bill is to pay more
salaries so we can get better,
um, experienced people on the
bench and again realized right
now, if you've got a district
attorney starting out of law
school, and they start working
for the public defender's
office, or maybe making $60,000
a year
You know films back there in the
back solution. What public
defenders Miss Sherman Public
defenders are starting at how
much
Yes. So you've got somebody
coming out of law school and
they're working for the public
defender or district attorney.
They're making $60,000 a year
Getting us a state judge ship
right now is a huge salary
increase. So that's who's
getting attracted to those
positions. If you're in private
practice, the salaries are
paying here in almost all cases
would be a significant cut in
earning
And, um, the Chief Justice
Shannon Bacon has talked about
that as well. Too Many of them
have taken cuts in what they
could be earning in private
practice to serve, so the goal
here is to try and get people
who do have 20 years of
experience or even more on the
bench.
Old guys like me.
Although happy murder, Yeah, uh,
center Stein born. You wanna do
that? While I'm looking for the
well, I just want to make a
point that I think is been left
out of this conversation, which
is
The judiciary does have the
Judicial standards Commission.
Um which, in my time in
government I've always looked at
from a good government
perspective is being
A really great good government
oversight mechanism that
punishes judges.
Uh, I'm sure there's plenty of
judges who think
Already definitely has a, you
know, oversight function of the
courts of the state Supreme
Court is punished lots of judges
for bad behavior, which we have,
really and no other form of
government. I mean, all of us,
probably the fourth floor. I
mean, statewide officials, you
have to impeach him.
So and you know
Anyway, I think qualification
performance measurements are
appropriate for all of our
public employees. But in this
branch of government, they
actually have a commission that
As um
As
I had to do. Um, um you know,
tough stuff with lots of judges,
including removing from office
already. Would you would you
know how many judges a year The
Judicial Standards Commission
has to
If corrective action to and I
don't say it is like a ding on
the judiciary hiding it as like.
It's a performance adjustment,
people getting
Mr Chair and Senator sign born.
Sorry, Mr Chair and Senator
Stein born. Uh, I don't have it.
They do an annual report
Standards Commission. They're
very active among the nations to
standards commissions, which
exist in half the states. Uh,
there are among the most active
now understand? They get a lot
of complaints in are actually
supposed to be there like I'm
mad because I lost my case.
Okay. You're supposed to appeal
that not
The judge didn't do anything
wrong by overseeing your case.
Um, but
Many, uh they conduct trials.
It's a lay body made up of a
majority of citizens, not
lawyers, 65 and there
I can't say much, except that
they're very active, and I have
the responsibility on occasion
to file a complaint with the
standards Commission. Um on a
judge. I don't do it very
happily. But
That's not unusual.
Um
Yes, I think that's a difference
from other branches of
government.
Yeah, YouTube, very qualitative
difference and something that's
actually a model in state
government.
That exists in the judicial
branch to oversee judge
performance. So I'm not saying
we shouldn't do more, but I want
to
Point that out because
It's a really good thing that we
do in this branch.
So what happens?
Would you get us a number yet?
already? Mr Chairman. I still
don't have they're trying to
find the number of pending
cases. I'm sorry. That's not
like a
It's not a data point that we
tracked daily or monthly. You
know, we reported when we do a
dive into the
Data. I do see that the fiscal
year 23 disposition rate in the
Court of Appeals. What I said
before 99%. That was the last
quarter. Their annual rate last
year was 104% in FY 20 to 136%.
2100 and 3% and 20 103%. They've
had a backlog, but they're
making progress on it, obviously
because they're over 100% of the
cases filed, but I don't have
the number of active pending
cases. They're trying to get it
for me.
So that's not a data point. Your
travels, you would be tracking
the Pell, according
There's 700 judges German that's
right. And in part, that's
because we wouldn't track that
in the appellate court of the
District court because the judge
might have a different mix of
cases that
Uh, um, require them to carry
fewer cases, but for a longer
period of time or something like
that we track
Have you disposed of the case is
assigned to you. How long does
it take you to get from
beginning to end?
Um
We don't. I haven't. We don't
regularly produced that on
exactly how many cases each
judge has, but we can do so.
And you went from
You're clearing cases, decreased
murder cases you clear down to
93.
That's on page 140 of the LSC
report. So that's the numbers
that you gave the LFC.
You went for for criminal cases,
an average of 460 70 the average
of pending cases, 524 did
decrease and that's a magistrate
and metropolitan courts only, um
It is, but I mean
I don't mind paying people more,
and we should pay people what
they're worth.
And we should pay for experience
do it In every other agency. We
set tears and levels if you have
a new Supreme Court judge that
comes in, and he only has
10 years worth of
Criminal judge or district
judge, right, and you have a
judge with 20 years of
experience.
We should pay them more.
I mean, we want good judges and
so in order to get in the system
and keep moving up the
experience level matters the the
longer I stay, the more I make
right?
I can move up to appellate court
judge If I want to run, I can.
Get appointed to Supreme Court.
I can senator once said, really
like to see her tears right in
this.
Maybe it's a little too late,
but it's It's a thought process
that I think
Could help.
Mr Chairman, your committee and
the committee you chair. The
committee I chair should, uh,
during the interim, and when the
opportunity we have more time to
do these deep dives into the
efficiencies of the court, it's
It's difficult Always to call it
apples and oranges. You know,
when you talk about the number
of cases are on appeal Criminal
appeal issue may be very
different than for example of
water rights.
Issue incredibly complex. You
look at the water rights cases
that take decades to resolve, so
it's hard to just call apples
and oranges and the case or no,
no, not clarified that earlier
judges and in the room, right
they should be. They should be
like the doctors at the mail,
right?
They come in a circle each day
and say, how can those cases but
it is difficult about done. It's
difficult is sure just equate.
Also years when you're talking
about experience on the bench,
I'll just let me just give you
an example. Um
I don't think with much
question probably one of the
most distinguished justices on
the Supreme Court in my practice
lifetime, agree with him or
disagree with him. His ruling
sort would have been probably
Charlie Daniels. Um Charlie
Daniels came to the Supreme
Court to the question earlier
didn't work his way up through
the court system at all was this
was a probably one of the most
extraordinary trial.
Attorneys.
Made a lot of money and went to
the bench in probably authored
more opinions and probably
considered one of the greatest
jurists. But he came to the
Supreme Court without having
lots of experience on the bench,
and probably one of our greats,
and that's that describes
Chavez. I can I can go down the
list. There's plenty of
extraordinary judges who came
out without
Working up the bench at all came
out of the private sector. This
salary structure, I think, opens
that door a little bit more as
well, too, and those are years
of experience in front of the
courts. You know what's
happening in the courts mean?
Attorneys can judge which would
be a
Curry right Matters which judge
in which jurisdiction
Sort of Miss Chairman is not
quite that easy. You definitely
is pretty easy.
I mean, we don't want Larry
Barker, who just walked in the
room during the story about
judges that got a pay increase.
That would be a good Larry
Barker story. I think we could
just put a time clock in the in
the system and say you're going
to punch in electronically that
maybe performance measure we
should have. But
Kind of my soapbox, but I mean,
there are a lot of cracks. I
mean,
You know, this already knows
this that I have a business and
and really in quarter to not
And I have tenants and tenants
may don't not pay their rent.
But I go to Magistrate Court in
civil on my own.
Because if I go higher centers
have wanted he's going to charge
me $1000 for the city civil
case. Well, the person that's
trying to pay the rent.
Really can't pay the additional
1000. So I tried to do my own
and I'm in. I may I don't ever
get a performance report from
Magistrate
File 8090 cases a year.
Right. I never get a performance
measure on the judge. The public
doesn't
Lawyers do
That's it very closer.
Just be aware we're gonna be
tracking it Pretty good. Can I
have
Emotion do pass. Almost go
ahead, Go ahead. Second motion
for new pass by Senator Hemphill
second Base Center via
Call the roll.
Senator Bert? Yes, Bert votes?
Yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Bradley. Yes, Senator
Bradley votes? Yes.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzalez votes. Yes,
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla? Yes, Senator.
Pdf boats. Yes, center.
Senator Stein born Yes, and I'd
like to explain my Senator Stein
born votes. Yes.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes Yes.
Senator.
I'm sorry. Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Thank you. Vice
Chair. Rodriguez votes Yes. And
Chairman Chairman Sports. Yes,
Do past 9 to 0 90 0 Center.
Stein born explaining this
chair. You know, I think I make
that while we have the young
people in the room, uh, anyway
I just want to point out I just
want to point out the disconnect
that
We talked a lot about concern
for competitive salaries as we
should for our public employees.
But this branch of government
continues to be given the short
trip to level legislative branch
where we don't get paid anything
at all other than a per diem
when we travel, and I would ask
the question, Do we have a hard
time getting good people?
Would we get better people if we
offered a salary? I know there's
young people in this room that
would love to run for office
someday. That cannot
So we we hope we take the same
train of logic to investing in
the legislative branch that we
expected citizens to be able to
make good public policy
decisions on the most complex
matters facing us public puts us
in these seats that we have to
make decisions on child welfare
that we expand on at great
length. But yet
We don't empower us to work on
it really full time if those of
us to have to work and a lot of
us do
Um
There is a disconnect there, Mr
Chairman and Mr Chairman, and I
really hope that we expand our
consciousness on this subject on
good government on empowering
everybody, including the young
people that are in this room,
the next generation
We've all been here awhile.
The next generation to be able
to do a good job in the seats
and not creating
Saturate the same imbalance that
really short shrift New Mexico
So that's all. It's it's hard to
not feel this dichotomy.
Sometimes when we
You know, we're giving very good
salaries rightfully so, But you
had We expect to do this job for
basically nothing.
Senator Stein born read the
Constitution.
Hmm. And
Everybody has to give up every
job that they have. We can
change constant security like
you already made your response
constitutionally.
Everybody will have to give up
every job that are paid in other
sectors will, I think
You get a wide that
Running for office that know
what they're getting into took
it.
They know it wasn't paid. Pay
somebody
Like buying pay my health
insurance.
Pay.
My full retirement. We pay for
our own retirement. You pay into
the my health insurance. I mean,
Other people may have other
needs.
Give a per diem for a higher per
diem rate, actually reimburse
your real expenses is in Santa
Fe. There's not a room that's
under $200.
During the summer.
Just thank you. Thank you. Mr
Committee will draft subsection
three of performance. Look
forward to working with you, Mr
Chairman.
Senator. It's okay. We're
talking. We're adjourned. We're
gonna We're gonna get house
built to in here and get a rack
