Dollars provided cash balances
for the legislative expenses of
the First National session and
this includes ninety five
thousand seven hundred dollars
for the house of representatives
and that eighty seven thousand
one hundred for the Senate and
sixty thousand six hundred
dollars for the Legislative
Council Service and that section
two makes general appropriations
to the executive additional
branches for the cannabis
related
legislation as follows let me
reminded the committee that
these next appropriations that I
will be reading are all continue
their nonrecurring but they're
all contingent upon the other
bills passing their related to
these one million seven hundred.
Thousand dollars to the
regulation licensing department
to administer cannabis
regulation Act and seven hundred
fifty thousand to the department
of public safety for law
enforcement certification and
for roadside impairment tests
related to campus impairments
and I guess I could take my mask
procurement I do have a roll
from the Legislative Council
Service here Mister we don't
want to take it off here and
because I too close to him here
four million dollars to the
taxation and revenue department
for the implementation of the
cannabis tax act and five
hundred thousand dollars to the
administrative office of the
courts to address the expanded
meant of arrest and conviction
records for certain cannabis
related offenses that's all it
does Mr chairman members of the
committee.
And just to make everybody
familiar and house bill two R.
Charles you're there to me when
we passed house bill two we had
five million dollars and correct
me if I'm wrong for TRD ten
minutes.
Representative contingent upon
us the bill.
Mr chairman members of the
committee can you hear me OK yes
we got a okay so House Bill to
contained
to contention appropriations one
for two million.
For TRD to upgrade their tax
system for the cannabis bill
that contingency failed.
There was no
legislation that passed during
the regular session so there's
not a duplicate appropriation
there's another two million for
other legislation related to the
tax code
that we're still looking at but
the two million was earmarked
for the cannabis bill was a
failed contingency so that money
is going away.
In the only other differences
and I think Senator Rodriguez
com correct is seven hundred
fifty coral for DPS to do some
type of testing to figure here
over over intoxicated or
whatever they want to call it
right and then R. L. B.'s dollar
amount which was not in house
bill two prior but which R. L.
B. says they need now correct.
That's correct for start up cost
RLD has indicated that for full
implementation of this bill they
need about seven million dollars
going forward which would likely
come out of the cannabis Fund.
Okay questions from committee
members etcetera would you have
your hand up.
Thank you Mr chairman so we had
four million dollars set aside.
And house bill two and it was
contingent and budget of bills
been passed.
We don't have that money more
that's correct correct Mr
chairman.
Senator Woods there was four
million set aside in trials
correct me there was two million
for the can cannabis bill in two
million for other contingency
bills that either have passed
and may have not been signed
into law so there's two million
from for marijuana and two
million for other bills that
were set aside.
That's correct Mr chairman.
Were you we have.
So we only had two million for
Campos said at one time.
And two million for some other
bill next Mr chairman and
senator Rodriguez some sorry to
leave you out sure thank you Mr
chairman and thank you Senator
Woods for your questions and
you're absolutely correct the
contingency language that we put
in here is basically contingency
language that we put back then
is that nothing takes place no
appropriations are consummated
on last other bills has that are
can that make it contingent upon
that and and we did not pass the
cannabis bill last time so that
contingency went away and the
appropriation that was proposed
and so this one here does the
same thing it says we will not
spend this on last we will not
appropriated last these bills
actually passed down this is
appropriate.
Well guess what my problem is.
Is now we've got we're asking
for seven million.
Where we were asking for two
million before.
So that's quite a bit different.
And I'm Mr chair so so.
And Senator Rodriguez you see
what see you see what I'm
saying.
That's five million dollars
difference.
A lot of money in anybody's.
So as long as I'm squirrel that
broke next that's so.
That's where I'm seeing thank
you thank you very much.
Thank.
It only says that R. L. B..
Will require up to seven point
six three million in reoccurring
revenue for the cannabis we are
only appropriating them
One point seven and it's my
understanding that contingent
upon the bill passing that they
will use the funds from
legalization to gather the the
seven million in in cost so
we're only preparation one point
seven the difference is going to
come if marijuana passes are not
that's where the differences
come from that fund.
Thank.
Thank you thank you.
Centered I mean you have your
hand raised I'm sorry if I was
needed.
Senator what they just want to
make sure that that one point
seven million that we're
appropriating now is what we're
appropriating a seven million
dollar cost is a cost of
marijuana passes in that will
come out of the marijuana funder
whatever you want to call it.
Legalization Fund generally
pretty bring one one point seven
in contingency language.
What the Mr chairman it it says
all coming up generals or is
what it says.
Mr chairman then interject on
that for a moment Senator
Rodriguez here Senator Woods the
the alright that will be coming
out general fund that we're
talking about now would be in
the future when more recurring
expenses and senator Munoz
indicated the amounts that are
do the regulation licensing
department is estimated to need
to proceed with all of this if
the bill passes would be dealt
with in the future and likely
that would have to be most of it
would have to come from
recurring however there is a
fund established in created in
legislation where by this
funding would come from and that
would be directly from the
cannabis if this passes from the
the tax.
In.
Run the industry itself.
Well yes they would come from
the taxes paid if in fact it
passes and any revenues
collected.
But that's again all in the
future if this passes this
funding that we're doing now is
just to get it's going now under
nonrecurring expense.
I have no more questions thank
you very much thank you.
Thank you let me just clarify
something in.
I know I ask your name three
times we change our gym operator
two times today.
Cardium operated we don't have
any public do we have public
comment.
Okay.
In your next.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
probably a question for you
freshman question just on the
process is is this maybe common
practice for wire the
appropriations not included in
the in the related legislation
that I mean we're gonna hear
these bills on the floor this
this evening why are these not
divided out the appropriations
in the legislation that we're
gonna take action on tonight
just explain this process to
make quickly.
Some Senator.
When bills have not passed the
legislature and we're not sure
if they're gonna pass but they
kinda look like they're do we
put contingency language in a
different bill so that if
something happens in the bill as
it passed the money's not
sitting there and we have to
change that later on so it's all
contingency language upon.
House Bill whatever passing and
it doesn't pass then the reverts
back to the general fund.
So that's why we we put it in
that way.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
announced Senator Rodriguez your
time elaborate just a little bit
that for Senator
Four hundred and here is that we
just passed house bill two and
house bill two very commonly we
do this kind of thing in fact
there were approximately when we
were discussing it in finance
and other places where
approximately fifty six million
dollars without going into all
of that that were intended to us
so it's nothing real and
comments that we're doing.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Senator
Rodriguez.
Yes Sir thank you.
Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I
don't know what the effective
date of the cannabis bill is but
I thought it was at least a year
out what we have to put money in
here right now.
Yes Mr chairman if I may I
answer that it's the
implementation time that is
needed and they estimated that
approximately April first two
would be the next year or have
twenty twenty two would be the
time when this would be able to
be rolled out it takes a lot of
time to implement all the
procedures all of get the staff
and and do and then the
producers have to produce and
grow and it's just a huge
business so that is the amount
of time that was estimated to be
needed for to get it all clean
and and so wanted committee
would have to be established to
what to review the applications
and and on and on it's a great
administrative endeavor.
So.
I I don't disagree with any of
that but it I thought that was
the whole reason why there was
the delay here was so that we
could do all of this in the next
thirty day session.
I mean I I I thought that was
the the purpose of the delay
that in thanks purpose of the
delay was to rush money through
the day.
And so that's just a a concern I
have
and I see Mr press Mr.
Chair and senator but we
certainly have money in there
for our LD and if all these
gonna run this like they do the
alcohol park will that part's
already exists.
Sensually
what we don't have is anything
in here for the department of ag
who probably ought to be
involved somewhere in this
process although I have been
told that that we don't want to
Department bag in the bill
itself because well they might
not do the right thing.
just because of the people in
our gross stuff.
in and of course the AOC portion
of this to expunge everything.
Do we have to rush that part
through as well so those those
are my concerns Mr chair doesn't
necessarily have to have a.
Unanswered to to but but I do
think that we're trying to rush
something through here that
doesn't need to be rushed.
As you said or somebody said at
nine twenty one in a special
session nine twenty one evening
and special session so thank you
Mr.
Thank you senator shooter
Senator Diamond you still have
your hand up we have another
question.
I'm just checking on a text from
the DPS secretary right now
any other questions from
committee members.
Yes so people can you know I
mean
Senator Diamond when we seen
appropriation bills they're
always being Appropration to the
to the courts to judicial to
make the three legislative
branches equal and and so you
may see this two hundred
thousand eight hundred fifty
thousand five hundred thousand
are I think it is is for a
expungement
and so they're gonna work on
that.
I just want to make sure that
the PS has enough money for
maybe thirty seconds I'm just
waiting for me to text me back
that they have enough money to
implement this because they have
the lowest dollar.
I just want to double check that
with the secretary.
Job on the floor tonight.
Graduations your first bill.
Thank you yes that was my first
bill so I need some applause.
Thank you.
I just I just wanna make sure
DPS has a right dollar amount so
this can wait let me just call
invoke.
So Mister chairman.
Madam chair while waiting can I
make a comment.
Are you.
Bill tonight right yeah we're
we're we're.
Senator Burt.
I'm just getting an answer right
now.
So Senator Rodriguez if you want
to answer Center birds question.
The senator Byrd question is.
It's it's not a question
actually is just
I would I would vote and then I
would tell you what I'm going
that way so I'm gonna from low
that by telling you why cannot
vote for this bill I am very
supportive of the funding for
the special session what we need
to do that I am vehemently
opposed to the legalization of
cannabis and this bill has money
to support that so I am not
gonna vote for this bill that's
my I just want actually my son
got a front row that was
supposed to do on the back thank
you madam chair.
Thank you senator Byrd for
letting us know.
Madam chairman if I may well
we're waiting.
Yes crystal I mean Senator
Diamond says.
I'd like to do this I'd like to
do the exact same thing I think
my question about that was I
understand that we have bills to
pay and so when I look at the
feed going to come in here with
an open mind but but these the
funding that we're passing here
is very specific to cannabis so
it seems to me like there's no
way I could be a test on this
and be and no on cannabis on the
floor and so I too will be no
voting no on this I think that
was my confusion on why we can't
separate the two but but thank
you senator Byrd for opening
that conversation.
I think chairman rod Regus a
Senator Pat Woods here and I
feel the same way I'm going to
vote no on the campus built so I
certainly can't vote yes on this
I would be but in doing so I
just wanted to let you know
ahead of time thank you sure
thank you Senator Woods zero.
I just want to make sure that we
don't have to go back and do
this on the floor anything I
wanna make sure that we got it
correct as it comes out the
Senate finance and we're not in
that situation.
Well back up.
She doesn't even know XMM
insieme F. R..
Mr Chairman this is Charles
right.
I think these numbers came from
the executive that's what I was
told I think thank.
Thank.
It's not to say that they
wouldn't come back and ask for
more later but does.
The current situation I think
this is what the recommendation
as well okay.
I do pass on.
Correct you Mr chairman.
We have a motion by Senator
Campos a second by Senator
Gonzales
Secretary call the roll.
No.
Yes.
Okay.
No.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
There's going yes any.
Thank you.
No.
So.
Yes.
Yes.
You have a vote of six yes four
one excuse.
All right we do have a due pass
motion I forgot to add the
disclaimer for anybody to go to
know will be adding your per
diem to other members checks.
Thank you for your state
incentives and.
Thank you guys I think we are
done what will in the state and
try to get committee report
thank you appreciate it thanks.
