Why are we will actually.
Senator is also in the movie.
well thank you Mr chairman thank
you members on the house bill
two this is so discussion that
we have had specially probably I
guess so within the last month
of well how to be able to will.
Havel.
A rebate or you know all.
Household relief payment to in
lieu of phone.
We are all all experiencing the
high cost of phone.
Of just operating the home you
know anywhere from your own
needs to while also fuel
consumption.
And so the discussion has been
known Mr chairman of.
You know with the different
scenarios the on the last
scenario that we're working with
right now yes without having a
payment of two hundred and fifty
dollars and this would be before
June of two thousand twenty two
and then the.
One of the amendments actually
covers the changes on the bill
which is to have all.
The second distribution done
from between August first and
the end of this versus the prior
it was listed as September so
that so that amendment now with
that of.
Mr chairman not since I haven't
seen that he said he's familiar
with the second amendment we
have a
Mr just my in the totals for
LFC if you want to cover the
second amendment sure thing.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales a
great I'll just add that the
house floor amendment which is I
believe the one that's gonna get
pass out insurers that if you
received a payment through the
payment program you also can't
receive a rebate through the tax
program so just make sure you
can't double dip and received
two checks.
So we'll.
the other part terms chairman
and being that the numbers have
changed so I will yield to Mr
Taurus but but we had initially
was set of.
Part of will.
Part of the funding that would
come for this is part from
twenty twenty two and the other
ones from twenty twenty three
and which will on the numbers
that I had prior was so an
estimate of
With the.
With the researchers being at
thirty three point five and then
for twenty twenty three at
twenty eight and I will not see
those numbers have changed.
Mr chair those numbers have
changed okay very well so they
know we're looking at all of six
hundred and seventy seven
million plus the twenty million
that is for the non filers and
then we also have a phone.
The number of phone seven
hundred on the for the
administrative announced you
speak up just a little bit.
This better.
I don't.
No.
If you turn up the volume maybe
that'll that'll.
Okay very well on the end of the
administrative cost we were seen
of the total cost would be of
seven hundred eighty five
thousand.
And now this is to administer
the entire process of of.
distribution of both the relief.
And with that Mr chairman of
there's other technical or any
of the other question from
members will stand for questions
thank you we don't have anybody.
Right believe that just double
check.
will go to the audience anybody
in support.
JD and his fabulous speech.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee good evening my
name is jade able I'm speaking
on behalf of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
was supports this effort to
share our historic surpluses
driven by our state's energy
production directly with New
Mexicans.
many of our taxpayers are also
small business owners and we all
know what they've been through
the last several years in our
consumers businesses are
experiencing runaway inflation.
In forty years so the great rock
Committee chamber of commerce
strongly supports this rebate
plan but also wants to make on
the record a couple of points
encourages the legislature to
continue to address the
fundamental problems in our tax
code that make our state less
competitive we've got to
continue to promote long term
economic growth attracting
investments here to make it
easier to develop and attract
talent to New Mexico that's
going to stay here for a long
long time and the second point
is the chamber's perspective it
feels that from and efficiency
standpoint this bill would be a
little bit better practice.
It is those individuals who have
the appropriate and relevant
taxpayer identification numbers
regardless of what their
situation is thank you so much.
Thank you anybody else.
Anybody in opposition.
Opening up in opposition.
Question from committee members
Senator Steinborn.
Mr chairman and senator Sir I
just have one question if you
know the answer to order anyone
does have a constituent assembly
in the mail today who's he and
his wife receive only social
security income they don't file
a tax return how does this
affect them.
You
chair Senator Steinborn they'd
be able to receive their rebate
through the application that HSD
is gonna set up as part of that
twenty million dollar pop for
non filers okay so they would Mr
chair that have to file an
application to receive it would
work I because I guess they're
not filing so they're kind of
not in the system that way so I
okay thank you very much
appreciate it thank you Mr thank
you.
Etcetera I'll put John Senator
share and then Senator with.
Thank you Mr chair so I got of
section two of this is.
Caused some heartburn certainly
with me and others and I just
want to get some clarification
here to section two is the Human
Services Department department
of in how they distribute these
of these funds so.
I guess the first question is
what kind of controls to we have
to verify somebody's identity
how do we know that they didn't
just show up from Texas
yesterday and will five hundred
Bucks.
Especially taxpayers economy.
Senator Munoz.
The bill requires individual
taxpayer identification numbers
or social security numbers to
verify their identity and tax
and Rev we'll be doing the
identification process.
So Mister of shared do we have
what kind of process do they
normally have we know.
I'll try to answer that question
miss if you don't mind hello
good to see you all
that question certainly came up
in our various discussion on the
house side in the secretary of
taxation revenue provided
information that indicated that
they have multiple databases
where they cross check to make
sure that someone hasn't
received.
The tax rebate and I'm assuming
you're asking about the second
provision under the other
program to ensure there isn't
double
You know receipt of monies if
that was a question came a
little late Mister chair Mister
chair and chair what it really
is so HSD is going to.
Distributed certain amount of
money to what we call non filers
second remember the the term
there okay so they didn't file a
tax return
so idea of everybody follows a
tax return don't hear anything
else about so these are people
it didn't file a tax return.
In the end I understand that
they have to provide a social
security number or individual
tax ID number the I. TI in.
Then they have to show that
their residents.
What kind of systems this TRD or
HSD have to verify.
The the they're a resident.
Mr chair and senator we do have
more taken who is the policy
director and TRD and I think
there.
Who I think you can answer that
a little more specifically than
I.
Thank you.
Mister chairman Senator share
we do have a many databases of
information besides the social
security number and I tunes
information so we do maintain
database includes address
information that from that we
draw from other sources
including federal sources and so
we will be able to use that
information to verify residency.
So I know of.
Mr chair madam chair mark
The biggest concern is that the
people who ought not be
receiving of of a rebate from
the from this are somehow going
to get that rebate and you know
I've heard all kinds of rumors
and stories in about this it's
not factual many of them I'm
convinced now does not exist but
I still need to be able to.
To articulate to everybody of
how we're going to do this so
that it's
residents of New Mexico that
that are eligible so is there an
age requirement dependence hello
how do we pick out who gets this
from HSD not that not just the
just the money from HSD
distribute.
Hope Mr chairman and senator in
the bill itself in the provision
that relates to the non filers
there are about four criteria
that are listed in the bill that
indicates who is eligible so
certainly someone who is not who
is who is eligible for a rebate
is not eligible for this program
the person cannot be a dependent
so if you look on page three of
the bill they're not dependence
as that term is used in our code
they are at least eighteen years
of age during any part of twenty
twenty one and they must file an
application with the department
Mr chair and senator and as
you've previously noted the
person must be provided social
security number or I. T. number
and frankly that probably is
that is key in terms of
validating the legitimacy of
their claim in terms of
residency and and other things
so that was a that was a key
component in terms in terms of
validating
The application process Mr chair
Senator.
Mr chair madam chair that so the
next thing is is the the twenty
million dollar cap which that's
expended that's expended
somebody so wait a minute so of
grandma who and on the ground
fund for some of but so grandma
who didn't have any monies a
didn't have any income so she
didn't follow the return but
she's in the Mexican
it should get down there before
this was done is there any way
for her to still get this
Mr chair Center actually there
it could be away if that person
is willing to file a tax return
because that person could if
they do it within the
appropriate time frame could
file a tax return and become
eligible through the tax return
process because as we pointed
out.
That they will have a social
security number and I ten in
eligible through that process Mr
chair or senator.
How long does this have to be
filed by whatever.
Four days from now you for me
Yes please answer okay good Mr
chair Senator share in order to
receive it through the tax
rebate process you can find that
on page two.
may thirty first to to to to
after may thirty first before
may thirty first twenty twenty
three so they have over here.
All right so.
We've tried limited to residents
of New Mexico who really are
residents of New Mexico no
Texans.
absolutely.
The
TRD believes that they've got
ways to verify who they are
certainly the so security number
in the in the of I. T. I. and
and possibly other things if so
if I walk into HSD with my
application they're not going to
have other things how how are
they going to no one when I fill
out the application.
Mr chair Senator the application
that is filled out obviously
will go into the system
electronically it's downloaded
in the data is transferred to
TRD and in truth the the bulk of
the working of the heavy lifting
Mr chair and senator is going to
be three TRD.
Who's HSD gonna ask for a
utility bill or a copy of my
driver's license or a W. two.
I guess I will at the LCS others
I think not there will be an
application where various things
will be asked.
and that data will then be
verified by TRD through their
very status based system and I
may plan on if I mean Mr chair
and senator this is based on a
program that has been in
existence in the past and I
don't know if that was mentioned
prior to my arriving that is how
we came to to the structure HSD
had a similar program for those
who are not eligible for COVID
relief payments so the structure
is already essentially in place
in terms of how the work had
been done that is why we feel
reasonably confident that there
is a mechanism to do the
validation of the data because
it was done in a program that
was in place before and just
completed.
So we're not recreating the
wheel we just have to it's
already there we just got to do
it again correct Mr speaker Mr
chair and Senator sorry I I've
been on the floor for two out of
that ugly and isolation devoted
to a lot not that I know you're
there by that yeah I hope so too
the gentleman.
you so.
As I said this is we it is not
really a brand news like program
at the it's modeled on something
that we just that the agency had
worked together on before Mr
chair and senator.
Thank you Mr thank thank you
center what.
Thank you Mr.
The first question I have is but
we need to talk a minute about
the.
The
Tax stabilization.
But and it talks about a two
thirds majority of votes in the
house.
In the Senate okay on that
particular question is that two
thirds.
Of the members present is that
two thirds of the.
Our membership.
Mr chair and senator it's two
thirds of those present so
everyone is present yes yes Mr
chair and senator for example we
got two thirds on the house
floor just before coming here
there were a few members excuse
and it was based on the votes
who were present.
Okay.
This is going to be a touchy
question Mr chair.
And I apologize for.
But you probably expected me to
ask you about it.
When we did the the tax bill.
During the last session.
You told.
Us that a rebate would be
inflationary.
And you said that was your
staff's recommendation.
And as you know.
There were some of is trying to
give thousand dollar rebate at
that time.
Can you tell me your methodology
or your thought process.
Of why not inflationary now
Thank you for that question
Senator and it's not touching I
appreciate it thank you Mr chair
The inflation is occurring as we
speak now regardless of what we
have done in the state and I
would point out Mr chair and
senator it derives largely from
gas prices skyrocketing for
partly for reasons that are
perhaps domestic but probably
more largely due to reasons that
our international which is
something certainly we did not
anticipate at least I didn't.
And members of that many members
of the house did not anticipate
at the time we were working on
in the in the short session that
just ended in February things
changed Mr chair and senator
very quickly I think we would
agree once the war in Ukraine
destabilized oil prices and so
on and because of the
inflationary trend through the
oil so
Sometimes you can't predict
things and I think we would
agree that's the case Mr chair
and senator and as a result
we're now trying to assist New
Mexicans who are impacted not by
actions really within the state
per se but things that are
happening nationally and
internationally and for that
reason we're working to try to
support New Mexicans and along
these lines Mr chairman and
senator.
Yes it's terrible.
We have to.
Change of our.
Middle of the stream.
I understand that and
understand.
What you're trying to do.
Hi.
I have a real problem.
That we couldn't do that.
During the regular session.
We had just as much money in the
tail.
And.
The other question I have.
We we gave a a two hundred fifty
dollar rebate during the regular
session so we're just talking to
one individual a two hundred
fifty dollar rebate.
And now the way this thing is
structured we're going to give
one checked for two hundred
fifty dollars to an individual
from the session we've already
signed by the governor this bill
gives two more checks.
What the two checks out of this
bill is to get it into two
financial years.
Why couldn't we give and save a
whole lot of effort.
At least one checked combined
the first two checks in one
check.
Now it may not cover the same
people but it could save us a
lot of administration time a lot
of of headaches to our agencies
if we would just got a five
hundred dollar check to the
people that would get a five
hundred dollar check.
And the people that didn't
qualify for the first two
hundred fifty two once a journal
over the amount that we have on
this bill and give them two
hundred fifty and cut down on a
little bit of.
Reproductive work their reach up
you know overworking or
agencies.
What I know that's not going to
pass a new US number I mean this
thing is cut and dried and it's
got votes to pass.
But doesn't it seem a little.
Aug.
That we couldn't do that.
Mr chair.
Madam chair.
Mr chair and Senator I'd point
out that the house bill that we
passed you know in the past
regular session will not take
effect until the next fiscal
year
so this check though two hundred
fifty dollars that we want to
get out in may or early June is
intended to address the
immediate concerns of New
Mexicans and so to to wait until
July to get to merge it with the
other I think is kind of defeat
some of the goals that were
attempting to address
Mr chair and senator
and also I'm not sure
administratively would be easier
because there are criteria and I
you know maybe I should just TRD
to address that Pete piece Mr
chair but their criteria on the
other one on the you know on the
house bill one sixty three bill
and there are no quick you know
the different criteria for the
this rebate and how they would
we're so systems I'm not sure Mr
chair and senator in fact it
would save administrative costs
but we do have Mr Chaykin here
from the tax department if you
can speak to the administration
on you know Mr chairman of
Senator Woods I would say that
once we set up the system it
actually won't cost a great deal
more to do to payments as a
share Chandler mentioned on the
rebate park which is section one
of this bill and a rebate was
what was passed in house bill
one sixty three during the
regular session those have
different criteria because of
one rebate is capped.
by income level there's a income
threshold was this rebate is not
and on the the second payment
therefore once we set up the
system it's not actually going
to result in a great deal of
additional costs and on section
two of the bill as chairman Jim
Dutcher Chandler mentioned.
we run this program before so
it's really just standing up for
a program again that we already
have the systems in place and
making some small changes to the
application process.
I guess it only be and private
business that saving cutting one
check would be at an advantage
Mr chair.
State government has problems.
So
it makes it looks as though.
We're timing events.
For a particular reason.
Just in transparency.
So that's I guess that's all I
need to say shares you very much
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and I would be quick I
just want to thank you
Representative Chandler and of
course
Senator the site is here for all
your work I enjoyed working with
you in the workgroup thank you
for I think you did to directors
and guide us help us learn to
and your staff thank you smile
and everyone who was there to
assist us
I do have just maybe more of a
point then a question I wanted
to make having to do with the
the the user friendliness of the
application for those non filers
that are going to be applying
for assistance those that as we
mentioned do not qualify because
under the rebates because they
do not file income tax returns
so how do we get them to get
some help right now we're gonna
call that relief so we can
differentiate and in that twenty
million that we're calling
relief for people that didn't
them have a tax filings when
they apply I'm trying to
visualize that hopefully they
will have the most simple way to
be able to read that the
application is should be onerous
and and really difficult where
they would have to put it aside
we got calls before when we did
that in the last a the EDD
distribution we were people
would just get staff didn't
understand the the application
how it read what to do and and
someone I just want to make sure
though that you mentioned that
if there's past structure in
place and that it's going to be
already it's not going to have
to recreate the wheel right
reinvent the wheel I should say
and and that's good but I think
this is somewhat different in
that this has to do they have to
distributions one now in June
for example and the other one
would be in Aug.
As with the amendment for
example and I'm wondering if the
application is actually tailored
so that they can do that once
and no clearly that that's going
to be expected.
Thank you Representative I if I
may
here and vice chair the so let's
talk about there two programs
the rebate program is to
payments okay based on one well
on the one tax return.
to the data exists very low
administrative costs Mr chair
and vice chair
with regard to the second
program for the non filers
there's going to be one check
one application and.
That was done in part to save on
administrative costs and
complexity so I hope that helps
Mr chair yes it does thank you
and and I'm I'm sorry that it
may not interrupt you
Representative yes but I it does
help a lot because I think that
that's going to make it a lot
easier for them to apply just at
least one time us is the other
groups that are file taxes don't
have to play at all they just
get a rebate it be just fair
that these people that are
qualified under a different
program would do what we want so
thank you for that and then just
a last point more of of
information than anything maybe
fortax here for a mark to take a
good look at the application in
the the actual body of the
application to make sure that it
is in fact something that users
can do easily and and so on and
and that the numbers are clear
in their word to call if they
get stuck if something doesn't
work doesn't it doesn't take or
whatever because we did get some
calls on that last time but I
know it was during the time of
when short staffing was taking
place and so on so I appreciate
if you can do that very much
thank you and I think that's a
that's about all I have I want
to thank you again for all your
work thank you Mr chairman
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and Representative thank
you very much for your work on
this so just you know I and
again I mean been a poor
listener earlier so I apologize
so was the the temp to spread it
into two payments also to be
helpful to the tax year for how
that might appear from a
reserve standpoint do you want
to say anything about that
because it seems to me like
we're gonna lessen our impact Mr
chairman by doing that was that
part of your.
Mr chair Senator very good point
and if I didn't make that point
I intended maybe it did
representative but we're a
little tired at this point so.
Mr chair Senator so much so I I
the intent was you know we're
putting in two different fiscal
years that will smooth out some
of the fiscal impact Mr
chairman.
And and the Senator if you want
the same thing.
Mr chairman of some of the no
it's pretty much that's one of
the big reasons and so Mister
chairman and and and sponsor so
it is what is this due to the
new fiscal years reserve and and
is it repairable.
This is a great thing to do and
we need to do it but is it
repairable are we projecting
that you're terrible by the end
of state the the calendar year
after the payments made
Yes and I believe the assessment
was it would might drop our
reserves to twenty eight percent
but I'm happy to have a smile to
he's obviously more
knowledgeable Mr chair and
senator I details Mr chair
Senator Padilla eat.
Madam chair here got it right
we're expecting about twenty
percent but the revenues are
still fluctuating quite a bit
and we wouldn't be surprised
come in one or two percent above
or below that so you might end
up at thirty percent by the end
of fiscal year anyway thank you
Mr chairman I just we should be
lost on us that that by
spreading across yes it's a
little more administrative might
be a while once you've set up
the the thing the first time
you're ready to rock and roll
sounds like the second time but
but we we shouldn't you know
like.
Not taking the consideration
what this does to our reserves
protection of our credit ratings
and all that I think it's a
smart move to do it that way
thank you.
I'm teaming else have a few
quick.
The question thank.
Mr chair representative senator
dumb question I'm sure you
answered already since we're
appropriating money to two
different apartments here two
different programs do these
departments talk to each other
to make sure that that we're not
issuing checks from both.
Mr chair and Senator a hundred
percent and
It the way the program for the
non filers because that's the
one I think you're focused on
is.
The HSD is simply the Ripper
recipient of the information
their data the data they collect
is given to TRD so there's not
too agencies issuing checks
there's one agency Mr chairman
and senator.
The issues that taxed that's
TRD.
Mr Chairman
Representative.
We're actually appropriating
twenty million of the Human
Services Department.
So.
So it just reads like you have
two different agencies cutting
checks so I'm just asking the
question could be those entities
talk to each other system again
this I'm sorry that's okay Mr
chair there are not too agencies
that TRD will tap into the fund
that HSD is holding an if
someone in the finance side lost
explain it more fully but that's
my understanding Mister chairman
Senator.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I
believe in the past week as
Representative Chandler
mentioned have already set up
this program before my a model
program and in the past TRD it
would set up in and you with HSD
and they worked extremely
closely to verify those payments
I would assume that to be the
case Mr chairman I want to ask
questions of thank you.
Thank you.
I just have a few questions and
maybe this is some of it may be
a little bit personal but it
it's parents that have college
students right.
If I currently clean.
My college student as a
dependent but he's also in the
work force and he has a receives
a W. two or ten ninety nine then
he still has to file a tax
return.
So is he in eligible because I
claim as a dependent or is he
eligible because he still has to
file a tax return based on his
W. two wages.
Maybe TRD in that entire to help
them handle.
Might be a trick question in
real life question.
Mr chairman the way that the
legislation is drafted you would
have if you are dependent you
could not claim the either a
anything under section one or
section two.
And even though he he's taxed on
is W. two wages and has to file
a tax return for his W. two
wages he still would be
ineligible because these
independent even those are
college students may not be in
the household buddies is
dependent upon your tax return.
If you Mr chair that is correct
yup that's the the way I read
the bill.
Thank.
That's one of my questions let
me just.
Offered to me.
We all want to make the Mexico
better right.
In in in you are partially right
when when we give rebates are we
influx money into the economy
inflation is is looming upon us
pretty hard we see it in the
supply chain that that's coming
across the when that inflation
stops because we've overspent
are overbought product it's what
she's driving the shortage in
the supply chain across the
across the world and across the
U. S..
And so these aren't real
inflationary pressures your seem
whatever manufacture of cereal
say the same box with.
In four ounces last at the same
cost and you're not seeing those
inflationary pressures because
you're looking at the same
boxing sized box with less
product the feds are coming back
and they're saying we need to
slow the economy we're gonna
trigger.
Eight rate increases across
economy it had a quarter percent
now they're coming back and
saying Google we need to slow
economy even more we're gonna
trigger rate increases at half a
percent and come back and see if
we can slow this economy down.
What we're doing here is my new
in what is happening in the
economy in the world with the
rebate.
but I think it's very important
I mean
Madam chair and then we all have
to eat a little crow in the
Legislature sometimes and and
and fighting against rebate
insanely concur and then coming
back and proposing one it is a
little bit hard and can but at
the end of the day we're here is
provided for New Mexico.
We know this will hit the people
then it needs to head in every
way shape or form in their
pocketbook
they talk about that you know
that the twenty million dollar
cap for those that don't non
filers well some of those are
veterans some of those are
seniors
some of those are people that
are you know they're incomes
below ten thousand dollars and
don't need to file their living
alone and and may have not have
family members but they're
eligible to get a bump in the
may have to deal of the work let
me ask you this so can tax
repairs do that or do we have a
place since in somewhere in
state government.
Where elderly person or an
elderly veteran can go in there
and say
I've seen this in the paper
because they read it every day
how do I file or how do I get
someone to prepare this for me
even though I'm a non filer how
do I get this.
Mr chair that's a very good
question.
I guess I would just the TRD
help with that or others because
this program isn't the as I
pointed out earlier it's a it's
a modeled after prior purpose of
the question I would have did
did those folks get assistance
when they replying for other
programs to have a sense of that
Mr chair and
Mr Chaykin I'm sorry your
looking perplexed.
Mr chair Senator can you just
repeat what I believe the chair
was asking us as their
assistance available for people
who wish to apply for the second
program the non filer program
that's what I think the chairman
was asking us some madam chair
and let me repeat that south.
My mother this is my mother's
eighty eight years old if she
says my income is below that
threshold I've read the rebate I
seen on the news how do I get
that so I can get that in my
house I don't file tax returns
I'm elderly.
and they're not saying that
she's elderly.
Other issues but she needs help
preparing the and she knows that
she needs the money in our
household for whatever to pay
your utilities you know
alleviate some pain is there
system in some more state
government that some place that
says if you're non filer your
elderly you need help with that
we can help you prepare that
important I believe there was
one in the turning general's
office at one point for tax
filers prepares some system I'm
I don't know if there was
another one is TRD or someone
gonna have that in the system
where where those people maybe
not comprehend how to how to or
elderly in the.
Enough not to do it on their own
but need assistance on Mr chair
of human of work with the tax
information policy office and we
feel a lot of questions along
those lines so we would be
available in the tax information
policy office in the call center
to assist with that I do believe
I I'm hesitant to speak for HSD
but I think they also provide
assistance in filling out that
application for the agents
provided in section two of this
bill so as we move along I see
some of the governor's staff in
the back room I expect to see a
campaign for these non filers or
elderly filers that there some
assistance to help them get that
as we move forward and I think
there's plenty of money around
you know what.
We have the money right now.
But when inflation actually hits
and if we get those recessionary
pressures we're gonna have to
pull that.
And I don't know what that's
gonna look like our reserves are
going to be plus or minus two
percent so on the twenty percent
range and down again go up right
we know that oil and gas it is
piling money into Terrel and the
childhood trust fund which we
don't count in our reserves I
mean that's going almost hit
three billion dollars or or
above this year those are not
counted in our reserves and
that's one time money.
And and so New Mexico needs to
prepare on how we're going to
budget and how windy tax policy
over the next couple years with
one time money and not
reoccurring money
I don't disagree with this I I I
think I said in the beginning I
said if we're gonna go to
special session then we know
inflation is hitting people gas
prices and people and for rural
consumers and I'll use my
district for example we have
employees a travel sixty miles a
day to come to work round trip.
It's a different cost for rural
than it is for urban urban
consumers they can hop the bus
they can ride the rail runner
for fifty percent off today.
Not yet.
They they they said to take
effect immediately and and so
there's options for them but
when you got a.
You gotta fill up a truck and a
hundred and twenty five dollars
a tank or higher it's a little
bit hit between the pocketbook
and you have children to raise
and and life happens and and
built happen and so this will
give them the flexibility in the
to to get some relief get caught
up on right get caught up on
utility bills that's what I see
is I hope that we should
probably thought about this is
making them illegal cash maka
see knows.
Is there the last place where I
really want to see the the
rebate checks band is it can
casinos owner seems bent in the
household want to see him
spending the economy
but I know it's it's it's gonna
be a long haul
just prepare ourselves for as we
head into the next session is.
We cannot sustain a budget
increases in that thirteen
percent range of reoccurring and
then expect that in the next
year and the next year and the
next year when we New Mexico
writes a roller coaster of oil
and gas revenues as we move
forward so I think we've done a
pretty good job of helping every
New Mexican that we possibly
could maybe take a little effort
on some we've done some fraud
protection in order to do that
and so with that I will
entertain a motion.
Can I second just because I had
one point Mr chairman quickly I
forgot to ask mark now that you
brought these points of good
points actually up to something
else came to my mind can a
person apply in person in other
words for the non filers we've
been talking about doing it
online but if there if a person
well that's my question can't
can someone go to the Department
and apply is are going to be
some help for them if they go
there in person just say
somebody's computer doesn't work
somebody's elderly this is there
anyone else that or or perhaps
impaired or just can't make the
computer work or though they
don't have a computer can they
go to the
tax department it or I'm sorry
Human Services Department and
have you discussed that with HSD
to see if in fact somebody can
go there and and get help there
in person.
Thank you Mr Senator Rodriguez I
would have to check on that and
all of where the the there's an
in person method for applying I
do think it is online but I can
look into that yeah that that
really concerns me I just want
to make sure that the resources
are there that we're not forcing
people to who can't do it to
have to do it online we know
that a lot of computer now but
we should have the availability
for everyone to be able to do it
in person if they want to or if
they can do it otherwise so can
you check into payments thank
you very much for that Senator
Rodriguez says comments and make
you senator Senator Steinborn
will go to you thank you well
thank you Mr chairman of a
little bit on your point and
also with our Mr of the other
part is that you know the
process for the technical
assistance it's also available
in Spanish and then also from Mr
total C. saying that all they're
also working with the Indian
Affairs to us you know that part
also with our native American
population yes thank you thank
you for that that's very helpful
I just wanna make sure they can
do it in person to if they if
they decide that's the only way
to do it for some people you
know yes Mister chairman Senator
Rodriguez I'm informed that we
will have a kiosk in our field
offices where people can go and
follow this application.
A kiosk but not a real person
they can there will be a
question for them to talk to.
That I see a kiosk as a machine
like you we see kiosks are you
going to get another computer
but a different format so yeah
Mr chair Senator there will be a
live person there to help okay
and will that information be on
the application so people know
that they can go there if they
can't get through a computer to
be in the kiosk in the.
The kiosk somewhere it will it
will be in the application
process if this fails you know
there's an option here or.
Whatever just hearing center up
here we will look into that
thank you appreciate that is yes
Representative no voiced her in
on that and also and I can speak
for other parts of the state
that Intel so all the libraries
are assisting.
And and they have computers
there also and they also have
assistance.
Okay the well that's good thank
you very much and if the
department can provide that
assistance in person also that
would be great and we have more
resources thank you and I think
so.
Centers my Munoz thank you Mr
just I think that's a really
important for
you to drastic but you know a
lot of people go to the Human
Services Department already
there in person so if you just
sense that the staff of the
cross train.
Getting that to be able to
manage that so hopefully sure.
Consummate point one thank you
Mr thank you just one more
question how many employees are
in the office every single day
that can then these or to help
someone with the kiosk I mean
how many how many TRD employees
HSD employees are actually in
the office that they could
rotate shifts because I I know a
lot of are still working
remotely so how are you going to
handle that because it's time to
come back to work and come back
to the office space.
Mr chair I don't have that
information on how the field
offices are currently being
staffed I do believe that there
we have a system that is still
in place so if you call up and
make an appointment then you can
go in and see somebody.
Five point.
We are on a motion for the past
to have a motion by Senator
Campos and the second by Senator
share.
Having cholera.
Senator Burt yes Senator yes
Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator have.
Senator Hemphill yes senator
here yes Senator sure yes
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Somebody's eligible.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
agrees and senator Munoz yes
gentleman yes yes it's
unanimous.
Madam chair Senator the on the
floor and.
Home.
To do so now.
Sure I have this.
He.
Actually they're going to.
They're acting.
