Can you send a bill to ten as
amended Mr chair for it have a
the general come.
Mr chair committee members
This is Senate bill two ten and
this provides a National Guard
in a death benefit here for our
guardsmen when they're activated
by the state to do the state
mission if we were to lose one
of our guardsmen
of the State missions this
ensures that their family and
loved ones that they
unfortunately behind that
they're taking care of
with that I will pass over the
general and give him an
opportunity to make a few
comments about it Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time today Senate
Bill to ten all will allow the
parity in our benefits for
someone who passed away in the
National Guard in support of
state emergency only the
currently over the last couple
few years you've done of bills
that increased survivor benefits
for law enforcement firefighters
two million dollars this this
particular bill will raise will
do five hundred thousand dollars
it's a little different in
amount of state compared to
firefighters and law enforcement
the reason for it is we've got a
bill on the books since the mid
two thousands that Department
literatures pays the just to
ally the service group life
insurance offer guardsmen for
this coming year start in March
B. five hundred thousand so the
combination of both in the in
the event that we lost someone
state active duty would be the
equivalent of a million dollars
which is what our firefighters
and our law enforcement officers
get
with thank you for for your
attention on this and I'll stand
for questions and Mr chair of we
also have an amendment on this
bill we do have an amendment.
Have a motion to
It's under center Boller to
strike it can not here
is.
A second that for discussion Mr
chairman.
One comes with amendment does.
Mr chair what from the last
committee we basically wanted on
page one line thirteen after
appropriation certain declaring
an emergency we wanted to
clarify that on page three
betweens line seven eight
inserting the following new
section emergency it is
necessary for the public peace
health and safety that this act
take effect immediately so just
wanted that that clause in there
as well.
Questions on the amendment so
if.
Question on this is.
On the amendment I have no
questions on the amendment thank
you Mr.
Any objection to the amendment.
I guess because we're in the
paper today center and bills on
some of the.
All the rules.
That we see here.
Senator Burt excuse to Senator
Campos this.
Senator Diamond excuse to.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Used Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz yes.
The bill.
Senator Woods had won the bill
Mr chair my only question and
it's more of a question to our
staff then Senator pope.
Is we get the money for the
firefighters and state police
wet leased to firefighters from
a fund that it is a.
Of.
Tax.
On homeowners insurance.
Property.
And I'm just wondering if
there's not a.
Fund that we can get this
through.
Instead of general fund which is
my question and that specific
question to.
Our staff on that because.
If you're like me Senator.
lots of phones out there.
So.
Have you had any thoughts on
that Mr chair to possibly get
this from another funds to the
general fund.
It was Senator as we move
forward expected appropriation
of what will it's a one time
balance doesn't revert case
something happens and that's.
They can also get gives
donations from other thanks for
the mother deals and so it's a
it's actually a long time
procreation but at that the fund
is used then the general fund
will back fill that fund back up
so there's a recurring battle to
and so we get tied fund with
them after.
Time is of
how how long ago.
How many times is the.
Mr chair members of the
committee I so the so we have at
this point in history and
thankfully hopefully never I
have lost and gorging on state
active duty and so as as without
this statute in place there is
there is no death benefit for
national guardsmen on state
active duty so I have one were
to pass away today there would
be no benefit.
So that's that's a passionate
way I understand it I was just
trying to figure out a way that
we could.
Bring out of another existing.
Fund but that's in ninety here
nor there that's my own of
course.
Sure.
Thank you Mr etcetera chairman
thank you good morning sorry I'm
late general sorry when we get
your correct title
generals so.
Quick question you cleared up
one question I have Mister chair
which was yep our students are
recurring appropriation.
the bill said to show to one
time appropriation which kind of
makes sense since it doesn't
rarely get use thank god I got
hopefully it doesn't but so
that's question number one and
and and Senator pope you you for
that as soon.
Mr chair Senator.
Cool but my hope is that
you know that we never have to
use this but the reality is we
we need to have this there for
them and if unfortunately if it
is used in the.
Depleted I would hope we'd come
back.
Make sure that funds available
absolutely and then second
question Mr chair I guess to you
general perhaps or Center pope
is the bill says.
That you would determine when
someone was killed and into the
and you just use the word when
they pass away.
Which you know if someone passes
away from natural causes while
they're serving with this
benefit apply for would only
apply if their kids in the
course of.
The mission.
Okay Mr chair Senator Steinborn
this so so the intent is that
the adjutant general be
determining there'd be an
investigation and then then I
would be the person who signs
off on this was in the line of
duty and so so part of the of
the rules that will that we will
generate up related to this
budget will lay out of that
someone would have to be a lady
so you're right if if someone
passed away as as a as a course
of natural causes in would have
to make that determines whether
the the the duty that they were
serving had an effect on it just
like you do in law enforcement
or firefighters to thank you Mr
it sounds like your intent is if
they pass away as a cause of
their mission almost.
As a contributing factor Mr
chair Senator Steinborn that's
exactly it so it would be it
would be in relation to I think
there's there's the the in
betweens of you know you're on
state active duty is so so take
this last summer for example
we're operating heavy equipment
we were moving folks from Santa
Fe to to into the fire area on a
daily basis two vehicle crash
then we have to make a
determination as is that
considered in the line of duty
but that there be a very
deliberate investigation and a
decision made on that.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
looking similar to what happens
even on active duty folks are
fifty there's a permission.
All right thank you general
thank you Senator I have Mister.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
just along those same lines a
couple of things so the National
Guards person then would have
maybe holder term life that's
going to be there's and then
from there with this
particularly if you will death
benefit
where's the definition for what
is considered to go ahead and be
either an active duty or in the
line of duty as a
is that incorporated some place
so we can take a look at that as
well Senator saw Mr chair of the
center Campos so so you're right
so the service group life
insurance that's that's half of
the million dollars we're
talking about which would be
you'll in in in line with
firefighters the law enforcement
that's that's a separate benefit
that that company makes that
determination on whether it
applies not it implies a to a
death I think you can in any
circumstance off in this so the
there's a lot of teacher
researcher focus correct as a
lot of duty determination we
would do regardless there's a
there's a fifteen six
investigation into the death
that would also take place when
that investigation is complete
the determination would then be
made was was this staff related
to the the state active duty all
the other component of it is is
it would have to be a a an
emergency in which we were
activated a soldier to go be on
duty to do work for the state so
if they were in on a federal
orders like annual training
other doing something else then
the federal government would
would take care of that this
would not applaud with and so
Mister chairman dealing with
that where we're is a definition
for that or is this going to go
ahead and be determined on a
case by case basis and and there
is not a a definite definition
in terms of that.
Mr chair Senator Campos so so we
when we bring someone on state
active duty there's an order
that we cut forum to say you're
ordered to state active duty for
this purpose so that that's the
one line it would have to cross
to see if this was even a
something that we should look at
under under this statute and
then the investigation would
then determine was was was the
duty related to the cause of
death that would be the second
termination which the
investigation would lay out and
and Mr chairman going back then
to a way to go ahead and
leverage a permanent revenue
stream in order to continue to
have these resources coming in
and we hope it never happens but
let's say for example it turns
out to be a major catastrophe
where they'll be several people
that that possibly would lose
their lives and and and a
devastating situation
within that how.
And have you looked at the
possibility of doing this other
form if you will a group
insurance that will give us the
resources necessary in case
something like that was to
happen.
Mr chair Senator Campos we have
not looked at that.
That's all I have Mister.
Mr chair Senator.
General support so.
S. T. ally pays five hundred
thousand dollars whether you're
active duty Air National Guard
is that correct
Mr chair Senator just correct.
And so what this does is say
there's another five hundred
thousand dollars from the state.
That is correct and then Mr
chair Senator that's if they're
on the state mission yes so if
they're if they're deployed
somewhere or it that
Training the.
Then this doesn't apply so they
get the five hundred there
survivors get the five hundred
dollar miss miss Mr chair
Senator the so that it does not
apply so they'd get the rest
your life on active duty there's
a there's a one hundred thousand
dollar benefit the other thing
to consider though is that there
are other federal benefits to
survivors that that a soldier
killed State activity would not
get access to and so this this
brings parity in comparison to
service to the state like a law
enforcement and firefighters on
on active duty whether deployed
for on a trading status that's a
different set of benefits that
would come from the federal
government this would not apply
Mr I just try to get is it.
Impaired.
If if.
If the soldier dies.
In Afghanistan which parent.
If they did.
They get SQLite only if they die
in Las Vegas New Mexico it would
be S. July plus that Mr chair
Senator so they will if they if
they were deployed to the state
in Afghanistan or Africa today
were some folks
they there's the five hundred
thousand dollars July there's a
one hundred thousand dollars on
your death benefit and then
there's all the others that come
to the family so so there's
educational programs that would
allow all for college tuition
assistance they go to the
families of that that we just
don't have a way to do in the
state and so we drafted this
language the intent was to
compensate like a first
responder would be compensated
knowing that it that the amount
is more but the budget or for
less that the federal government
provides to families and
survivors.
Would still parity so it in then
I have got the question will
shall not reverse this money
shall not refer because that
mean it's going to be in a a fun
somewhere drawing interest or is
it just going to sit there is
two million dollars in the piggy
bank.
Mr Mr a the chair Senator chair
at this point it would sit in a
fund
and and and not be an interest
bearing account.
Mr chair so the two.
So we're doing this so we would
need it sooner we don't have to
fund it again but this is
Senator all that.
Portion.
Right.
Senator.
Mr chair Senator so at this
point there's there's there's
only one appropriation the two
million dollars on it would not
refer so that in subsequent
years we could still go to the
account and and draw the two
million dollars and so that's
that's what is a there's not a
recurring two million on a
yearly basis so that the fund
will grow beyond that amount
unless you we came back and at
appropriate more money later.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair is.
Why don't we set up with some
kind of insurance policy for
this agency to put in the actual
funds here.
Of the premium on insurance
policy would be quite a bit.
Less than setting aside the
money itself.
And distance gestione.
Don't need nobody's got that to
that additional suggestions
thank you Mr.
Hemphill.
Yes.
Thank you yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods is Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz yes.
Pass thank you sent hope you
want to stay right there we'll
do your next one MLK Fund thank
you Mr.
Thank you.
The state.
Thank you Mr chair talk a little
about Senate bill two ninety
seven MLK's Commission funding
once again I'm.
Prepared to talk about this
signed on as a sponsor I have
limited weights here to talk
about it
this this funding is just
important just to spread the
meshed message of Dr Martin
Luther king junior not only in
Albuquerque in the bigger cities
but all throughout the state and
to make that happen and to.
Have the programs that we need
to share that message with that
run around the state specially
are you this additional funding
is needed so I want to pass
relented weights and talk a
little bit of this funding is
important.
Chair thank you very much for
this opportunity
once again like Center supposed
to our signing is very important
to the.
to do the work that we've been
doing for the last year and a
half or maybe two years
We we have tried to do more than
just a commemoration throughout
the state we're want to increase
our presence in each state by
twenty percent right now we're
and five or six different cities
Doing commemoration I'm sure
each one of you all has
participated and those
commemorations
along with that and where are
funding need is is our future
which is our youth leadership
program we now have a youth
leadership program and and five
of six different cities
it's important that we teach.
The six principles of Dr king
teach them how to do the
community work that's needed and
and other things that we we talk
about in those used office we
end our year each year with the
youth leadership conference and
this used leadership crop
conferences where we bring all
the kids to one central location
and we talk about leadership
are things that are affecting
them in high school during the
course of the year such as cyber
bullying
dating financial literacy other
things like that so it's really
important and we've we've
traveled this year more than
we've ever travel and within the
minimal funds that we have it's
hard to do that
we've been flat for the last
seven years since I've been on
this program and it's time for
us to get an increase so we can
do the work that's needed and
keep Dr king's dream alive.
Thank you.
Anybody in the audience for.
Anybody in this.
Questions from committee members
and I thank you very much Mr
chairman I understand that
through HB to at all that
there's about three hundred
ninety seven thousand or so that
is included for this specific
purpose is this in addition to
for have you kept up with the
that direct appropriation and
and is this intended again to to
be in addition to what the
resources of already been
included in in our
appropriations act.
Mr chair Senator Campos
I believe that numbers a bump up
from previous years of three
hundred twenty seven K. so
that's a little bump up
we requested the two hundred K.
so we've got a little bit of
that
My assumption is that bump up
that we got is good but we would
still want to get the remainder
to do that two hundred K. so
make it appropriates Mr chairman
senators so the indication is
that you're looking for at least
with the state five hundred
ninety seven thousand in in the
front of the appropriation is
that is that the intent and how
this would would more if you
will the resources that are
coming through with the or
appropriations act thank you
chairman Senator Campos I would
assume that we would go to
indicate off the three twenty
seven so we would want the.
Five hundred twenty seven
thousand nine hundred is what we
would be looking.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Sure.
Request for the last two years
and twenty twenty two.
Question five six.
You know that.
Thank you thank you.
Adopted.
It.
This project I.
Fifty six.
FTP user over there full time
thank you for currently we have
two FTE myself and my associate
director.
We would like to add one other.
individual or FTEs for the work
that we're doing and build from
there.
In the state.
The director correct your page.
But every other of the other
person in that same class you
are I think I think it's reading
that we're thirty nine percent
lower.
Than any
Any other individual in a month
my position.
Other small agencies that do
this.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
you bring up a very good point
and so I'm just going to see if
if there's any other of
supplemental appropriations that
are going into this specific
area and the reason I bring it
up because if there is the need
for even more order to not only
raise your compensation but to
provide the effect of services I
believe that something that we
need to consider so I I.
No
appropriations that we're gonna
be going along to this
particular agency.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Call the roll.
Senator Campos yes in if I can
just real quick if you would
please announce the the final
vote tally after each one of the
boats I know that's been one of
the contentious issues that
we're dealing with thank you.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn Jeff Senator
Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz yes two passed eight zero.
Thank you Mr chairman wants to
their percent of just walking.
Thank you Mr thank you very.
We have the funds are.
Just click here here FOR Senator
Gonzales's Bill.
Transcontinental Senator the is
going to sit with okay.
You have an amendment to this
bill.
Most effective appropriation.
Is that.
Thank you have a motion.
Second first.
All.
The amendment.
Members and.
Districts appropriation right
now.
Second in.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Share.
Senator Steinborn.
Good Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Yes yes.
Eight two zero to drop the
amendment we're back on the
bills under a Lopez I know who's
taking the lead.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning everyone
I'm here in front of you along
with my colleague senator
appropriate Senator Pinto is
also called a sponsored but she
of course is recovering
probably should be back with us
on Monday but Mr chair members
of the committee sent out two to
six is essentially are proposing
to create an office of diversity
within the state personnel
office Mr chair this is kind of
a I was saying.
rollout as legislation over the
years always has an opportunity
to improve and what this bill
does Mr chair members of the
committee
this would actually created
diversity officer for the state
of New Mexico.
what the chief diversity office
would do and actually is doing
Mr chair is to develop policies
that prevent inequities in
hiring pay and promotion will
develop anti institutional
racism trainings and track
progress towards ending
institutional racism Mr chair as
such trainings will include
strategies to eliminate cultural
prejudices and discrimination
improve engagement with
employees customers and
contractors from different
backgrounds and counteract
unconscious bias Mister chair
members of the committee to
foster a climate of diversity
and inclusion Mr chair there's
been legislation in front of us
over the last fourteen years
trying to move forward as we
talk about the institutional
racism that does exist in every
institution in this country and
in our state to so with that Mr
chair to be short and sweet I
know you always busy I will
differ now to my my
A co sponsor.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members I I just think this is a
very important bills we see
having a chief diversity officer
or some cases achieve equity and
inclusion officer even in the
private sector we can see this
in some forms of government it's
really just making sure that we
are creating an inclusive
inclusive inclusive environment
in state governments and working
within those government systems
the reality is many of the
systems were created and they
were not created for everyone in
our community service for the
already and so having this
officer just insurers that we're
looking at our hiring we're
looking at our systems and
ensuring that everyone has an
opportunity to New Mexico to
participate and be part of the
government here in New Mexico
with that I will pass it back
over to Senator Lopez
thank you Mr chairman I also
would like to
This guest here who's missed
video from state personal office
it's very shiny issues.
Thank you Mr chair was.
Is
flexion kinda blind.
Anybody in opposition of this
bill in the room anybody in
support.
Many bands.
Questions from committee sent
compass thank you very much Mr
chairman a couple of questions
and deals with the governor's
Advisory Council for racial
justice as we as we go forward
is is this a compliment to
what's already occurring or is
this going to be a duplication
and and that'll be kind of the
first thought in terms of the
line of questioning that I have
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez no thank you Mr chair
Senator and I appreciate you
mentioning the council I
actually an honor to serve on
that council the I was appointed
to serve and the the council
racial justice equity in the we
have talked to many different
areas as to how important it is
for us to work alongside of what
this particular bill is
proposing but that is something
outside of what government does
we are an advisory group to the
governor and this particular
measure is something that has
also been supported by the
council and I know we haven't
met this past year very much
just because of COVID and
everybody trying to regroup but
this is also something in line
with what the Advisory Council
is very supportive of so so
Mister chairman Senator Lopez as
we move forward then the issue
becomes how does this office
become more efficient and
aligning if you will the tasks
of ensuring that we do have
racial justice as we move
forward and and I the reason I
bring that up because striking
the appropriation and then the
other question is our duty are
you gonna have enough resources
in order to strengthen the
office as you move forward so
it's a it's a two fold question
thank you Mr chairman No and
thank you Mr chairman miss piggy
I know can help to answer the
question last year we were able
Mr chair to present junior
monies into CPO which actually I
think began to to help with the
foundation laying the foundation
of this part.
Gular office within CPO and I
know that was pretty is pretty
Mister chair if she could go
ahead and answer a few more
questions with more specificity
as to what's been.
Mr chair members of the
committee
as Senator Lopez said last year
we received an appropriation of
fifty thousand dollars to the
state personal budget it's fifty
thousand dollars that was
nonrecurring and what we did
with that money this year is we
we hired a an attorney to act as
a
assistant general counsel as
well as fifty percent of her job
is to work on the diversity.
Diversity and equity inclusion
initiative that this that this
bill is intended to to enhance
some of the things that she's
been working on issues she was
hired in December and some of
the things that she's already
begun working on issues drafting
a five year strategic plan.
She's reviewing and revising
policies for best practice.
He's working on whether or
training group to develop and
enhance our training.
Offerings she's working with our
data analytics team to analyze
the statewide workforce and to
you to be able to utilize that
data and in addition to this
going forward
and she also enlighten advises
H. R. on D. E. I. issues
including ADA accommodations and
accommodating transitioning
transgender employees.
So we have already begun to work
on this initiative within the
state personnel office I do not
feel that it's work that we
couldn't continue to do.
To to help.
Build the foundation for this.
Mr chairman so related to that
with the supplemental
appropriations act other
resources in there that you all
know of that will our will be
used this year as part of the
nonrecurring dollars to continue
to if you will develop the
office and and the
responsibilities and duties that
you expect.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez.
Are there excuse me are there
any I'm sorry I thought it was
asking a question I don't think
any various question.
Just a simple statement Mr chair
Senator at this point there is
no there there is no.
Thank you.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senators and thank you this body
so you know a lot of companies I
don't really this really have a
question but a lot of of a large
organizations
Elected to install a chief
diversity officer and there's
some very valuable things you
can you can get out of this
position if it's funded properly
and if it has the resources that
it needs
I think worst companies
sometimes stumble when they
identify chief diversity officer
is
you want to ensure that that the
organizations from and CMI in my
business because in
organizational change management
that folks really know what it
means and that there's an awful
lot of education what you should
use this office for I guess my
only question would be around
for chairman how will this be
communicated to you know
cascaded across the work force
and then we do you have give us
some sense of what it maybe the
big three things this office
will do.
Chair Senator Padilla the.
we're fortunate to find the
individual that is working for
us on this initiative she has an
extensive background in
diversity and equity initiative
she worked in the state of New
York on on those issues and so
we're fortunate to find her so
she's well ahead of us on on
research on policy revision on
communicating out to the to the
HR community that she's
available for for consultation
and it will be I'm going through
trainings and and communications
that go out to the different.
Agency have and agency heads and
H. R. individuals.
That's our communication I.
Okay intent I guess the only
other last question is is there
going to be some measurable
goals for this CD or how how
would you anticipate
demonstrating success because
we're gonna do this I'm assuming
for the purpose of driving a
more diverse workforce into the
more diverse and inclusive
workforce what are some of the
measureable things you think
that the CEO will have to come
forward with.
Sure Senator Padilla I think
that the bill itself is it's
it's evolved to this and I think
the bill itself gives us those
measurable goals so I I really
believe that the bill is.
It's come a long way in
revisions over the years and I
believe that it's the bill
itself will will give us the
parameters that we need to be
able to measure up to to to
measure success so then the Mr
chairman and and madam that the
director for the so will their
who they report those
performance goals to is going to
come to the legislature so I
just wanna make sure that we're
far and wide communicating this
we can see how we're doing
because this is a very important
bill for the for the state of
New Mexico.
Shares Senator we the state
personnel office could include
that in our in our reporting
this to the legislature it's not
one of our performance measures
right now but we also could look
to adding that as a performance
measure for fiscal years going
forward thank you thank you Mr
chairman I really appreciate
hearing that
I've created a couple things in
my time here and the whole
discussion around what we
getting for it obviously is
Super importance I appreciate
your comments there thank you.
I think most of my questions
and.
He's already got everything in
statute with the that federal
law.
We've got everything necessary
for this to happen but what I
understand.
It is our desire to die one
person to do this to be the head
person of this in the state
personnel office to look over.
All agencies.
Is that the the reason for this
bill is to you you said you had
a person hired and they have
retired.
No they're still there.
And so you're just gonna
designate them.
How are you gonna change your
job Mr chair and and senator
how does a job change without
this bill are with this bill.
Senator
chair Senators the her job will
not change because she was hired
to do this work because we
already with the appropriation
last year so her job will not
change whether or not the bill
is is.
Enacted because we.
We are committed to doing that
work and we hired her with other
expertise to help us move in
that area part of her
responsibilities are it there's
one designated chief service
officer but the rich people in
that position are also to
collaborate with all of the
state agencies and develop
develop.
Communications with the agency
so that they assign it to for a
chieftain diversity office
officer in their agencies and
create a committee of sort.
To to work together on the
initiatives of the bill showing.
This bill creates.
Other responsibilities and
other.
Agencies.
Chairman and senator that's what
that's what we're doing with the
bill.
Chair and senator the the bill
creates.
The responsibilities already
exist within the agencies to
provide a a diverse work
workforce and so what this does
is it helps the agencies to
focus on on data driven issue
data driven initiatives so that
we can improve our workforce.
So with that dictates Mr chair
it dictates.
Someone in an agency to to get
the data.
So we can.
Compiled this data.
So that we can.
Focus.
Say that one more time I didn't
quite get that we've jurors say
that one more time.
Chair Senators the the data
already exists.
And the state personnel office
would be responsible for
collecting the data and sharing
it with the agencies so that and
pointing out areas within the
data where the agencies might
might want to focus and improve.
So the data already exists it's
already being collected today.
But it's not Mr chair and that
it's not being used today.
Mr chair Senator not in this
fashion no it's not and.
Thank you very much I appreciate
your comments thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning Senator pope Senator
Lopez and of course our
secretary good to see you I just
dump it seems to me from all
that is been indicated in the
little bit that I got a chance
to read here is that you're
really trying to put this data
to use it as a resource to put
it to use finally the data
existence you said but you need
to put it to use and without
having the proper streamlined
way to do it there's just no no
way to get it out and so you're
trying to do the to have
diversity and equity to
hopefully make sure that the
work force is equitable fair and
that we've I'm gonna say this
that we finally put an end to
the discrimination that exists
so clearly and in many ways and
so this is a true effort to to
approach that and have any
questions the you know the
person is already there she's
doing the job so all you're
doing is making sure that the
council it is created and that
you have you define things
you're you're improving the
definitions here of certain
things and I highlighted some
things here and that you
let's see there was something
else in here yes the definitions
and the you creating the title
which is a chief about diversity
officer I have no questions Mr
Chairman moved to pass thank
you.
I do have one question which is
actuals and supplementals.
Quest appropriations from the.
Mission.
Supplementing the income on a
FTE inside ages yes chair that
is absolutely correct we we're
utilizing the fifty thousand
dollar appropriation to.
To help supplement her her
salary we have we have funding
within the agency.
We prioritize this position to
be able to fulfill so that we
can maximize on the on the.
The appropriation that was given
to us.
Thank you how many.
Right undertakings.
Chair Senator I want.
The our vacancy we have eleven
vacancies right now we have four
positions that that are in
active recruitment and I would
say are funded vacancy rate is
probably about about.
Twenty percent.
We're a very small agency.
Can see.
Trying to find R. F. T. is forty
six.
I'm sorry forty six FTE
questions after total.
Looking for that.
Three seven eight.
One asset.
Additional.
Thank you and have a motion from
the.
Specifically it.
Yes Representative center this
mean the most to pass sympathy
is second question.
We call the roll.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Do you yes.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator then yes.
Six in favor to a post.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you thank
you so can't do anymore building
structure.
Senator both of the kids are
morning so far.
I didn't mean to.
Saying that we're going to use
once in the bill one sixty and
then we're gonna jump around
because.
Taxing to Senate bill one sixty.
Transfer functions from.
More.
You need to.
Thanks
for saving it for when we have
to read them and pull it.
On the Senate floor Mr.
Thank you for reading.
Mr chair it's it's is lengthy
but it's mostly just scratching
out to PRC and inserting the
economy and a whole bunch of
sections all over the.
Hello the statute to this is a
concept to to route relatively
simple bill it transfers the
transportation functions that
are currently under the PRC and
moves those under DOT.
And that's really all it does
the the money follows that's
provided for in the bill it's
also provided and we just took a
David Abbey about it dissolves
provided in sections in house
bill two written in a think it's
changed around native agencies
order the dollars follow and
that's a that's a standard
close within out HB two.
This includes things like
ambulances tow trucks non
monopoly type activities with
the PRC
They're not their intended to be
in dealing with monopolies and
utilities and so forth these are
non utility I could activities
that have been over time had
gotten stuck over in the PRC you
know is over the last few years
even prior to the constitutional
amendment we were moving a lot
of these and non related
functions out we moved insurance
out into their own thing we
moved corporations to the
secretary of state this is just
kind of a clean up to get more
of the of functions that under
the department they ought to go
in
I think that's pretty much it
again it's a link to build it
again most of that is just
scratching up to the PRC and
inserting DOT in a very a lot of
places stand for questions.
Thank you I don't know senator
Wirth is gonna try to get here
not.
Duties they haven't come up may
have.
Be there for.
Mr chair Senator thank you for
the question we're we're
supported we've obviously have
already begun the process of
identifying you know the
critical areas that are going to
need to be assigned to a project
manager obviously understanding
capacity of the department
versus the statutory
requirements the fund the
transfer of funding will be
critical but understanding put
indirect costs will come in
addition to the staffing
equipment and other funding
availability that's already
going to the Department so our
first brush with something
similar to this transfer was the
transfer of the ports of entry
from DPS which occurred over the
last few years so we've we look
forward to talking to are
getting the weeds if you will
with PRC division staff so that
we can better understand what
they're doing what's working
what's not and how we can
strengthen the in the process of
moving this divisional for.
And.
Mr chair and.
You know I understand.
Trying to get efficiencies in
government understand that.
But it also adds up to to
management in your.
Your particular deal do budget
right now is well over a billion
dollars.
And.
My concern is that is this is
the management and.
You know the it's it's much like
the last bill.
They were talking and
engagement.
In the end of a level that.
Should have been taken care of.
Already.
but this bill is transferring
management from one source one
agency to another
I guess it really that's my only
concern is is do we drop the
ball anywhere in between
You know the the I understand.
The crossings of railroads
understand what a what.
Amount of of.
Work you already have with the
real world.
Management but.
Sometimes I worry about the
regulator.
Also being.
The guy the cooperators.
From that situation.
It all adds up to integrity I
guess so I've got to trust your
integrity to do that do the
right thing and
That's that's kind of what state
government is is integrity and
now we get the job done so.
I don't get cell oppose it but
it it it's.
The thickness of the bill
there's there's a hell of a lot
stuff even though it looks like
a simple concept but.
It doesn't sound like I mean to
me it's a complicated deal to
transfer and I'm sure you're
going to transfer a lot of the
same employees over Mr chairman
and this so that their job is
essentially the same and
maintenance work out of a
different building Mr chair if I
might they don't work on
different building this is a
standalone entity I'm reading
chair there at the face they're
going to stay there they won't
even move districts Changin
letterhead one Boston to access
our the division's concerned yes
they're going to have to deal
with whatever the new policies
are to DO too much come up with
over over time but
it should be fairly from the
function of the agency itself
this particular agency it should
be fairly simple because they
don't again they don't have to
pack up a box for instance so we
are transferring the real root
function this the road safety
stage with three or six.
I guess which should read that
link the bill.
I'll try to do that for we get
on the floor thank you Mr.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator and Mr secretary yeah I
I'm actually fully in support of
what you're up to here and I
think it really lets the PRC
focus on what they're probably
truly capable of I know that
we're redesigning that operation
as well and I think this moved
it right into the.
Into the valley where where it
needs to be I mean I think the
motivation and the direction the
overall direction for the
department is super important in
what this the work of this
division does and I think it's
just a really good move I mean I
don't know that we get the
satisfaction of the PRC on
things like telecommunications
and several other areas that's
this reminded I'm typically over
there on this will allow them to
focus on that real true
regulatory type activity verses
these functions all I never
understood why the with the PRC
anyway so I think that's a good
move from Memphis States thanks.
I do have one question.
Employees Rikki transfer over to
two DOT and some are.
Your day to day operations you
might know where they're located
they're located separate from
the regular PRC offices I
understand it they're going to
stay right there it's a list DOT
has plans in the future but
right now they're gonna stay
right where.
Mr question so so right now we
have been looking at our our our
footprint and moving up four of
twenty employees over to the
general office or any of the
building that we have currently
in Santa Fe would be difficult
so the transition would
certainly call for kind of a
hold in place initially and then
an evaluation of whether or not
there needed to be a physical
move but that wouldn't be a on
automatic termination we don't
know where they're at they're
not PRC.
I don't believe your house here
current pair she's been renting
a place somewhere.
They got the victim.
So that the other by the the.
Yeah I just don't know where the
house is just very interesting
that they're under the PRC but
they're not.
DOT but there has.
Kind of unusual.
So maybe you want to go to
forget the answer that question
just.
One of the of.
The other thing is I.
In the FIR.
The PRC is making some comments
PRC is not aware of any carrier
subject.
Striking.
I don't know of any aircraft
over the aircraft carrier there
some language I can do is to you
madam and LESC committee my.
Mr chair I think in that section
particularly the stress the
statutory requirement for the
fees because they're unaware
that they're being applied the
only other change to the fees is
its roof removing some
statutory the committed dollar
amounts and instead adding
language that would allow the
duty to apply a fee that would
essentially offset any
administrative costs associated
with administering and assessing
those fees.
Schaller.
Contract motor carriers which is
classes.
Mr Mister chair I I'm not sure
I'm not sure that would be a
question I think that someone
from the PRC and the
transportation division could
likely answer.
You may not know.
I don't know what it.
Large dollar.
The show anything FOR but their
strike.
Motor carrier.
Passengers.
Is that remain with the PRC and
no it's not but I think that's
a.
We're sorry there there were a
number of things that were being
utilized as that one of those
troops Education Mr that's does
our understanding as well is
that there were fees that
weren't being utilized that were
in statute that they were
living.
Mr chair and to be brought up
some of these things added no we
had aircraft carriers.
this includes the uber with uber
or those kind of things move
over as well with a state into
the PRC.
Mr chair Senator so any any
regulated transportation it
would include passenger
transportation school buses
it would include a review of
rail compliance it would include
ambulances Cardoso services and
it would include a insurance
oversight for ski lifts it's
kind of it medicines for photos
that include uber or not hoovers
like a taxi company is suing
would include that correct.
K. so.
This.
This kind of brings that the
concerned enough money.
So.
I'm gonna transportation work
for the governor PRC does not.
Can the governor then turned
around to all who were drivers
are employees and therefore they
have to be treated differently
than independent contractors.
Which you are certainly does
that change she could do that
this by yourself I don't believe
so Mister.
What would keep you from doing
that Mister chairman Senator.
For the next governor the one
after that.
Mr chair Senator a couple of
things one is that would be an
agency with an appropriation to
employ them and so it have to be
a agency would have to identify
the resources with which to
bring those contractors on as
employees and so they would need
that out that they would need
that financial op appropriation
but they would also need the
appropriation of the FTE which
is regulated by the legislature
but then I I I'm not sure that
the statutory responsibility of
overseeing that from a
regulatory place would give us
any power to any any authority
or empowerment to change how
they function as independent
contractors.
Mr chairman there wouldn't be
any different for tow truck
drivers or for a.
in any of the these are all
regulated companies but they're
not to.
The third because a little bit
unusual sustaining the remotely
consider to be under state
employee arrangement Mr I'm not
seeing a state employee I'm
saying.
In other states state
governments are trying to say
that independent contractors
that that identifies who were.
Then become employees of uber
there for uber has to to track
their time and pay them and do
all of that and it so right now
any deal taxis are part of a
company that's doing that
they're not independent so
there's Ortiz of the company
this case it couldn't happen but
it would matter whether it's
inner piercing rivets under duty
same thing could happen either
way.
Mr Mr chair Senator I think a
great point and and I think I
understand the question better
so I think what's encouraging
other states to do that is
determining whether or not
they're contractors acting as
employees and pursuant to favor
fair labor standards act and
read requirements for an
employer that the revaluation
whether or not there for going
to need to pay employer
contributions like health care
and retirement other things by
treating them as contractors so
I think the issue isn't of
related to who's providing
regulatory oversight for them as
of individuals to transport
passengers as much as is whether
or not they're in compliance
with labor laws in in each of
those states are understand that
but I also know Mr chair Senator
that.
In other states there's a purely
political drive to do this.
And the PRC is.
Supposed to be less political
especially now.
The governor is not.
Governor's very political.
Any government.
Just grab one of.
So that's so this this this came
up when he was when he was
talking about a wait a minute
does this now give the governor
the authority to do something.
The independent contractors
don't want but with little
pushes to make it happen I can't
say that it would never happen
but I the whether or not this
isn't appears here not if you
are dealing with the independent
contractor concept it's not
gonna matter what agencies are
supervised by.
Thank you thank you Mr.
This whole section section the.
I'm not turning but it's kind of
give me a little bit harder so
that the fever cares not this is
on.
eighty five line twelve with the
for the care should not exceed
two hundred fifty six thousand.
Calendar year well if they're
currently in operation of the.
Percent increase so then they
won't be paying any fees.
Since that.
Com and contract.
We have so many.
Mr chair that for a new business
that is just established there's
no data to determine what that
percent should be.
So the same things the question
some of this material.
So maybe I think so we explained
it to me so caps at the.
Section three.
If I hire bus.
El Paso we wanted to says that
it says that there will.
K..
Much of this is due to the
language I'm not sure of so it
should I see Mr chairman the
bulk of it of course is language
pertaining to the transportation
division's current operations
and so I I don't want to miss
speak but I think having PRC
representation it would be it
would have been most ideal but
So I cannot answer questions I I
just think it's some of those
come.
That answer that question who is
a pipe to district five key
party buses limos to supply to
this common carrier right
who's not gonna pay at the
offering the PRC.
The greyhound bus pay for.
I think that's an actual I want
to get Representative catch so
we don't do something you should
be catches.
Try to get.
Trying to guess the answer that
Ricky.
That one next.
Any other questions.
Thank you.
With
that with those conditions
second.
We will want those answers.
Something happens will.
We have.
Support.
The main opposition.
We call.
Senator Burt excuse Senator
Campos yes.
Senator Diamond excuse to.
The list is.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Rodriguez yes.
Better then yes yes.
Seven yes one no.
About thank you to the surface
Mr.
Right on that later on.
Representative thanks for your
okay trying to figure that out
Center on recent for keys are
present
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee presenting for
representatives are center
Senator Gonzales I apologies
essentially Senate bill two
seventy five a seeks to increase
the vehicle registration fees
across the board essentially by
for almost every of class by
twenty five percent Mr chairman
these fees have not been
increased since two thousand
four for the new vehicle section
it would be twenty seven dollars
to seventy dollars on average
and for the trucks trailers and
buses depending on the age and
weight of the vehicle that
increase from forty dollars to
approximately two hundred
fifteen dollars no change in the
distribution of the funds
this would generate an
additional twenty three point
six or so million dollars in
revenues
the cost of construction of
where these dollars typically go
is gonna five hundred fifteen
percent all we're really seeking
to do here is a twenty five
percent increase in these fees
if you take a look at the
national average on these types
of these across the country New
Mexico is right now forty
percent lower than the average
across the the country and so
this just simply sit slowly
modernizes these please read and
for the intended purposes we do
have secretary certainly here to
talk us through why this is so
critical important thank you Mr
chair just a few quick comments
there's four of four primary
primary tax distributions that
support the state road fund at
the department of transportation
and vehicle registration fees is
the fourth largest the others
are in order special fuel
gasoline taxed we distance tax
so we understand that over the
last few years the department
transportation has been
fortunate to receive general
fund appropriations in light of
our healthy budget or budget
budget projections and we know
that that's not always going to
be the case so what we've got to
do is understand how we use the
tools that are already funding
the state road fund to support
the cause.
Senator construction over a long
period of time some of the other
measures that we're working on
including with Senator Gonzales
is a change in the distributions
of motor excise tax which would
generate probably about a
hundred and seventy million of
new revenue that would otherwise
go to the general fund coming to
road construction this would
generate about another eighteen
million every year of
distributions from the cost to
register a vehicle so in total
if these two pieces of
legislation were to pass we
create about a two hundred
million dollar increase in those
tax distributions on an annual
basis to the state road fund
again looking at this change in
percentage twenty five relative
to the hundred fifteen percent
increase the cost of doing
construction we have to be sure
that when we increase these fees
or if in the future these tax
rates we do so responsibly so we
don't hit you know taxpayers and
drivers with something you know
eggs you up out of out of a
range for them to be able to
afford so with that Mr chair
Committee will stand for any
questions.
Everybody in support.
Community in office.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm sorry if
it's Gerald senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we respectfully oppose this
legislation we believe in making
prudent investments in our
state's infrastructure but this
is a year where we're
considering much more
substantial substantial and
impactful appropriations and
revenue streams to fund road
improvements this bill is at
odds with that reality the
increase in fees proposed here
is burdensome to our state's
drivers and when you consider
the additional revenue of twenty
three point six million in Rome
dollars won't go as far as it
might in other areas of state
government it just doesn't make
sense just because New Mexico's
registration fees are lower than
the national average doesn't
mean we should be in a hurry to
increase them we are seconded to
table this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Questions committee members
Senator.
Mr chair secretary welcome
this is been a bill we've been
interested in centered on.
Others because of the impact.
I know that so for registration
this is kind of interesting I
often think a dollar fifty that
goes to work on.
The note that.
Their estimates this is the
right for money for their fund
but I thought by law that that a
portion of which seven dollars
fifty.
Touches do you see what it is
our top.
Sure Mister chairs Senator
Steinborn thank you the we
expect that that this twenty
five percent increase would
generate about twenty three
million in new revenue annually
but are only about seventeen
million will come to the the
transportation the remaining six
percent will go back to local
governments and so those
distributions include items like
beautification funds are county
road funds municipal street
funds County municipal general
funds so those distributions of
the remaining six million
dollars that it'll generate will
go back to local governments
that so Mister miss the
secretary you may be right I
hope you're right because that's
the these funds are indexed to
words well they're not really
index there there's a set amount
so as I read the bill as you
increase these funds unless you
also raise that apportionment
that's a fairly static.
Number because it's seven
hundred people registered not
else's sept the but I would like
I would like to achieve that in
this so if it doesn't do that he
said something sorry Mr chair
Senator you're you're correct
it's it's a it's an
apportionment so it's a
percentage distribution so the
the more that is collected from
the registration fees the
percentages that distribute that
fund to various sources don't
change then just the dollar
figure based on that percentage
increased value would would give
those those sources more
interesting Mr chairman
sectarian Center maybe
conditions that we may add on my
research was that it was set at
a dollar fifty per registration
self incentive percentage that
would be fantastic that's what
we would love to achieve.
That would help with our
beautification letter things
that you're we're all struggling
with and I know your department
has to spend a lot of money on
so that would achieve a really
great extra policy persona I'll
work with you on that and look
at that the other thing I want
to ask you is.
For me is it true Mr chair in
and the secretary and senator
that that our road fund really
have struggled through the years
And that's anticipated is only
gonna struggle more with a lot
of.
Electric vehicles.
Mr chair Senator that is correct
that we're anticipating there's
going to be cost implications of
based on two factors one is an
increase in electric vehicle use
into is
the increase in fuel efficiency
of gasoline vehicles over time
primarily because gasoline taxes
the second largest contributor
to the state road fund as cars
become more efficient or as a
luxury vehicles eliminate the
need for fuel together those
aside from hybrids then
certainly we're going to see an
impact there now right now
there's there's very few
vehicles that are really fall
into that category at least
electric vehicle so we're
looking at now is what other
states have done states who are
already seeing a high percentage
of registered vehicles being
either hybrid or or entirely
electric to see what would work
best for the state for the
replacement of that loss in tax
understanding that they'll
continue to be on our roads the
way more than your typical
vehicle so we're anticipating an
impact over the next several
years and then and Mr a this Mr
chair Senator sector and that's
why this bill is needed as I see
it is to address this potential
challenges with the rent fund is
that correct Mr chair Senator is
it is a long term strategy right
okay thank you Mr Mexico.
Use Senator share our Senator
Woods first.
What the.
What keeps a.
Trucking company.
From registering their vehicles
even though they they are living
in state business is in state
registering their vehicles out
of state.
Mr chair Mr chair Senator it's a
great question but given how
where we fair relative to other
states in terms of cost of
vehicle registration we would
likely be one of those states
that come to to register
vehicles where it's more
affordable so and and we can
share with you Senator later
time you know where we are
relative to other states and B.
B. one they kind of identified
as a pretty good place to go and
register.
I just wonder how many come to
our state to do that.
that be interesting to see if we
can figure out how many.
More vehicles more heavy semi
type trucks come into our state.
then we're here.
Year over year and I'm sure we
could figure that registration
out of.
I agree with the fact that as
things get more efficient.
Efficiency this is dollars lost
in tax I understand that.
I tried to raise the tax accrued
vehicles for several years to
you can get that done.
It was no no.
This go look raise in the the
tax on gasoline it's kind of no
no and really to me instead of
raising it on the registration
it should be a user's tax on
gasoline because that's or do so
that's that's the user of the
road.
And so
There's lots of vehicles out
there that travel very little.
And they're still registered and
so.
I'm thinking we're going the
wrong direction on this self and
I've been told that if you raise
the try to run a bill to raise
taxes on gasoline it's a death
to anyone that tries to do that
they don't come back to the
legislature in drought second
time so I understand maybe where
you're coming from on this but
I still think we're going the
wrong direction here for that
reason which should be a user
fee not a vehicle for the.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you senator share Senator
Rodriguez go ahead with senator
your call him for Senator you
can ask and then I'll.
Thank you senator so Mister
chairman Senator.
I've talked about raising things
and I am perpetually beat up
about how it works support
specially the poor colored and
they beat me with a stick for
that forever.
If you were talking about a
twenty five percent increase.
Which.
Might make sense to look at the
numbers but would it make sense
to do a ten percent increase now
when a ten percent increase
later so that the impact this.
Less.
Public policy Mr chairman and
senator is is you know if the
numbers I reviewed earlier I
think you were in the room when
I said in the construction costs
for the roads gonna pattern
fifteen percent were nowhere
near what proposing Senator
Gonzales is nowhere near
proposing that kind of increase
which I think would be probably
that would be that I could
support that twenty five percent
increases over looking at here
that hasn't changed by the way
since two thousand four so.
I think a you know if a public
policy standpoint you know what
we need to keep pace with that
somehow and this to me is the
ten percent that you're talking
about them and I think that
twenty five percent raises one
fifteen.
This Senator.
Would it make sense Mr chairman
and senator to put electric
vehicles in here.
That we have to be
you know right now we could put
a hundred and fifty dollars for
a hybrid in the three hundred
dollars for a full elector
vehicle.
With that being said here is a
moment as well secretary but
I'll leave it to the chair.
Mr shape and we've we've been
asked by we've been asked by
another legislator to take a
look at how to possibly amend
this on the floor perhaps the
the thought process initially
would be to add a increments up
of a vehicle registration so
currently the cost of
registration is based on a
couple factors the weight of the
vehicle and whether or not it's
greater than five years old and
so the thought is if we were to
propose some language for that
Senator it would likely be
accosting commit one cost for a
full electric on top of
registration and then a cost
increments for hybrid so we're
we're we have our our legal
department working just to
present that to one of your
colleagues so.
Mr chair Senator.
Any idea what that number would
be the increments of all our
poor implement of a hundred
dollars Mr chair US senator no
we we don't have a dollar figure
we know that there's been some
other bills moving through I
think we they were looking at
something like fifty dollars
above typical registration but
we're proposing kind of just a
mechanism in than we imagine
they may arrive at a dollar a
dollar amount at this point
Senator it would be in terms of
revenue generating not
significant because of the
that's the low percentage of
elector because of the state but
it does set us up to be able to
start establishing that the.
Mr chair and senator I know
those comments it's going to
have to happen.
In order to replace whatever.
Whatever gasoline tax wasn't
wasn't used on that so it's got
to replace at least that the
chair is common goals.
But anyway I would just those
two things ten percent instead
of twenty five and then elected
vehicle registration instead of
nothing
of things that I would be
looking at here I understand why
that why we need to do it.
I just know that.
I have experience of being
beaten vigorously.
Because I'm trying to harm the
poor every time anything like
this comes up.
Thank you Mr.
Just around the.
Senator for doing this for
Senator Gonzales and of course
secretary
I thought I can find it here is
looking through it I thought I
had Representative this morning
there is a bill like this is
there a companion bill or if it
said something about it being
approved or being maybe it was
proposed and I thought it was in
the house but I can't find
anything right now so I don't
know if there is a they're cited
bill House Bill three twenty one
and for twelve Senator I don't
know what was no but not one
like this because they explained
all the detail about this bill
and that's where I learned more
about it when I saw it in the
newspaper but I thought I don't
know if it was passed out there
or or what so I just thought I'd
check in but you don't know of
any okay you should have been
this one they were talking about
is proposed sorry go ahead.
Mr center three is not that
we're we're we're we're of of
two bills on both sides that are
changing the distributions of
excise tax but not specifically
change to registration fees.
This doesn't change association
yes it must have just been this
one they were talking about
thank you.
This system we have a question
the question.
Well I I I agree we should
probably triggers up over.
We divided twelve percent over.
Because it does increase you
look at it and then just think
about how many in the.
Fixed income just cargo the
grocery store and come back in
six provides tools to pass.
Sen goes by that part of the.
The only has ten thousand miles
on it like my mom's car six
hundred twelve because my truck.
Your paralegal try those ones
that.
I mean that that's the number
we're looking at right so.
We're looking at that and we're
looking electric vehicles in use
so you don't have we're trying
to pull center COVID hospital
but I want.
The twelve percent per year.
Twenty this bill comes back
active in the in other words
because.
July one twenty three.
Twelve percent becomes effective
in July one twenty twenty three
and then.
Additional twelve thank.
Two twenty five.
Can't reach the senator at the
moment but I think we have some.
Comment on.
We're Miss Mister chair we we
appreciate the compromise I mean
that that would generate about.
Eight million a year of new
revenue for those two instances
to the state Fund.
Thank you.
Here more Madam thank you Mr
chairman at Ricky but it it
generates as a twenty five
percent would generate twenty
three point seven million
dollars so if we if we break it
up into why would be sixty
million eight and eight seven
point something yeah it would be
eleven points on that chair
Senator going back to Senators
timers Steinborn question is the
twenty three million that this
would generate about seventeen
would come to the state road
fund and then the remaining six
would go to bear to other other
entities as part of the tax
distribution so it would be half
of seventeen give or take about
eight point five.
Okay thank you.
Thank you.
On.
FY.
I'm gonna I'm gonna make this
motion is.
The only question I got it is is
the excise tax.
We're talking about increasing
it twenty five percent also.
Then and what I'm talking about
is when we purchased a vehicle
and that excess taxes paid.
What are we doing on that.
Just missed Mr chair Senator
this bill wouldn't affect when
in fact that this is just
registration.
So make that as a motion.
Sen Sander Scheck we call the
roll on that.
Senator Burt excuse to Senator
Campos.
Excused.
Senator Diamond excused.
Senator Gonzales excuse.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn Jeff.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
yes yes.
Six for the motion one against
thank you those women can you
have a comment occur I question
it can Mr chair so July one of
twenty three would be FY twenty
four and July one of twenty five
would be FY twenty six so was
the intent of what increase in
FY twenty four in the second in
FY twenty five which would be
July of twenty four and then on
July of twenty three and then
July of twenty four.
Intent was the first increase
will be July one of twenty
twenty three okay the second act
date of the bill yes thank you
but let me clarify it something
the next one would be just
Senator chairman recognize the
next would not it wouldn't apply
twenty three looking for a year
to twenty I think we're going
years ago a fiscal year saw if
that's the case that would be
for the the second half with.
The twenty twenty twenty four
twenty five right at the end of
the motion made so okay so in
July twenty four in July of
twenty three.
You're gonna fiscal years we're
doing.
The end of the year so that in
July of twenty twenty three to
be effective date of the bill so
twelve percent would kick in
there two years later in July of
twenty twenty five years in
between these two and.
You fiscal years and are doing.
Thank you.
And then one and then in
electric vehicles.
And so.
I still waiting for that.
And apparently he took it out so
he never even put it in a bill
up for any other bill that I can
find here that actually talks
about.
Registration for electric
vehicles there's a lot of other
things to deal with electric
vehicles but registration I
can't find as a key word.
So Center comment certainly has
some things in there the deal
with electric vehicles but the
registration questions.
So let's just.
Mr secretary the new any and I
think secretary Schardin Clarke
is our funds come of it is going
to ask you some questions maybe
the staff has been missing we
know what electric vehicles way
in any way shape or form or.
So what do electric vehicles
weigh on average and do we know
anything well and then tell us
the part where thank you
remember any electrical vehicles
at registration taxes.
Put forth.
I know Representative Harper
shaking his head do you have
information Representative
Harper Sen Mr chair and are
currently there and
Representative Harper knows as
well and there's a bill that
would put them eighty dollars.
Thank and they are I know they
do what way somewhat more but
because of the batteries but I
think Secretary certain knows
more about that so chairman if I
may.
We have a bill in the house
right now that would raise it to
eighty dollars for luxury
vehicles and how you get to that
mass simply is roughly an
average car drives twelve
thousand.
And if you say thirty miles per
gallon.
And you played the gas tax
that's about eighty dollars.
Now you're asking the right
question which is these cars
with.
Wait a hundred twenty.
So between eighty and hundred
twenty is the right number.
So then this will be my second
amendment in.
Well in passenger vehicles
greater than.
Three thousand pans that use
electricity electricity charge
vehicles at the placed in.
The.
Looking at the weight class of
eight to ten thousand.
so that would be a hundred and
five for electric vehicle.
That's New.
Eighty four for a lecture given
vehicle that's been five years
old.
Thank you it's not official in
the captain's chair I I I I have
to say that on on that
amendment.
Something has to be done I
completely agree I just am
caring this for Senator Gonzales
I just want to remain neutral on
whether that's friendly or
unfriendly because I think we
should probably.
Get his take on that before we
change is built this way that's
my wrist respectfully Mr
chairman that's what I would
offer them this is Mrs rollover
let's have that conversation
Senator Gonzales let's get the
right weight class in the right
correction is as we market IT
and I respected him yes and I
want you to know that try to
reach their Gonzales twice
earlier to haven't been able to
just now but.
Over that maybe if we come back
this afternoon with enough time.
This is our opportunity.
Gonna roll over this.
Thank you.
All right for Mr chair I mean
I'm not an expert in.
But I mean we're talking about
registration fee so so first of
all after car that drove the
vehicle would be.
Would it not have the same
registration fee is another
vehicle from us we do anything
different for sectors so Senator
Steinborn I looked at the
greater that passenger vehicle
right when you look at the
passenger vehicle for over on
the schedule and then I took a
weight class of six thousand
two.
Eight thousand to ten thousand
pounds which is prying actual
weight of the vehicle try to
calculate that well we're gonna
come back seven right well Mr
chair here is the only issue
with that so.
I mean we have to consider off
part way this fan.
That's one thing so I mean you
know there there so I don't know
these things by weight is that
sorry I'm not looking at the
schedule so are we only thing
for a electric are over a
certain weight would be charged
more or any less the critical.
Mr chair Senator the.
Finally for gasoline vehicles
the weight is one of the factors
in the cost for registration so
if you were to purchase electric
vehicle the wait what's at that
base registration fee an
additional unemployment above
that rate would be aimed at
replacing it's up the loss of
fuel tax for that.
John please vehicles and that
doesn't include electric trucks
which are changing the
market place which could exceed.
Twelve to fourteen thousand
pound class which is currently
law right now the way the class
Fe classmate trucks tractors and
buses right.
Senator Munoz the Senate bill
twenty two installments bill
that adds provisions for an
incremental cost above the base
registration fee and I can share
that language or we can just
pull that language up as a place
basis for an amendment if
Senator Gonzalez is in the attic
recommend more.
Our regional reach Senator
Gonzales before we always have
to focus you want to the.
Note that Mexico.
Thank you for the service.
Representative Harper.
We have an amendment for your
bill.
Mr Chairman is yes is bill will
you discuss them in a.
Yes.
One twenty so short and we can
really short.
Continue on the floor and
tenants chairman.
Right so make sure looking at
the right moment Sherman.
the the.
Dot two two twenty two number is
two two five six three nine
point one.
That's member we have right this
the.
I move.
Senate finance committee member
number one to.
Senate bill one forty seven for
discussion purposes.
Two Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill one
forty seven.
To call ten minutes.
Yeah the second
Second so.
Representative tells.
Yeah so so briefly chairman this
amendment addresses some
technical issues that were
flagged by T. O. T.
when we're looking at the
changes to the trip Tax.
And also a little bit of clean
up with the corporate and tax
actually to pass through entity
fix taxation we passed last
year.
An update or making to it this
year
and secretary if you have
anything like that.
Nothing else on the amendment
thank you Mr chairman as a
technical for.
So healthy about tax policy.
Yeah that's messed up in it so.
a motion on the mend.
A motion.
We've called the wrong.
Three nine point.
Sanchez then.
Representative of our.
yeah Colorado.
Yeah so.
So chairman will of course do
whatever the pleasure of the
committee is on that we had a
substitute for tax and.
Because that was a little more
substantial this one touch is
just two sections so we thought
an amendment was okay but we'll
do whatever you think is right
here.
And and.
We know how some of these
outcomes and been with
estimations or sheen is
everything so maybe you want to
do it substitute brings us to
rack it up with the red line
differences so that we can see
and will come back this
afternoon.
That that will be easier for
everyone to comprehend in for
us.
Happy to the chairman will put
your first.
This out quite a bit because.
Question your laugh.
Of million times if you look
guilty.
Find I want to stick with I said
look you know and say are get
this and look thanks a lot we do
that we'll come back this
afternoon that we can spend a
little time on that was good
