Uh, good morning, everyone.
We're gonna go ahead and get
started with our uh
Committee meeting this morning,
uh, it's just for, are we good
on the internet and so forth.
Uh, this morning we're just
gonna be going and having a
discussion on HD 11 as well as
279.
No action will be taken. It's
just uh
Or I always go over
Uh
The
bills.
committee
so forth, so we'll go ahead
Started uh with John and
be.
Uh
uh
the committee, um
Pre
I am a little under the weather
So
Please bear with me
your name forward
the
that are listening, uh, John
Cream, a comedian.
Um
I will be
Uh, presenting sort of this
morning.
11
the family
um, just recently though.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm
going to
walk through just briefly
observations.
feedback
either in the middle
purposes of this discussion,
this particular bill.
HB 11
Um, as I'm looking at it and
the way that it's drafted, um,
sort of has, so there is a um
The
Leave program
And then
is also a welcome child. Um, so
I'm gonna start with the uh
family wellness leave and then
um I'll finish up.
Uh, with Welcome Child Benefit.
Um, so the, um, family wellness
Leave Act, um, that, um, is
proposed by the bill would apply
to all of the public and private
employers um in the state, um,
except for federal.
Um, an employer for the purposes
of the act is defined as
somebody who employs. Um.
Now, uh, workforce solutions,
um, which would be the State
Department which would have the
um responsibility of
administering the program can
grant um a participation waiver
um to employers who have a leave
plan that's substantially
similar, um, or greater to the
benefit of employees in the
state.
Um, it would also, um, apply to
self-employed individuals who
opt into the program.
Um, as well as, um, Native
American tribes with that.
Um, and, uh, family wellness
leave would really cover several
different types of leave within
sort of its umbrella, um, it
would include medical leave for,
um, you know, a serious medical
condition, bereavement leave for
um the death of a of a close
family member, and I will um
touch a little bit on the um
foster leave, um, which would be
placed with the applicant within
12 months.
Um, qualifying exigency leave,
um, that would be granted based
on an applicant's family members
acting.
Call or order to active duty in
the armed forces.
Um, and then lastly, safely,
which would be granted to an
applicant, um, who is the victim
or whose family member is the
victim of domestic violence,
stalking, sexual assault or
abuse. Um, so all of that would
be um employees would have to be
able to use that leave.
Um, assuming and workforce
solutions would also um identify
your eligible.
Um, employees will be eligible
for up to 6 weeks of paid family
wellness leave in a year, um,
and that would be good.
Um, as far as what that leave,
this is paid leave, what that
would, um, the amount of weekly
family wellness leave would be
the state's minimum wage.
plus 67% of the employees above
minimum wage cap.
Um, so the second component of
the bill would be the welcome
child benefit, um, and again,
here, um, this also has two
components, um, the Welcome
child benefit general this again
would start on January 1st 2028.
It would have 2 $3000 welcome
child refund.
Um, that would be paid to for
each of 3 months after the $3000
for those 3 months. Um, it would
also benefit, would also
include, um, up to 12 weeks, um,
of welcome child leave granted
to um each parent, so both um.
The total leave taken under the
Act, including both um leave um
would be a total of 12 weeks.
Uh, that leave cannot result in
a reduction of other leave
available to and still be
entitled to all of that.
through your employer, the one
exception is that the employer
would be able to require, um, so
as part of this, um, there would
be 2 new non-reverting funds
created to implement the bill.
The first one would be the
family wellness leave fund.
Um, that would be funded through
contributions from employees to
give um a sense of what the, um,
I believe it's 0.2 of 2027. The
employer would have a
contribution of salary. Again,
that would be 71 of the changes
that was made on employer
contribution I believe was 2027.
They delayed that.
to July 1st, excuse me, um, to
match the
Um
That would um be in effect from
July 1st of 20 premium would be
increase um those contributions.
Sure, the solvency essentially
of the fund.
Now the second fund that
That the bill would create, um,
would be the um welcome child
Fund.
Um, this would, um, um, welcome
child refunds.
Um, there is no IDFIR.
Um
I've talked a little bit about
the amendments, um, that were
made in Senate tax.
Um, the only other one that um
uh the amendments did clarify
that self-employment.
So, um, so just to start walking
that same
Family um refund.
Um, so the largest, um, source
of um um issues with respect to
the uh family wellness leave
fund and you see this throughout
the FIR, um, is going to be
essentially the um.
Oh, did you?
Mr. Chair, do you want me to
take questions now?
Oh, OK, OK, perfect. Sorry.
OK
OK.
OK.
Um,
so the 1st, 1st, you know,
again, throughout the FIR
there's this question about FC
analysts analysis, um, indicates
that that's really going to
depend a lot on the upturn we
leave.
Um, and, uh, the LFC states that
those uptake rates are extremely
difficult to predict.
Um, so, and they do very widely
by state. The LFC did in New
Mexico that um would um but
depending on the solvent.
Um, the LFC also noted sort of
along those lines that um New
Mexico would be to date, I think
the lowest of this and.
Um, if I haven't mentioned it
before, I should clarify this
has been done before.
Um, there's some discussion, um.
About the opt out, um, with
respect to coverage of the
family wellness, um, and ability
for an employer similar to or
greater than the um they're
essentially were 22 items raised
about this in the analysis. The
first one, the LFC did express
some concerns about what would
constitute uh grants that
waiver.
Um, the other note was made by
Workforce Solutions, um,
Workforce Solutions noted in its
analysis of the bill that based
on its
Um, they, um, apparently when
this has happened in other
states and there's been a large
termination.
Whether or not it's um um
They did note that other states,
um, the opt out application um
pay a um a fee to do that.
Um, they are, um, couple of
other notes made by um New
Mexico counties, um, uh, I
mentioned before that, um, this,
the family, um.
Family wellness, um, they, um,
suggested that the individual
who's close as the equivalent of
a family relationship, said the
terms close association um
problematic to define and.
Um, the other point that, um,
New Mexico County made, they
suggested that the bill's
provisions for safely were um,
they noted that, um, the
documentation abuse.
Um, this is, um, they noted that
include um assigned state, a
family member of the applicant
or.
The other item um that I did
note.
Um, and this is more of a
technical item, um, and I don't
believe that this was raised in
any of the analyses, but, um,
with respect to the calculation
of um uh family wellness leave
in terms of the amount, um,
there is a significant, um, the,
the bill you, you know, an
applicant.
Um, based on the mean wage that
is um and so it appears that
that the second set of of um
issues in the bill, um, relate
to the um welcome child um
benefit, uh, I noted before, um,
the biggest issue here is that
um the bill doesn't specify a
source of funding, um.
Uh, this is different than
family wellness, um, but the
Welcome child benefit is um
appropriation in that LFC, I
think phrased it, it means that
the future, um, presumably there
is a question as to whether or
not the um I tend to think that
that would not be.
Um, there's no provision and
available source of funding.
Let's see, so, um.
Just a couple other notes about
the welcome child refund, um.
Um, the NMJ noted NMDOJ noted
something that um I noticed when
I went through it, um, the word
refund is a little bit confusing
being called a refund. It's
unclear as to why that is, um,
because
And then the other question that
came up um uh to the welcome
child, um, refund, but welcome
child refund because there's no
contributions, um, that does, I
think, create some um we did
reach out to um analyze that
item. They did come um, they
can't state with certainty what
the outcome of a legal challenge
would be on that, um, but there
are key features of the benefit
that suggested it uh would
survive, um, they pointed out
that they said that the
eligibility for
the benefit applies to all
public employees who have
contributed to I think the
problem with that is that
anti-donation clause there, but
the well um and that's I think
where this issue comes up.
Um
Um, so that, that is a potential
question that's out there. Um, I
don't see that that item and
then I guess the last note just
about um one of the items about
investment that the state has
historically used, um, is that
if funds are needed, um, the
bill would have both of these
that may not be an issue, but I
did notice that that was um
slightly different at the.
Um, these investments, um, and
with that, um, I'm happy to
answer any questions, brief
summary of what, what all is out
there. I know it's a lot.
OK. Thank you, John. Uh, we'll
have committee members, uh,
Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you. Um, chair and.
Thank you both for your analysis
and dealing with the cold here,
so I'm gonna try to get all this
out. Uh, well, this chair was,
uh, was uh, uh, Representative
Chandler or any of the uh house
sponsors of this legislation,
were they invited to this
hearing?
I got silent quickly. I guess
nobody uh
Well this is their bill. I think
we should have had them here, so
I'll just say that, you know,
for the record there. Uh, thank
you. So, uh, a couple of
questions. I have quite a few
questions, but I'll try to be as
succinct with them and maybe you
can document them and we can
have that as part of a follow up
because I know, I think almost
everybody here has questions for
you today. So with the current
plan, we tried this 2 years ago,
we tried it last year, and now
here we are at this juncture.
Who pays for everything? Like is
there a grid or a matrix that
tells us
You know, who's on first for
each one of the items that you
just mentioned, because I'd like
to know that.
Well, excuse me, sorry, uh, Mr.
Chair and
There's not necessarily a grid
out there. I mean, I can, I
mean, I would, there's a couple
of things I would say. There's
sort of 3 funding aspects.
There's a whole.
There's the welcome child family
wellness leave.
Startup
Um, so there is, I should have
mentioned here, I should have
mentioned there is funding in
HB2 um for this bill and
includes $35 million in startup
costs. It's gonna cost us $35
million to start this up.
Um, actually, uh, benefits even
going out the door yet.
Actually, Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, that is correct and
actually it's expected that
startup costs would be um uh a
bit um I believe that the
estimated start, um, now that's
over 2 years, so it's nice, I
believe that's correct. So
that's the s off the ground and
then
Now the family wellness leave
program again the idea there is
that it's going to be funded by
contributions from the employer
and from the employee.
Um
There are solvency questions
there, um, but in, in theory,
that's where the funding would
come from.
The family or the, I'm sorry,
the welcome child benefit
because there's not a funding
source identified.
It is presumed and so chair is
there should the thing become,
you know, insolvent or um bless
you, we feel like we need a
little bit more for this is,
what are the mechanisms to
To shore up the account, um, is
that just dipping into a state
fund or several state funds to
keep the thing afloat.
Uh, I'm very concerned about
this, as you can imagine, I
started hearing things like the
early childhood trust fund, you
know, that's, that's kind of
like my baby, no pun intended,
but I'm very concerned about
this.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator PS,
so there is some discussion
about uh in the FIR about the
steps that the legislature fund.
Um, I think, um, but yes, it's
possible that that depending on
whether or not.
Whether how that up in the
initial years of the program. I
think I might have added to your
grid. So if you can grit grid
out like each one of the
programs, where the dollar
supposed to come from, and I
also need something in the grid
or a description of some kind.
It tells us like where are the
triggers to keep the thing
solved. We should have all that
figured out before we start
going down this road. And then
is this also, uh, is it still
being managed by the Department
of Workforce Solutions or who,
or is it gonna be an outside? We
talked last year about
potentially
Excuse me, having New Mexico
Mutual as an example or some
outside firm be contracted to
manage because they do that all
day.
who's managing this?
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
right now that would all be, um,
I believe that Workforce
And then on the Welcome child
benefit, uh, can you describe
what that is? Because I, this is
really has morphed into
something that I'm really not
recognizing any longer. So what
is that?
Um, uh, yes, so, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator Padilla, there's um
two aspects of that, um, welcome
child benefit.
There's an unpaid leave aspect
that can be up to 12,
I really don't recognize the
name.
Up to 12 weeks, excuse me, and
um that's unpaid, and then
there's a um $3000.
Per month for 3 months payment.
called a refund.
Um, that would be offered either
in full to one of the parents
for 3 months, you know, 3000 for
3 months, um, or, uh.
And so, uh, with current birth
rates, do we know what something
I'm sorry, can you say that
again? Yes, um, the total cost
is
100, 193 points per child.
So I think I've heard you say
chair a little while ago that
you didn't know if the early
childhood trust fund is, is
viable for this based on what
the what the usage of the money
would be. Did I hear you say
that? Yeah, uh, you, you, you
were guessing Senator Padilla,
yes, I did not see that
suggested funding, um, I, I, I
took a look. So I'm one of those
who looks back at the tape, and
I know that the debates through
the house and on the House floor
did mention it.
Um, so my, my question to you is
what I need answered is, is
there anything that would
prohibit?
This, uh,
$193 million from coming.
From the early childhood trust
fund.
You don't have to tell me right
now, but I do want that answer.
I have some real analysis being
done, uh, you know, the sidebar
with an analyst that we have to
find that out.
Yes, um, so Mr. and, and I, I, I
don't like when, so when I come
here and I have this, what I
believe is a big grand vision
idea, whatever. I've always got
to show up with with it paid
for.
I don't think I've heard. I
don't think I've ever seen us do
something where it's not paid
for when we put it on the books,
because then we're sort of on
the hook, and we have to do it
because it's a law.
So
It did, did all the, the uh
financing of this gets stripped
out of this legislation before
it got to us.
I heard you say that some of it
was already in the budget.
For some of it, but this larger
ticket stuff, is that, is that
Is that already, is it stripped
out how that's gonna get paid
for?
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, I,
that's sort of a difficult
question to answer. My
understanding, so, um, as far as
the history of this bill, this
session went.
My understanding is that the
welcome child benefit was
commerce.
Um
I believe that when it was
originally.
Put into the bill as part of
that committees the original
version.
Did not include the welcome
child benefit.
And so therefore there was no
need for funding for that that
was added on its way to the
market. OK, interesting. That's
my understanding.
Oh boy, OK. All right, so then
the next year just these ones
are just, I'd like you to maybe
consider putting this together
for for me at least, and I don't
know if it'd be helpful to my
colleagues here, but when I do
something in my business, I like
to look at what I call case
studies.
So one of the case studies I'd
like to see us do is um
Sort of how would this affect a
small, medium, and large
business. And what I mean by
small business is, is there
still the opt out because of the
size, the number of employees,
that kind of stuff. The medium
business has a benefits plan,
but maybe doesn't quite meet
these standards and then a large
business would be, you know, has
a fully blown benefits plan
package, etc.
I'd like to see sort of like a
way for a small, medium, and
large business to opt in and opt
out.
If that's, if that's something
y'all could put together, I'd
appreciate that.
And then I'd also like to see 3
case studies on 3 employees that
would benefit from this like
beneficiaries of this.
What would that look like?
So maybe uh an expectant mother,
um, a father, a
Uh
Someone who's the guardian of, I
don't, you know, I'm not quite
sure what the what the third one
is, but maybe.
But the foster, there you go,
you could do the foster. I heard
that earlier too.
Does that make sense?
Could we get something like that
put together, Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, it does make sense. I'm
in my head, I'm not sure how I'm
gonna do it, but yes, it does
make sense, but you're some of
the smartest people I know, the
two of you there, so you, I'm
sure you'll figure it out. Um,
and then the third, the last,
and I know others have a lot of
questions too, but
In the current version of what
the bill looks like it's going
to be presented to us here in
finance. I'd sure like to see.
What are 3 other states that
have been
That are in that implemented
what we're
currently considering.
In this committee right now. The
the current version and shape.
What shape is that bill in and
like, you know, states A, B, and
C implemented something up as if
you can find a similar as
possible.
And sort of what, what happened
to them. They implemented it, it
took them how long to implement
it?
Um, how much did it cost them,
say, per citizen of the state or
whatever. And, and then also um
You know, what direction did it
go? Did, did it?
Did
Did it become insolvent? Did it
stay solvent? I mean, all those
things need to be answered
before I think this is a big
decision for our state.
And we're sort of a
You know, land rich and we're
large, but we're small in
population, so we, we could
certainly harm ourselves.
You know, if we don't set this
thing up the right way, when
it's intended to help people,
but I would hate for it to go in
the opposite direction.
Does that make sense?
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, yes
it does, so I, I, I'd kind of
like to see maybe a 3 to 5 year
estate that's been doing it for
3 to 5 years.
Maybe 3 states like that, and
what, what direction did it go
in?
Also, you know, what did those
states do uh economically and,
and, you know, job growth wise
shrinking. I know there's sort
of a lot to play the last couple
of years, but maybe you can find
a state, a couple of states that
are similar to.
Bless you, whoever
needs.
Yikes. Uh, OK, so I think,
chair, I think that
it's, I have a bill in front of
them. I'm begging them to let it
out. So, OK. All right, thank
you, chair. That's all I have
for the moment. Thank you,
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I have
a whole different set of
questions, but I also have
questions now based on your
great question, Senator Padilla.
So I'm gonna start there, which
is you mentioned, um,
Workforce solutions supposedly
at least right now, we'll be
managing this and that they
would contract some.
Of this work. Do we know exactly
what that is?
Um
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobias, no,
and, and, um, I believe what I
expressed to Senator Padilla, I,
I will have to double check that
that was in, um, you know, and
antis, um, I believe they
mentioned it as a possibility
that it might happen, but I
don't have any further details
on that and I'll have to verify
that was there. Wonder because
it sounds like a lot of the hope
and dreams that we hear from
different cabinet secretaries
instead of definitive answers,
and this is such a huge, um,
Bill, it has effects for
basically every citizen in the
state, so I think that.
We, the taxpayers, let alone as
the legislature before we were
to ever hear this um in
committee or on the floor, we
deserve a lot of exact data. So
my second question is, um,
How, how was it figured out? You
said one parent could get all of
these welcome child payments or
it could be split among two. How
is that determined?
Mr. Chair and uh Senator
Tobiasson, um, so in order to,
um, um, one of the parents would
one of one or both of the
parents would end up um just to
get the benefit.
Um, so in the event that you had
two parents, that's when this
provision that was added I
believe by.
So that sounds like Mr. Chair,
some potential lawsuits because
um I can just say I, I'm on my
second marriage. It will be my
last, by the way, but my first
marriage, um, I can just, I can
think back to those moments and
go, wow, I can see where there
would be some major fighting
happening and um potentially my
children's father could have
filled out the application as
well, um, without my knowledge
and if I was counting on that to
take care of my child, and here
I am now potentially a single
mother, um, and my ex or even if
I'm not married to the
biological father, um, he could
go ahead and apply or vice
versa, but if I was the main,
um, caretaker of that baby and
maybe I'm not even getting um
payments from the biological
father, but now the biological
father is splitting those
payments. I can see a
catastrophe right there. I mean
across the board, so I'd like a
little bit.
more information on that because
that's too generic of an answer
for me with some very specific
scenarios that are going on in
my head. Um, my third question
is, how long do you have to be a
resident of the state of New
Mexico to benefit from any of
the payments on this program,
whether it's welcome child or
the sick leave.
You, um, have to have for family
leave, you have to contribute it
paid into the fund, um, for at
least 6 months um during.
Um, paid family leave part.
The um the welcome child
benefit.
Slightly different.
Um, again, that's the.
Um
6 month there's that.
The applicant has to have been
employed for at least 6 months,
um.
That again. OK, Mr. Chair, and
does it specifically stayed in
there because can I move here
from, I don't know, let's say
Oklahoma.
I know I'm pregnant.
I move here, maybe I'm working
remotely for a business. I don't
know where that business might
be, whether it's here or maybe
I'm a resident here now for 6
months, but I'm working remotely
for a business out of Oklahoma.
And am I still going to be able
to get that payment, that child,
that welcome child payment?
I mean, I live here and I am
working.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Tobiasson, that's an interesting
question about working remotely.
I'm looking at the definition of
an employee and the definition
of an employee is a person who
performs a service for wages or
I believe that if you were
living in New Mexico, I don't
know that you would necessarily,
I, I, I would have to look at.
Um, with respect to the.
Family leave component because
Um
I think as far as the um
welcome.
You would likely be eligible for
and maybe that helps me put a
down payment on my home in
Oklahoma.
That I'm trying to buy.
So I come, I get a payment to
have my child here.
And then I go back to Oklahoma
and the employer isn't paying
anything and then I'm assuming
I'm not paying into this either
if I'm actually
Technically working for an
Oklahoma business, wouldn't that
be correct? Like there would be
no payments for me as an
employee because I'm not working
for a New Mexico company and I'm
not the employer in Oklahoma
isn't paying in either.
So now New Mexico's just paid in
an Oklahoma resident.
Really.
To have their child here.
Uh
Mr. Chair and Senator Tobiasson,
well, I, I think that uh with
respect to the welcome child,
the only thing that I would add
is that um right now, no one is,
no one so
Mr. Chair and Senator Tobiasson,
well, I, I think that uh with
respect to the welcome child,
the only thing that I would add
is that um right now, no one is,
no one,
there really aren't
contributions that are being
made.
Mhm.
Program.
So that's really, that's, that's
it.
Really big red flag for me and a
huge concern because
I mean, I'm listening to Senator
Padilla, Mr. Chair, um, really
bring up, bring up great
questions, especially if, if
we're gonna potentially, we've
heard people mention this and
there's no solid answer where is
$193.5 million coming from
Per year and that's just with
our current birth rate. Now, I
know it's declined over the last
several years, um, the hope
would be that we're growing the
economy and people all of a
sudden want to live in New
Mexico instead of leave it, and
we have more children being
born, um, where are we magically
growing this money tree.
For paying for all of this. I'm
concerned because we certainly
do not have room currently in
the budget. I don't know where
this magic pot of money is
sitting, um, we're all working
on the budget every day and
If you can get more specifics on
this part of it. I, I think it's
really um a must. And then,
You mentioned, and I love the
idea of putting together a
matrix, and I will tell you I
have an entire book of business
of business owners around the
state and they have been working
with myself and my husband
talking to us about the, about
the cost of potentially not
having workers with a moment's
notice with having to find
temporary workers. I mean, we
are coaching businesses right
now that could not fill.
A spot in a twelve-week period
of time. They just absolutely
could not do it. We don't have
the skilled workforce here, um,
they'd be looking at contracting
um employees from out of state,
which I think further is, is a
huge burden on the economy of
New Mexico and business centers
in particular. So I would, um,
volunteer that if you need a
really healthy cross section of
business owners of every size
and type around the state, um, I
would be happy to put you in
contact with them and um right
off the top of my head, I can
say the clients that I've spoken
to so far are telling me from
advertising, hiring, training,
and bringing on that employee
for up to 12 weeks, it would
cost different um business types
that I'm currently coaching
anywhere from 6000 to $16,000 to
do that.
And that is why businesses put
so much money in training and
development of their employees,
um, no matter what size they're
in because it costs way more to
turn over employees and that's
really what we're talking about.
This bill is creating um
This
Forced turnover of employees
almost and I will say you
mentioned um finding out these
other states. There's 10 states,
there's 13 total that have this
program. There are 10 states
that have had it for well over a
year for multiple years, and
every single one of those states
have not anticipated the use and
you even mentioned that it's
almost a foregone conclusion
that here in New Mexico, we
would see an even higher than
average use, um, I would love to
know what are the average um
Um, or the mean wage in those
states, not just the program,
but what is the mean wage my
understanding is it's tens of
$1000 more than I think the
$52,000 average here in New
Mexico, um, we are creating, I
think, an absolute nightmare for
every citizen in the state,
which leads me to my questions,
um, in, in 2021, uh, President
Biden, um, signed into law the
American Rescue Plan Act, AARPA.
And then change the
requirements. So if someone is
paid $600 or more, um, with
those reporting requirements
they would need to fill out a
1099. So in looking at the bill
as it currently stands, it is my
understanding that
Every person that gets a
payment, whether it's a welcome
child payment or a a family sick
leave payment that they would be
required not only to fill out a
1099 because under ARPA, it is
not considered wages that they'd
have to fill out a 1099 and then
pay all of those taxes
themselves. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Tobiasson
that.
You know, I really can't speak
to that if you could find out,
Mr. Chair, that, that is a
potential massive burden on,
I've said it here before, the
lowest wage earners in the
country, um, who probably have
never heard of a 1099 would
never in, in their right mind
dream of having to hold back,
um, potentially thousands of
dollars in a situation where
they're already going to come
out in the, in a hole. I've done
my own calculations and from
what I can tell, and I don't
know if there's some recent
changes in this bill that.
Change this, but
If someone takes that family
sick leave, their potentially
walking away with only 30% of
what they normally walk away
with in their paycheck, which I
don't know a single working
person that can pay their bills
on 30% of their normal take
home. So I would love to see an
analysis of
If someone uses this sick leave,
what are they fundamentally
walking away with especially if
ARPA is coming into play and
they have to fill out a 10 and a
9 and and pay additional taxes.
Um, so I've got that. Then I've
got the competitiveness and
employment.
Um, I would really love to see a
study and I guess I keep saying
these studies, but are there
studies on all these silos
of all these things if we can
just kind of keep the questions
to just the analysis and because
this is not the bill sponsor.
No, I know, but he's gonna give
us the information, right, Mr.
Chair OK your questions on
Our analysts and their questions
and their uh analysis and so
forth so we can kind of keep it
moving. Appreciate it. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Is,
is there analysis on all these
silos of this bill, like.
Actuarial analysis.
Where are we missing on, I feel
like we're missing a lot of data
in all these little silos.
Did anyone provide that in this
spill, or are they just changing
it on the fly.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Tobias and, so, um, there is
detailed information about the
potential costs of the program
that again is uncertain with
like now with respect to the
actuarial component of that. One
of the requirements that um the
department has, um, and I
believe it's solvency of the
fund and what requirement would
be as I read the bill.
Um, when those premiums are
recalculated in 203 of the fun.
OK. And
So on the family leave portion.
Let's say
I don't know, the 4 of us
sitting right here, Mr. Chair,
siblings, um,
Senator Steinborn over there,
gets sick.
And I decided to take 12 weeks
leave.
Can my other siblings also take
that leave? Who's monitoring
that? Um,
How many family members can take
leave for one sick.
Individual
pertains to
um siblings of uh.
They would to, to be clear, all
of those i program um through
their contributions um and um
cap under the bill as it
pertains to, you know, your
hypothetical where, you know,
one parent has.
For kids
OK, Mr. Chair, I, you know, I
don't think we have family trees
in New Mexico, I joke with
friends that we have the New
Mexico tumbleweed, um,
Everyone's related.
We have large, healthy, robust
families that stay here, um,
Is it just is it just immediate
and what is immediate, like how
is it defined, um, who can take
leave to take care of a family
member. Um, so, uh, Mr. Chair,
good question. That is addressed
by the bill with the domestic
partner or person related to an
applicant or the applicable
child.
Um, um, the biological foster
step or adoptive parent.
Um, or a person who stood and
A grandparent, granted sibling.
Spouse or domestic partner of a
family member.
Um, or an individual who's close
association with the applicant
is the equivalent of a family
relation, um, that feedback I
was sharing from New Mexico
counties.
OK, Mr. Chair, so
That last description
descriptor. Can you read that
one more time, just that last
person.
Someone who's like uh.
I, I want exactly what that says
there.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair and Senator
Tobias and so this is in section
one, subsection K of the bill.
Um, and this is an individual
who's close associates or
domestic partner.
Is the equal
And is there any further
definition of that cause I mean
I could technically have a close
relationship or association that
feels like family to my mail
carrier.
Who do, I mean, are they
describing that any better and
who's gonna figure out whether
that's accurate or not. I mean,
that sounds really super
subjective.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, um, that's the only
um
That feedback from
OK, I know I've taken up a lot
of time. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you because I know you
have a lot of work ahead of you.
I appreciate it.
Thank you for real.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for being here to
present. Um, Mr. Chairman, I
would just like to point out
that for me, it would have been
more helpful to have the
sponsors here as well as to have
the bill copy and.
FIR which I can't find in my
books. I'd like to take notes
and it would be helpful. I can
answer some of my own questions.
Just to be noted.
Um, so in regards to
The waiver. Does that waiver?
Include state and local
jurisdictions, or is that waiver
just for private
understanding of the bill is
that that would apply, um, and I
believe um in the analysis
submitted be available.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
I heard, I think, I think I
heard you say that the fee for
that, that they're, the
workforce solutions could be
given an opportunity to charge a
fee for it, but there's no cap
on it. Is there language in
regards to that? Um
Mr. Chair and Senator Trujillo,
so, um, the costs associated
with the address by
I thought bringing to the
committee's attention that was
in solutions and so Workforce
they noted that in other states
that what those states have done
to try to address that by rule.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It does seem like it could be
costless substantially the same.
Um, I know others have already
asked for information. I would
love to see like a formula, um,
diagram, and, and I know it's
already been asked. I'm thinking
like, what would it be? What
would be the, the, uh, paid
family medical leave for someone
who's at minimum wage, and then
someone who's at median wage for
New Mexico.
Uh, that will be really helpful.
And then in regards to the
welcome child leave. I'm really
confused about
How FMLA and paid family medical
leave and the well-child leave
come in. Do you get the well
child leave or paid family
medical leave or both?
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and and
Senator Trujillo, so that's
again an excellent question. So
the way that that and that is
addressed by the bill. So the
way that that would work is
there's an overall cap in both
programs within the bill, no
more than 12 weeks per year.
Um, for the paid.
Um, family, 6 weeks.
For the unwelcome child benefit.
12 weeks.
So in theory.
You can take both and then.
6 weeks of the
Of the unpaid program. Um, but,
you know, you wouldn't be able
to take the full amount of the
12 weeks on the unpaid if you've
already come and then to answer
your question about
Um,
FMLA, um, that I, as I read the
bill would either leave program.
OK, thank you. That's really
helpful. So, um,
You said that there's 21.
500 approximately babies born a
year.
Do
How many of those do we know.
Or
Or I guess if one parent worked
then one parent could claim,
but.
It
No parents work.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and, um,
Senator Trujillo, um.
So that estimate comes from the.
Um,
children
would have two parents who do
not employed or um.
It's something you didn't have
if neither do it.
Um, but if one parent was
working then they would be
entitled to the full. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a
few more questions. I'm wrapping
it up. Um, I know, I, I, I just
want to uh make a comment that,
uh, you indicated that there's
no language um that would say
that the
Then it would have to be spent
on the child. I'll just, um,
Point out that there's no
language that says when we pay a
childcare center to care for a
child. There's no language that
says that they have to spend it
on a child.
Um, it, they just, we know that
they're spending it on the
child, and we know that if we
give parents a benefit, it's
going to be spent on the child
because the house, whatever the
child needs is going to be paid
for.
I do want to point out too that
We have limited infant care
available here in New Mexico,
and I like the idea of uh
welcome child benefit, but I
think I'd like it to be more
focused on those families who
have been unable to get care for
their infant. It's really very
limited.
And that we would there that
there would be some sort of a
qualification that if you have
no access to or you choose not
to take your child to childcare
that you would get this money,
so I, I, I want to say we're
paying probably just about that
much for a childcare to care for
an infant and, and young
children are much better served
in the 1st 3 months at least,
the first year actually.
And being able to bond with
their parents, um, and then I do
think that there's a, a problem
with the splitting. I agree with
Senator Tobiasson that if um
If uh
You've got 2 parents and if the
domestic abuser has the
opportunity to claim that. Um,
it's kind of like the challenges
that some families have with tax
claiming of children, right?
That can be a real tricky
situation, so I think I'd like
to see that we address that, and
then I think the um out of state
employer with the remote worker
is a problem too. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Steinberg.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I don't
have any questions on the bill.
Thank you both for being here.
Uh, my comments are not directed
at you, what I'm about to say,
OK, I appreciate you doing your
best to understand this bill,
but Mr. Chairman, I don't think
I've ever seen a time where a
bill was put on without the
sponsor.
And
It's, it's
It's, it's all incredibly unfair
in a way, it's unfair to the
whole process because
These pills are very complex and
answers and information are so
important to be accurate.
That oftentimes the bill sponsor
who's worked on a bill knows it
better than anyone because they
understand every nuance of every
sentence and every situation and
contingency and so I feel like
we're kind of almost wasting our
time here today because
We're asking questions. It's,
it's really like almost like an
opportunity to trash the bill
actually is what it feels like.
It's, it's not an opportunity to
build it up.
It's uh
And, and we're gonna have to
repeat the exercise. I mean, if
this committee is serious about
hearing this bill and maybe
voting on it, we're gonna, we,
we're gonna owe it to repeat
this entire exercise to get good
information. To have a
bifurcated conversation.
On separate tracks is just not
appropriate. It's not
productive, it doesn't have the
right people in the room. I
don't understand why it was
done.
Um, I know that the, the, uh,
sponsors of the bill are really
not happy with this process, and
I don't blame them one bit. I
would not be happy if one of my
bills was put on by another
committee without me being
there, that'd be outrageous.
Um
And, and it's really
unproductive. It's actually a
waste of time.
All due respect. Oh, it's good
information, but we do not have
a bill in front of us. We don't
have an FIR in front of us.
So it's like, I commend my
colleagues here for having
photographic memories to be able
to ask such good questions
without having those documents
in front of them, but uh.
But I don't, and of course we
all know I, I lost an extra hour
and a half asleep because it was
supposed to be a 7:30 meeting,
and I didn't.
Know that it had been canceled,
so and a little grumpier than
normal.
Um
But uh
But anyway, I, I mean, it's very
important discussion and it's
worth having it twice, but with
the right people in the room,
but we certainly don't this
morning and I.
And then I understand we're
gonna do it again on another
really important complex
controversial issue, and I
Anyway, I just that's all I have
to say other than
I'm in defense of the sponsors,
Mr. Chair. I'm gonna compliment
that what it sounds like is they
have continued to work on this
issue, is continue to evolve.
There's continuing to be
accommodations, and I think I
judged that from 30,000 ft as
being a good thing as far as the
evolution of it. They're not
here to defend that and to speak
to that.
Which is really unfair to them
and.
It does a disservice to the
bill, but um I appreciate
everyone else for coming here
today as well. Thank you, Mrs.
That's all I have.
Thank you just
small little.
And I forgot to ask this earlier
on the list, can we get enough
data to FYR? Can you please
request that because I know that
there's been multiple iterations
of the bill and I uh we're
looking really hard to find an
updated FIR. We need to see it.
Thank you.
Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll, I'll
keep it really brief. Thank both
of you for coming in and
briefing us today. I mean, I
know.
Um
We've got a lot of questions.
Obviously, this is the hottest
topic, but I, I just, I want a
couple of things just clarify
that you talked about in here
already.
Um
What stance did New Mexico
counties take.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
What I have reviewed is the
villain.
Um, I'm not aware that they took
that one, you know, so that they
support or do not support the
bill.
Um, I, I was looked at the
position.
Usually I take note of that if I
see that, thank you. And Mr.
Chair, just, just a couple more.
Um
Can you explain what small
Medium and a large business
would be.
How would that be determined? Is
it by the number of employees.
Profit margin exactly what would
that be?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lanier, um.
Well, as I, as I read the bill,
um, I don't know that the bill
necessarily draws businesses.
Um, they draw a distinction
between an employer, employer is
somebody who employs one or more
persons. Um, beyond that, you
know, I don't know that there's
a distinction that just in
response to questions that were
raised. OK. And Mr. Chair, but
there was a minimum, right?
If, if you have a certain number
of employees.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lanier, so, um, you know, this
bill has had different recall
what I think perhaps the
original version of sessions,
um, but in this particular bill.
An employer is defined as um
someone who employs one or more
persons. OK.
And, and I appreciate, um, and
I, we don't, none of us mean to
put you on the spot if we just,
we just have a lot of questions,
so, and Mr. Chair, so
Do I understand you have to be a
resident of New Mexico.
To pay into this and to
Draw the benefits off of it.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lanier, I believe that's Senator
Tobiasson's question earlier,
you would have had to have been
here.
Um, but certainly, um, the
requirement would be with
respect to the fame paid family
leave program, um, you would
have had to pay into that system
for at least 6 months. So if I
was an employer, say in
Armington, New Mexico.
And I'm right next door to
Colorado.
They have Cortez, Durango,
Mancus, all kinds of communities
to draw from.
Mr. Chair, would it be fair to
say that
I could hire Colorado.
And the employer would not have
to pay into this.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
I'm not sure that I understand
your question. Are you referring
to if a New Mexico employer
hired someone who's living
remotely in Colorado if they
would have to pay into that.
Yes, for example, Mr. Chair, if,
if I only hired Colorado people.
I have a small business in
Aztec.
And I didn't hire anybody from
New Mexico. I only hired him
from Durango.
Would
As an employer, am I still gonna
have to pay into this?
I understand that they're not
going to draw out.
Unless they pay into it.
But in my circumnavigating the
whole system by
Not hiring anybody from New
Mexico.
Chair and Senator Lanier, that's
another good question. I don't
have an answer for you at the
top of my head. I, I'd really
have to look at that, and that's
OK, and, and again, we're not
trying to put you on the spot.
Um, we're just trying to throw
out some things.
To prepare us for for later too.
And then
My last question, and I'll get
off of it cause I'm gonna save
all of my stuff for the sponsors
like it's already been brought
up.
Um
What is the penalties? So let's
say I'm an employer.
And I just refused to do this.
What, what is going to be my
penalty?
Mr. Chair, I'm not aware that
the bill is refusing to
participate.
That's another question I'll
have to look at.
OK, well, we have lots to do
this morning and I know
everybody's got questions, so
I'll cut mine off and save them
for later. I do really
appreciate you guys coming in
this morning and I, I do look
forward to some of that data
stuff that you're gonna get to
us and, and I know how hard you
guys are working, so we really
appreciate it, Mr. Chair, that's
it. Thank you, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The first question, you said
that we have about 2100.
1500 verts.
In the state every year, Mr.
Chair.
That's, and you said that.
Figuring the 9000 per birth it
was somewhere around 196
million.
More or less something like
that. OK.
The, the work, the early
childhood.
People was in here a few days
ago.
And they made a statement that
they was visiting about 10,000
home visits a year.
Is there any tie to the tube? Is
there any tie?
That says, well, if we're gonna
give people
$9000 we're gonna require them.
To have home visits.
Because that's
That's the premise of the early
childhood.
was to try to help mothers teach
mothers to be mothers.
And, and
Is there any tie to the two at
all in the bill.
Um, um, Mr. Chair and, and
Senator Woods, the answer to
that question is it or anything
like that.
Well, I would, I would question
the motives of that, I mean,
If, if we think it's so
important to
To put money in a uh a parent's
hands.
And we have a functioning agency
that we think it's so important
to go into these homes.
It takes child, why wouldn't the
world when we tie the two
together, Mr. Chair.
Why wouldn't we require
One for the other.
Well, why wouldn't, why wouldn't
we think that?
And I know I'm not trying to put
you on this chair.
It's not your bill.
But
You know, it seems reasonable to
me that if you're gonna
Pay somebody money.
Then you're going to require
something for that money.
But you seem reasonable.
And it's funny, 21,500 and only
10,000 total visits.
childhood.
People.
And it makes me wonder about
that part too. I didn't realize
there's that many births in the
state.
The, the other thing and I know
we're short on time. I'm worried
about the
The mean and the media and also
on the calculation here.
Because I've heard.
Many times that
We're not going to collect near
enough money to do this.
On the states have, have we got
states that have some kind of
program like this in place.
Can we get
The
participation rate.
To use these monies. In other
words,
How many states have uh.
A leave plan like this.
Um, Mr. Chair and and Senator
Woods, I believe the figure that
I heard earlier today was as
numbers go, the FIR does have
some information on what's in
the FIR.
OK, it's, it's in the FR yes
sir.
OK.
So we
So we'll have a pretty good
idea. That should then be pretty
well, uh, uh, we can.
We can come up with the, the,
the money.
That they're gonna need to
collect if that's, if we've got
that part of it. I mean, we know
how many employees there are in
the state of New Mexico,
there's.
8
70,000 employees in state of New
Mexico.
Um, Mr. Chair and and Senator
Woods, so the, the one caveat I
would I would.
Um, the FIR does note that
there's a lot, it's, it's not as
simple as how many employees do
you have? How much money are
they paying in?
Therefore we know this happened
as I understand from the FIR
that metric.
So, so, so what you're telling
me.
Between 4 and 8.
But what you're telling me is 4%
of the
Employees
Comparable to a 12-month lead.
12 weekly.
6 monthly.
Is it a 6 month leave is what
we're talking about. How much
lead time, 12 week leave, right?
3 months. So, uh, Mr. Chair and
and Senator Woods, so two
things, it's 12 weeks, 12 weeks
12 weeks, um, and then, you
know, I think with respect to
the uptakes necessarily that.
every boxing out that lea yeah,
that's what I was,
you know what, could we call
some of those states?
And, and, and.
That's your request I have.
Can you get a hold of some of
those states and see how many.
Uh
cumulative days they pale.
Would, wouldn't they have that
information?
Or would they just have a,
because it's a fund.
But they could divide their
medium.
Or, or
So we could divide to figure
out.
Approximately what the high and
the low on the leap is.
Um, so, Mr. Chair and, and
Senator Woods, so, um, I think
that would be a good we're here
and able to talk to you today. I
summarize what the in their
analysis. I can say that in
workforce solutions analysis of
the bill.
Um, that they did indicate that
they had.
Well
I guess I can call workforce
solutions and ask them that
question then.
See if they figured that out.
Mr. Chair, sorry to leave you
out of this discussion.
All righty. Are you done?
But that's wrap it up here. I
wanna, I wanna get to the bills
here, so yeah, I, I, I
understand and
Those, those, I'm worried about
the actuarial part of the deal
because we've missed so many
places in our state government.
And we just fall back on general
fund.
But this could add up to so much
money when you start talking
about $200 million here.
And, you know,
Up to $350 million there, that
kind of adds up to real money,
you know.
And, and, uh.
It's my problem.
So
I'll, I'll ask further questions
to the sponsor when they get
here again. Thank you.
OK, thank you. Uh, I'm gonna go
ahead and, well,
Thank you, John, and we're gonna
skip 279. Uh, we want to, uh,
roll that over and get you our
bill, so I appreciate it again.
Mm
So thank you both. Thank you for
the good discussions and it's a
prep for the next meeting and
there were some good questions
around charts and things that
hopefully will add to the
conversation when we have the
sponsors in front of us. So with
that, we're gonna start with
Senate Bill 411.
Senator Brent.
OK, uh, Senator for Brent, uh, I
believe you have an amendment.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have kind
of the standard amendment for
this committee, OK, um, it's uh
0.231685.1.
And it removes the
appropriation. OK, all righty.
Um,
You have a motion to move the
moment.
Motion by Senator Padilla,
seconded by uh Senator Lanier.
Any opposition to
Emotions or
Discussion purposes and what it
does is just
Removes the appropriate
appropriation.
OK, so can I have a motion to uh
Approved to the bill.
So Senator Lanier.
Senator Padilla, 2nd.
Any opposition to amending the
bill.
See none?
The bill is amended, so go
ahead, Senator Brent. We're on
the bill now.
Creates the physician loan
repayment Act to provide loan
assistance of up to 75,000 per
year for a maximum of 4 years.
For physicians practicing.
and designated professional
shortage areas in our state.
HED will administer the loan
repayment program and determine
loan amounts based on the
location and characteristics of
the medical practice and the
applicants total indebtedness.
And that's what the bill does,
creates a a program alongside
the current program that we
have.
Um, the current program that we
have pays a maximum of
Uh
25,000 for the year.
Um, which works really for all
the other medical areas, but it
doesn't work for physicians, as
you know, we have a huge
shortage of physicians, almost
every other state is doing a
much higher loan repayment
program for physicians.
And this will help us attract
new doctors and more doctors.
Anything else?
Um, most physicians leave
college with close to $300,000.
OK, great. All right, thank you,
Senator. Uh, first, uh, we'll go
out to the audience. Anybody
here in support of this bill,
Senate Bill 411.
OK, you guys can come up.
Anybody on Zoom?
OK.
I'm gonna
Good morning. I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. I'm here this morning
to support SB 411. New Mexico is
in a health care crisis as 30 of
its 33 counties are designated
health professional shortage
areas SB 411 creates a lifeline.
To provide loan assistance to
doctors, practicing in one of
these designated health
professional shortage areas as
health care is key for economic
development, the physician loan
repayment Act, not only would
give the ability for New
Mexicans to be cared for across
the state. It would also be
positive in keeping New Mexico
competitive in the healthcare
arena, the chamber urges your
due pass vote on SB 411 and
commends the sponsor for
carrying.
the bill. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
Jerry shallow, president and CEO
of the Rio rancher Regional
Chamber, and we strongly endorse
HB or SB 411.
This program reimburses, is a
reimbursement program bringing
and helping fill physicians that
we desperately need in New
Mexico.
It reduces the financial burden
on doctors makes New Mexico a
more appealing place for doctors
to uh begin their career and
hopefully be retained and stay.
This initiative particularly is
targeted towards encouraging the
physicians and underserved
areas, which when you look at uh
throughout the state of New
Mexico, our rural cities and
counties and villages are way
underserved as it is right now.
The program not only addresses
the immediate financial concerns
of healthcare provide.
Riders, but also demonstrates
the commitment to supporting its
medical workforce ultimately
leading to improved healthcare
outcomes throughout the state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jerry.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody is in. All right,
committee questions Senator.
The news.
And
Next school. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I just, I want to
commend you on, on a job well
done and I know how close this
is to your heart and I wanna say
that this is gonna help New
Mexico for years to come. This
is not a quick fix. This is a
long term fix and I just, I want
to say thank you and
And I was gonna make a motion,
but I guess I'll wait. OK, not
yet, but we, we, we got you on
deck.
All right,
Senator Trio. Thank you for
bringing this forward. I thought
this was deja vu and deja vu,
and that I'd already heard it,
so I had to look up and see that
I was actually just waiting for
my bill to be heard in Senate
education. This is a great bill,
and I look forward to supporting
it.
uh senator.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and, and.
all thinking like because as you
know, I have several bills, one
very similar to this, and
New Mexico needs this
desperately. My one question is,
the money is
Coming out of the general fund,
where does the money come from?
I make sure I'm clear on that.
Senator, yes, it would be
general fund money.
Uh, get a report from HEB as to
how, how much it's been used.
And no no next year to make it
stable.
OK, and Mr. Chair, it's, it's
currently in HB 2.
Yes.
OK
Thank you.
Senator Woods, and then we got
Senator Padilla.
OK. Currently we're, we're
doing.
25,000 per year.
Currently. That's correct and
you want to put in 75,000 on top
of that.
you have to choose one or the
other.
You you wouldn't be able to do
both.
Um, this is it
To be in New Mexico, you would
be able to get the 70 up to
75,000 a year. They wouldn't be
able to do both programs.
What's the other program do, Mr.
Chair, the other program is for
anyone in the medical field.
So it, it includes your your
x-ray technicians, your.
Uh, nurses, your nurse
practitioners, all of them.
This is specifically for
physicians, which doesn't cover
doctors, it covers everyone
else.
This chair
So currently we have
How much in the fund to do this?
As far as this particular
program, how much, how much in
the
Current budget
Last year's budget did we have
to do this?
So we have $10 million set aside
in this year's year.
To pay for this program for this
particular program in
15 million, if I'm remembering
correctly, it was either 10 or
15 million.
You pay for it.
I was just trying to figure out.
If we had 100 doctors apply for
this.
Where did you come up with, with
your
15 million, uh Mr.
15 million, uh Mr.2 you said 15
million.
At the 10 million
So,
so, Mister Chair.
question is
You know, I talked to a doctor
yesterday.
Thank goodness
And he was telling me about his
loan. He had been in practice 18
years and he still owes 15
million.
I mean $50,000.
No, I'm not 50,000
18 years.
After 18 years.
So, and, and he said the only
way he can get into a program
repayment program if he serves
on a specific area, which Santa
Fe is not that area.
He said there's one place in
Santa Fe that he can work in.
That would qualify for the
existing deal. Now this one has
a different qualification, I
see.
The
Yes, sir.
So
It says uh um.
Where is it? Explain the
qualification for me.
And this one has to be an
underserved area, which right
now in our
Well, and it's not even by
county because parts of the
parts of it do not, like real
ranch wanted to be a doctor up
in Cuba or do that.
And that would qualify so it has
to be an area of the state where
the doctors.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
OK, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, uh,
senator, very, very good stuff
here. Um, was there any thought
to the um awards being
prioritized uh or or New Mexico
doctors receiving the priority
versus anyone from that's coming
in from anywhere.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, no,
um, in, in working with the, the
secretary and in with the
medical society, you know, the
problem is we need doctors.
And we need to recruit them from
everywhere.
We, we are losing, we're
hemorrhaging doctors right now.
Um, we, we have got to add one
way of doing that. I don't
think, well, I, I think that
most of our in-state people that
are graduating from our medical
program. They applied, they're
probably gonna get it.
We didn't want to put all those
qualifications in.
With the chaired Senator, do you
have any data that tells us what
percent of doctors that are
trained here leave the state.
Um, right after they
Leave their, maybe their
residency or whatever. Sooner I
believe when I was talking to
the residency program that's,
that's kind of Mr. Chair, why I
was hoping we might be able.
That's why I was kind of hoping
that we might be able to, to uh
prioritize New Mexico doctors so
that that 50% has a have a real
incentive to want to stay here.
Uh, you know
Higher ed's gonna have their,
their ability to make rules and
if they wanted to put that in
there, I don't think there would
be anything that would keep Mr.
Chair.
Page 3 lines, line 22.
I'm Mr. Chairman, I stand
corrected. I didn't know that
was in my own bill. That was my
question right there.
So, uh, that's great. That's
good to hear. And then, again,
first time I see this, if you've
presented before, Senator, we've
been here exactly the same
amount of time, but I don't
remember. Did you present this
is actually the first time it is
the first time I did work with,
um, she said, I'm great with
doing the.
It's so, uh, how long does the
doctor have to stay here once
they receive the award
commitment, OK.
And that was kind of negotiated
uh the medical society, this was
one of the things the higher edd
secretary and I had.
Pretty long discussion, a lot of
states are doing 3 to 5 years
and so I kind of took the
middle.
So, so when I pay the expenses
and the fees to move a
supervisor.
Manager, director, VP or
whatever for my company to New
Mexico, you have to stay here
with us for a period of 2 years.
Otherwise, you have to pay it
all back, right? And this one is
44. I think that's good. I
actually like that because you
do a lot of living in 4 years
and maybe you're gonna set some
roots in like that long, it
becomes the land of entrapment,
and you never leave, and that's
what we want. We want these
doctors to love it to find a way
to get you to leave.
I've been working at it for 13
years.
OK.
We're glad you're here.
Um, OK, well, that, that's, this
is, this is all very good. And
so that, you know, if the
average debt, I think you said
was 300K. It it's between 2500
to 300,000. So ideally, you're
gonna, you're gonna pay, we want
3000 they're recruiting pitch
that other states are giving is
you come to our state.
Your medical loans will be paid
off.
Now, if you're gonna become a
surgeon, it actually goes up to
like 600,000.
This is your normal everyday
general practitioner doctor is a
little under 300 primary care.
Yes, OK, which is actually one
of our biggest needs so that if
I understand the math that it
looks like you're gonna get your
300K out of us. That was done by
by.
OK, and then when you said that
33 out of 33 counties, uh,
would, would qualify to be a
part of this, not the entire
county, but portions of it like
the South Valley.
Yes, South Valley USA
this is a, a, a area that's
underserved for medical than a
person having a business, I
think it's really good to chair.
I think it's going to change the
way of thinking in a lot of ways
for a lot of these folks. So,
all right, that's all I have.
Thank you. Good job.
Thank you. So send to Lanier.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you. Do
pass motion for defense. Do we
have a second, Senator Trujillo.
Colro
Senator Brant? Yes, Senator
Brandt votes yes. Senator
Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
votes yes. Senator Padilla
Senator Padilla Bosia, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson Senator
Tobiasson votes yes. Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
as Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes. Senator
Shedo Senator Sendo votes yes.
Senator Munoz Sennoz votes yes,
we have a DuP pass 8 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senator Cervantes.
Senate bill.
4:56 as amended.
Uh
I'm sorry about that. The only
hesitation that coming back has
not been about medical
malpractice and if you all
wanna, I don't imagine you don't
want to get into that whole
issue here again too. There are
concerns about coming back our
quality of education and crime.
Two things, uh, they want to
have a family, they're brand new
newlyweds. Uh, I wanna have
grandkids and we want to raise
them in a place that's safe and
uh it's hard to do in
Albuquerque, and so if you all
wanna know why your doctors are
not coming back here. I
appreciate what you're doing,
Senator Brent.
Yeah, well, and, and Senator
Brant, you guys don't have the
crime problem Albuquerque does,
right?
Uh, same state laws but entirely
different outcomes, so.
uh
All right, we're adjourn. No,
just kidding.
Move the table.
A little, a little bit of a
diversion, but I, I, I
appreciate it and
it resonates very close to home
for me, um.
So, uh, the uh bill before you
right now would make permanent
the interim committee that now
is not a permanent committee of
courts, corrections and justice.
I'll give you a little bit of
background. Years ago, that
committee was just called the
Corrections Committee or was it
was called called courts and
corrections, and it was formed
largely in response to the
prison riot.
Um, at the state Penn and the
committee used to spend a lot of
its attention going to state
prisons, uh, and traveling the
state when I began sharing that
way back in the house, I changed
the title to uh add the title
justice to that because it gave
it much more expansive.
Typically, we know you all see
what comes through the judiciary
Committee and interestingly,
most people think the judiciary
Committee outside of the
building think Judiciary
Committee is is uh essentially
focused entirely on the courts,
but as you all know, our, our
role is much more expansive.
Of these days on many of the
other things we're doing, so it,
it seems that we're past time
when this should be a permanent
committee, not an interim
committee. uh, we're not
responding to the prison riots,
but we're really addressing the
fact that there's a third branch
of government, the courts and
the judiciary, I think they're
an essential component to uh
fighting crime and to many of
the things we're trying to do.
Look at this session we're using
the judiciary to essentially
take care of our competency and
behavioral health issues. We're
standing up, the courts to
essentially take care of all of
those functions which are really
executive branch functions.
We're making the judiciary kind
of.
a whole new thing, so this
should be a um a permanent
committee number 1 and number 2,
what this does is very
significantly is it shares with
you all the opportunity to
subpoena witnesses right now,
uh, legislative Finance
Committee, those of you that
will not have the opportunity
during the interim to issue
subpoenas.
We should have that authority as
well too, and the best example
we had this last year was the
uh.
Paid paid leave, uh, issue, uh,
or, or purchasing essentially
the courts paid leave the issue
very well in this committee.
And it would have been good for
us in the interim as part of
that committee as well as you
all to be able to subpoena
records and find out really
who's benefiting and so forth.
So I, I, I'd like to have that
authority for that committee,
and that's what this bill would
do, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. So at this time,
we'll go out to the audience,
anybody here in support of the
bill?
Anybody else?
Anybody here in opposition to
the bill.
Committee question Senator
Trujil.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator for bringing this
forward. So I'm looking at the
fiscal uh impact, um, the FIR
and it looks like uh
That there's not money in the
budget to hire staff because LFC
can
absorb that, um, I, I would just
say that it seems to me this
committee is a really important
committee.
Because of the things that
you've said and the
The public wants to see.
Crime reduced.
And I'm just wondering, is your
vision for this in the future,
that it would operate much more
like the LESC and the LFC which
has multiple staff so that they
can do research, and they can
do, you know, draft bill writing
and because one person is just
not enough for this subject
matter.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator, that's
right. So two things. One is
you're right, there's no uh.
physical impact to this because
we're planning to absorb the
staffing needs as we always
have, so nothing new there.
You're absolutely right, we
should do what you're proposing
and we've been fortunate
because still here someplace.
Maybe around the back. We, we
have Mr. Lata Goitte who's an
attorney and essentially gets
shared with us um during the
interim, and then I have to play
a lot of fictions, you all
probably familiar with some of
how this works, but we adopted
this new thing of legislative
assistance, right? So what I did
was I hired a legislative
assistant who really not in my
district and he's not there to
deal with constituent concerns.
He's an attorney and that's
Brandon Cummings and I've
essentially hired him as my
legislative assistant to give me
the exactly the research um.
for crime issues he prepared us
for the special session during
the summer and so forth and then
if you want to get into the
lunacy of what we do here, of
course, I had to fire him as a
legislative aide so that he
could work during the session as
my staffer and then after this
session we'll have to fire him
from that and wait 90 days, uh,
for some BS to then bring him
back in and I can hire him back
as an attorney, so you're right,
fundamentally, I do need the
researcher, I do need the
staffer, we should have that.
Um, and I'd like to go there,
but that's not, that's you're
getting ahead of me a little
bit. I'm taking it one step at a
time and in the meantime, I'm
prepared to continue this
fictional little game we play to
make somebody in this building
happy. I'm not sure who.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator.
The Senator Padilla.
Thank you, chair. I guess I, I
just want to make sure I know
what we're doing here. Um, we
already have a
Court's Corrections and Justice
Interim Committee, you're just
simply want to make sure it
never goes away.
That's right, and right now it
is not a permanent committee, so
I'm trying to raise it to that
level to treat it as a permanent
committee and Senator Trill is
right, I want to begin to
recognize that it is overseeing
the third branch of government,
the courts and and to repeat the
judiciary is becoming an
important, more and more
important part every day and
without getting partisan, we see
that even at the federal level
right now, the push back on the
executive branch whether you
agree or disagree, but really
only pushback that's taking
place is really not coming out
of the legislative branch.
at the federal level, it's
coming back from the judiciary,
right? And I think we're gonna
see more of that, uh, more and
more of that in our future, uh,
around here and federally as
well too so I want to give the
importance to the courts. I've
worked hard and you with your
help to get judicial salaries up
so we get more experience, more
learned, uh, more mature people
in the judiciary in years past
we've been getting public
defenders and district attorneys
who are pretty green, uh, right
out of school becoming judges
because they're going from a
$60,000 a year salary to now
$120,000 if you're if you're
public defender, district
attorney, that's a, that's a
good deal. But if you're a
seasoned attorney who's got 20
years of experience, you can't
afford to take the cut, so we're
doing a lot of things, but, but
I think fundamentally I think
the court's interim committee
senator deserves a permanency in
our, in our laws and that's what
this is intended to do in in a
chair and senator, um, why is
the word corrections that
included?
Um, Mr. uh Mr. Chairman Senator,
the, the reason the courts, I'm
sorry, corrections was in there
is when I came to the
legislature, that was the name
of the committee. It was, it was
a committee created, as I said,
largely in response to the
prison riot and and because of
the, the scandals that were
involved with that and the
horror of that, we created this
interim committee to really deal
with the prison situation so it
was called at the time it was
called courts and Corrections.
Uh, and as uh as the years of,
of, uh, as I've been here now 20
plus years, the focus has been
less on the corrections
component of that work, so we,
we may go, we might go to one
prison during uh during interim
committee process, but we're
we're expanding our scope to so
many other things and you know,
Senator, you've been in my
committee a lot that we're,
we're covering just about.
Everything in the, in the, under
the sun in that committee these
days and so, um, putting the
name corrections in in there I
think is we're not gonna
eliminate that function, but I
think when we call it um.
Fords Corrections and justice it
allowed the justice captures
just about everything really.
OK, thank you, Chair, and then
Senator, the probably the last
question I have is, so you have
judiciary in the house,
judiciary in the Senate.
As you just said, which was
gonna be my next question,
almost everything that related
shows up in your, your
committee. What would it not be
doing? What would it not be
looking at?
That would because then you have
to have somebody looking at it
for when the session rolls
around.
You, you, you're looking at
you're talking about corrections
or or just what does the
judiciary committees look at
that this committee is not going
to look at.
Nothing, uh, I mean, why did you
just call it an interim
judiciary committee. We, we
could, um, and we could rename
it to that too and it gets kind
of confusing for the
non-attorney up here. Well, and
I think that when we call it a
judiciary committee when we call
it judiciary Committee here,
it's kind of a misnomer of the
general public thinks that that
committee deals with the
judiciary would make some sense.
So we're dealing with the, with
the judges and the courts as you
all know because you I think
I've seen most of you all in
there. We're, we're dealing with
a much broader responsibilities.
And so, um, I again.
What we name it Senator isn't
gonna matter too much to me but,
but I, I've heard a lot from
you, uh, chairman and senator,
that words mean things and I
agree that they mean things and
that's why I'm asking these
questions. No, you're right,
and, and ultimately the, the.
Big issues come to this
committee and mine.
Uh, I mean, that's just, let's
call it what it is, the, the you
all control our state in terms
of our finance, which controls
policy and we try and write good
laws, that's not to disrespect
all the other important.
Committees that that contribute
here too, but in the end.
We end up holding the bag,
right?
In the chair one last one, do
you meet all your is this
committee, the existing
committee meet all year? Are you
or or will you be meeting every
month of the year.
Uh, the, the interim committee
would just meet again according
to our interim schedule so
whatever the LFC meets every
month of the year. I didn't know
if that's what you were moving
to as a permanent committee
here.
Yeah, I, I don't anticipate that
we would change our schedule
again that is ultimately decided
by the date, and I, I don't
serve on that committee. All
right, thank you.
Senators.
Thank you. Let me ask you about
the subpoena powers. How, how
many times do you think this
committee has really
Need the subpoena powers to pull
somebody in. You're your
committee, your committee,
you're asking for subpoena
powers. That's a major portion
of this bills
changing the name is not a whole
lot, but.
No, I, I agree with you. I, I
think this is just the most
significant part of the drill.
Um, the best example I can give
you, Mr. Chairman, the easiest
one to explain this is when I've
been repeatedly asked to impeach
uh government officials, so.
I had the unenviable task
appointed by the Speaker of the
House to lead the impeachment
both of the former state
treasurer, former state auditor,
and former PRC commissioner.
Now, when I was asked to do
that, um, I,
I bless I hired a team of
attorneys to assist us as the
house because we were the ones
to do the impeachment.
But we couldn't get records
because we didn't, we didn't
have uh um spin authority.
And and the subpoena authority
would only exist in the house
when we're in session.
So we would have to have the,
the presiding officer of the of
the house, the Speaker issued a
subpoena authority but we had to
convene the whole legislature,
the whole house to give him that
authority.
And, and that doesn't work right
during the interim, so that, uh,
that, that is probably the
easiest example I can give you
is when I've been asked to
impeach individuals before I
can't, I can't get records. I
can't make people come and
testify.
So, and, and put them under
oath. You all have that
authority and uh whether you use
it or not is entirely up to you
whether you use it enough is a
question for you all to be
probably having yourselves, but
Um, Mr. Chairman, the other
example I give you is, um,
again, not to get partisan, but
during the last administration
with the Republican governor,
there were frequently times we
wanted to hear from a cabinet
secretary, and they would just
say we're not coming, um, and
we'd say we'd set an agenda
during the interim and put him
on the agenda, and they just say
we're not showing up, um, and
there's nothing I could do about
it. It's like, sorry.
Um, so we should as a as a
branch of government.
We oftentimes in in our caucus,
I'm not supposed to talk about
what happens in, uh, uh, the
complaint is always made we're
such a weak legislature and, and
maybe we'll get stronger by
pairs of salary, or maybe we'll
become more modern. Maybe we'll
move them more professionalized.
The reality is we choose to be
weak because then we're not
accountable, right? Um that
avoids accountability. I said I,
I can say I want to have the
cabinet secretary come in front
of me and answer some questions,
and they just say, no, we're not
coming. Oh, OK, I guess I won't
know the answers, so we should
be asserting ourselves as a
branch of government. This is
the way to do it.
Well, I mean, you went on a long
story in in, I mean, impeachment
is a big critical case. I mean,
the legislature should weigh in
and you have to have a trial and
a hearing for impeachment.
That shouldn't be part of a
committee subpoena power. I
think that the legislature, if
they think it's
Uh
Needs to happen, that they'll
come in and call them self in
the session to do impeachment.
The other thing is we have
cabinet secretaries all the
time, environment cabinet
secretary.
Maybe at a live requests this
year.
It only showed up maybe once.
In
That's not a subpoenapo offense
for a cabinet secretary. I don't
care which side of the aisle.
They may have a conflict in
schedule, I mean, I mean, give
me an instance where you're
gonna need subpoena power.
I mean, I've only seen it being
used maybe once in LLC and I
don't remember how many years
ago that was.
Um, and it was over records.
I don't want subpoena power to
be used. Oh, they won't come sit
and talk to us about.
Whatever is happening, so let's
subpoena. I mean, that's not
what subpoena power is for.
It's, it's to.
When there's a critical
situation where you need to
gather information.
Not will a cabinet secretary
come or not? I mean, this will
be used as a Republican
Democrat.
Device to get cabinet
secretaries into the committee
rooms.
Uh, or into interim committees
when they don't want to show up
or their bosses tell them not to
show up, that's been an instance
before, so I mean, tell us the
situation where you would really
need some peanut powder.
Uh, Miss Chairman said, well,
first of all, I agree with you,
it's an awesome power to have
the power of subpoena, but I'll
just tell you as a lawyer, I
have that power. I can subpoena
you today, uh, every lawyer in
the state has the authority to
issue a subpoena, so it's, it's
a power that we respect and we
use, I think judiciously and and
always whenever you uh serve a
subpoena of an individual can
move to quash the speed inhibit
the subpoena from from being
effective.
Uh, to your example, Senator,
the other example I would give
you is if you turn on the news
and watch any day, Congress has
subpoena authority. They bring
people before them all the time
for hearings, uh, the, we've
seen some of them very high
profile, the
January 6th, uh, were hearings
where there was a great deal of
subpoena of emails, documents,
individuals who are compelled to
come in and be sworn under oath.
So we see it. I, I see it every
day in Congress, and again, I'm
essentially suggesting we have
that same authority and we
assert ourselves as a as a
branch of government.
It's not just uh directed at
cabinet secretaries and you
write impeachment may not have
been the best example because
that's a very unique
circumstance, but, but it's not
just cabinet secretaries, uh,
people from various, um,
industries, um, other things
should be subject to us coming
in and asking them questions and
many times they may not want to.
Uh, you also pointed out, Ms.
Sherman rightfully so, uh,
another power of subpoena that's
used quite a bit is for
documents. So if I want to get
documents.
Um, if I'm doing the interim
committee and I wanna look at
crime. I'm gonna want to
subpoena documents from the
public, uh from the district
attorney's office or from APD to
find out the scope of this DWI
scandal, right? and figure out
who's implicated and, and what's
going on there too because
handedly, sometimes people are
not uh willing to take on those
hard issues that we in in the
legislature should so I don't
see Albuquerque licing itself,
and I, and I'd like to take a
more assertive role in doing so.
Yeah, I, I just, uh, you still
don't give me examples and even
over the interim at any point in
time when you would say this is
the reason why I would need
subpoena power. I mean.
It was set in LFC before I was
there. Like I said, I only
remember one time and it was for
documents, I mean.
you want to subpoena somebody
and saying you want to subpoena
records because you don't have
them.
Doesn't mean you can't do it a a
different route, but a subpoena
powers are completely, it's a
pretty thing in the, in the.
And the rules said I didn't see
where the rules are set in here,
at at least one member from the
Senate, uh.
For the subpoena power doesn't
say the committee has to vote by
a percentage, it doesn't sit out
anything yet.
In the rules.
Page 2, section A for the
subpoena powder.
Yeah
there's a majority, you'll know
that we do have the rules that
already applied for subpoenas
here so 2255.
OK is in there.
I guess I'll listen to the worst
of the question, but I mean, I
think there's times when you
need subpoena.
Authority.
I don't think it would anybody
be used just, well, let's have a
cabinet secretary come testify.
I mean, we use that against the
Republican Governor Martinez in
every aspect in LLC never did
that.
But when you don't get what you
want and then you're just gonna
use this authority and you can
convince the committee members
to use the authority for
something that may not even
matter, I mean.
You didn't give me an instances
where we said, this is where we
really need to dig in and see
some records or see this person
and see what they had to testify
to give you subpoena authority.
I can, I can give you countless
examples, Mr. Chairman. So the,
the better example maybe for you
persuasive is let's, I believe
that a lot of our breakdown in
criminal prosecutions and so
forth uh happens that the
prosecutor's level, right, at
the district attorney level. So
you've got a district attorney
here in Santa Fe who dismissed.
3 or 400 DWI cases early on and
then said, well, the reason she
was doing that was so that she
could refile them at a later
date. I, I wouldn't want to
subpoena which cases were
dismissed and which ones were
refiled. I would want to know
that right now.
Um, but I can't get those
records without a subpoena, so I
can give you countless examples
of where we could be more
effective with the subpoena. And
how would that determine in
courts and correction what's
going wrong when the district
attorney isn't elected official.
I'm going through this right
now.
So I've been down this road,
right? How do you get rid of a
bad district attorney.
Ours has one attorney in the, in
the office and that's her.
Another district attorneys are
hired. Another staff is hired.
She's running a one-man show
with 600 and some cases they're
probably gonna fall through the
cracks and get dismissed. And,
and you could subpoena her to
death.
And and you get nowhere cause
that's not the issue. I mean,
all those cases are gonna get
dismissed. The same thing with
the, with the stuff in
Albuquerque DI, I mean, they got
dismissed because
Crooked things happen.
I don't, I understand you're
gonna have to convince me a
little more. I'll, I'll yield to
somebody else, and listen, but
the subpoena powers I mean, but
you've told you've told me
you've complained at great
length. I think sounds like
rightfully so about your
district attorney in your
district, right? I, I would love
to have that district attorney
come to our interim committee
under a subpoena and explain why
she's got one prosecutor and why
she's lost her staff and how
many cases she's losing. That I
think could be very effective
for us as a legislature to know
because there there is no, there
really is no
oversight of district attorneys,
you and I have been working with
the district attorney in Las
Cruces, the last prosecutor
there, the district attorney who
was thrown out of office this
last election was down to 6
prosecutors.
Governor Martinez when she was
the DA down there had in the
upper twenties, mid-twenties of
prosecutors, Fernando Mascias,
the new district attorney just
got elected, is now back up to
17 prosecutors. There's no way
we can not ignore the fact that
when you're down to 7 or 6
prosecutors in Donana County
when Santa Fe has 30.
That there's an imbalance in our
resources there's an imbalance
in our outcomes, and there's an
out an imbalance in our
performance of our district
attorneys, I would want to be
able to bring that to the
legislature.
Um we can't even get them to
show up on their budget
hearings.
So they don't want money, then
they shouldn't have an office.
You can subpoena them.
I don't have that club, and
subpoena would give me some.
The club is moving to District
11 and so she'll be have
to all right, send it, I guess
my question under the same
lines.
So
You're planning to call a
district attorney in was
subpoenaed.
Are
It yeah
What are you uh after you've
questioned him, will that be
facts for a case against him.
Is there, is there any
Or will that be facts for a.
Legislation be put into place so
that there'll be someone.
Holding him accountable. I, I,
uh, that's question I've got.
center.
Mr. was said it's a good
question, to what end?
We've got a, we've got to get
the public aware of what's
really going on in our criminal
justices and why it's failing us
and again.
Everybody comes up here and says
we need more laws, we need more
laws, and you all see me push
back on that for 2 or 3.
Senator, uh, to my mind, um.
Bringing that to the public to
understand that the media, the
chamber of commerce, I think was
here earlier. I don't know
whether it's still here or not.
These people need to understand
where the breakdown is
happening. And um I think that
that's one thing to do from the
example of the district attorney
here in in Santa Fe why they
dismissed all these cases with
her reason, her stated reason
was that so she could refile
them more properly at a later
date. Did she do so?
I have no idea. Um, and, and
hundreds of this of DWI cases
just dismissed.
Why? Question we can pass laws
to increase sentences on DWA all
day on to why these cases are
being dismissed and not refiled.
Uh, I can't give you all good
answers, and so I think there is
an end to information.
Whether we, we, I'm not thinking
that we're gonna bring that DA
in that example and bring him to
an impeachment.
But I would think that the
citizens benefit from knowing
the district attorney may have
dismissed hundreds of DWI cases
promising to refile them and
never did so. I think that's
information the public should
know. I would want to know that.
But that's our own trouble, Mr.
Jared and senator with, with the
retention of judges. Hell,
nobody knows what a judge does.
Who said here and ask the public
to vote for retention.
And most people, they might know
who the sheriff is, they might
know who the senator is.
But the judge, they have no
stinking idea who he is and
The DA is probably the same
thing. They may know the DA, but
if he
You know, at least one of the
DA's in the system.
But
You know, it sounds great what
you're saying, but
Without the teeth of using the
information.
Did we correct anything so I
know that you've got
Better idea which needs to be
done in the court system than I
do, but it's, it's a problem
with me that everybody's
pointing the finger at
everybody.
And you know, uh, uh, a DA has
to bring factual evidence to a
court.
And the court's got to make a
decision on the facts of the
case.
And then it
Escalates on up from that.
So
The, the fact you brought on the
floor yesterday.
About, uh, you know, the release
there.
And then a gentleman.
You know, suspended got a
suspended sentence, you know,
why wasn't that judge?
And it's always, it's always
hindsight, I know that, and it's
hard to, hard to see uh in front
of you. You can't predict the
future, but damn through some of
this stuff, it looks like if
he's, you know, how could they
come up with that? And, and so.
If, you know, if you got it.
can put some teeth in this deal
or explain to me where
You know, where the factual
information is gonna be put to
good use.
You know, I, I'd feel a lot.
Closer about voting for this
bill.
You know, immature, so you, so
you've now, uh, give me a good
another good example to Senator
Munoz's question, which is,
well, how would you use this?
Give me an example. And so
you've just pointed out the fact
that the judiciary part is
overseeing the administrative
office of the courts and the
judiciary. I would like to know
and be able to get data from the
courts about how many judges,
uh, cases are being disposed and
how quickly.
Because there is a great
disparity, uh, I'll just tell
you that between the performance
of different judges, and you're
right, the public doesn't know
who they are, but I think we
should try to help the public
understand who they are, uh, who
is, who
Who are the judges who will hold
people. The, the governor and
others have been talking for
years.
The the that authority exists
with judges today. They can hold
people, but some do and some
don't. And, and I'll tell you,
you're part of the state or
other parts of the state, judges
are probably more inclined to
hold people, uh, and other parts
of state they're not, and
there's a, there's a geographic
disparity. There's a political
ideological disparity on that
judgment.
I want that data. I want to know
which which judges their cases,
which judges are releasing
people and which ones are
holding.
But are we gonna make that
information public.
Or we don't put that out in the
newspaper.
Or we don't, you know, how are
we going to inform the, the,
the, the voting public because
at the end unless we impeach
them.
It's the public who votes ait.
Or at least votes to retain
them.
So, how are we gonna, how will
we use the information that,
that you get.
it could be very political, is
what I'm saying. Uh, but if it's
good, solid.
Facts.
Then we need to bring it
forward. So would we publish it?
How would we do it?
So Mr. Chairman, Senator, again,
this is a tool that I want to
give us, right? And I can't
understand why we would ever not
want to have more tools in the
toolbox, whether we use it,
whether we use it intelligently
or discriminately or
indiscriminately.
It will be on us, right? And if
I was a chair use this power
indiscriminately, I expect,
right? Either unseat me or
remove me or whatever it may be
as a chair, and that would be
appropriate.
Uh, but, but to your question is
what do we do with the
information? I, I don't yet know
um how well we could use it, but
not having it just leaves me
with which judges are moving
their cases.
Um, how do we, how do I do
oversight?
As a branch of government,
which, how do we, how do we
Uh, police, another branch of
government where we tie our
hands and say what information
they have.
Uh, I think that we want that
tool.
Uh, there are a lot of ways that
judges are evaluated. There's a
JPEC, which you go out and they
score judges and they survey
lawyers and they ask them, are
the judges senators want to
we're going to lose a quorum
here, so, so you're gonna have
to speed up a little bit and
then I just need to make it.
That's right.
Center get a question. I, I
don't mean to be short because
we're going to the floor, we're
gonna lose a quorum and so.
Yeah, I, I don't really have a
question. I just wanna, I just
wanna say like, you know, we've
been in a position where we've
got these scandals that come to
From public officials, whether
it's the, the, the courts,
whether it's um uh the uh
Agencies, it, it, we've seen
them.
We've got the DWI scandal.
I have questions about why cases
are getting dismissed and people
are out on the streets killing
people.
Um, I have questions about how
did it get to the point where
the Justice Department, the
Department of Justice at the
federal level.
enters into descent, um, um,
consent decrees. Why didn't the
legislature step in and get that
under control before it reached
to the point that the federal
government felt compelled to
come in and tell our state what
to do.
And I do think that having
subpoena power would give us the
ability to do that. And quite
frankly, the press is here right
now, Senator Woods, and so even
just us having the conversation
about that brings some interest
of it.
Nobody comes to our interim
committees. There's a few people
that watch it online, but if we
issue subpoenas, the press is
gonna be here and the public's
gonna hear about it. And quite
frankly, the fact that we only
meet 30 days and then 60 days.
It gives the public and
everybody else, all of those
months in between to point the
finger at who's the problem, and
I, I, I hear it across the board
in my community that the
legislature's not doing enough.
And I think we are.
We just haven't been able to
explain why we're doing it now,
so I really support this. I just
one question just to wrap up.
So, if you did a subpoena in,
and then if there's a public
benefit, can a lawyer get the
information from the subpoena
and then sue a justice or sue a
DA for not prosecuting.
Uh, can that happen? Or does all
the information the subpoena
information remained with the
legislature and is not public.
Miss Chairman, so it, it could
happen both ways, um, a subpoena
we before I could, I could serve
a subpoena on estate agents and
they might say, well, you're
asking for information that's
confidential. Let's say I
subpoena tax information, they
say that's private, that's
confidential. We're not gonna
give it to you, then I could go
to a judge and say Judge,
produce it to us under seal,
right, which means we could see
it, but we couldn't disseminate
publicly, so it could be, it
could be public, it could be
private, it could be something
in between. It could be all of
those things under a subpoena
and a judge could ultimately
fashion limitations on that
authority.
And that's kind of typically
what happens in my practice. I
oftentimes, uh, I do medical
malpractice. I'll serve a
subpoena on the I'll say no, and
I'll go see a judge and the
judge will usually let me get it
confidentially and emotion.
for Du pass by Senator, 2 by.
Senator Brnt
No
Senator Brandt votes no. Senator
Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
votes yes. Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla Bosa, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Tobiasson votes no
Senator Trujilal.
Senator Trujillo Boia, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes no. Senator
Sendo.
Senator Shindo Bosia, Senator
Munoz.
I don't know, I, I'm gonna vote
yes, but I'm gonna bring a lot
of issues. Senator Munoz votes,
yes, we have a due past 5 in the
affirmative, 3 in the negator
before you guys leave 11 quick
thing center.
This morning, our committee
hearing was just for us to do a
Senate Finance Committee
analysis.
I talked to the speaker last
night. He was supposed to send
some staff members over. I don't
know if they were in the room or
not. So we're just doing an
analysis of 11 and 279. It
wasn't a bill hearing. It wasn't
anything uh against or for.
Uh, I'll give a perfect example.
Senator Brandt didn't know that.
That
And the Mexicans had a
preference in his bill.
That's a big bill. There's a lot
of moving parts to it and people
need to understand it in the
committee, and that's why we do
that. We're probably gonna have
another one on, on 279.
To understand that as it moves
forward, so.
They, the sponsors can get mad.
It wasn't a sponsors.
We're gonna hear the bill, we're
gonna hear what's in the bill
and as our committee and our
staff tells us what's in there,
what's constitutional, what's
not constitutional for our
understanding, so.
That's all it was, OK?
Thank you. Werejo.
