You're up.
Your senator Candelaria and
Senator Diamond gets elected I
think we are live on the
webcasts.
Thank you Mr chairman felt that
good morning members of the
subcommittee member good morning
to our staff and good morning to
the public my name is Senator
Jacob R. Candelaria I am the
chairman of this subcommittee to
address final language revisions
to house bill two.
Act of this subcommittee is to
hear testimony this morning from
our legislative staff from
legislative finance committee as
well as from the Senate finance
committee staff on revisions
that were made to language and
house bill two in light of
yesterday's hearing and
presentation before the Senate
finance committee of the whole
regarding house bill two
following our discussion
yesterday and the different
scenarios that were presented to
the committee the committee took
action on various elements of
the budget with direction to
staff to prepare the final
versions and also took
some action on the federal funds
Sheetï¿½ with some direction to
staff but then also the chairman
has directed this committee to
your testimony and I as I said
review what staff has made
revisions to language at the end
of this committee our task is on
upper down we will make a
recommendation to the full
committee to accept.
What is extensively the final
version of language into house
bill two of course if and when
this recommendation is made and
the committee undertakes the
entirety of the bill every
member of that committee of
course we'll have another
opportunity to propose any
substantial amendments to
language or to the budget at
that time or following today's
hearing the two days purpose is
not to sort of engaging a broad
restructuring or re sweeping of
the language our task here is to
really get the in depth briefing
on what staff has accomplished
ask questions make sure we
understand what's going on make
sure there's no mistakes make
sure everything is clear and
transparent and straightforward
as we can make it so that the
public understands very clearly
what is in this budget
and of course if members have
more substantial changes that
can be addressed with the
chairman of the Senate finance
committee that you know if we
identify those today of those
will be action items that you
need to take up with the
chairman as I said today is is
enough for down so
I want to first members
go to I believe it's probably
best if we start with Mr Abbey
or Mr so we
you all have been sent an
additional packet this morning
of revisions that our staff
undertook to the language
following yesterday's Committee
meeting so Mister Selena Mr
Abbey which whoever wants to to
walk us through our the shape
and my hope here is we kind of
get the deep dive
here with the testimony thank
you Mr.
Turn it over to Mr solely and I
think it's worth repeating a
little more background when we
talk about language and bars
where they are in the bill and
how they work so if we could do
that in repeated
over more detail agency
personally will start with that
actually great I suggest a
strappy and Mr Slee please do
thank you Mr chairman real quick
I'm I'm looking for a we're
we're would have received the
additional information.
Mr us Senator Steinborn it was
sent to your email if you don't
have it I suggest you reach out
to our committee staff they can
get you a copy real quick it was
built around morning.
Okay I'm just looking for right
now if so.
Senator etcetera etcetera I've
I've we've given some direction
should an email if you don't
have it okay we've got to move
forward so Mister so we please
begin your presentation.
Okay Mister chairman so this is
house bill two this is what
you're working on amending.
Section one of house bill two is
basically the title I want to
give you an orientation about
how the bill is structured.
Section two of the bill or
definitions you're not amending
any of those section three of
the bill our general provisions
basically explaining how the
bill is structured and set up as
well as some reporting
requirements reversions for
unexpended balances things like
that you're not amending any of
those sections the main sections
that you're amending a section
for.
Action for as the body of the
budget if your call hearing all
of those agency presentations
talk about their main operating
budget that's where you're
appropriating money to the to
the agencies on an ongoing basis
I'm for their operations
normally large agencies will
have multiple programs within
the agency selected children
youth and families will have a
children's behavioral health
you'll make specific
appropriations to that program
for specific purposes you'll
have a juvenile justice program
you what you want that program
to get a certain amount of money
and spend it in a certain way
child protective services or
programs support.
sometimes within those programs
you'll have specific earmarks or
language directing the agency
more specifically how to spend
money so there will be things
like of the two million dollars
in the general fund
appropriation is for this
specific purpose.
and so that those are usually
laid out in section four.
In section five of the bill
section five six and seven those
are special appropriations that
are for one year they're usually
made available in the current
fiscal year and they can spend
it into the into the next fiscal
year.
sometimes there are supplemental
appropriations that are in
section six that help HSD finish
the current fiscal year so like
the
an agency may have a current
shortfall that they need to to
get additional general fund
appropriations or some other
proprioceptive finish the fiscal
year and then you've got a
separate section for all of your
information technology
appropriations.
Sometimes within each of those
you'll have specific language on
specifically how the agency
supposed to use the
appropriation and there will be
language around that sometimes
HSD won't be able to spend all
of its special appropriations
that you thank you that you gave
them last session a good example
of that is the environment
department got additional money
to start hiring people they can
spend all the money so they'd
ask for an extension of that
appropriation and that's in
house bill two.
Then we get to the further back
in the bill for budget
adjustments so there's two types
of budget adjustments one is for
the current fiscal year to help
finish out the fiscal year maybe
the agency expects to get a new
grant maybe they've got
additional revenue that was
coming in to one of their
accounts and and they're asking
to be able to spend that money
in a specific way those bars are
adjusting agencies budget above
and beyond what you appropriated
instruction for.
So they can ask to finish the
year with extra money in their
budget and they submit a budget
adjustment request to DFA and
LFC outside the legislative
session or in some cases they
would ask for new bar thirty for
FY twenty two.
Usually we don't recommend
giving a lot of budget
adjustment authorities for FY
twenty two because you've spent
a lot of time is both LFC
members adrenaline you're
looking at building the budget
you spent time as Senate finance
committee members building the
budget.
Why would you allow the agency
to go and re arrange the whole
budget for the fiscal year even
begins let let's give them a
little bit of time to see what
what might need to be changed
I'm at the end of the day.
So let me go through the sheets
that were sent this morning
Charles Department you didn't
explain FY twenty two standard
for authority that is in their
previous.
Each agency RD has just standard
language the ability to increase
their budget from other state
funds an interagency transfers
by five percent so they've
already got a blanket ability to
are to increase their budget
above what you're appropriating
an inspection I sometimes will
ask for authority beyond that
five percent which can be a lot
for HSD to be able to increase
their budget if they've got that
amount of fund balance and that
amount of extra revenue
typically staff for gonna be
recommending to put that money
into section four two budget
don't leave it outside of the
budget for them to spend
differently once the once the
year begins we're also tend to
recommend
our programs are ready for
specific amounts and for
specific purposes because you're
the legislature you're the
appropriating by often times
you'll see our request for an
unlimited amount for unspecified
purposes
and we usually don't recommend
those or or exports rare and we
start also in the FY twenty two
par thirty with full.
Authority to move money among
categories from person to
contracts to other costs up and
down so they start out with a
whole lot and again to repeat
what Mr so is that let them get
start Representative Rowe would
always wonder why wouldn't
agencies our first app of the
year.
When they have that they spent.
Nine months building a budget
with the legislature and LFC let
him work with that and then
after they need adjustments come
back and do it at the.
thirty eight.
So I'd like to get started with.
line four of the the packet that
was sent out this morning we're
says remove not withstanding and
let's go to.
She.
That show the changes to the not
withstanding language way if I
can I apologize to you maybe
missed written so is it all
possible.
All the share screen so that the
public can see the sheets that
we're reviewing.
Where Senator Mr so we could you
repeat with members of the
starting line.
It's with the.
The pages that look like this
says not withstanding what.
There we go yeah scroll down I
feel the put page numbers on
this this morning I apologize
Mister.
Keep scrolling.
One more page.
On.
That's going.
Okay.
So.
In lean budget years
house bill two would contain
lots of different
overrides of different
Statutory funds in order to make
the budget balance.
We've been asked to go through
and find instances where our
house bill to contain this not
withstanding language and
determine if it's continues to
be needed or not and the making
a serious attempt to try to
reduce the use of not
withstanding language.
The first two lines are actually
legacy.
Provisions that have just been
holdover from prior years that
are not needed anymore so the
county supported Medicaid
program are the county supported
Medicaid revenue stream the
statute says the legislature
should try to appropriate nine
percent to D. O. H. that's what
house bill two in front of you
today does so there's actually
no need for that provision
saying not withstanding so
recommended to strike it and
then this is just simply
designating that of the amounts
in the table thirty four point
nine million is from the county
supported Medicaid fund DFA
within transfer that money to
the Department of Health
according to the statute and
transfer the other questions to
the Medicaid program of Human
Services Department.
Fire protection fund provides
for a disbursement to fire
districts
by a formula it also provides
authority for other
appropriations from the fund you
are making appropriation from
the fund for the administration
of the program of the fire
marshal's office and homeland
security that not withstanding
language is totally unnecessary.
This next line is a provision
that I think there's a bill that
will be fixing this problem that
senator Munoz just carrying
we've talked to your Senate
finance committee staff who used
to run NMFA and we all think
that this isn't needed right now
any longer and so recommending
deleted.
There are other provisions
particularly in the public
school section where for the
current for the fiscal year
you're appropriating money your
you are directing how that money
should be spent
so in the case of this next one
there's been a lot of discussion
about more flexibility for how
this K. five plus program is
implemented your providing that
flexibility and house bill two
the not withstanding language is
unnecessary this next one is
really important
we've been asked
The transportation distribution
for public schools is based on
for next year is based on this
year's ridership and how many
miles school districts drug
buses since we've been in remote
learning there haven't been any
to and from
data being generated by the
school districts the original
LFC recommendation was so the
whole districts harmless and use
the twenty nineteen school year
data in order to distribute the
FY twenty two
Distribution.
We've been asked that
not to do that through the
budget but rather do it through
basically two or three lines
into a standalone bill that will
need to pass it will need to
pass if this is struck from
house bill two in order to hold
districts harmless for
transportation
shortfall for next year.
the last two language languages
again these are directions on
how to spend money in house bill
two and recommending leading and
notwithstanding it's
unnecessary.
Going back to if you can scroll
back up please back to the
excel spreadsheets.
I'll go over a couple more these
Mr chairman and then will stand
for questions.
mostly so the AOC
wanted specific language of the
bill as appropriating money from
various accounts at the agency
they would like that language
specifying how much is from each
of those accounts
for their operating budget us
that's just adding language the
public regulation commission
we've noted that.
We need to move sixty five
thousand from one program to
another
Economic development this was
What you acted on last night
when I brought up this to
performance measures they would
be added to the bill on line
seven and eight.
The public at department asked
for an extra ten to fifteen days
to set the your final unit value
so that date would be changed to
January thirty first of twenty
twenty seconds a line ten would
update the name of the micros
programs mock trial in high
school forensics which I think
is the intent of the
appropriation
Line eleven would add
flexibility language there's
some concern among the
department that the amount of
money going in the SCG for K.
five plus and for extended
learning may need to be shifted
around depending on how many
units school districts struck
down so this gives some
flexibility to move money yes
the extended learning program
units are not sufficient.
line twelve this updates the
language that others contingency
language in the bill that says
contingent on enactment of house
bill six X. amount of money is
available for the SCG to get rid
of the the impact aid and other
credits the this proposed change
would also at the another build
its to getting rid of the
credits SB forty one is part of
that contingency very technical.
DFA asked for an extension and
that the amount of time to be
able to account for that cares
Act money from last but she'll
session ended twenty two there
are no longer planning I'm
accounting for that money and
public schools
and this would extend the period
of time for them to account for
that federal funds.
This was an important one and
General Services Department
there be language inserted
required mismanagement to
provide liability coverage for
the manta patrol.
one sixteen ads for other
election costs for that special
appropriation for the
The Albuquerque congressional
district that they have left
over money they would be able to
use it for other election cost
later in the year I where they
felt that they were short of
secretary of state.
This is just updating of.
The name of the leader fund
online seventeen I know that
their email traffic this morning
for regulation and licensing
asking for extending an
appropriation for alcohol
control licensing software for
another year
there was no need for
contingency language on a
livestock board and so that
would be struck under this
proposal.
The next page.
The underlying language would be
inserted into the special
appropriation for early
childhood in doubt positions
this is what the department was
planning on spending the money
on in the first place this is
just clarifying that
To go ahead and spend it that
way and that any unexpended
balances would refer to that
early childhood fund I'm not
back to a an account that they
can't get the money out of.
I'm there's a lot of requests
that you'll hear during the year
for agencies to have non
reverting language for their
section for spending
the typically you want to limit
or not allow that because then
that's money that they will
bring into next year's budget
that is essentially an
appropriated by you it's better
to get a handle on what that
would be
that you do waiver is one
program that typically has had
non reverting language and
they've built up a surplus of
about thirty six million dollars
that's an enormous amount of
money to have sloshing around
outside of the appropriations
process
you'll see language later on
allowing them to move that
around to cover shortfalls
through a budget adjustment
process and then this proposal
would limit the amount of non
reverting to ten million dollars
that would help them put new
people on to the program and not
have to worry about there not
being enough money for that but
not too much like thirty six
million dollars sloshing around
the the next one is changing
appropriation for panic buttons
from the public school facility
authority to the public
education department that's to
administer this program last
time.
This next one required PED to
submit
new disparity calculations if
allowed prior to accessing the
supplemental appropriation
that's in the bill for impact
aid adverse
dispositions of those cases and
then last night there was a lot
of discussion about the special
transportation appropriations
and this this part would replace
the shall and house bill two as
it sits today with the NMAA for
those list as well as add to
list of projects that you
approved last night.
For section eleven and twelve
these at this is the budget
adjustment request section of
the bill thirteen District Court
requests FY twenty two bar
thirty when they needed FY
twenty one Mar thirty of the
state engineer needed some
standard bar thirty for things
like the Pecos river settlement
cost recommending those staging
Department
agencies that have multiple
program sometimes were asked to
move money from one program to
another.
Think about if you're think
about your junior probation and
your appropriating money for a
specific purpose you wanted to
go towards that purpose.
Not to something else the same
thing is true with section four
in this particular case the
adult protective services
program in in aging department
is embarking on a new method of
trying to build the federal
government for some of its
services that could free up
additional general fund revenue
in their budget.
What they're asking for and
what's recommended here is if
they do generate those surpluses
because you're doing a good job
of federal leveraging let's take
the surpluses and spend it on
aging Network and so that's
what's recommended here.
But Human Services department we
discussed last night it has a
shortfall in its cash assistance
for temporary assistance for
needy families program this is a
federal federally funded program
that you appropriate the federal
dollars in this particular
program they need an increase of
bars already for it to cover
that shortfall right now they've
got ten million dollars this
would add another fifty another
five million for a total of
fifteen.
this Department of Health online
thirty this is using surplus
money in their budget to cover
shortfalls in other
other programs within the
department rather than
appropriating additional money
to the department and the
environment department needs
fires already in case you all a
past and house bill twelve is
enacted for the campus Act the
last ones are some technical
things that a staffer found that
are recommending there's a
duplicate I. T. appropriation
for the retiree health care that
needs to be structured in
section seven they have it the
same appropriation in section
five
it wasn't clear that those were
different probation or with the
same appropriation and so we
also recommend recommend
clarifying that for web portal
There was a
discrepancy of a hundred dollars
between the health program in
the tobacco settlement revenue
and then some other language
changes to to correct actual
bill references the courts asked
to clarify the justices or
judges for purposes of the
additional judicial pay and then
the the last one is the correct
the reference to Senate bill one
thirty three in the
transportation for the
essential air service with that
Mr chairman I stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr Abbey thank you Mr
so we do we have any comments
the that are Senate finance
committee staff wishes to offer
Mr Propst MCM.
okay seeing non is chairman
thank you question Mr chairman
all Mr Senator Steinborn we're
not yet at that point you just
got to you where at that point
okay I know you have just ask a
question star and misunderstood
mission.
Show.
And Senate finance committee.
The staff doesn't appear to have
any testimony I just want to
thank our staff for the quick
turnaround on these amendments
so now we will go to questions
and comments by committee.
Sins and comments by committee
please raise your hands.
Okay we'll go to Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
for cobbled together the
materials this morning would
thank you guys for all your hard
work I appreciate that being
responsive to the little thanks
Amanda falling through the
cracks or whatever
the one I don't know that we've
gone through it this morning so
it by we have not a where are we
the little thank you said this
morning about CYFD.
How we got through that yet.
Mr Chairman yes.
So.
After last night's hearing.
We discussed two items with the
chairman that
she asked us to look at in the
context of this committee and
one of the CYFD and Mr we.
We have looked at it CYFD
reverted.
last year actually none reverted
because they had non reverting
language they none reverted
about twelve million which is a
lot in a budget the CYFD budget
is only.
General fund is only two hundred
and ten million.
They non reverted five percent
of their budget which really
makes budgeting difficult when
you move that much money from
one year to the next so
and then for the current year we
have a similar estimate that the
the what version would be about
ten million so.
It can be problematic to do a
lot of non reverting language
but we discussed with the
chairman and we are for it.
It affects laying on the table
recommendation to provide none
reverting language of up to one
million remember they got six
hundred thousand yesterday in
amendments related to their
electronic notification program
here's another million of.
So so that's one item there's
another item that will come to
at the right time relating to
tourism marketing and I I I
would propose Mr chairman to set
that aside so it's certainly
appropriate for members to ask
anything they want but we are
laying those two additional
items on the table.
Okay so thank you so I'm gonna
ask about about both of those
Mr chair Mr Abbey on the CYFD
appreciate some language their
money better start yes Senator
staff are so before you arrived
at the committee we.
And before you arrive we did go
over some ground rules and I'll
go over them again
if a member of this committee
wishes to propose a more
substantive change to language
and I think the tourism and CYFD
falls into that that's really a
matter that a member needs to
address with the committee chair
we are not going to add
significant.
You know revisions here our job
is to take the testimony
understand what's here and and
then advise the committee
whether or not the staff
recommendation should be
accepted that doesn't preclude
members from advocating with the
chairman of the committee
regarding more substantive
language changes but I would
encourage us to limit our
discussion today to those
matters that are before us thank
you okay so this matter is
before us Mr chairman.
And and I'm I'm just going to
say that it's good to start I
liked it but I Ms.
From CYFD and and I will be
giving you additional feedback
on them.
I think they need a little more
a little more dialing in but
But that's all I want to say is
that I I like it there on the
street but I so let's start
let's just keep working on it
and that's my feedback on those
two items that's all I have at
this time Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Steinborn
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman my
question is for the first page
of not withstanding language
that you share with us Mr solely
the very bottom line Mr chairman
I don't I am not suggesting any
language changes I just want to
better understand you made a
point to say that that this
language was contingent upon
that bill passing is that
contingency does that put
presents some challenges that we
need to address what was the
intent behind that language just
like a better speech at.
There's been for a number of
years a desired.
To not have House Bill to
override substantive statute.
And in the case of the school
transportation you we need to
change the statute or we need to
override it in house bill two in
order to properly fund that the
school districts for
transportation costs next year
because there is no data on
which to base how much of school
districts should get for
transportation next year because
we've been out of school this
year and the statute says we
would have to use this year's
data so we're recommending
getting rid of the language and
I'm just pointing out for the
the committees
Attention that that means house
bill one seventy five has to
pass.
Or a similar legislation that is
suggesting that formula for one
year if it doesn't pass then
there will be a problem with how
PED would with the develop the
transportation distribution for
next year so when when we're
told don't use house bill two to
make small changes to a statute
then that that means you've got
I'm actually do a separate bill
and a separate bills only gonna
change about three lines.
Thank you Mr chairman so I guess
my question would be well that's
a lot of pressure to get that
bill passed I mean what.
Right what kind of what kind of
position does that put us and if
it's not when we're completing a
budget like this hypothetically
I guess this is a very odd here
in on circumstance that's
usually why we would recommend
using the budget for those types
of things we're kind of in a.
As staff were in a position
where we're being told that she
is not with standing in the
budget but this is a an area
where you may yeah actually may
want to do it okay thank you for
that clarification high yield
Mister chairman thank you.
Thank you and thank you Senator
Diamond so just to go back
members in consultation with
the share
I think it would be appropriate
just going back to Steinborn
point for LFC to present its
recommendations at this time
regarding this CYFD bar issue
that Senator Steinborn has
raised as well as the tourism
issue so Mr Abbey Mr solely
analysis kind of moving back and
forth a little bit this is the
first time we've done this
process you know in this fashion
and it currently in public in
this way so you know as
gentleman just said we kind of
go back and forth and we're
trying to do things right so Mr
silly can you walk us through
what in light of the
conversation the committee had
yesterday with CYFD and tourism
what it what it LFC what is the
proposal that house you want to
lay on the table.
Mr chairman.
And I suggest we take them up
one at a time select sure CYFD.
Mr Abbey absolutely let's go and
start with
It's quite a long time to bring
people on to the rules so we may
fund have an intent to take
people off the waiting list but
it starts out pretty slow to
bring them on in the expenses so
low when they wrap up later and
then finally because of the
pandemic it's been hard to
qualify people to enter the
program that's why there is
limited non reverting language
for CYFD for I'm sorry for the
developmentally disabled in the
entire budget and and that
survived through the house and
so for is so far indiscretions
in the Senate clearly some of
the what the points about CYFD
also could apply we're talking
about vulnerable populations.
Ten million unlimited non
reverting really.
Again means that the HSD is
building nonrecurring revenues
in a substantial way like five
percent of their total budget
into their recurring
expenditures and then we were in
twenty three what they spend ten
million non recurring from non
reversion from twenty one how we
gonna find the money to continue
that in twenty three that's a
lot but again in the and they
also got six hundred thousand in
last minute amendments the
Senate finance so recommending
the yield on the vulnerable
populations staff recommendation
was to allow non reversion of
the of an additional one million
which is a companion to the six
hundred thousand increase you
had yesterday and Senate finance
members.
For.
Strap it that is the proposal
okay Mister so quick.
And I will trust you want but I
and this is a staff
recommendation it's not take it
or leave it if members wanted
justice that's appropriate.
That's our starting point for
discussion Mr.
At.
No I do not.
All right so all questions and
comments from the committee just
so we're clear.
Just
now on the staff.
I do
members of their staff board
with your hand up there's time
on the floor is yours thank you
I'm a little unclear if I'm
allowed to to color outside the
lines Mr chairman I I think I'm
getting the signal from chairman
the us that he wants us to have
a full discussion if we want to
change the language before us
etcetera etcetera I just address
that I was mistaken I didn't get
that there okay this was revived
on so you you if they would like
Bangor's thank you Mr chairman
all right so I I just want to
give the feedback that I've
received and
On the CYFD specifically was
obviously we're starting with
that that
That it's it's important to the
agency that they're they're
looking for non reversion
specifically in the.
In the protective services
division.
And one of the other divisions
and that the transfer authority
of up to million between
divisions is key to their the
styling of efforts for the new
system that they're building
I realize that goes beyond what
you what you are at it but I
also note that update you know
from our briefings with that
department they are doing
awesome job
Reducing their caseload and
they're standing up a new a new
a new system there and for the
texting and everything else and
so I I just think we want to
continue to keep our foot on the
gas and I would ask for that new
language and I can read it again
or or however the department
wants to handle it you all
certainly can reject it but that
is what the department is
requesting in the.
Mister chairman Senator yeah yes
I have they told you what it
specifically for.
And how much.
Yes well.
I talked to the secretary about
this this morning and I've
committed to work with him you
know this is like I said you set
up a budget for how much the the
legislature once spent on child
protective services and this
would would potentially move
money from child protective
services to another purpose if
they're able to generate you
know savings in child protective
services that's great I've
talked to him about possibly the
need to reorganize their budget
and starting with the the
following budget cycle rather
than doing this through a budget
adjustment process I I committed
to him to work with him on that
I'm not version language I'm a
little bit I'm clear on.
What you want them to spend it
on a specifically.
Sure well Charles thank you for
that Mr chairman we can you know
they're the experts on that I
just know kind of what they what
they have told me and
Which is that that there was a
few divisions where the non
reversion is really the most
important and they're requesting
authority transfer funds up to
million between visions
with three divisions being the
most important so I think
they've given it in a couple
different divisions within on
reversion really important and
then three divisions where the
transfer authority between them
is most important and that that
it's important for them building
their on child well being system
electors system so perhaps we
can look at like
Giving them that authority this
year and then working as a call
to realign let's use the trials
that the overall budget perhaps
that's where they're headed but
I.
Can can I I apologize I don't
have more detail than that but
that's the the R. you obviously
I just saw the language and so
it's trying to triage that but
we can certainly work together
the committee feels like they're
amenable to giving that broader
authority to this particular
agency perhaps we can then work
with you to dial in.
Staff report any other members
of the committee on the CYFD
issue.
Senator Diamond.
You Mr chairman I just want to
clarify so I'm new here is a
freshman here but we are we are
encouraging to shy away from.
We're reverting
Language and just to see I just
wanna make sure I understand the
request at CYFD is making Mr
Steinborn and then I also want
to make sure that I understand
that they had of the eleven
million dollars from last year
is that correct because I was
the total would remain from last
year and then in this year's
budget I am very lost on the
CYFD just help me try to help me
draw a line here so at the end
of the trial gentleman.
No I was just gonna direct that
I you know I think it's best of
LFC address the issue thank you.
Sure so at the end of fiscal
year twenty CYFD had just had
surpluses.
In its budget.
And protective services.
Me pull this up real quick.
It had a surplus of six point
nine million in general fund and
protective services two point
two million in juvenile justice
and one point eight million in
behavioral health services.
So that in the current fiscal
year FY twenty one they did a
budget adjustment bringing that
nearly eleven million dollars
into their current year
operating budget for a variety
of different spending
initiatives normally you would
Representative those types of
things through the budget
process how much should you
spend on this texting program
for example do you want to spend
on reverting money do you want
to spend one time money on an
ongoing cost or these things
that are going to be like
training for example to bring up
a new type of program.
All of that is left to the
discretion of the department
when you get this non returning
language and then they budgeted
and they'll spend it in the
current fiscal year and what the
proposal that Mr Abbey talked
about is letting him do that up
to one million dollars at the
end of fiscal year twenty one so
if an agency is asking for that
non reverting that tells you
that they've been appropriated
more money than that what they
need for the current fiscal year
and they're wanting to spend it
in the next fiscal year question
do you want to allow that or do
you want to vet how they spend
the money in the next fiscal
year for specific things or just
leave it to the agency and may I
add to that.
The general fund revenue
estimates include an estimate of
reversions that the census
revenue estimators agree on and
you have many other agencies out
there who want this not
reverting language and so when
you do not reverting in effect.
Where you're gonna you're
standing out of the red version
estimates that we count as FY
twenty two recurring general
fund revenue there is a
consequence of adding this
giving them more authority that
you've never seen to to
appropriate money and reducing
the recurring revenues that
you're planning on building a
budget for next year.
Thank you gentlemen Mr chairman
I just want to go on the record
by saying I I'm not favorable
accounting this non reverting
language and I feel like in this
specific instance almost like
we're relinquishing our
influence as a finance committee
as we move forward doing that
but I just want to make those
comments thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you any other members and
just everyone is clear on
process what what what we'll do
is we've taken the testimony on
the initial staff recommendation
we've now taken the testimony
regarding the staff
recommendation on the
staff.
and now let's go ahead and Mr so
we can you can you brief us on
what the staff recommendations
regarding tourism in light of
yesterday's all does that also
Mr chairman.
All right Mr.
Mr.
Again you're the chairman but.
This committee crap
but we don't want to kind of
we're trying to.
Move these items forward in some
way to achieve consensus so.
What it with there be a
different amount may I just
Senator Candelaria tried another
tack.
Yes Mr Abbey I'm just asking you
to brief us on what is the
recommendation from Alex Torres
and then the traditionally we've
just here a few more of.
We're gonna take actions we're
gonna take action what I'm
envisioning as of the end of
this discussion will take action
on the first set of
recommendations and then we'll
take action on the CYFD
recommendation and then we'll
take action on the tourism
presentation thank you and and
and at the end of the committee
wants to defer action on any of
those items for further
discussion with the committee
staff then they can make that
motion and if they have the
votes and we can do that but you
know I think it's appropriate
that the subcommittee Act as a
subcommittee and if the majority
of members feel revisions need
to be made then they can be made
but I'm not gonna hold up
everything just because there's
one idea floating I just think
we need to come to some finality
so Mr Abbey with you thank you
Mr chairman all right on tourism
just to recap the tourism
recurring marketing budget is
ten million dollars.
On a recurring basis on on going
basis and that's probably was
only five or six million four
five years ago there's been
pretty smart increases in that
marketing budget over the years
the
executive requests twenty five
million for a one time increase
to that marketing budget I mean
that's that's state of.
Two hundred fifty percent
increase in one time funding
over the on going about the
house the LFC recommended five
million a fifty percent increase
the Senate amendments yesterday
for specials that were adopted
at its two million to that I I
don't think anyone doubts the
importance of getting the
tourism economy back on its feet
Mr Chairman you may the the you
recognize yesterday substantial
federal dollars or remain the
the staff recommendation to kick
this off is to at five million
to the seven million one time
funding that's already in there
I discussed this with the
chairman and in those kind of
agreement that that was a good.
Amount to lay on the table again
not precluding your sub
committees right to adjust it is
as you desire Mr chairman so the
seven million is it would
represent a seventy percent
increase.
In the marketing budget over the
ongoing activities and my final
comment.
The economy is ready to come
roaring out of the pandemic
there's pent up demand Texas is
opening up New Mexico's opening
up into green and and certainly
tourism will help but there's
going to be a great.
Level of activity just US
consumers come out of the to
sequester Asian they've been and
in return the economy so thank
you Mr chairman Charles G. you
need.
I would like to have something
Mr chairman the I. HFC also gave
the tourism department budget
adjustment of thirty to bring in
an additional five million
dollars by leveraging local
local funds through partnership
dollars for the tourism
enterprise fund so I think there
is discussion last night about
how do we make sure that we're
we're partnering with locals
there's five million dollars R.
thirty to be able to do that in
New a budget as it sits today
one more thing I'm sorry.
Senator Steinborn you brought up
the issue in our discussions
with you about whatever amount
you choose in language
clarifying that the the
supplemental the special
appropriation could be used by
the department to work with the
the local matching requirements
of their cooperative marketing
program and that staff would
recommend working on some
language like that with whatever
amount you choose Mr chair.
Okay thank you.
LFC.
Questions or comments but the
committee members on this can
you all will have another
opportunity to consider what
actions are taken.
You Mr chairman and the strappy
so the tourism five million
dollars per state and co op
advertising
It's just not exactly clear that
that writing this this new this
is new could potential money
that's what this represents with
this.
This is a one time back of the
bill special appropriation yeah
be expended for the remainder of
twenty one in any time into
twenty two in addition to the FY
twenty two budget for the
department and so now the amount
sits at seven the five coming
over from the house and the two
this Senate finance committee as
a whole adopted yesterday I
seven on top of their recurring
budget I see thank you and Mr
chairman Mr Abbey the the
stating pop advertising I think
what you're getting out there is
what you just mentioned it's to
sprinkle out around the state
and and help promote regions
within the state I think we need
to that wording could be
probably better to say that
to support mark the marketing of
in state communities equitably
or something like that so if.
If the everybody's immutable I
think we don't necessarily need
to come up with that language
right now but I am in total
agreement that I think that be a
wonderful thing and all of our
communities would like this a
lot especially when you combine
it with the eliminating the co
op marketing requirements for
this coming fiscal year what
that means that small rural
communities could get a little
help from tourism department to
be out of reach from right now
and of those two things together
would be really cool and
That's my thought well that.
For.
The committee with questions or
comments regarding.
Tourism
J. saying none what what all
suggestion you know we we do
have to get to the floor in a
few moments so what I'm gonna
suggest members as we take this
one piece of the time LFC
presented a scenario as Mr
sleepwalk through which is
basically all of the proposed
language revisions not including
CYFD and tourism we will act on
those separately and that we can
have discussion and emotions
that arise so at this point
members I would take entertain a
motion to recommend that the
committee adopt the LFC staff
framework
for bars for Eddie and the other
revisions that were presented to
us today.
Well Mister chairman Senator
Diamond.
Do I have a second thank you.
Second from Senator Steinborn we
do not have a secretary with us
so I would ask members this is a
small intimate group you any
members opposed that motion.
Oh no.
Senator Burt close now.
All other members voting yes to
senator Candelaria vote yes
Senator come Campos but yes
Senator Steinborn vote yes in
the diamond but yes and senator
Byrd what's now okay members now
I will go to without let's take
up the CYFD.
Matter I will make a motion
for discussion and debate but I
will make a motion that the
committee adopt the LFC staff
frameworks I understand Senator
Steinborn the passion you have
for this issue of my challenges
we don't have a lot of
specifics.
Our data sort of factor for me
to evaluate the concerns you
raised I think we have a
commitment from LFC staff to
work in good faith with the
department now this is just a
motion folks can voted up or
down and we can entertain
another motion but I will move
that the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation regarding CYFD.
So we have a second from Senator
all recognized Senator Campos
there is debate on that motion
is there any debate on the
motion.
K. nine Mr Chairman.
Yes Senator Steinborn for debate
on the motion yes so so I can
make a.
I can make an alternate or
addition motion after you make
your motion on alternative
scenario that be the appropriate
way to do it.
Now Steinborn we are adopting a
recommendation and there's only
one recommendation so you can
vote no on this you can try to
table it or you can do a
substitute motion and see where
the committee is but I'm not one
member of the committees connect
the opportunity to re write the
budget at this point no I
understand I will and I'm again
I'm sorry Mr Chairman is a fast
moving process to spend about.
Meeting and I just got
clarification and I know the
department has those details you
would like to see but I would
make a substitute motion if
that's the option allowed.
Well we're gonna take a vote on
this motion and if it doesn't
pass that you can make whatever
motion if you have the votes for
so all those in favor of
adopting the CYFD
recommendation.
R. L..
Okay speaking.
Okay I'm gonna call the vote.
So.
All those in favor and I'll call
the roll Senator Burt no.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Burt I mean Senator Steinborn
no.
That motion passes three to two
Senator Steinborn as a member of
the committee as I explained
beginning.
I mean this is the
recommendation of the committee
we're not adopting the bill we
don't have that power my job is
to get a recommendation to the
chairman I'm not trying to say
that your points are valid but
at this point it needs to be a
discussion and decision by the
chairman of the committee to be
on my jurisdiction.
Okay I apologize I can't do more
on that.
So
next members of the committee we
will and let's go to the tourism
portion here
on this one I do have some
discussion so I want to refrain
from making a motion myself.
But I would respectfully suggest
that we increase the five
million dollar of federal one
time allocation to ten million.
And I would also suggest that we
adopt senator Steinborn language
and that staff be directed to
work with Senator Steinborn in
crafting the language to Ms as
you described earlier that would
be my recommendation to the
committee but I think since I am
sort of invested in proposing
this all yield to other members
to make any motions they deem
appropriate.
On this budget item.
Mr Chairman on this item with
that recommendation.
She was that second from.
Burt.
Alright is there any discussion
on that.
Okay is there any opposition to
that recommendation.
Mr Chairman yes senator start
where there is no question I
want to clarify or maybe tweak.
Recommended tweak a little bit
so the act discussion here on
from the step from the agent
staff five million dollars for
specifically state co op
advertising or state rural
advertising I would like to
recommend that your motion B.
five million.
With five million of the ten
million dolling towards towards
that so that we're.
Segregating those that
particular effort into what's in
front of us and then the
additional five million going
towards the greater departments
efforts Senator Steinborn.
Before the committee it is the
it is.
Million with the inclusion of
the language that you have
requested thank you can work
with staff on but we at the
motion is not to segregate funds
out again if the motion fails
you can propose a separate
motion.
So again to the motion before
the committee.
Senator Burt how do you vote.
Yes.
Senator Diamond how do you vote
yes.
Senator Campos I do you yes.
Senator Steinborn how do you
vote yes.
Okay and I vote yes so.
Members thank you I want to be
very so I want to just discuss
with everybody what happens next
what this committee is done is
made adopted these
recommendations of staff to the
full committee.
our recommendation and report
when the committee at retention
change our report will be that
the committee adopt the
recommendations as we've acted
on today of course every member
of the committee is free to
continue working with staff is
free to propose any amendments
they wish to the budget in front
of the full committee but our
role forces a little more
circumscribed I think we made
good progress today I think
we've clarified some issues and
I think we have a solid
recommendation for the committee
so I want to thank the members I
want to thank the staff for the
enormous amount of work that
went into getting this ready to
propose to the committee today
and with that we are adjourns
thank you.
Thank you all where George.
