That way she didn't hoard all
the money and you don't get any.
starts up.
Yeah, good, good morning, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
I'll get it started. My name is
Doctor Rachel Garcia. I'm the
LFC analyst for CYFD.
Um, John, uh, Courtney will join
me at the table this morning
because I am double booked and
if this goes more than an hour
or so, uh, I may have to go to
the house side and John will
continue to be here LC person,
um, we send John to the house
side.
And keep you.
And then how's Kelly today?
She, she's she's doing a little
better. She's a little mad at
me. Thanks, thanks for asking
but she's a little mad at me,
so. Yeah, she just loves her
job, she's
she's very committed to her job.
Hm
And with me at the table, Mr.
Chair is uh Secretary Teresa
Casados, uh, from CYFD as well
as Mary Beth Dinsmore, who's the
DFA analyst, um, for the
Children you think Families
department. Um, working from
your packets today, Mr. Chair, I
have a question. I can give you
just the very high level bullets
of CYFD's budget.
Or I can do that plus walk you
through the high level.
Please let me know your
preference, um, and then I'll
turn it over to the secretary.
Let's walk through the whole
thing complete, so this is gonna
be one of those agencies that
Everybody's gonna be requesting
so we're better off than we
understand everything that's
happening.
That is perfect, Mr. Chair. So
then what I'll recommend um is
that uh as I talk, the high
level for CYFD is probably your
best document, um, because
there's a lot of movement
between programs that were
different in the LFC
recommendation, uh, in the
executive, and there are a lot
of special appropriations,
non-recurring, and your high
level will show both of those
things all in one sheet of paper
is probably the easiest thing to
follow.
Uh, I'll also point you to a
couple of pages in your volumes
to get you started, page 347 in
volume 2, is a helpful one about
CYFD's budget, and then volume 3
on page 80 has some additional
data about CYFD.
Um, OK, so I'm gonna kind of
walk through the big picture and
then I'll take you through the
high level.
Um, so, uh, the first thing to
know is HAFC did adopt the LFD
recommendation for CYFD earlier
this week. Um, the LFC budget
recommendation for CYFD totals
389 million, and it maintains a
flat operating budget, um, while
making significant targeted
investments in non-recurring,
and that is a strategy you all
as a legislature pursued last
year as well. So not making
increases in the operating
budget by making substantial
increases.
is in non-recurring.
Uh, the LFC budget
recommendation would provide
14.1 million more in federal
revenue, uh, then the executive
recommendation and keeps federal
revenue flat with FY 25, uh,
while the executive budget
recommendation would have
reduced federal funds by about
10 million within protective
services and backfill with
general fund to address
decreased federal revenue
collected by the department.
Um, overall within the recurring
budget, LFC includes a
generalend increase of 1.8
million, and that is for
operating costs associated with
rate increases for GST and IT
and those types of rates. CYFD
does have um an increase to
their liability insurance
premium of about 1.47 million
coming up next year and the LFC
funded that with a
non-recurring, um,
With the non-recurring budget.
Um, in addition, uh, the LFC
recommendation provides about
41.3 million in non-recurring
funding.
Um, to address systemic
challenges and within CYFD
particularly workforce, uh, and
that includes 24 million in
general fund grow
appropriations, uh, to hire 101
case workers and address Kevin S
arbitration, uh, needs. In
addition, uh, 5.4 million in the
grow to develop pilot and
evaluate a child welfare
workforce training academy, um,
with a in partnership with
schools of social work.
Um, the LLC recommendation does
not include a reorganization of
the department as the executive
recommended, um, carving out a
prevention services into the
family services division. The
executive would have moved about
64.2 million in revenue,
including 39.8 million from the
general fund.
Um, and 162 FTE to a new
division, the LFC recommendation
does not include that
reorganization and instead funds
prevention, uh, within
protective services.
Mm
And then, um, excluding if you,
it's a little bit tricky then to
compare the executive
recommendation to the LFC
recommendation because of the
different approaches. LFC
funding with a non-recurring
executive recommending funding
in the operating budget and so
if you do sort of an apples to
apples comparison, the LFC
recommendation would provide
about 11.7 million more, uh,
funding in FY 26, then the
agency had in the year prior,
but primarily within um.
No, and that excludes the $10
million transfer into the
Children's trust fund.
I'm sorry, that yeah, the
children's trust fund.
And then the last thing to know
before we kind of walk through
the high level is that she went
during the HAFC hearing, CYFD
requested about 38.3 million
more than what was included in
the executive budget
recommendation. So during the
HAFC hearing, the agency talked
about some additional needs that
they have resulting particularly
from the Kevins arbitration, and
those are things that were not
included in the executive budget
recommendation at all.
Um, so that's kind of the big
picture. What I'll do is I will
walk you through the high level,
which is the program by program,
so you can see both what LFC
recommended, which is generally
a flat budget, but you can see
next to it what the executive
recommendation was. So I'm gonna
talk you through this document
really quickly here.
Um, if you start at the top with
program support, this is one of
those places where the LFC
budget recommendation, um,
provides an increase of 105,000
or GST rate increases for
vehicles and IT, um, but did not
include an increase, uh, for
liability insurance because as I
mentioned, all of those
increases are funded on the
non-recurring side.
And going down the list,
juvenile justice services, the
LFC budget recommendation again,
maintains a flat operating
budget, um, in total of 71.8
million for juvenile justice
services, um, the executive
budget recommendation would have
pulled about half a million out
of juvenile justice services to
fund uh the family services
division, the LFC recommendation
doesn't do that and keeps that
funding within JJ.
Um, going down on the list,
you'll see protective services,
and this is where some of the
biggest differences were between
the LFC recommendation and the
executive. So you'll see this is
where LFC maintains protective
services at a flat level, uh,
within the general fund, funding
442,000 for GST rate increases
for vehicles in IT, um, the
executive would have made a
variety of changes. So the first
thing on that list is carving
out 18.8 million from protective
services, taking that money.
Uh, and about 146 FTE and
placing them in a new division.
Uh, the LFC doesn't do that, and
then you'll see the list below
that is all of the funding and
the executive would have funded
within protective services, and
that includes 10 million to
backfill federal funds.
Um, as well as a variety of
other things, uh, 2.1 million to
add additional positions, uh,
I'm sorry, 2.5 million to add
additional positions to address
case loads, um.
As well as operating costs
associated with those 3.2
million to fund group homes, um,
or congregant care settings
about 900,000 for staffing at
the receiving center, as well as
a million dollars for a training
academy.
This is the place where I'll
I'll note that the executive
funded additional positions
within protective services and
training, the LFC recommendation
funds that with a non-recurring
and I'll show you that at the
bottom uh of this sheet.
If you move down the list,
you'll see family Services
Division.
And that's the, uh, program that
the executive proposed creating,
carving out other pieces of the
agency into a new program code.
The LFC recommendation does not
include that reorganization and
what you'll see there is that
the agency was proposing moving
um a little over $30 million
from the general fund from other
programs, namely protective
services, but also some from
behavioral health and juvenile
justice and moving them into a
new program and then adding
additional funding for things
like
Mm.
GST rating increases liability
insurance, um, and then also a
mobile resource center.
Um, and then if you go to the
last program on the list, that's
the behavioral Health Services
Division. Again, the LFC
recommendation there maintains a
relatively flat budget but does
provide some general fund
increases, uh, within behavioral
health services, and I'll point
out a couple of those. Uh, one
is the GST rate increases, uh,
for vehicles.
In IT that's $45,000 and then
about $1.2 million that would
fund domestic violence programs,
uh, CYFD did experience somewhat
of a decline in federal revenue,
uh, as ARPA funds went away, and
so that million dollars would
backfill, um, some of that
federal revenue and actually be
a little bit more than they were
spending last year on domestic
violence services when you
spending from the federal grants
last year, uh, and then also
backfills, uh, lost court finds
and fees.
that historically funded, uh,
domestic violence programs. If
you look under the executive
recommendation, this is where
the executive would have pulled
out about 16.5 million um from
behavioral health services in
general fund and moved it to
family services. That primarily
is a move um of domestic
violence programming into a new
uh program area that the
executive proposed. So that's
kind of the overall program by
program and so you'll see at the
bottom what I mean.
The LOC recommendation
essentially holds CYFD's
operating budget flat, but then
if you look at the box below,
that's your roll up of the
non-recurring, um, and so what
you'll see is
Um, executive, I'm sorry, the
LFC recommendation.
Um, we include 1.47 million for
the liability insurance premium
increase as a special
appropriation.
Uh, the LFC recommendation
provides 5.4 million from the
general fund that can be matched
with federal funds or a child
welfare training academy that's
proposed by the department to
really address some of the
training and workforce needs
that the agency has.
Uh, 24 million within the
general fund that can also be
matched with federal funds, we
expect about 30 million um for
caseloads. So that should fund
about 101 additional caseworker
positions annually within
protective services.
And at the time of the budget
submission last fall, that was
about what COD was projecting
they would need to address
caseload standards.
Um, and then a few additional,
uh, special appropriations,
$100,000 for a contractor to do
organizational health employee
surveys and really better
understand retention issues.
$100,000 for a foster care and
TFC rate study, um, to, to look
and compare us to other states
and do some analysis around our
foster care rates set
adequately, uh, to address
shortages.
Uh, and then you'll see $6
million.04 million dollars.
Those are two fund transfers
into the Children's Trust Fund
and the NextGen Trust fund.
Uh, and then at the bottom of
the page you'll see both the
reauthorization of technical
assistance money, you provided
the agency last year as well as
an additional $200,000 for
technical assistance, and that
is specifically to obtain and
and support a contractor to help
them with their federal funds,
uh, and Title IVE. So with the
executive essentially does,
would have done in their budget
recommendation is back back the
federal funds.
The LFC recommendation was don't
backfill yet. First, get someone
in there to help identify where
we may have the opportunity to
claim more revenue, uh, and help
understand why we've seen a drop
in a decline in federal revenue,
and that's what you heard me
talk about when I was, I did my
presentation previously.
Um, the LFC recommendation did
not include appropriations, uh,
for a supplemental or deficiency
for CYFD, they requested both
primarily uh because of that
decline in federal funds. Um,
and again, the LSU
recommendation is to seek
technical assistance, uh,
before, um, just finding those
decreases. So
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, this is your helpful
one pager. There's a lot more
detail in the packet, um, and I
will turn it over to um DFA as
well as the secretary.
OK, thank you, Rachel. Good
morning, Mr. Chair, committee
members, um, happy Friday. Um,
I'll take just a minute. I just
kind of want to go over a few
things um from the executive
side, um, in the rack, give you
that perspective as well.
Although Rachel did a wonderful
job explaining the very
difficult um
Comparisons in the exact in LFC
for this uh recommendation this
year. Um, so I just wanted to
point out a few things. So in
the current executive
recommendation, that's what I'm
going to be talking about, but,
uh, you will hear from the
secretary, obviously in a
moment, and she's going to have
some of those additional asks
that Rachel spoke to, they came
out of the recent Kevinness
arbitration, um, hence the
additional asks to meet, uh,
those, uh those deliverables,
but
Um, in the meantime, so I want
to point out, Rachel noted that
the liability insurance increase
for the agency as well as
personnel staffing for
protective services are in
non-recurring, um, and these are
in the base for the executive,
um, these are really recurring
costs, this liability insurance
needs to be in their base.
Personnel is a recurring cost.
It's, it's
I mean, it, you can see the
different approaches, um,
clearly there's a, a good amount
of support in non-recurring, um,
but the executive supports it in
the base as personnel is one of
those costs that is considered
recurring pretty um
Universally. Um, one other thing
I want to point out that is in
the executive recommendation
that's not in the LFC is support
for um moving children out of
office stays, um, you've all
heard about this many times, I'm
sure this is not something that
the state is supposed to be
doing, um, this agency does not
want to have to do it at all, so
there is 3.2 million is for
contracts, one for girls, one
for boys, for a group home,
congregate care that
Does provide additional services
for these children. So they're
not just being thrown into a
room and they are getting
support, um, for their, you
know, behavioral needs, their
mental health needs, things like
that. So that is in the
executive to help with that. Um,
I did also want to talk for just
a moment about the federal
backfill. That's probably one of
the biggest differences when you
look at this agency on a whole,
um, the LFC does not provide any
general finance, federal back.
bill yet, um, the executive
does. Uh, there is a special
that Rachel noted to um uh to uh
coordinate for the agency to
coordinate with someone to help
them look at their title 4E
reimbursement rates and whether
they're drawing down what they
are able to, they, they already
have done this. Um, they just
completed this. So I'm not sure
they need another study, but
that isn't something that's in
the LSC's recommendation, and I
think you'll hear about this a
bit, but um, the, the consultant
that they worked with did not
find that they were leaving a
lot of federal money on the
table.
Um, could there be a little bit
here and there, of course,
right? Um, that's, that's
totally possible. Is it likely
that they're leaving 10 $15
million on the table. No, it's
not. It's really not. So, um, so
the executive supports, uh,
getting them some general funds
since these federal, uh,
Funds in their budget, they have
not collected for the past few
years, but now we do have some
uh reassurance that they're not
way off with their collections.
Um, so the other thing that I'll
just uh underscore again that
Rachel mentioned and, and
discussed is the family Services
division. So this is probably
the biggest budgetary just
tracking where money is between
the two,
the LFC left the recommend, uh,
did their recommendation based
on FY.
25 operating budget. The
executive supports this family
services division. This, this
division was actually approved
over the summer for them to
request and get, um, but it is
not funded again, they asked for
it last year as well, but they,
they already have a family
services division. I really want
to make this clear. It's just
within protective services right
now. They don't have a separate
P code for it. They would like a
separate P code for it to really
be able to focus on prevention
efforts and have these efforts.
transparent to the public and to
the legislature. And as it is
currently with these programs in
protective services, it's all
muddled.
Um, and it doesn't allow for a
good distinction between those
two different service types,
right? One is before the
children really even come into
contact with the agency to try
to prevent them, right, provide
family supports, information,
um, you know, and, and meet some
of their needs, so the children
don't end up in, uh, you know,
the foster care system, if it's
at all possible to prevent that.
Um, and of course, there's a
protective services money in
there. So if we were able to
separate
those. Um, it would really help
CYD not just organizationally,
but making sure the funding that
the legislature appropriates for
protective services in the
funding the legislature
appropriates for family services
prevention are spent on those uh
initiatives as intended. So
that's what that one of those
things, that P code is supposed
to do for this agency, um, and
so again, executive supports
that reorganization when you
look at LFCs, you'll see it's
Back to the FY 25 operating
budget, uh, but I did want to
provide a little bit more
information context for you on
the reason they're asking for
that division and why they need
it and why the executive
supports it. Um, but with that,
I've taken up.
Plenty of your time. I'm gonna
hand it over to the secretary,
um, for her presentation.
Thanks.
Thank you, Rachel, very much and
Mary Beth. I think they
summarized, um, you know, the
two, recommendations that are
before you, um, I will keep kind
of my remarks about the agency
brief. I know we've talked a lot
about what happens or doesn't
happen at CYFD. There are a few
things I want to highlight for
you guys this morning, um, but
then I really want to be able to
get into the meat of the budget
and what that request is and
give an opportunity for you to
ask questions of me, um, so
we'll do that. So, um, I have no
idea before I had.
OK. Next slide.
Great, thank you. Um.
Do I?
Here's some somewhere, yeah.
OK, well, I will just try to
keep up so that you guys are
with me on where those slides
are.
I will do that. Thank you. Um,
so, as you all know, I'm Teresa
Casados. I'm the cabinet
secretary for CYFD, um, with me
this morning I have several of
my staff, most of them you have
met prior. Um, I'm fortunate
that I have, um, staff that has
been with the department, some
of them for many years doing the
work that they're doing, um, and
I'm really fortunate that
they're continuing to serve in
this capacity, um, in today's
climate and making the dedicated
decision to
stay with CYFD. There are a few
new faces that I don't think
you've met and so I'm gonna just
introduce those individuals
really quickly because the work
that they're doing, um, is
highlighted today, so I just
want you to see them. So if I
can get Pilar and Dawn and Lisa,
the stands just really quick.
Um, that would be great so you
guys can just know who you're
working with and we typically
try to provide a sheet that has
their contact information. We'll
make sure and get that to you.
It's not in today's packet, um,
but I just want to make sure
that you know who the staff are
and that they're available to
you anytime. If you, it has
their cell phone numbers, their
emails, the feel free to reach
out to them when you have
questions about the department.
Um, so the most important thing
to us and one of the things that
we've really been focusing on is
supporting.
our workforce and recruiting um
staff to do the job that we need
done at CYFD. So one of the
issues that we've talked about
consistently over the last year,
are our um
Social workers, right? That,
that type of worker is critical
to the work that we do at CYFD.
Right now, we have 284 employees
employed by CYFD that have
either a master's or bachelor's
in social work. We also have one
social worker who has their
doctorate degree, um, and we're
super excited about that.
Last year, there was an
appropriation through Grow
funding specifically targeting
retention of social workers and
so I want to say we took that
funding and we gave a salary
increase, a temporary salary
increase with one-time funding
to social workers to encourage
retention at the department of
those individuals. So I just
want to thank you for that
allocation. Um, it has been
spent, social workers were
incredibly excited to get that
increase and to be recognized
for the work that they do, um.
I just wanna make sure that we
also recognize the rest of the
CYFD staff that are not social
workers. We have counselors, we
have, um, individuals with
degrees that are similar to that
or lend themselves to that who
are working hard every single
day, so I just want to make sure
that we're including them in the
thanks that we give for them
showing up and doing the work
that they do every day.
We have several who are social
workers that are not licensed.
There are 129 licensed social
workers. So we're working with
those other individuals to
figure out how can we help you
to obtain that social work
license. And so we're working on
funding to be able to um bring
in assistance to help them if
there's additional coursework
that they need to feel
comfortable in sitting for that
test. We're bringing in people
to help them with that. We're
also looking at the test itself
because we've heard so many
concerns about individual.
not able to pass that. It's a
national test and we're looking
at that on the national level to
see if that's something that
needs to be addressed. But
working really to support those
individuals. So thank you for
recognizing that and giving
that, um, one time allocation
for us. We recently had a rapid
hire, um, where we really
concentrated on trying to get
statewide employees. Happy to
say that we had over
400 people, I believe that came
through looking for work at
CYFD. So that was really
exciting for us because we hear
so often people don't want to
work at this department. It's
not some place they want to be.
But we had over 400 people who
said otherwise and so conducted
interviews we have offer letters
going out to individuals, um,
and we're really hoping to
continue to increase the staff
at CYFD, um, next slide, please.
So this just gives kind of a
high level interview of where we
are on our positions, so the
department has a total of 22,303
positions and one halftime
position.
Um, we currently have 621 of
those vacant with a 27% vacancy
rate. We are right now looking
at bringing on board offer
letters have gone out to 128
individuals in the last couple
of weeks. And so that will
significantly change those
numbers of employees that we
have there, um, and we're still
continuing to conduct interviews
for individuals that came to the
rapid higher that maybe we're
interested in one job that they
didn't qualify for, but we're
looking at those resumes to see.
There's other jobs within the
department where they would be a
good fit because for us,
individuals who want to work
there is really the first step.
It's difficult work. It's long
hours and you have to want to do
that work, and if you want to do
that work, we want to help
support you and then get you
trained for other jobs and maybe
start you in something and work
you up.
Next slide. In order to do that,
we've really looked at what our
training is, and we have really
redeveloped our workforce
development division. So we
brought Pilar Brooks on. She's
been with the department. I
wanna say maybe a month now, um,
she previously worked at
Department of Health in their
training unit. She has an
incredible background in
training and development and so
she's really looking at how we
deliver that training. We have
taken our trainers and we have,
rather than having that really
Concentrated in Albuquerque, we
have sent those positions out to
regional offices so that we are
creating regional training teams
in each of the five regions that
CYFD has, so that our staff will
have access to trainers near
their office that can be better
support to them in their region.
So we're currently hiring for
those and getting those regional
offices set up, those trainers
slash coaches will be available
to staff in that region, 3 per
region, but also
interest is they are also going
to be doing the training and
development for our.
Um, community partners and our
foster parents. So the trainers
will do all of that training,
removing that responsibility
from the placement pillar, um,
so that they can really focus on
the recruitment and retention of
foster parents and not so much
on ensuring that they are
receiving the training that they
need. That'll be our training
bureau. Um, so we're really
excited for Pilar. The other
thing that I want to highlight
is our partnership with New
Mexico State University. So they
received federal funding, so the
program that we're doing is
100%.
federal funded right now for
them to prepare and provide
training, um, they created an
inspire program, which is an
8-week training program that is
focusing on our current staff.
Um, so that is staff that do not
have a social work degree to
really start training with them,
so they have an understanding of
some of the social work type
horse work that is really
important to deliver those
services and provide better care
to.
kids coming into our custody or
kids that they're just
interacting with that are not in
our custody. Um, so we're
excited with Highlands to do
that. They got funding to do 125
workers. They're doing it in
cohorts of 25, and that first
cohort is currently, I believe,
on week 3. so we'll see how that
rolls out. We're excited to
continue that partnership, um,
and as I believe, um, Rachel
mentioned, start a training
program through Highlands
University that would provide
coursework for non
licensed or non-social work
staff that would give them a
child welfare certification that
has certified that they have um
a tended and passed certain
coursework that really helps
them to better understand the
work that they're doing. Um, so
that is how we're gonna try to
grow staff. They will convert
that coursework towards degree
program if in fact they want to
continue into a social work and
so, um, I'm grateful to the
Highlands. The rest of that, I
think you can look at and I'm
happy to.
answer any questions that you
might have. Next slide.
Um, the next, um,
New venture that we have at CYFD
is our office of advocacy. So
this has taken the Office of
Children's Rights that was
established and combine that
with our constituent affairs
office, um, and Don Walters, who
was previously one of our
children's court attorneys is
the director of that office, um,
Don has incredible experience,
um, that, you know, even when
she was outside of New Mexico,
um, but she's been working with
us and has brought her
experience to the table to
assist in ensuring that people
' s voice is heard within the
department, um, and I know we
hear often that people don't
feel comfortable coming to the
department, um, but as you can
see from this, there have been
quite a few individuals who have
inquired quite a few issues that
have been resolved through that
office, um, and Don is amazing,
um, as well, if you haven't had
an opportunity to really sit
down with her if you have
questions about the work that
they do, which ranges from, you
know, education to immigration
to um foster parent rights to
Children's rights, um, you know,
I would encourage you to just
reach out to her and spend a few
minutes to understand the work
that they're doing and how
that's affecting so many
individuals, um, across the
state.
Next slide, please.
Also, one of our recent hires is
Lisa Hamilton. Lisa is the
director of education. So at the
department, as you know, we have
our own school district, which
we previously had a
superintendent. That individual
was overseeing the two high
schools that are within CYFD.
That includes the Aztec Youth
Academy, which serves the kids
at John Paul Taylor in Las
Cruces, and the Foothill High
School, which serves children in
Albuquerque at YDDC and I may
have that reversed. I don't
exactly.
We know right now. But those two
high schools serve youth that
have been adjudicated in our in
our facilities. I've visited
those schools they do incredible
work for those kids. And as you
can see, I'm really excited to
say that 81% of kids.
Earn a GED or high school
education while they are in
those facilities. Um, that's a
huge comparison when the
national average for adjudicated
students is about 21%. So we've
had huge success in that area in
getting those individuals who
leave those facilities, um, you
know, prepared to be able to
move on in um continue their
education when they leave that
facility or trained for um a
trade, and we do welding, we do
auto mechanics, we do, um,
carpentry. So there are
different courses.
Um, in addition to, um, them
obtaining their GED with their
regular coursework.
We've expanded that position. So
the person is no longer just the
superintendent of those two high
schools. They are providing
educational information and
support across the agency. So
that is now reaching into what
we do in um protective services
to ensure that the kids that are
in state custody, have those
same opportunities that were
somebody is really making sure
that we are paying attention to
ensure that they are receiving
an education. And
That can sometimes be
challenging when they move from
county to county or a relocated
or there's a better fit for a
foster family for them somewhere
outside of their school district
and so Lisa is working um that
alongside our Office of Advocacy
and our Education navigators
that we have there. She's also
providing training to our
permanency workers so that they
understand, you know, the
responsibilities and how to work
with those school districts, how
to engage with them and ensure
that we're being.
good advocates for the kids that
are in state custody. Um, she
works on bids, she works on
transportation, she's ensuring
that IEPs are done timely. She's
ensuring that kids have
representation at school when
these meetings are taking place,
um, and just really ensuring
she's working with our out of
state, um, residential, um,
treatment facilities to ensure
that if they're out of state,
that education is continuing. So
we're really excited to have
Lisa on board, and again, if you
have questions about that or
would like to set up.
some time with her to understand
more about what we're doing. Um,
she is available.
Um, next slide, please.
This year there's a large focus
on behavioral health. And one of
the things that was so
interesting to me is that these
conversations are happening, um,
and up until we mentioned it at
a hearing last week. CYFD was
not at the table for discussion
on behavioral health.
When in fact CYFD is the state
agency that is responsible for
children's behavioral health
across the state. And that is
not just behavioral health for
kids in state custody. That is
for all children across the
state, um, and so we are now at
the table in those discussions
to really be a part of that
planning and understanding how
those that funding can really
help kids and to start this
behavioral health services with
youth is so critically.
and not waiting till um we're
dealing with adults who need
services. And so I'm really
proud of the work that we do at
CYFD and behavioral health, Liz
Hamilton is the director and
she's present for those meetings
and working um across agency,
um, to ensure that we're really
thinking about kids and what
their needs are. One thing that
I do want to point out because
it was a huge success for us,
um, was high fidelity wraparound
services. And that is something
that is so important to all
kids, but incredibly
important to kids in state
custody and in July of 23, we
had 26 facilitators, and in
August of 24, that number had
increased to 63 facilitators
across the state, growing from
13 providers, um, across the
state we have 6 more sites that
are currently in the training
process to open up. And so that
was one thing that I wanted to
highlight, um, some of the other
things that we're doing are
targeted in that slide, um, and
I'll move on to the next.
life.
This next slide details the 20
million allocation that the
state made through GoFunding for
behavioral health services. And
so, um, a large percentage of
that funding was to increase
services that current providers
were doing, some in rural areas,
some in the metropolitan area,
um, but an expansion of the
services so that they could
serve more families. Um, we did
spend, I would say probably 25%
of that 20 million on new
services and setting.
up additional providers and so
this kind of details what we
did, um, with the amount of
funding that went to those
providers for you to take a look
at.
Next slide.
So the controversial family
services. One of the things that
when we started looking at the
reorganization of CYFD. It was
noted that many of the programs
that were happening across the
state for prevention and
intervention services for youth,
and that's early intervention,
because that is really what is
key. Get to those families and
figure out what do they need
right now so that we can provide
services to them so that they
don't end up in protective.
Services so that we're not
taking those kids into state
custody. And that work was
always being done at the
department as I think both
Rachel, who's no longer there,
and Mary Beth pointed out it's
not new work. It was just part
of different areas of the
department. So some of that work
happened through our behavioral
health division. Some of it
happened in juvenile justice and
a large percentage of that
happened in protective services.
But when you're working with the
family on prevention and early
intervention.
And you show up and you say I'm
with protective services.
They are not interested in
engaging and so pulling that
out, accomplishes two things. It
allows our family services to go
in and engage with families
early and help them to
understand that there are
programs and services available
to help them get what they need,
but it also gives us an
opportunity, as Mary Beth
pointed out to carve out that
funding that is already
appropriated through this body
and really focus on how much are
we.
spending on prevention and
intervention and be able to
track that spending and track
the results. Is it money that is
well spent? Are the programs
that we're utilizing working? Is
it keeping kids from coming into
custody. And so giving us that
opportunity to really have a
separate P code so we can track
that and know what we're
spending, um, is critically
important and as I said, it is
not new. We're not adding to the
work that we're doing at CYFD
were just isolating.
it so that we have a better lens
to understand how that is
focusing. So, um, you know, once
again, I'm asking your support
for that P code, um, so that we
can track that and track the
budget and understand what that
is. Next slide, please.
Um, this next slide as um they
pointed out is the agency budget
request that is currently before
you. This is what had been
presented, um, our total request
prior to the Kevin S um
arbitration was $437 million.
And as you can see, um, the
executive does carve out the
family services and um that is
64.5 million of funding that
we're pulling from other areas
and FTEs to do that.
Next slide.
So this slide just really
details what all of that initial
base increase is for CYFD, um, I
won't go into detail about all
of that, um, but I do want to
point out, you know, there has
been conversation about
increased money year over year
to CYFD in the operating budget.
That is true. You know, I think,
um, in a previous hearing that
we had, it was pointed out that
there was a 33% increase to
CYFD's budget over the past 5
years or $33 million 33.7
million dollars. That is
absolutely true. But when you
look at that and back it out,
$23.5 million of that was for
compensation through the percent
increase that this body approved
in-house Bill 2.
To give additional compensation
to employees. So the actual
amount of operating budget that
has been provided to CYFD over
that 5 years for program new,
new programming, um.
is very slight. So that was one
thing that I just wanted to
ensure that you had an
understanding of what that
funding looked like and it
didn't look like we had um a
huge infusion of operating
budget cash to create new
programs or solve some of the
issues that the department has
been facing. Next slide, please.
The next slide that you see is a
new ask. So we received the
Kevina remediation order, I
believe, on, um, opening day of
the legislative session. So we
had an opportunity to go through
that and really figure out what
is it that we still need to do
based on that order, that we are
not currently doing, that
they're asking us to do that we
have not properly requested
funding from this legislative
body for. So you can see that
we've tried to break that down
just.
Based on the remediation order,
um, and that is an additional
$24.3 million some of that
creates new FTE.
There are a lot of new positions
for case aids. So we currently
have some case aids in the
state, but not across the state
and not for all workers. So we
are asking for 50 new case aid
positions, and these
individuals um are hope really
is to bring them in at this
level to give them an
opportunity to understand what
CYFD is and to help them to grow
into other positions if they
find CYFD to be a good fit. But
what
s do, which is incredibly
helpful to our frontline staff.
They assist investigators and
permanency workers, um, with
paperwork with filing with um
entering data into the computer
system. Importantly, they
provide transportation to our
youth so that our frontline
workers are not transporting, so
they will take them to school if
they need to get to school, they
will take them for after school
activities, um, they will take
them to therapy or doctor's
appointments, and they will do
the transportation with
which then frees up our
frontline workers to do the
investigations or the court
reports that are due for cases
or to appear in court, um, and
not having them juggle their
time between a child needs to be
picked up from school, but I'm
still in court. So how do I
manage that? So that's what the
additional 50 case a positions
are, and those would be um
across the state and all of our
county offices to provide
support to the frontline
workers.
Um, we're also asking for
individuals to create an
emergency and overnight response
team.
We struggled with that when we
were looking to create AMI and
YDI because if we were to staff
something in every county
overnight in case we have an
office day, we would have people
who maybe didn't have kids in a
county, but there's no way for
us to know where those are gonna
be or when those calls are gonna
come in. So in the remediation
order, it is asking us to do
that so that we're not expecting
staff to stay overnight in
offices and then work the next
day or work incredible.
overtime and then the on call.
Um, so that is what that's, um.
That $2.8 million does. It
creates 25 positions which would
be um night positions for staff,
which would be regionally, so
they would still if a call came
in at 2 in the morning, they may
have to still drive to a
location, we wouldn't have them
in every county, but we would
have them regionally, um, and
we're starting with that as a
pilot to see if that helps um
with some of that overnight work
and extended shifts for our
current staff.
Um, so that ask is 24. 24.3
million, and then the next ask
on there that is not in our
current budget request is a $15
million ask to increase the
foster parent maintenance
payments that we do right now.
So I think the governor
announced that her state of the
state, it is doubling their
payment up to $900. So if a
family is currently making $600
a month for care of a child.
They're
would go up monthly to $1200. If
there's special needs for that
child or they have, um, medical
needs that require a higher
maintenance payment and say
they're making um $11,000 a
month.
The payment would go up to 1900.
So we would cap the additional
money at 900. It wouldn't travel
to 1000 to 2000, um, you know,
we have some families on the AA,
I think maybe 30 like.
There's the number I made up. I
think we're there though, um,
that can make all the way up to
6000 a month if they're very
high need special need, that
would then be capped at 6900. So
that is um the funding of $15
million part of that we
estimating would be about 5.2%
in federal funds, so 9.8% in the
general fund operating to
increase foster parent payments.
Next life.
Um, again, this is just kind of
a recap of the recommendations,
um.
This gets us to, it's an
increase right now the way it is
currently sitting before you,
2.4% increase from the executive
and a 0.1% increase from the
legislative and as um Rachel
pointed out a lot of the money
is not in the base. It is um
being recommended to this body
through one time funding or uh
one time appropriation. Um, and
there are many of these that can
be funded through one time and
we can look at.
them and see the effectiveness
of those programs and so, you
know, we are not saying it has
to be one over the other, but I
think if we're looking at a one
time appropriation to be able to
solve some of the issues that we
have before us at CYFD. My only
ask in that is that we ensure
that the language that we put in
enables us to be able to look at
the programming and determine
how to spend that, and that
we're not so specific in the
language that it really ties our
hands when we have a program.
that we really need to do, but
the language doesn't quite fit
in, so, um, if it's in the base
or if it's in one time funding,
I just asked that we really be
um considerate of what that
language looks like to allow us
to be flexible enough to meet
the needs either under Keviness
or the needs of the department
as a whole.
Next slide.
Um, this is really the
supplemental and deficiency
recommendations that we have,
um, as Rachel pointed out early,
the LFC is not supporting the
deficiency or the supplemental.
The deficiency from last year
was $12.3 million. Um, we
figured out very early last
fiscal year that we were going
to have some issues with our
funding.
Even during this legislative
process last year we brought
that to the chair's attention to
really talk about what that
looked like, you know, God
assurance from them that we
should continue to fill
positions and continue to do the
work we were doing and not cut
services, which we did, um, at
the time when I came initially
we were looking at about a $20
million deficit for last year.
Um, some of our contracts did
not expend all of their dollars
and we were able to reduce that
to 12.3% by the end of the
fiscal year.
we did have reversions in our
behavioral health and our
juvenile justice last year, we
had requested um language for
bar authority from program to
program, which we did not
receive, so we were unable to
move that money to reduce the
deficit. So if you look at what
we reverted versus that
deficiency, um, the true
deficiency is about $5 million
based on the reversion from some
of our other programs.
Um, the $20 million this year is
a supplemental to ensure that we
can continue to provide services
at the current level, that we
can continue to staff and fill
those positions. I think if you
look at our budget right now in
protective services, um, we
would only be able to feel about
1% of the positions that are
vacant, um, knowing that we have
a much higher need in protective
services to do that. So we've
been incredibly um fiscally.
responsible in the last year,
really looking at what those
contracts are, how we're
spending those money, um, but
one thing that continues to
climb is our overtime rate for
staff that are covering, um,
case loads or office days when
uh when we're short staffed and
so our overtime um is already
surpassing what it was in the
previous fiscal year.
So without that deficiency and
that um supplemental, um, you
know, we will be operating in
the red at the department again
this year. That has several
consequences. One, we should not
be overspending our budget.
Um
2, we need to continue services
for kids, um, but more
importantly, like operating at a
deficit and having an audit
finding has a larger effect on
the state as a whole. It could
eventually, um, you know,
jeopardize our bond rating or
other things for the state and
so, you know, operating in a
negative manner is definitely
not um.
A recommendation that, you know,
I believe should be made to this
body for people to continue to
receive services at CYFD.
Um, next slide. This information
technology recommendation is for
the CWhis project, the New
Mexico impact as it's called
now. So CAS is a federal
requirement for a child welfare
system that meets requirements
of the federal government. This
was started, this wasn't started
as a CWS project, but
implementation and an upgrade of
our system, our our fact system
started in 2018 with initial
funding to do some planning, um,
and so.
that took place. They were
working with one vendor, I
believe at that point in time to
look at that.
I think a year, year and a half
after that planning and started,
um, it was determined that that
vendor could not meet the needs
that were needed to create a new
system for child welfare, um,
and they started, they went out
to look at another um vendors,
they did an RFP when I came on
board a little over a year ago,
um, RFPs had been completed and
a selection had been made at the
department to move forward with
a vendor.
At that point in time, we put a
brief pause on that, knowing
that it did not include our
juvenile justice division, which
is a huge part. We do have some
crossover youth. We work closely
with juvenile justice and we
wanted to ensure that a system
was gonna be for the entire
agency and we weren't gonna be
running on two systems, one
that's 25 years old and
expecting it to provide us the
data that we needed for those
youth that were in juvenile
justice that were crossover.
Um, so we included juvenile
justice. We amended the contract
so that they would be a part of
that initial contract that was
signed in November of last year
and they began working on that
project.
Right now the request on CES um
is for the testing and roll out.
So all of the funding for
implementation and building that
system is intact. The next ask
is for testing and roll out.
We're hoping to roll that out
and test um in the fall by
November of next year that we
will have a system that is ready
for us to really roll out to
staff and it will be huge for
staff. They will be able to do
work in the field. They will be
able to use iPads or
phones or tablets to do that,
they'll be able to upload photos
when they're out in the field,
um, they are not able to do any
of that right now on the system
that we have and so we're
excited about that project and
hopeful for the last, um,
funding for testing and roll out
of that.
Um, next slide.
This next slide, as I mentioned,
really talks about the
reversion, and I know that there
has been a lot of talk that CYFD
reverts a lot of money over the
years and so it looks that way
when you look at that. So I
broke this down so there could
be a better understanding of the
reversion. Not all of that was
um due to us not spending money.
In 21 and 22, the department
received
A lot of federal dollars related
to COVID. So those dollars were
spent ahead of general fund
dollars. So that was the reason
for those large reversions,
those two years, we had general
fund money that we sent back
because we were using federal um
COVID fund relief instead.
Um, when you look at fiscal year
23 and 24, there are reversions,
um, not as large as in previous
years, but part of that is due
to the contracting that we do a
lot of it in behavioral health
services or with our consortiums
in communities to provide
services to at-risk youth.
And so we were not getting
detailed information back from
those vendors timely to be able
to
Allocate that funding to other
providers who maybe had spent
all of their money but still had
a need, um, and so we would get
it back too late to know that we
could get it to them in time to
spend by the fiscal year. So
we've changed that reporting
process so that we have a better
understanding earlier and our
monitoring so that if there's a
vendor who finishes earlier in
the fiscal year, but still has a
need and one that is not going
to expend all of their dollars,
or at least it doesn't look to
us like they will. We will sweep
those funds and reallocate them.
Earlier, um, so that we can make
sure that we're serving as many
individuals as there's need, um,
but we're not.
Reverting that money, um, and so
I'm hopeful that this year we'll
see a huge difference in the
reversion. Once again, I am
asking for bar authority to be
able to move from program to
program. So if in juvenile
justice we're not spending all
of that money.
And we have a need for kids in
protective services that, you
know, could could benefit from
some of those programs that we
could transfer that money and
serve out a protective services,
um, so we are asking for a bar
authority from program to
program.
Next slide.
So this shot slide details for
you are federal funding. And I
know that that has been a
constant conversation. I think
in almost every hearing that I
have attended or every meeting
that I've gone to, there's been
conversation of the fact that
CYFD is leaving money on the
table when it comes to federal
funds.
So we started working on this.
Late last fiscal year to really
have a better understanding of
what does that look like?
Because when you look at this
graph.
There is a lot of federal
dollars that's on the table.
But as we started digging into
this and really understanding
it. I think the agency.
Did not properly ask for what it
needed in federal funds. It
elevated the amount of money
that it anticipated getting. And
I think that was when at the
same time they started to
increase our general fund
appropriation, which much of
that, as I mentioned earlier,
was for compensation, they
automatically said, if we're
going to bring in this much more
in general fund, we're gonna
obviously bring in that much
more in federal funds, which was
not the case. It's not a, it's
not a exact science.
If you bring in this much
general you get this much in
fed. There's all kinds of
requirements by the federal
government for eligibility and
so I think that when the
department submitted that
budget, they falsely identified
what they expected revenue was
going to be from the federal
funds, because as you can see,
we have never realized that
amount of cash. Um, we did go up
high in 22 to $84 million but
then it kind of dropped off in
23, and then it really dropped.
24 from what we brought in of
about $11 million.
So we dug into that to see why
was there such a decline at the
department in those federal
dollars. And what we found was
that 3.7 million of that funding
was because grants had ended. So
the term of the grant had
expired. There was no new
opportunity. The programs had
moved on to, you know, other
revenue streams and the grant
was over, so we expended all of
those, as I said, that was COVID
funding, it was SAMSA funding
and it was $8. That was 3.7.
million of that 11.
There was also $5 million from
SSBG.
So when we had new budget staff,
they were really looking at
those grants carefully and they
were looking at the methodology
of what we were drawing down
through the SSBG grants and they
had questions that they could
not answer. They didn't
understand the intricacies of
what was being included in that
drawdown, um, and they were
really having trouble with.
Confirming that all of those
dollars were eligible under that
grant. So what they did was they
rolled that $5 million to the
next fiscal year, which is what
we're in right now, and we did
not draw down that $5 million.
We didn't lose that money. We
didn't leave it on the table.
They were able to figure out the
methodology and that money will
be drawn down this year, so we
will see an increase in our
federal funds of that amount
this year, um, so that helped,
that contributes to that $11
million decline. So
That's $8.7 million. The other
1.4 million.
Um, is allocated to Title 4E
administrative dollars and so we
did switch vendors during a time
period, so we do random moment
sampling. And so at any given
time, somebody will get an email
that will ask them, you know,
what is it that you're working
on right now and they have to
respond to that email and if
it's eligible for federal
reimbursement, then their time
is allocated and others based on
the random sampling.
So that just is really dependent
on what that individual is
doing. If they say they're at
lunch, then they don't get
qualified for that drawdown of
that period. And so it can vary
and it goes up and down.
But at that same time, we did
increase our administrative
drawdown for
Another federal program through
Medicaid and so
There was other funding that was
available to draw down.
Um
So that makes up the majority of
that $11 million decline, as I
said, part of that ended, part
of that will be recovered in the
next fiscal year.
So when you look at the fact
that we have money left on the
table, it really isn't accurate.
There's money that shows it's
available, but it's not really
money that we're eligible to
draw down. There are not other
expenses that were not claiming
that are sitting there that we
could draw that money down.
Um, so I'm hopeful that that
gives you a better understanding
of the federal dollars. We did
work with um somebody we reached
out um several times we had
worked with the LFC to try to
identify an expert in Title IVE
funding.
Casey Family programs did reach
out to us to say they had an
expert that they could contract
with who had worked um for a
considerable amount of time in
other states had worked with
Casey had done work at the
federal level, um, and basically
worked in the financial world.
His name is Don Winstead, and I
believe you have in your packet
his bio and his report that he
did for the department to really
look at those federal funds.
And what Don identified, and I
don't know, he may be on and may
be available to take some of
your calls. I know that he was
in the previous hearing, but
what he identified is that
A significant portion of our
funding is Title 40.
He says that a challenge for New
Mexico is that 4E eligibility is
tied to the 1996 standard of
need for the former aid to
families with dependent children
and New Mexico's standard of
need is the 5th lowest among the
states.
He goes on to say that in spite
of this challenge, New Mexico's
4E foster care penetration rate
is the 10th highest among the
states.
So among the 10 other states
with the lowest standard of
need, the average penetration
rate was 32% in federal fiscal
year 23 compared with New
Mexico's rate of 52%.
So he has looked at everything
that we're eligible for what
we're drawing down and is
identified that we are not
leaving funding on the table.
Um, he's available to meet with
you. He would set up a call to
discuss that, you have his
report in your package.
Um
You know, the last thing we
asked him to look at is where
are we with respect to our
family's first program, because
that has been another issue that
New Mexico does not have.
An an approved families first
program. We submitted it again
in December.
Um, and that has not yet been
approved. So before the middle
of this last iteration of that
report, we had many people look
at it, including Casey Family
Services, they had a couple of
their contractors look at it. We
had Secretary Greginsky look at
it to ensure, you know, that her
knowledge with the federal level
and see, um, so we're hopeful
that everything that was in
there, um, we'll meet with the
approval of the federal
government and we'll get that
approved soon.
However, the programs that we're
doing that we will continue to
do.
Upon approval of the family
first program are currently
being paid with federal dollars,
some of them at 100%.
Um
Many of them are through tan
dollars. So that will just be
taking them from that program
and transferring them to a
different funding stream that
likely will only reimburse at a
federal level of 50%, maybe up
to 70%. But we will need more
general fund to do those
programs that were currently
doing right now with federal
funds that were being reimbursed
at 100%.
Um, you know, the good news is
we could then take that funding
if it's can and do a different
program. So I think that is
where there's expectation of
increasing our federal dollars,
but it is not believed that
In doing the programs through
Family First will immediately
increase our federal dollars.
Um, there's anticipation that it
will take a couple of years to
actually start drawing down
federal dollars from Families
First.
Um, and the majority of the
states that have approved plans
are not yet fully realizing the
federal dollars that they had
anticipated. And my
understanding is Don is
available. He is online if you
have any interest in asking him
any questions that I was unclear
about, um, he would be available
to take questions from you. Um,
so with that, I'll leave it to
you if you want to ask him
anything or if you want to just
move to questions, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary. uh, we'll
go ahead and the committee for
questions of Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Secretary and
This is a lot and I'm not even
clear where to start.
Well, I'll start here, um.
Ontologically, I don't agree
with what you're saying about
foster parents because the
governor and you have said that
foster parents are making $600 a
month. Is that correct?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Tobias said, it's a, it varies.
So we have a chart that shows
the different rates. It can vary
anywhere from about 400, 415 per
month, um, and it goes up from
there.
So my concern with that is maybe
we need a mind shift around what
a foster parent is, and, and I
know that they are volunteers.
There's no foster parent that
I'm aware of in the state of New
Mexico that makes a dime off of
taking in one of these
vulnerable children. So I'd ask
you to maybe say um they are
reimbursed, um, no matter what
that amount is, they certainly
are not making money and, and I
actually, I take offense to that
to that as a volunteer myself as
a senator.
I'm not paid. I get a per diem
to cover my costs for
reimbursement, but I certainly
do not make a dime, and neither
does a foster parent. Um, how
many kids are currently will be
sleeping in office tonight and
what are their ages?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tobiasson, I don't have the ages
of the children that are
currently in the office, um, but
I can give you a range of what
that looks like. So, um, let's
see, I believe right now we have
um 16.
Youth sleeping in offices or in
custody that are over the age of
12. We have 9 that are at our
receiving center.
And those are all under the age
of 10.
OK.
So, Mr. Chair.
I, I understand.
Madam Secretary, that you are in
a very tough position.
I, I don't envy you at all.
But do you believe there's 16
children that will be sleeping
in the office or are there 16
children, and if I were you, I'm
just saying that would be a
basic dial on my dashboard every
single day that I was directing
and mentoring and trying to move
children through this horrific.
Mess that has been created here
in this state. Personally, I
think that we should have
declared an emergency.
A long time before now and today
we are in a crisis and these
children, if these children that
are in your care, you're the one
responsible at the end of the
day. They're in your care. They
do not have a family unit that
is willing or capable of loving
them, then it is your job and
your agency's job to love them
and show them the way and give
them a sense of security. So
when I personally hear
From qualified individuals that
you have children under your
care that had been placed 90,
100 or more times, it makes me.
Physically ill.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, I'm, I'm
gonna be human.
You
To see my emotion. I cannot
imagine.
I can imagine as a parent that
we are all sitting here. If you
need help, like I know you have
what Wednesday night you told
the House Appropriations that
you have 44, 41 children missing
or on the run. Do you need us
all to volunteer to pack a bag
and come out with you and your
agents to find them. How are we
finding these children? Will
they be sex trafficked?
What, what's gonna happen to
them?
Will they be pulled into a gang?
What is happening in the state.
We have been in this crisis for
so long and then I hear you
asking for more money when you
can't even fill a quarter of the
current positions that you have
available.
I, I don't understand, Mr.
Chair, and it's hard to sit
here.
It's really hard to sit here.
Because if my children were
missing, if my children weren't
loved.
I wouldn't rest.
I, I'll stand back, Mr. Chair, I
apologize.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Padilla.
Thank you very much, uh Mr.
Chairman and thank you, um.
Senator Tobiasson.
Um, thank you, Madam Secretary.
Can I just say that um
And I've publicly disclosed
this. I grew up in 7 different
counties and 7 different foster
homes.
I also grew up in the all faiths
home, which was our last, uh,
you know, real orphanage here in
New Mexico.
And my heart goes out to all of
the people to you.
I want to look right at you,
Madam Secretary.
And to all the people that are
sitting behind you.
Um, I, I wanna say thank you.
I know you get beat up all the
time.
I know people are always, you
know,
Saying this or that or the
other.
But I want to look at all of you
in your eyes and tell you, I
thank you, I thank you for the
work that you're doing.
Presentation you made today was
very long, it was very hard to
hear a lot of that.
But you sound solidly in place,
in charge, in control. You sound
extremely different from the
first time you walked in here.
I was on this committee then
too.
And uh
You have given me a lot more
confidence in what you're up to
and what you're doing.
I carry a lot of your
legislation, as you know.
And I did before you came to
this role as well.
And I will continue to do that.
But it's not lost on me how hard
your job is because I literally
grew up in the, in that system.
And um
I do. I want to say thank you
for the work that you guys are
doing.
And, and it, and it, it does,
it's hard to hear a lot of these
members. It really is hard to
hear this.
Uh, but, but I will tell you
that um.
I have a glimmer. I see light
there. I see a little bit of
light there coming out.
Um, don't stop what you're
doing. Don't, don't give up.
I, I also see a lot of movement
in this department at all levels
of the organization, including
the cabinet secretary role.
It it's uh you have the time for
me.
You know, and I've created a lot
of offices, a lot of different,
I even created a whole state
Department of Education in my
time here. You have the hardest
job in state government.
It's pretty hard over
corrections. It's pretty hard in
DPS. It's pretty hard in a
couple, but you have the hardest
job.
And
Yeah, we don't want kids
sleeping in offices. I don't
want that. Nobody wants that.
I, I don't, I don't think that's
ever appropriate.
But I do hear you.
Sound
Uh, more confident you sound
better. I'm just gonna say it
than the first time you came in
here.
And you sound totally in command
and control and understanding
and, and, and clear of what
you're trying, what your mission
is and what your goal is and
what you're trying to
accomplish, and I want to
acknowledge that it doesn't
always get acknowledged that
way.
And I will fight to the end for
you.
Uh, you know, we have a bill
except we have multiple bills
together this year. One of them
is the fostering Connections
bill, and I was not going to
leave this session without that
thing being done. I will not
leave my foster brothers and
sisters on the field like that.
We, we got it done 4 years ago
and now we have 13 or 15 or 18
kids that we need to uh to make
sure that they get taken care of
as well with this thing.
And we're gonna get that done.
And you have been right there
helping me get that done.
You and the people behind you.
I'm not a crier.
But sometimes it just breaks my
heart. I mean some of the things
that are going on, but that
I don't have any doubt that you
all are trying with every breath
and every ounce that you have,
and I, I need you to hear that.
I need you to hear that people
are proud of the work that
you're doing, but know you need
to do more.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Webb, thank you very much
for that. I appreciate that. Um,
my staff works incredibly hard
every day and the kids that are
in offices do get the attention
that they need from our staff,
um, you know, they, we have some
who say they don't wanna leave
the office. We put them in a
placement, they come back and
it's incredibly hard for that
staff to give them that care and
that attention that they need in
a home environment, but they do
their very best to provide that
for those that are staying in
offices. So thank you for
acknowledging the
work that my team does, they
work incredibly hard, um, and we
really are hoping to work
together with you to make a
difference for the kids across
the state, so thank you.
So, so all of that being said, I
do have some technical questions
for you about the presentation.
Um, but, but first.
Do you find that the juvenile
justice, juvenile peace, do you
think that belong, well, so you
know, when I created the early
education department, I said,
why on earth would we have early
education in the emergency room.
I used to say that all the time
and got beat up in the media a
little bit over that, but that's
fine, you know. To me it seems
like really, so I thought, OK,
let's pick up early education.
Let this department focus on
what they need to be focused on
and not have all these other
areas that are taking their
focus sometimes off the ball.
OK, so we got early education
out of there. Now they have
their own focus, their own
department, their own.
Cabinet secretary that's they're
doing phenomenal work over
there, but juvenile justice, do
we need to pick up juvenile
justice.
And, and take it somewhere else
in state government, so that you
can also continue to focus on
the protective services, the
behavioral health, the
I'm sure it's beginning to feel
that way, like we need to pick
that up and move it where it
belongs.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rip.
I don't believe that it does. I
think it lends itself,
especially to our family
services, you know, we have some
of those youth and juvenile
justice who are crossover youth,
and so they work really closely
with protective services to
ensure that, you know, they're
working together for um whatever
needs that child needs, so
whether they're incarcerated or
whether they're in a family and
they have probation, making sure
that they're working together
for that individual, but it's
really important in our family
services division.
You know, a lot of those youth
that are juvenile justice that
are maybe on probation, um, they
are not in our system with
protective services. They are
just families who need
assistance and so partnering
them with family services to
better understand the needs of
the family and not just the
child and giving them that
opportunity to work together and
create a plan and a program, um,
I think it's hugely beneficial
to the families. We've changed
some of the language this year
for what we can serve.
Um, a lot of the language
through juvenile justice said
you had to be an adjudicated
youth, and we're changing that
to read, you have to be an
at-risk youth, and that includes
kids on both sides that are at
risk that we're really hoping to
get to with some of the programs
that juvenile justice can fund.
I'd like to continue, Mr. Chair,
uh, that conversation with you.
Um, I'm, I'm trying I'm sort of
on the fence on where that
really belongs, but I'm not
trained with your skill set and
your team skill set, and I, I
would always, you know, defer to
the people who do this work all
day. So I want to hear more. Um,
second, uh, item I want to ask
you about is the title for
e-money, that is a large uh
funding source for the fostering
connections uh discussion or
mitment that I mentioned
earlier, and, and by the way,
um, I will tell the committee
here that that legislation is
going to
d ra ma t ically reduced the
number of foster kids in New
Mexico in a decade or two and
the way that it's going to do
that is, uh, states we have the
most comprehensive fostering
connections program in the
country now. There's about 16 or
17 other states that do maybe
housing and transportation,
housing, transportation and
healthcare or just healthcare or
whatever. Ours is comprehensive.
The states that have done
anything have seen um
A a reduction in the number of
foster foster kids, kids
becoming foster kids.
Um, by about 70%. So that's
going to reduce that number in a
really big way over time because
that, that 18 to 21 period of
your life is just, it's so
dramatic. You could be the
wealthiest kid in New Mexico.
You don't know anything at 18.
Can you imagine being the
wealthiest, the poorest kid in
New Mexico or the, the kid just
aging out of foster care.
There's zero safety nets, zero
support for now we have that.
And I think that's going to take
them into the that critical part
of their life. But
why are are we pulling down all
the 4E money we could.
Or we can.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Whip,
according to my staff and um Mr.
Winstead, who looked at that, we
do believe that we are not
leaving for e-money on the table
that those children that are
eligible for drawdown that we
are capturing that.
And so then if you could please,
uh, I don't know if it's it's
title for e-Money the same as as
the Chaffee Act. Can you look
then, Mr. Chairman, at, at, at
in New Mexico, uh, find a way to
bring Chaffe money for these
purposes, maybe not for the
fostering connection purposes,
but I'm not quite sure if that's
another funding source that
could do some other creative
things for us.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Webb, we
will definitely look at that. We
do draw down chaffe funding.
Yes, we do, but we'll see if
there's opportunity for us to
expand.
Uh, and Madam Chair, uh,
senator, um, CFD also uses some
of the TANF transfers
specifically to support the
fostering connections
population, you will increase
that transfer by a million
dollars last year and that was
part of the intent to support
that aging out. Thank you. Very
good.
Um, and share one more, one last
thing I know we've gone on for a
little bit here on the uh LFC
report under non-recurring line
75.
Did you catch that? Did you get
to that point. I, I guess I'm
just surprised why was there no
um executive ask on the Kevin S
caseload standards to to to
manage those
the the LFC came with the resent
LFC that 3 of the end time
quickly as that.
Uh that that's LFC, yes, that
was 24 million, but the
administrator, the exec did not.
Can you just tell me why that is
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, so this speaks again
to that um
The difference in the funding
approaches, right? There is
funding in the executive
recommendation for caseworkers,
uh, to bring down those K&S case
loads, OK? It's not as much in
the non-recurring.
Because we were putting it in
recurring, but there is
absolutely support in there to,
to hire additional, uh, case
workers to help with that, did
you want to add to that or no?
Mr. Chairman, um, Mr. Whip, I
was just gonna say that it is in
the base budget in the
executive. I appreciate that.
And then the last thing I'll
mention is um on the fostering
foster homes, that is a tough
road to hoe right there. I know
it is. Um, I did pass some
legislation. I had to pass 3
times to finally get a
government assignment, which
this governor did, which was
the, the um family first rite of
refusal to foster because they
are typically, I think 49% of
the time they're the ones that
actually report the issue to
begin with. I I think that's the
number that I've gotten.
And um
You know, there's, there's 3
major qualifications they have
to sign this agreement, that
agreement, the fostering
training and all that and so I'm
hoping that over time that we
spend a lot of time on that as
well. I think that'd be helpful,
but we have a bill this year
that the department is, you
know, I invite any member who
wants to sign on to this
legislation, I'd be happy to
have you as a co-sponsor, um, to
provide the tax credit to the
fostering families so that it
means it becomes even more
meaningful for them to to help
them with this. Can you talk
just a little bit about what
that would be.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Whip, yes.
So currently, you know, last
year alone, we recruited an
additional 245 relative foster
homes. So that is the first line
we go to relatives to see if
they're able to take that, um,
we currently have about 1,064
licensed foster homes in the
state of New Mexico. And so this
bill would allow those
individuals a tax credit, um,
for fostering youth, and so it
is proposed in the bill at
$500 per month, um, credit for
them to claim um while fostering
youth, and it will be a huge
support for kids, as was
mentioned earlier, they don't
get paid and I didn't mean to
indicate that they're paid for
taking those children. It is a
stipend for them, um, and it
does include a lot of
reimbursements and costs for the
youth, and so this tax credit I
believe would be significant.
Thank you, and I'll stop now,
Mr. Chairman. I just want to say
that um
I personally am carrying like 8
or 9 of the, you know, so you
are, you are doing what you're
supposed to be doing, and I love
it, and I appreciate it, and
it's not easy and um the topics
in the legislation that we have
for this year are some pretty
awesome ones I would say. So I,
I, I look forward to those
discussions and those debates
and I just wanted one more time
say to the people that work in
the department there, thank you
for everything you're doing.
Keep doing, keep on keeping on.
Thank you.
I think Senator Senator
Steinborn, Senator Trujillo, and
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, welcome and welcome
to your team. I echo, thank you
for everything you're doing. We
know it's really hard, but it's
so important and so valued.
So thank you all, um, for this
public service.
Uh, one quick question, Madam
Chair, or, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, the um study that
we're doing a reclassifications
is that if you look at that, is
that gonna make an impact on the
payment of your workforce, the
salaries, and be helpful.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Steinborn, I believe, yes, it
will in some instances. There
are some cases where I believe
that they have identified that
we are, um, you know,
competitive with both other
agencies neighboring states and
the private sector, um.
So I think in some areas it
really will cover.
And help.
Well, I hope so, uh, cause,
cause, you know, clearly, I
mean, we need to pay people very
well for this work and, and have
them drawn into this field.
Having said that, um, yeah, I
think the vacancy rates are
definitely cause for concern
because they're high and, you
know, I think when you hear the
frustration and the anger, you
know, it's just heartbreaking, I
know for all of us. No, I'm not
any different than you, maybe
more, probably more so you
because you live with this every
day. When you hear about the
stories and, and you know those
kids out there they're just
suffering and falling through
the cracks and
And then you see a vacancy rate
like that, some of those
positions, you're like, wow, you
know, we've got to address that
because we need every everybody
out on the street, you know.
Looking for those vulnerable
kids and helping to catch them
before something bad happens.
Um
I think for me, it's also
important, so this is an
oversimplification because every
single thing you talked about is
important and it has a role in
the continuum, right? Um.
For me personally, you know,
Those jobs that are just really
frontline helping kids at risk,
uh, they're all at risk again.
Yeah, I don't know, I, I would.
We gotta find a way to, to fill
those jobs. I mean, that's the
bottom line. I mean, even if
it's like, OK, out of all the
priorities, this one's the most
important so that we can fill
these jobs and get this vacancy
rate near 0 and give us more
dollars, so we're paying them
even more. I mean, or it sounds
like you, you know, the
recruiters, everything you
talked about sounds really,
really good, and I'm sure all of
those things will help.
But nonetheless, uh,
Yeah
I'll just say that. I mean, I, I
don't know what it's gonna take,
but I, I just think.
Highlighting those particular
jobs.
Yeah, I don't know.
For me, that's at the very top
of the list, but I, I'm sure
that there's others that
probably compete with that spot.
So I'll just leave it at that.
And I think for us also
understanding, you know,
everyone has only so much.
attention span and you know,
bandwidth, like,
Prioritizing
Those kinds of things that are
frontline that help us deal with
those vulnerabilities.
It's good to, it's good to maybe
focus on here the highest
priorities within the
priorities, but.
I know it's all important. So,
and it's my job to have the
bandwidth for all of it, but
I'll just leave it at that and
thank you all again for what you
do and, and hopefully, we
continue to move the needle.
On these issues. That's the
bottom line.
You know, is, are we making
progress? And are we seeing the
data that supports that.
And, and figuring out solutions
to get us there. That's the
bottom line.
Thank you, Mrs. Thank you thank
you Senator, Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Secretary for being
here. Um, I am a crier, but I'm
gonna try hard not to. Um, take
some deep breaths and take some
drinks if I have to, but I echo,
uh, Senator Padilla, and we've
shared, uh, many times that we
both have lived experiences. I
ran away and went into foster
care at 16 and stayed there
until just before my 18th
birthday.
And so, you know, those lived
experiences are really powerful
and um
I just appreciate the work that
you do. Thank you. And I also
understand that there's more to
do, and I know that you
understand that there's more to
do and you express that and so I
just want to say thank you. I
wanna say thank you to your
staff for the work that they do
to the foster families for the
work that they do, um, and
I, I want to clarify something
though that was said earlier,
um,
Yes, I was in foster care.
But I know that my parents loved
me, and it's not that these
parents don't love their kids,
they do.
In many cases, they just don't
know what to provide for them,
and they don't know how, and
there's other life circumstances
that happen, but to, to, to be
able to
To let that comment go.
That these are unloved kids,
it's not OK with me. Um, so I
just want to say my mom and dad
did the best they could with
what they had and the resources
that were available, and they
know for a fact that they loved
me, so.
Let's go on to the technical
stuff.
I heard that there's some
funding and I was trying to find
it. It's too many, too many, um,
papers here, too many things
going on, but I understand that
you're looking at like uh
ongoing training, um, to, to get
employees up to speed, and I'm
thinking about a comment that
you made when you were here
earlier about it takes us 6
months to get someone up to
where they can actually take on
a case load. Is this training
going to help us
Make that a smaller.
time frame so that we can get
them in the field handling cases
quicker.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Trujillo, that is our hope. So
we're doing a couple of
different things. We're working
with Highlands University on
training workers that we already
have, so they would have already
gone through net. It's just
additional trainings. We're also
looking at our net trading,
which is new employee training,
um, to really, as I said, we're
gonna to regionalize that, and
we're going to do more on the
job training with them in their
offices in the hopes that they
can start taking a smaller
caseload earlier and actually
working those cases with.
either the trainer or a seasoned
employee so that they can then
start to take those cases. Um,
it makes it really hard for us.
We don't want to just give them
a caseload after 3 weeks and
assume that they know what needs
to be done because that will
then just continue with our
revolving door because people
will be frustrated, they'll feel
they can't do the job, um, and
so I really think he for us is
the training that we do for
them, that's so important for,
um, retention.
Thank you, Mr. um uh Madam
Secretary, so, um, Mr. Chairman,
I will, Secretary, if you look
at page.
To
Of your presentation and you uh,
had 286 in-person interviews on
January 23rd, 111 virtual
interviews, that's 397
interviews, and I'm gonna assume
that all of them were at least
qualified or are those just
people that showed up and you
had to sort through because you
really only hired 32% of those.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Trujillo, those were just people
who showed up. We did a huge
marketing effort, um, people
came, um, they.
screens, we had screeners there
from um our staff from our HR
department and from the
Department of Workforce
Solutions to meet with them, um,
you know, some of them had no
idea what they qualified for. We
had other staff available to
just work with them on their
resume, um, as I said, the idea
is if people want to do the
work.
I really think they should be
given an opportunity and maybe
we need more entry level
positions, which is what we're
doing with some of those cases
aids to really get them in the
door to understand, right? We,
they can drive kids to
appointments. They can do take
notes and do filing, but it
gives them an opportunity to
understand the department and
see.
What is it like? And we did a
project last year with
Department of Workforce
Solutions on some pre-apprentice
programs and several of those
didn't have the experience to do
the department, but came in and
loved it and stayed and actually
a couple of them, you know,
started doing social work school
and so if we can take some of
those that have the heart and
want to do the work and help
grow them into employees for the
department, um, I think we'll
see the retention of those
individuals will be huge.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Secretary.
um, Madam Secretary, uh, Mr.
Chairman, so, um, I understand,
um, and I read through the, um,
the directive, I think is what
it is that you got from the
Kevin S as to how to move
forward, and it, it, it, there,
the first and foremost things
seem to be um hiring.
And so I'm wondering, is the
budget request here um the LFC
and maybe um our DFA analysts
can help answer this.
Is the budget request.
Allow for you to overhire. In
other words, in other states.
They've looked at strategies of
hiring, you know, 1.5 people, 2
people for every position that
you actually need because of
the, the turnover and the, you
know, getting them to the finish
line.
We are we gonna give you enough
money to try to do that?
Maybe, um, Mr. Chairman Senator
Trujillo, the budget request
that you have before you, um,
fills the 101 positions that
would get us to the caseload
requirements, it brings on
caseworkers to help the
frontline workers, um, and so in
reducing some of the front, but
the answer to the question is
no, it does not give us the
ability to overhire, but our
thought is with the case aids
and taking some of that
responsibility off of the.
case workers, we won't have as
much turnover and we'll have
better retention, but it
actually takes some of that
work, um, off of their plate to
allow them to do the work that
they need to do. Mr. Chairman, I
would like us to consider the
possibility of bar authority
just for the purpose of
borrowing money into programs
for personnel, not into the 300
or 400 but into the 200
category, so that over hiring
could happen cause I think
that's an important thing even.
the best of circumstances, staff
come and go.
Um, uh, Mr. Chairman, um,
Madam Secretary, in regards to
the prevention, I'm, I'm
listening and, and I hear that,
you know, you've got a, a lot of
prevention programs and I think
that's wonderful. um, I also
recognize something that Senator
Padilla said, which is we've got
bits and pieces of these kinds
of programs all over the state
agencies and we've got a, a, a
plethora of nonprofits that are
trying to help with that. Um,
we've got Department of Health
that's doing some prevention and
domestic.
violence prevention. We've got
the health authority, we've got
PED, they had some stuff in
their budgets, um, for
prevention, and that's all good
and well, but it does seem to me
like it's become kind of, you
know, spread out, um, instead of
really centralized, so I'm
hoping that I can work with
Senator Padilla to find a way
that we could try to do like we
did with the early childhood,
which is kind of consolidate
some of those services and, and
then have some.
benchmarks and measurables and,
and that actually, um,
You know, we've spent a couple
of weeks going through Senate
Bill 12, and 3, and Senate Bill
3 is the outline for how we do
those kinds of things, right?
It's not just to reduce crime,
but it's also to reduce child
neglect. It's also to improve
quality of life.
And
Although I don't believe we
added and correct me if I'm
wrong, but I don't believe we
added CYFD to the list of
The committee that's gonna
oversee that.
I'm hoping um that CYFD will
pay, play a major part
throughout the state in the
different regions as those gaps
are identified, so that services
can then be provided because I
think you hold a lot, you and
PED and early childhood hold a
lot of the keys to what many of
us have talked about is that in
this.
Healthcare, mental health.
Collaborative that we're trying
to work, youth need to be
included in that, and they need
to be a major part of it, so I
would hope that you would
participate in that.
Um, the national test, I agree
with you that social work and
I've, I've read the study, the
Social Work association at the
top the the United States said
that social work exam, um,
Does not, does not meet the
needs and so here in New Mexico,
we allow trained social workers
to get a temporary license for a
year. We have them out
functioning in our schools, in
our communities, and if they
can't pass the test, I think
they have 3 times to pass it,
and we take that away from them.
We said they're OK to practice
for a year, but because they
can't pass this test even if
they've been successful, and
they've got now a year of on the
job training that we're not
gonna license them, um, Illinois
has taken the position of
eliminating that national test
and I'd like us to move in that
direction. So I'm looking
forward to possibly being,
having you be a partner in that.
Um, why isn't the education for
incarcerated youth funded
through the SCG.
You have a note here that it's
not.
It's under the
That page where you have, and
I'm thrilled that you've hired
um Lisa Hamilton, longtime
friend.
I know she's doing a fabulous
job, but uh there was a place in
your report that says that it's
not funded.
You said CYFD is paying for it.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Cruil,
oh, here it is. I'm sorry. Under
the education education for for
residential treatment
facilities. Page 6, CYFD doesn't
receive education funds but are
paying for the education of
youth and RTCs.
PD
um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Trujillo, that money goes
through PED to schools in New
Mexico. The kids in RTC are all
out of state students, and
Lisa's right here and she may
have a better explanation, but I
believe it's because they are
out of state schools and the
they're funded differently and
we pay directly for that. She's
working with PED on that. Um, I
don't believe that we get
charged for it other than maybe
one state. Typically that
education is.
included in the rate that we pay
for that student. Um, and then
it was brought to my attention
when we had a specific need for
an RTC and we had to send
someone to one in the state that
we hadn't previously used, and
they charged us separately for
education. So, um, we are paying
for that currently, but I've
asked her to work with PED to
identify um how they can cover
that cost, but currently they do
not. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Secretary, I think that's really
important because the
Constitution requires us to
provide an education for
residents of New Mexico and.
are in fact residents, even
though they're being serviced
outside of state. Would that be
correct?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Trujillo, that is correct and um
you're right, we have to provide
that education, um, it's why
we're currently paying for it,
but we're looking to ensure that
um we can get funding that would
really require.
be required to pay for that.
Thank you. And then um I just
have two more questions, Mr.
Chairman. I'm, I'm that, uh, the
floor session has started and uh
I have 3 more folks listed after
you, Senator. IT.
CYFD has been working on that IT
project so it's 2020, 2018, long
time, 2017, when did the
governor come in?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Trujillo, she came in in 19, I
believe they had started working
on that prior to that. I believe
the department received the
initial planning money in 18,
um, and they had started that
process. They went down um in
the prior administration with a
vendor then they were looking at
a different vendor. It has been
a very long process when I came
to the department in May of 23,
um, they had conducted an RFP
but it had not yet awarded a
vendor, although they had made a
they were still through that
process. So, um, I can't speak
to what happened between 18 and
23. Um, I don't know why it took
so long, but in 23 we, you know,
worked on getting that
finalized. We did a few months
after I got there, get the
contract finalized, and they
have been in production and
working on that, um, with the
department since that time, um,
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
is there any way that that can
be rolled out in pieces. I heard
you say that it will be ready to
go in November.
of next year 2026 of 25. OK,
that's better. Thank you. OK. I,
I was really worried about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you Secretary. Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning.
As you can tell, it's a very
emotional.
Very emotional.
Topic, anytime you talk about
kids.
And, and I know there's not one
person sitting behind you,
including your table.
That doesn't have kids' best
interest.
And heart.
We can go through all the money
thing and everything, and I, and
I'm gonna leave that to them
today.
Because I, I just want to share,
you know, a few things because.
You know, um
Senator bison.
Very emotional.
And I was a school teacher.
For 28 years.
And I've seen this.
I've seen Senator Padilla.
I seen Senator Trujil.
I never was.
A foster child.
But I dealt with a lot of them.
I, I dealt with their parents.
And I dealt with their foster
parents.
And some of them are bad, some
of them are good on both sides.
So, you know, I wanna make sure
that you understand that.
I have a family in, in Aztec
that
I believe what we, we call them
the Brady Bunch.
They're divorced couple, they
married they.
Melted their kids, they adopt, I
think, I believe it was.
5 or 6 kids. I, I don't want to
say exactly cause over that time
period, they, they have taken a
lot.
And I've always been amazed by
them and appreciate what they've
done.
Because some of those kids come
to them with a lot of problems.
Mm
And, and they dealt with it very
good.
Very well.
My only question, and I, and you
can see, I got paper, I got
everything, I got highlighted
notes, I got books with the
numbers.
And
I, I wanna
I want to help you and everybody
up here wants to help you.
And I, I don't want you to take
this wrong.
Have we
Have we gotten so big with so
much money.
That maybe, maybe it's time to
condense this. Maybe it's time
to move some of your under
departments out to other
agencies.
You know, what's your feeling on
that?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Lanier.
I've looked at that. I mean, we
looked at that last year when we
were really doing the
restructuring and trying to
figure that out, um, you know,
and we talked about it, you
know, internally with staff to
say if we were to break up the
department, what would that look
like and what would go and so
many of those services are
interconnected, right? Like
taking behavioral health, for
example, and moving that out to,
I don't know, healthcare
authority or Department of
Health. Those um clinicians work
with our staff.
every day. They're in those
offices working with juvenile
justice. They're in there on our
staffings with protective
services when we're making
decisions on sending kids out of
state or, you know, for
treatment and foster care,
they're in those conversations
with us and so, you know, then
we decided it didn't really make
sense for them to leave. We'd
have to hire clinicians to do
the work that they're doing if
they want somewhere else, um, as
I said earlier, our juvenile
justice staff.
Not only do we have youth that
are crossover youth, but they're
an integral part in working with
some of the kids that we have
who maybe are at risk and their
expertise in working with them
and helping to guide them.
They're a huge support to us for
office days. They volunteer
constantly to help alleviate the
staff from protective services
with some of those kids when our
protective services staff are
busy, especially during this
last summer, I saw them engaging
with some of the kids that were
in offices.
them out on, you know, trips for
the day, taking them on
activities and so, you know,
they worked really closely
together, so although it's a
large department, I feel that
the work that we do in the
different divisions is so
interconnected and important for
the success of the kids that I'm
not opposed to it if we sat down
and strategized and it made
sense for something to be
somewhere else. I would
definitely not be opposed, but I
haven't really seen where it's
like, well, this could go and it
wouldn't have enough.
effect on the rest of the
department.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, I'm keeping it
really brief, um.
Another
So just 2 more little points.
One is
Getting people hired, you work
with UNM Highland, you're
starting a program.
Have you thought about maybe
some of the rural areas, some of
the, the smaller colleges and,
and I know Senator Brandt's
gonna ask you some questions
about the education part of it.
But
Almost treat it like a trade.
Uh, my daughter's a social
worker in
Um, San Antonio.
He went to Portalis.
She got into a program, she fell
in love with it. Now she's
crazy, she's gonna.
She'll be a doctor someday
because she loves school. She
didn't get that from her
parents.
But, but I almost think if, if
we
Every, every single committee or
every single um group that comes
in here has hiring problems.
You know, the FTEs part time,
whatever it is, and, and I'm not
so sure that.
Part of our budget should be.
To reach out to those smaller
communities.
To those, those young people
that are not.
Driven going, I'm going to UNM.
I wanna be a doctor. I wanna be
a lawyer.
And, and maybe reach out to
them.
Just, just a very short answer.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Lanier, we do, we work with
high, um.
Portales we work with eastern,
Western, um, yesterday we had a
conversation with somebody about
social work or opportunities at
Dana College, um, so we are
working with smaller
universities. We're also looking
to link with out of state online
universities because my
understanding is there are
several New Mexicans who
participate in those online
courses with those universities
that have social work and so
we're trying to figure out how
we capture that audience as
well.
Great, thank you.
And
And really my, my, my last
question.
I
is emotional.
Your success.
I had some runners. I had a few.
You know, my career was 30 years
long. I had a few runners.
But the success stories that I
know.
Are
Easy.
After they turn 18.
it would be awesome if your
image could show some of those
success rates.
And again, it's all about
spending money, but that
campaign
You know, when I look back at at
my constituents, they, they
don't see the success rate.
If I hadn't been in the
classroom and kept in touch with
those kids.
I may have never known. All we
see is KOB.
Go, man, we need to hammer.
We've got a hammer, we got to
fix this.
And every bad thing that happens
in your department is going to
be on the.
Because it's children.
So, I, I would just in encourage
Those volunteers that come back
and work for you or whatever it
might be, um.
I, I think that'd be awesome.
And this is nothing but I came
in here to talk about today with
you.
And last thing is I, I would
encourage you to reach out to
my, to Tobiasson.
On a, on a personal note, I
think that would be fantastic.
Thank you. I will do that and I
would appreciate.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, thank you, Senator,
Senator Bren.
English, Madam Secretary.
Um
You have, I think, uh.
It's been said, and I will agree
you have the hardest job in.
Government today.
Because you have to deal with
humans.
Not only are you dealing with
With older humans, you got to
deal with tiny humans and every
in between human and
Human beings can be real.
It can be real bad.
They can also be real good.
We, we see and you see.
Some of the worst
You have to deal with the tiny
children that come from some of
the worst.
I haven't always agreed.
With how your department has
dealt with them. You've only
been there a little over a year.
And I
I think you know that I didn't
agree last year that we
shouldn't make changes last
year, but we were forced.
Not to our bills wouldn't be
heard that would provide
changes.
And I think that was wrong.
Because this department needs
changes.
So
I do have some questions. Um, I
don't know if you remember, I,
I've talked about it before, but
I used to be a foster parent.
And so I have some questions
about that.
Um
First of all,
With your with within the foster
families, what is the turnover
in that area?
Not seeing the, you know, I see
a percentage of how many, you
know,
Workers turnover, but how many
foster families or how's that,
what is that turnover like?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Brandt, I do not have that
statistic in front of me, and I
probably should cause that would
be an important thing to
provide. Um, I know that we do
have turnover of foster
families. I know that there are,
you know, lots of foster
families who are frustrated. We
hear about that, um, constantly,
you know, I'm happy to say that
I've actually had interaction
with foster parents who are not
unhappy with the department, so
there is that to Senator
Lanier's point, there are
positives, but I will definitely
get that rate over the last
several, you know.
Rachel.
we haven't looked at this data
point in a few months, so
probably not in the last 6
months. If we looked about a
year ago, what we saw happening
was in any given month, you was
recruiting about 60 families,
and then there are about 58 on
average kind of exiting.
However, I will note that
includes kinship placements and
so it may have been right that
their families who were kinship
placement, the child exited
foster care, and so that that
may be driving it, but it was
sort of like a we didn't make
net gains. That was a while.
ago though.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Bratt will get a breakdown of
that and show how many of those
are kinship, because I think
that's important to know, right,
if I go back to the family, um,
our the hope is to convert them
to do, um, outside of just
kinship, but we'll get a
breakdown for you. Of course and
and as part of that, I'd really
like to, I I know when a family
leaves foster care, you try to
do an exit survey. I'd like to
see why.
Why are they leaving? Is it just
because it was their
grandchildren and they're now
back with the parents.
Or is it
If we can identify, I mean, I
know why I quit doing it.
OK, and I wasn't through CYFD.
I, we went through a private
placement.
And I know exactly why we quit.
So, one of these days I can tell
you that. I would love to hear
it but
What we, we have to make sure.
That the family, the foster
family receives the support they
need.
You know, because, especially
once you get one, if you,
especially if they're a good
one.
And we need to make sure they're
getting the support they need,
they get the respite care when
they need it. They, they're able
to, you know, they still have
kids at home, they, they need to
be able to take a vacation.
And a lot of times you can't
take the foster kids. I know
some of that has changed and I'd
love to talk offline about that
a little bit.
Um, but it concerns me because
I, I see the commercials and I
and
You know, there's been several
times I've looked at my wife and
said, should we do this again
and and we're both like, no,
we're too old now.
And we like to travel too much,
so it's probably not a wise
thing for us anymore.
Um
One question I do have to ask
is on on the repeat
maltreatment.
Um
Looked in that section, um, in,
in our book.
And
15%.
Repeat maltreatment.
Are we still prioritizing.
Putting kids back into bad
homes.
Um
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brant, I
hope we don't prioritize at all
putting kids into bad homes, um,
New Mexico does prioritize
reunification if the family is
able to take that child back and
provide a safe and nurturing
environment. Um, I think one of
the things that we really want
to focus on through family
services is building up that
family and ensuring that they
can provide that environment.
But when it's not the
environment and when the family
is not able to do that, we
should really be prior.
izing um, ensuring that that
child can get into a stable
placement in a permanent
environment, um, I think much
faster than what currently
happens, and so, um, you know,
I'm not saying that there's not
still additional work that needs
to be done at the department.
I'm not here to say everything
is fantastic. There are still
areas, you know, especially with
foster parents and getting
placement for kids faster that
we still need to work on, and I
would love to hear your
experience and, you know, I
think that will help guide in
what we're doing.
And so we want to learn from
that experience. We want to
support foster families. Um, we
started up respite, so if they
wanna travel, hopefully we have
respite for them to be able to
go and do that. Um, but the idea
of putting a child back into,
you know, their home environment
as Senator Trujillo said, their
families do love them. Sometimes
they just don't know how to take
care of them or provide for them
and so providing them that
support to get to that point and
then staying.
with that family for a period
during a um trial home visit so
that we can ensure it's the
right thing because we don't
want to place kids in bad
environments ever.
Mr. Chairman and and secretary.
We are 15% of the time.
And honestly 5% of time is way
too much. 1% of the time is way
too much.
15% of the time we're putting
these kids back into a home and
they're being.
abused or neglected again.
And that's just.
In my opinion, it is
unacceptable.
So let me ask you this.
If a child is taken into CID
custody because they were being
molested.
Are we trying to reunify that
family?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Brand
new, I think a lot of the
reunification or the
maltreatment, the repeat
maltreatment, um, you know,
we're really looking at that and
we're looking at defining what
does that mean in New Mexico?
Because I think we need to make
sure that that doesn't include
when the child has been sexually
molested or when a child has
been removed, um, just, you
know, I want, I don't want to
say just because of neglect in
that household. Some of them,
there's medical neglect, some of
them it's other neglect that I.
think through family services we
can help to support them so that
we're not seeing those children
coming back in for neglect.
But you know, if there are other
circumstances that are more
severe, those are definitely
those that we're taking a look
at, and I don't believe that.
um, a molestation would be
included in a neglect for
maltreatment.
Doctor
Courtney over here actually has
done this analysis before. Um,
it, the, when you look at repeat
maltreatment, it's skews very
heavily toward neglect.
Um, being the instant. Thank
you. And this year I know we're
we're.
Out of time, so I'm trying to
get the
Answers a little quickly or, um,
but um it's just, you know,
concerns me that we're putting
kids back in the home where,
where they're having and, and I
don't believe in.
The philosophy of of
reunification all the time.
I think we need to take a
serious look out at
Um, you know, when I did foster
care, we had a 9 month old crack
baby.
Why they were trying to get that
family back together. It's
beyond me.
Just so that they can, you know,
the mom can do crack in front of
her children.
That that's not the best
approach.
And I, I think sometimes we're a
little too quick.
put them back into a home where
that home's not ready.
who hasn't really dealt with the
issues. I know sometimes the
molestation is a boyfriend.
And then mom
breaks up with the boyfriend,
um, and you, so you put the
child back in the home and guess
what? Mom gets back with the
boyfriend.
That happens.
You know what happens.
And we have
One in here where
We're talking about, you know,
how many kids die.
That are put back in the home.
what the percentage was, but any
percent is too high.
And we've seen that.
Because again we have this
priority that I think is, is
misguided.
Right
Um
Definitely need to, to work on
the, the, so on the education
for being
A uh
employee.
What, what are the
qualifications that they have to
have. They have to have a
bachelor's degree.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Brat,
it depends on the position. Some
of the newer positions that
we've created for the case aids
or um those you do not have to
have a bachelor's degree. Our
hope is to bring them in and
then help grow them, we support
them to go back to school if
that's um something that they're
interested in doing, um, for
some of the other positions, it
is a bachelor's degree or an
associate's degree, um, not all
of them require a degree in
social work. We've expanded what
that degree can be. Some of them
are a degree in any field, um,
but it's.
Just dependent on the position
with the minimum qualifications
are.
And I asked that because I'm not
sure a degree.
makes you a better social
worker.
I, I just, I'm not sure that the
two correlate.
Um
maybe there would be better.
Things to do, like, you know,
like some of our people.
Leaving the military and cross
train them.
to
This area.
You know, they've seen a lot of
garbage they can, they can
actually handle that stuff. My
sister, by the way, does this in
California.
She is a social worker in
California.
And so I get that side of it
also because I get to hear it
from her when we talk on the
phone or when I go visit.
Um
I know it's a very difficult
job.
I'm not so sure that
That college and that.
piece of paper, and I do have a
degree.
is really something that should
be required, you know, maybe we
should require an associate's
degree.
Um
And I think that's something we
get to choose as a state, right?
Just like with the test.
We get to choose the state and I
think Senator Trujillo is onto
something, maybe.
You know, do you need us to
change the law?
Because if you do, you know,
right now is the time to do it.
We have till Monday to file
bills.
You need us to get a bill
drafted.
I'll go with with Senator
Trujillo and draft a bill.
Mhm
right now
You gotta tell us what you need,
and then we will support you in
it.
But you've got to tell us what
you need and, and
You know,
I'm on finance now, so.
They're in the interim
You're gonna be before this
committee.
And I'm gonna be asking you the
same questions, and I'm really
hoping to get some different
answers. I'm really hoping for
some improvement.
But I also understand this is
probably the hardest job in the
world.
And if you don't believe people
are evil.
I have some pictures on my phone
from when I went to Israel in
December that a very disturbing
and people are evil.
They just are.
You have to deal with those
people and make sure our
children are being raised.
Yeah
Horrible situations.
And our children aren't being
killed.
Sorry for all of your workers
that have to see that garbage
every day.
They need, they also need care.
What are we doing for their
care? Because that's why we lose
them because we don't get them
the behavioral help they need.
Never seems to my last question.
You
versions
are disturbing.
Especially
I
For me
funny
I
you
Some
So
it.
Mm
Mr. Chairman, Senator Grant, I
agree with you, and that's a
failure on.
My part.
We weren't adequately.
Watching the money that
That went either
To falling colors or out in
contractors to ensure that they
were spending it. And what we
found out how much was gonna be
left on the table, it really was
too late for us to redirect that
funding. It's something that we
and I do it.
anticipate that we'll see that
same issue.
Just sending it to spend it.
I want to just give someone a
contract and say here's $5
billion.
And we
make sure they're actually
getting
The see
that spend
workers because they needed
You can't see those things.
Without being
so
I
social workers right now
Same thing.
Front line
Child.
Please
that you're
Support them when they
say, I
is a dangerous situation, I will
this child going back.
So to the child first. I know
we.
Education.
At least.
that's what the child is the
first priority.
State
true
senator and
Thank you and
for
ation I was been.
Child, families, like all of us.
grandparents, uncles.
And sisters, grandmas and
affects all of us
hear what's happening
You
For senators, you know.
and
trivial.
Yeah
know.
They've experiences, all of us
have witnessed what's happened
to our communities.
As it's been stated, and this is
probably the hardest job.
The
appreciate
And to bring also the
Yeah
as well.
sister that
Social work.
in Southern California.
see them
It's, it's just tremendous.
To look at.
this you
the staff and support you.
the news and comments.
And
really look
this
all different ways and see.
We can do a better job.
the
children
but also in
mix up.
called you
That's part of the department.
the
It's a lot of work.
It's draining
it's, it's, you know, it affects
all of us, you know.
lives and so forth so.
you have
support here.
So we need to make sure that
we're
the
our children.
The community, so thank you
Senator I think that concludes
our, our
This morning, uh, Senate bill.
You think you thank all of you.
I appreciate it very much.
