Nancy Rodriguez from Santa Fe
district twenty four we can be
so many places at one time.
Right good to see you.
Good afternoon state senator
Pete Campos says Senate district
eight representing all or parts
of seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico it's
great to be here if you all are
traveling this afternoon this
evening please be safe and again
to all our presenters thank you
very much for your insightful
information it's definitely
helping us to make great
decisions on behalf of the
people of the state of New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Woods and senator Byrd
in the center diameters Senator
share on.
I don't know if you guys can
hear me.
back now I turn something.
Something glitch in our system
Senator Burt you want to go next
and senator
What.
Are we down.
Yeah.
I think we're back Center Burke
center website I think we're.
Are you.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
Senator Wade prepared to be on
but have not yet connected to
audio and I don't believe that
senator Byrd is that on the call
yet.
Okay.
Anybody that I miss them trying
to scroll through here Senator
Diamond here on.
Mr Chairman said Senator crystal
diamond from Senate district
thirty five The New Mexico thank
you guys.
Thank you for that because my
computer keeps saying connect.
we are going to hear house bill
eleven today.
We're waiting for the amendments
and so everybody can have a look
at a
and so.
So the the committee knows the
process we will need to rescind
the amendments from yesterday on
the bill before we start.
And then we're going to try to
get everybody a copy of the
amendments I just got put in my
hand right now so we'll send
them to you and then as we go
through that but David let's
start with you guys so we can
everybody can read investments
in New Mexico on calls make sure
all good.
Mr Chairman I think we have a
Miss Iglesias and secretary
Schardin Clarke.
Receive
executive sectors first.
Thank you David thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I'm Stephanie Schardin
Clarke the secretase shin of the
secretary of the taxation and
revenue department I'll be
sharing my screen if you'll give
me just a moment.
Get into slide show mode after I
share it otherwise they.
I just can't do that for some
reason.
Okay thank you for that it if
you have any trouble seeing Mr
hearing me please let me know
also today secretary Romero and
I as well as Miss Iglesias from
the LFC staff will be presenting
to you an update to the December
twenty twenty revenue forecast
updating for a roughly two
months of data that have come in
since the December forecast was
released I will be talking about
the macroeconomic trends and and
changes in the US national and
New Mexico macroeconomic
forecasts that have happened in
the last two or so months since
the December estimate was maybe
I'll highlight for you some
trends in our largest revenue
sources oil and natural gas
personal income tax and G. R. T.
and other energy related taxes
and all of this sort of said
what I'll be talking about about
the macro economy sort of sets
the stage for what secretary
Romero will then tell you I'll
be talking about what's changed
in the forecast and then she
will follow that with what has
changed as a result in the
revenues.
So as a reminder of for those
members who may not be aware
that work that we're presenting
today is the work of staff
economist at four different
agencies the department of
finance and administration the
taxation and revenue department
department transportation and
the legislative finance
committee and they work together
and they run models and come to
consensus on each individual
revenue item in the general
fund.
So for comparison how lot of
what I'm gonna be talking about
again is changes what has
happened since we released the
December twenty twenty estimate
and if you focus on the chart on
the right hand side you can see
there isn't too much change in
the macroeconomic forecasts for
US GDP growth the red line shows
what was forecast in the
December estimate the gray line
is today so there's a moderate a
slightly more positive outlook
for US GDP which you know is is
a good indicator of overall
economic activity.
moving to the mix of U. S. and
New Mexico economic indicators
one of the big things that the
group looks to and has sort of
trouble having to make judgment
calls about is the future of
federal stimulus that will come
to New Mexico and the rest of
the economy we we received data
from many different sources
moody's analytics is one of them
and their current assumption is
that the federal fiscal stimulus
will include one point nine
trillion of stimulus and that
now it will be broken into two
different parts seven hundred
fifty billion of stimulus in the
first quarter of twenty twenty
one which we're in now and
another one point one five
trillion towards the end of
twenty twenty one and so that's
that is a big major assumption
underlying the moody's forecast
and that's balanced by the
forecasters I H. S. global
insight which assumes no
additional fiscal stimulus so
we've got probably a high
forecast in a low and we use
them both in coming up with the
estimates that we're presenting
to you today.
you know I I showed you a moment
ago the outlook for US GDP here
I have for you the same type of
chart for New Mexico and but the
the
changes the revisions that have
happened to the forecast between
November and now are much more
pronounced you can see that New
Mexico GDP and and the red line
on the on the right hand chart
that's what was forecast as of
the December forecast and now
moody's is is expecting a much
quicker regain in GDP in New
Mexico than they were just two
months ago so that's good news
and and that will come to us to
bear in the revenue forecast
that will share with you.
A little bit on unemployment you
can see on the right hand side
that unemployment both
nationally and for the U. S. has
been very unstable since the
pandemic began with peaks and
and spikes ups and downs it
stabilized quite a bit although
not entirely and we would still
like to obviously see that
number come down pretty
significantly the most recent
data point for New Mexico is
eight point two percent
unemployment and for the US at
six point three percent The New
Mexico is lagging the U. S.
unemployment rate by about two
percent.
I'm now looking at New Mexico
employment changes year over
year I'm here we are comparing
the number of jobs in each
sector in New Mexico and the
change that's happening each
sector between December twenty
nineteen and December twenty
twenty and so for the entire New
Mexico economy we're down about
sixty five thousand jobs over
one year prior you can see not
not surprisingly that the
greatest number of job losses
are concentrated in leisure and
hospitality
and that the sectors that are up
include state government a
retail trade is doing fairly
well and federal government is
about even it's up two hundred
jobs year over year.
Mining is also down seventy two
hundred jobs.
One of the things I've talked to
this committee about before in a
previous revenue estimate but
this is a new chart to kind of
try to make it visual for you
you know economists have been
talking for the last year about
what type of what shape recover
with recovery will experience an
L. shaped recovery were would
come down and stay low and Nike
swoosh is is that another one
that we hear about I I keep
calling attention to what is
called a K. shaped recovery
where you have job losses
continuing to be down and not
recovered very quickly while
wages are recovering more
quickly and so I want to thank
the staff for putting this
together in the gray bar you can
see that over the course of the
pandemic the number of jobs came
down considerably more deeply
contracted more more
significantly than wages and
that for the forecast period
Graybar employment is is not
expected to recover as quickly
and then actually level off well
we just didn't and included
contract is as much and are
expected to outpace job growth
and mathematically why that's
important what that means is
that lower earning workers are
have the the deepest job losses
and will are expected to
maintain those job losses for
the longest period of time where
higher paid workers in in higher
skilled maybe a higher
educational attainment type jobs
didn't experience as deep losses
and they're also recovering more
quickly.
that leads into the next slide
which we kind of look at jobs
and job losses and labor force
participation by a couple
different groups race gender and
educational attainment levels
and I think this is important as
policy makers first to keep in
mind just to make sure that
we're all aware there's a while
many of us are experiencing
stability those who are invested
in the stock market are actually
doing quite well there are
sectors of the economy that are
expected to continue to need our
support of the population that
need our support for years to
come.
On the left hand chart we're
we're just showing basically
from data from the bureau of
labor statistics that shows how
labor force participation has
declined amongst different
groups for men it has declined
two percent year over year for
women two point two percent year
over year but but then and that
has actually stabilized somewhat
since at a couple months ago we
looked at this at the
differences between men and
women aren't quite as as severe
as they were earlier in the
pandemic but I want to call
attention to the differences
between men in general at white
women and women of color labor
force participation is down
about one to two percent more
for women of color than it is
for white women or for men
similarly on the right hand
chart you can see how the
employment change and recovery
for different levels of
educational attainment and and
basically if the worker who went
into the pandemic with a
bachelor's degree or higher
they've regained all but about
two percent of their lost
employment well folks that have
less than a bachelor's degree
there's some college a high
school diploma or no high school
diploma have leveled off their
recovery still lacking about the
pre pandemic jobs.
Some some good news on
unemployment recovery though
We're we're here comparing for
you would be employment recovery
that was expected for New Mexico
in November in the red dotted
line versus January and now we
are moved moody's at is now
expecting us to regain our pre
pandemic employment level about
two years earlier than was
expected just two months ago so
two months ago it looks like we
were not expecting to regain
until about June twenty twenty
five now we had that pre
pandemic level around the end of
calendar year twenty three so
that's great news and and we
hope that that sustainable the
chief of all.
Okay next I'll move to some
slides that are specifically
about oil and gas and our other
major revenue streams of course
some of the the biggest news
that affects New Mexico revenue
over the last couple months has
been
orders issued by the federal
government impacting drilling
and permitting on federal land
we've provided for you here a
map of New Mexico with the
federal land highlighted in
orange you can see that about
forty two percent of New Mexico
is federal land and overlaid
with that you can see where the
Permian and Delaware basin is in
the southeastern corner of the
state so there are two different
orders that were issued by the
federal government in January
the first is the executive order
tackling climate creating the
climate crisis at home and
abroad and that has three
effects to highlight for you it
pauses new leases on federal
land however it does not
directly affect existing leases
or existing or pending permits.
The second issue is the
secretarial order US thirty
three ninety five that's the one
that we've read about probably
more in the news it's a sixty
day pines on the BLM's
administrative authority to
approve leases right of way
surface disturbances and permits
to drill and so as of now that
is just still a sixty day pause
and and I know that we're all
very eager to find out more
about what will happen as as
time goes by
the economist group has looked
at this closely as as I know the
LFC staff had and in and of
itself as these things stand
right now we don't expect them
to have a dramatic impact on oil
or gas production in New Mexico
for the short term but we do
need some clarification and
we're sticking out from the
federal government.
I'm just for your reference
we'll go through this in great
detail but we wanted to
highlight for you the vast to
data sources that the consensus
revenue estimating group uses to
formulate their forecasts some
of these are public data sources
some of them are subscription
some of them are our national or
international some of them are
focused very much on New Mexico
those are there for your
reference.
Back now to more more along the
lines of what to expect from
these federal orders that came
out in January here the the
staff has put together for you
well counts on federal and
verses other non federal land
for each of the companies that
are heavily present in New
Mexico and and basically you can
see that companies have been
stocking up on permits for the
last couple years in
anticipation that sooner or
later there would be a national
policy change towards extraction
on federal lands and so like for
example in the the first column
EOG you can see the pink bars
towards the right hand side of
their chart that's the the well
count on federal land in twenty
twenty you can see that for a
couple of the the companies that
really they're they're well
count really spiked in in the
last year or so.
according to BLM from twenty
sixteen to twenty twenty there
are six hundred and thirty two
leases issued on federal land
covering over two hundred sixty
six thousand acres and currently
ninety seven point five percent
of federal lands are already
leased in New Mexico.
Another way to to look at
permits and the duration of the
existing permits if if this pods
were to continue this is that a
graph from Rystad energy when
one of the data sources we use
for well remaining permanent
inventory lifetime here shows
that for example Colgate the
lifetime inventory is expected
to be ninety one I believe
that's months
and so there there's certainly a
lot of permits already acted and
available for use but the longer
the federal deposit goes on and
and the or the longer that we
lack of clarity on federal
action the more all of this will
will begin to matter.
To cover for you rig counts and
and taking a step back why does
RigCount matter it matters in a
couple different ways rig
activity on that's the drilling
activity out in the field tends
to be taxable under the gross
receipts tax so the more rigs we
have out in the field the more
G. R. T. will have and then
separately rig count is a
leading indicator of production
to come later and so the revenue
other than G. R. T. like from
the severance tax for example
see can see that earlier
and the the the early months of
twenty twenty New Mexico's rig
count peaked at a hundred and
seventeen active rigs
it reached a brought up about
forty one range in September and
since it is level it it's gone
up to about as high as seventy
and it currently stands at about
sixty rigs but some of the some
of the things to keep in mind or
that this drilling technology is
constantly changing and so if
you compare recounts over a long
period of time you're really not
comparing apples to apples one
right today is much more
productive than a rate was even
just a few years ago so keep
that in mind as far as the
production relationship.
I'm also we want to look now at
oil prices and how they've
fluctuated between the December
estimate and now
taking about eight and a step
back further the great out and
bar is what we expected at worst
our December there I'm sorry
June twenty twenty estimate in
the grey dot was the most
pessimistic we had there was the
most uncertainty about the
pandemic in the economy at that
time we recovered quite a bit
and our expectations for oil
prices by December and we've
we've increase them considerably
more now on the bottom right
hand side you can see a
comparison of the the price
forecast by fiscal year you can
see that for FY twenty one we've
added about five dollars and
fifty cents to the forecast and
taking that out levels off over
time but as a as a rule of thumb
each dollar and the price of oil
and this is average over an
entire fiscal year not day by
day for each dollar added to the
price of oil at about twenty two
million dollars to New Mexico
general fund revenue so adding a
five dollars would be somewhere
in the neighborhood of adding a
hundred million dollars two
revenue.
Next I wanted just cover with
you just slide that shows the
linkage between the price of oil
which is shown in the blue line
and then that basically that as
the price moves the recount will
follow so when price comes down
rigs follow and then finally oil
production lags that and so this
really has like I mentioned
before has a lot to do with our
gross receipts tax as well as
later on or severance taxes and
in the bottom right hand table
you can see the new estimate for
production volumes that are
included in this new forecast
we've added about thirty million
barrels of oil for FY twenty one
to the expectation this is still
considerably lower than that we
were on before the pandemic in
January twenty nineteen but
we've added about thirty to
forty million barrels per year
to that production.
I'm next just really briefly how
go through a little bit of
information on the personal
income tax and G. R. T. and I'll
show you how those shared in the
new forecast basically pit and
G. R. T. are the two single
largest revenue sources to the
general fund and they didn't
change very much they and they
were they are expected to remain
pretty stable at about fifty
seven or fifty eight percent
recurring revenue over the
forecast period
there are slight upward
revisions in the near term
having to do with that larger
than expected federal stimulus
expectation and then in the the
later period of the forecast you
can see there are slight
downward revisions for G. R. T.
and pet just having to do with
wages and salaries growing more
more slowly in the out years.
And next the last slides cover
before turning over to secretary
Romero is it as snapshot of what
we expect for severance taxes
and federal rents and royalties
in the forecast
one of the one of the things to
highlight you know is that there
was legislation sponsored by
Representative Larranaga about I
think it was about four years
ago now that created this very
stabilizing process where we we
take the five year average of
the
revenue from the severance tax
and anything above the five year
average automatically goes into
this tax stabilization reserve
and that mechanism is is a large
part of why we have had strong
reserves coming into this
recession and why we've had on
the ability to have flexibility
and and maneuver way through
this that and an influx of
federal funds but one thing you
know to to note is that even
though our expectations for oil
production and volume and prices
have come down significantly
because of that five year
average we're still expecting in
in green bars here we're still
expecting over a hundred million
dollars to end up transferring
into the reserve fund for each
of the next three years and then
the last forecast we presented
to that transfer was about fifty
million per year so with the up
with the upward revision to the
oil and natural gas forecast
we're also expecting more of
this revenue to make its way
into reserves which is great.
And with that I'd like to turn
it over to secretary Romero.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the Senate finance
committee
so the first slide and I'm gonna
go through is the general fund
recurring revenue and the good
news is that it's better than it
was when we spoke to you in
December so FY twenty one FY
twenty one general fund
recurring revenue is estimated
to decline up by eight point
five percent and that's down
from ten point nine percent when
from December reserves are
estimated at two point seven
billion or thirty seven point
nine percent of recurring
appropriations but this is
before in the action that you
take during this legislative
session the FY twenty two
general fund recurring revenue
is forecasted to grow by four
point nine percent compared to
FY twenty one so the good news
is that in the last on the very
right hand side you'll see that
there's no three hundred and
thirty nine million of new money
and that is up from the hundred
sixty million that we talk to
you about in December.
The next slide will break down
is to break down by revenue
source
so I think what's important it
to mention here is is the
decreases are are treated COVID
nineteen all revenue projections
since June had projected
revenues would decline in FY
twenty one that's still the case
revenues are forecast to grow in
FY twenty two by four point nine
percent again the program
estimates are slightly better of
four pin and and G. R. T. in the
near term and our current
estimates show improvements
coming from the revise severance
taxes and federal meaning the
federal mineral leasing state
that fast and then stronger oil
prices and volumes you know
there still rests the risks that
are attributed to are that are
considered are related to the
pace of the recovery.
So why twenty seven and and
you've seen a lot of this I
think I'm just going to try to
touch as much as I can I'm just
the new numbers and and just
give you a little bit of
comparison I want to spend a
whole lot of time on each one of
the slides since you've been
with we've done this revenue
projections a lot lately so
slide twenty seven is the
consensus revenue summary the
general fund has improved but is
still below what was expected in
in December of two thousand
nineteen.
For FY twenty one the June
estimate was that lowest at five
point nine billion
which was twenty two percent
lower than our current estimate
of seven point two billion also
there's definitely a big
difference there in FY twenty Q.
again the June estimate was six
point two billion compared to
what the new projection is at
seven point five billion which
is a twenty one point twenty one
percent difference so as you can
see the yellow dotted line is
where the estimates were in
December there stop the Green
Line is the current estimates
again we're looking at seven
point two billion in that why
twenty and FY twenty Tristen
point five billion.
When we compare this to December
twenty twenty.
When we compare the December
twenty twenty to the February
twenty one it's higher five
hundred ninety two million in FY
twenty one hundred and seventy
million in FY twenty two.
So slide twenty eight is the
general fund reserve slide
the final general fund reserve
balance for FY twenty we know
this is where we ended the year
it was two point five billion or
thirty five point four percent
of recurring appropriations.
Transfers to the tax
stabilization the TS are
expected to get to to increase
secretary Schardin Clarke
touched on that.
And our general fund reserves at
the end at the end of FY twenty
one are estimated at two point
seven billion or thirty seven
point nine compared to December
twenty twenty
which is about it's which was at
two point four billion or thirty
three percent that thirty three
percent before the legislative
session so this is all depending
on the action that you take the
session.
Transfers to do is sign in FY
twenty one are estimated to be
higher than the December
estimate at a hundred forty
million an increase of fifty
three million and in FY twenty
two the transfer is expected to
be a hundred twenty six which is
forty nine million more than the
previous estimate
and and again previously we had
at the estimates were by around
fifty million for the the end of
the next five years but that's
increased somewhat.
Our slide
twenty nine is the general fund
financial summary so this is
basically a recap of everything
I just mentioned but again here
you can see that three hundred
and thirty nine million of new
money this we believe that this
new money will allow the
legislature to maintain agency
budget slapped FY twenty one I
think it's important to note
that prior that the budgets were
reduced anywhere from one to six
percent with the majority of the
agency budgets reduced by four
percent during the June special
session I think bringing HSD
slap will still provide
opportunities for other
priorities and which include
economic recovery.
Slide thirty some of the risks
to to consider I think we are
hopeful side the upside is that
you know that scene roll out in
the minutes T. R. keep sooner
consumer confidence improved in
this meeting you know there we
know people have been saving
money and so there there's a
hope that once things open up
that that it's going to boost
consumer spending and we also
believe that the more as the
vaccines rollout in unity is
achieved that consumers will
return to travel and retail.
we also are hopeful that the.
We're hopeful and higher oil
prices and we are looking
forward to additional fiscal
stimulus you know the current
proposed legislation makes
distributions to state and local
governments and allows funding
to be used to back the lost
revenue which in the the
previous of stimulus did not
allow.
The proposed New Mexico share is
estimated about two point two
point five billion one point six
billion of that will come to the
state and about eighty eight
hundred and forty one million
we'll go to local governments I
think it's really important to
note that we are where we are
and a lot of that can I think we
can can give credit to the fact
that we receive the previous
cares Act many help stabilize
our FY twenty revenues and we
know that the new the new money
that's coming in will definitely
help in FY twenty one.
Some of the concerns are that we
just don't know what the
variants are the COVID variants
are are and you know vaccines
will continue to do it effective
against those variants we also
are worried about the fiscal
stimulus it if it's a weaker
discussed unless or if it's
smaller or if it's too late that
have an impact and then I'll as
a result of the variants and the
the the
Immunizations you know just
weaker consumer confidence and
then we're not sure we're always
worried about negative one was
flying and then shocks.
On slide thirty one.
This is the stress test that is
a key component of the care
credit process it's considered a
best practice and so moody's
uses a stress test for forecast
for all fifty states but they
encourage states to do their own
stress test to capture all the
unique situations attributed to
the state and so it's really
important for New Mexico to do
they're all
when doing the correct that when
during the stress test correct
takes into consideration our
sensitivity to the oil markets
and a national economic
recession which in the past New
Mexico has always taken a little
bit longer to recover from a
national recession and so it's
definitely something that the
correct takes into
consideration.
This slide also shows a low
moderate and upside scenario
compared to what you seen in the
past in December we thank a
quick provided an optimistic and
pessimistic view so this
actually has three different
scenarios in here the low
scenario takes into account
local prices that's the red
dotted line that is with the
five percent probability and the
results are would be a negative
three hundred seventy eight
million in FY twenty one to a
positive one billion in FY
twenty two.
The moderate view that the
yellow line is a twenty percent
probability with the negative
two hundred twenty four million
two in FY twenty one to negative
eight hundred and seventy two
million in FY twenty two and the
black dash is also with the
twenty percent problem
probability and so the possible
positive ninety million in FY
twenty one and a positive two
hundred seventy two million in
FY twenty two.
Again I think I mentioned
previously that where we are to
today
I think can be attributed to the
federal stimulus that we
received.
The action taken by the
legislature during the special
session in June which reduced
recurring spending and our high
reserve levels I think because
of our resilience on the oil and
gas and the fickle nature that
all of the uncertain and all of
the uncertainties that we still
need to be considerate of the
healthy reserve levels and also
mindful of our recurring
spending so Mister chair that is
all for me right now thank you
very much.
I believe dollars I believe
you're next the fact that thank
you thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee
I'm going to be speaking to LFC
is Revenue brief that was
distributed to the committee and
is also available on our website
in the interest of time I'm not
going to go through each of the
components of the three what I'm
gonna talk about is some key
take aways from this brief and
from this revenue update in
general and first of all the
thing that I'm going to talk
about on page two of the three.
The highlight that the changes.
For this particular estimate all
the upward revisions for FY
twenty this is the most of the
upward revisions for FY twenty
one FY twenty two are primarily
due to higher than expected oil
prices and observed growth in
oil and natural gas production
above what was expected in the
December twenty twenty estimate
you can see here rents and
royalties and severance taxes
contribute the most to the
increases for FY twenty one as
well as the most to the
increases for FY twenty two.
We discussed at the bottom of
this page that this accounts for
about seventy five percent of
the increase.
And Page three really goes into
detail on why this is the case
and why prices and current
observe production necessitated
an increase to the previous
consensus estimate despite a lot
of the uncertainty that's out
there regarding things like the
federal lands orders and and
other potential downside risks
the first is where prices are
today which the secretary talked
about prices rose above fifty
dollars a barrel in early
January twenty twenty one
they're currently sitting on at
about.
At about sixty dollars a barrel
and we were looking at an
average oil prices about thirty
eight dollars per barrel when
for the fiscal year when we were
at the December twenty twenty
estimate as you know an average
one dollar change in the fiscal
year average oil prices result
in about twenty two million
dollar change in revenue for the
general fund holding production
constant but production isn't
constant and we look here at the
average daily production of for
oil and in the December twenty
twenty estimate these were our
actuals we had data through
September and every major
forecasting agency was
projecting continued declines
protecting declines in the
fourth quarter of twenty twenty
so our consensus estimate
expected that after this period
in the fourth quarter production
would start to come down and we
did not see that in in fact
production actually increased
and is nearing the pre at
pandemic highs of production
about one point one million
barrels per day the same was
natural gas which actually
increased even more
significantly so that takes up
our base from where we were
expecting in December and assess
the tainted an increase to to
the current estimate however we
did take into consideration the
federal
orders and the uncertainty that
that that projects so our
production estimates what had
increased further had those
federal orders not been enacted
however because of the
uncertainty that those orders
hold and the potential for them
to have negative impacts on
production the current consensus
estimate actually holds
production estimates flat for
the forecast period in attempt
to account for that uncertainty
rather than allowing that
production to grow which is what
the forecast would have done
absent those federal orders.
The second thing our second big
key take away is that the
vaccine rollout and the
additional federal fiscal
stimulus do contribute to a
sharper economic rebound than we
previously expected and
despite that it's a little
difficult to see because it is
being masked by losses in Eddy
and Lea counties.
For things like gross receipts
taxes so the economic rebound is
contributing to much higher
retail spending we know that
retail spending as of January as
of about twenty six percent
we're seeing it show up in
different sectors and
particularly seeing it show up
in gross receipts taxes however
it's being masked by the fact
that overall gross receipts
taxes are declining because
right counts are down from
previous levels
total G. R. T. collections are
now projected to be about
fourteen percent below FY twenty
this is up from the projected
decline of sixteen percent in
December so we are seeing the
effects of that economic rebound
and should things start to
recover even faster we could see
some additional upward pressure
in the future.
The third major take away is
that our stress tests does
indicate considerable downside
risk to this forecast that
downside risks should the
economy re enter a recession or
if oil prices were to face
another significant shock
additionally if there is any
extension or expansion of the
current executive orders
regarding leasing and permitting
on federal land that could
result in significant revenue
losses and we have discussion on
page seven.
Of the LFC brief are set up all
the federal lands orders and a
stress test of sorts in terms of
what those potential orders
impacts could be if the effect
of those are greater than what
we considered in the forecast so
again we help production flat
and attempt to account for some
of the some certainty.
But that uncertainty for for
federal leasing and permitting
does create an indirect impact
on investment decisions and then
potentially on production so to
the extent that drilling rigs
will be moved out of the state
or investment plans are changed
either in the short run or in
the long run that could result
in the last year T. revenue and
production revenue revenue
generated from production as
well as the potential for for
job losses so to try to account
for what this might look like in
terms of putting a number to
what some different scenarios
might be.
As you recall you probably
recognize this chart as was
presented to this committee by
the oil conservation division
there were two alternative
scenarios in terms of what
production could look like one
that said what if production
declined by ten percent as a
result of the federal lands
orders and one that said what if
production declined by twenty
percent the consensus are the
the credit comments took these
scenarios ran them through to
look at what would be the fiscal
impact of these two scenarios if
there were a ten percent
production decline in FY twenty
one severance taxes gross
receipts taxes and federal
mineral leasing payments could
decline by about thirty five and
a half million and up to forty
three million under a twenty
percent decline scenario the
impact would grow for the
further you go in the fiscal
year beyond FY twenty one we
could be looking at somewhere
between a hundred and thirty
million and two hundred thirty
five million in FY twenty two
and then somewhere between one
seventy two and three hundred
and six million in FY twenty
three so this was an attempt to
quantify what some of the
different potential impacts
would be and we would recommend
looking at this in terms of an
additional form of stress
testing when you plan for
reserve levels and for recurring
spending to look at the
different downside risks
including additional risks to
production if those federal
orders are extended or expanded
I want to emphasize that point
because as the secretary
mentioned the current orders in
their form of lasting sixty days
for the the pause on
administrative
Ability to approve things like
rights of ways easements and
permits as well as the the
current pause on leasing in on
themselves are not expected to
have a significant impact but
could should those orders change
in the future.
And the very last thing that
I'll leave you with is despite
these upward revisions New
Mexico's revenues are still
estimated to be below the ten
year trend this is important
when making decisions about both
recurring spending levels as
well as
reserve levels so when revenues
are significantly above trend
that's the time to think about
putting that above trend revenue
into reserves in order to
capture some of that excess
windfall and to recognize the
fact that above trend revenues
tend to not be sustainable
when the state is in a downward
trend or at seeing revenues
below trend that can often
indicate a time in which use of
those reserves may be necessary
in order to support budgets and
to support the economy so with
that I'm going to to leave the
presentation there's a lot of
dense information in here and
I'm happy to answer any
additional questions the
committee may have about
anything that's considered in
the brief thank you.
Thank you.
You have anything else if we
have anything that.
Mr Chairman.
Questioned from committee
members.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and thank you to all
our presenters.
Presentation can work I just
needed a little bit of
clarification the things go by
fast and you have to because
there's so much to present on
the stimulus can you I think
cabinet secretary
Romero you mentioned.
One of your sheet and went there
about the but.
Tell me.
This reimbursement I wanted to
make sure we're on the same page
thank you.
Mr chair and senator Rodriguez
so the information that we
received and this is all still
very preliminary that bill has
not passed but it gets going
through reconciliation and so
what the numbers that we've seen
the information we received is
that New Mexico will get a total
of two point five billion
dollars.
Of that one point six will come
to the state and eight hundred
forty one million will go
directly to local governments so
it's not like all the money
comes to us like this last round
and we have to to send it out to
local government secretary the
distributions will be direct
that
what's different about this many
is that it will be allowed to
use tobacco revenue so this is
really going to be helpful to
local governments that have
these revenue shortfalls and to
some of our state agencies you
know I think of the expo New
Mexico and I think of of
Department cultural fairs that
have had their revenue reduced
significantly because of the
closures now we can back fill
some of those revenues so we
have more opportunities but
again we don't have the bill we
don't have the money yet.
Your thank you thank you very
much for that at least you have
a preliminary estimate from the
information that thank you
appreciate that and I'm.
Maybe Mr chairman from that
right now that you yourself
secretary or don your.
Our young secretary Schardin
Clarke the revenue is now the
one hundred fifty nine million
that we are project with your
money and now we have three
hundred nuclear three hundred
thirty eight point seven million
dollars that is that after the
we failure and the flocks
because I know initially we have
reproduced you met in the family
we're taking out the swap that
we have to make good the last
time and so we ended up with
sixty nine million
may be asked someone can now
tell me because otherwise we
would be EE R. sixty nine times
to accommodate the number three
hundred eighteen that means you
would get I need a new creams.
I answer that it's not David
David Abbey or somebody there
yes I agree with those numbers.
Thank you so that's already
taken out the swaps okay yes but
we got like twice as much.
You you mentioned before David
that we were looking at an
uptick in the in the revenue so
this is pretty good news
considering the circumstances
that we're in so thank you Mr
chairman that's all I have thank
you for all.
Senator Rodriguez.
Any other questions see
anybody's hand raised.
I don't see anybody's hand
raised.
I do want to ask some questions
done in New.
About this in.
You know we I talk about this
all the time that tractors
recovery dot org right.
And the job postings in New
Mexico.
And we're down about ninety two
you know twenty percent for job
postings in New Mexico and the
small business openings.
They're down about.
Thirty six percent.
So.
I understand where increases
come from that how we gonna get
that.
Job numbers up.
Consumer spending is.
Mr chair Senator Munoz those
that's a really good question so
with with the change in job
postings that's indicative I
think of the the slow growth
that we're expecting in the
employment forecast and this has
to go back to what secretary
Schardin Clarke was saying you
know our our personal income tax
revenues are largely based on
wages and salaries the amounts
that are received but the job
postings that the employment
recovered recovery is much
slower than the actual wage and
salary recovery so our revenues
are being supported by the fact
that higher wage earners are
regaining their jobs but our
employment numbers are not being
supported by the fact that those
that employment is still down
largely for lower wage earners
and it has a different effect on
the personal income taxes but
still a very significant and
severe impact on the New
Mexicans who are unable to to
get those additional jobs
Vaccine rollout and additional
economic rebound will help with
employment recovery
as well as any potential fiscal
stimulus that could help
businesses either re open or
remain open in order to to be
able to hire back employees
those are things that we're
definitely looking at within
this within this forecast but it
it definitely points to this
this anomaly if you will of what
we're seeing in terms of revenue
data versus employment data
because of the types of jobs
that are affected and you're
right with consumer spending
although if we look at total
consumer spending on I'm on
track the recovery right now and
it's down about one point seven
percent in All Things Considered
when it had declined about
thirty three percent at the the
brunt of the pandemic total
consumer spending has largely
recovered
however for for retail spending
it's about twenty six percent
which is in effect of a lot of
the federal fiscal stimulus
that's a providing additional
income supports but if we look
at things like restaurants and
hotels that's still down thirty
percent people are changing
their habits and what they're
spending their money on buying
more goods as opposed to more
services and then if we look at
small businesses small business
total consumer spending is still
down about thirty percent so
we're definitely seeing a
differing impact in terms of
where people are spending their
money and small businesses are
seeing a very significant
decline in the revenues that
they're receiving even though
total consumer spending in the
state has largely largely
recovered and is being captured
by our sales tax base we're
fortunate by R. G. R. T. base
for fortune off in the state to
capture a lot of service
spending as well as a lot of
spending on goods and internet
sales so we're capturing a lot
of that activity would sort of
masks it in the revenue estimate
that you're bringing up great
points there's a lot of.
Places of the economy that are
still very significantly
impacted.
And a lot of small business is
down twenty percent in New
Mexico so I mean those are the
things that drivers that we
require we came from PID team
because they're passed through
or single member LLCs that
passed through their P. I. T.
and and so it small business in
New Mexico is our economic
driver and we're seeing what's
driving our gross receipts in
New Mexico is is mainly out of
state a big box and corporations
which is where the market goes.
But to get our small businesses
revenue back up.
It is critical to getting our
budget.
Funded levels steady basis.
I just think it's something we
got to watch there's there's
just so much money out there
right now in two point five
billion dollars from the Fred's
the schools are going to get
almost a billion dollars by
themselves they have almost one
point nine billion in cash
balances there
We better be very careful that
we make this money last for a
while because we're going to pay
for in some way shape or form.
I wanted to ask you to go into
the oil gas section.
And and so.
Natural gas is trading at and
you know I had this conversation
and how much MCM.
I'm Mr chair members of the
committee right now at the Lahav
in the Permian basin it's
trading at over two hundred
dollars per MCF there are places
within the country that it's
trading at over five hundred
dollars currency F. and for
context it normally trades at
three dollars or less.
It increased or twenty five cent
increase in natural gas prices
it is how much are.
Mr chair so a ten cent change in
the total annual average for
natural gas price for New Mexico
is about eleven million dollar
impact so it the change in
prices can have a significant
impact on the amount of revenue
collected but just keep in mind
that that ten cent rule of thumb
affects the entire fiscal years
average and doesn't sway as much
with individual changes within a
few days.
Maintains for thirty days then
we're likely to see about that
good job
And our problem in New Mexico
because of the federal order is
we can transport oil out we
cannot transport natural gas out
so we're in a particularly over
the.
Extreme and upstream companies
to get that to market and so we
are losing revenue because of
that order.
They come back to some more
questions Sir what is your hands
up.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Our.
I know this is a hypothetical
question right now.
Because.
You know they're set to shortage
of natural gas due to a huge
cold air that covered nearly the
whole United States and natural
gas demand is so high it so
naturally the spot market is as
went through the roof.
We expect that to last.
Hello be expect that peak of
natural gas prices the last.
And madam chair
Mr chair Senator Woods via at at
the the risk of being totally
wrong on this given that it is
sort of a a and natural weather
events that probably should
hopefully be temporary I
certainly hope for all the the
the residents are affected by
that that this is a temporary
storm hopefully lasting no more
than a week or so the market
would stabilize after after the
storm passes and things sort of
and whether sort of goes back to
normal so I I would not
anticipate that this would last
throughout the entire winter
unless we continue to see this
sort of you know freak
occurrence of weather lasted the
entire winter which I hope for
everyone's sake is not the case
Mr chairman and what's your
prediction.
Sure you predicted something
area I mean you've got a whole
bunch of charts here in front of
me what's your prediction of the
length of time say that this is
going to stay in a three hundred
dollar range.
So Mr chair members of the
committee one thing that I do
want to make a very clear is
that this weather occurrence
happened after the forecast was
finalized so anything that's
happening because of this week's
weather occurrence is completely
outside of the forecast so would
not be included in the of the
charge that you have if if I had
to guess and I and the not a
meteorologist and I I don't know
the weather patterns but I I
would expect maybe a week or so.
Mr chairman and I would suggest
Mr Chairman that we've not put
any money into the natural gas
futures.
On either side of this market.
This is a very volatile time
and.
And we can even use this for a
projection of revenue.
This is an op knobbly this
latest completely outside that
belkhir way out sect.
I'm I've seen this in other
markets several times and I've
seen people.
Have a big bubble burst.
When I thought they can predict
this bill and how long it would
last so I'm glad
that you're not trying to make
that prediction.
That brings me back to a
question though Mr Chairman.
I was sitting in the
LESC meeting.
November December.
When the discussion telephone.
What kind of revenue back feels
what kind of.
Essentially it was talk about
what kind of taxes do we need to
raise.
To backfill the revenue loss
from oil and gas.
Do you remember that discussion
and all those those Mr chairman
this is any of the panel
remember that discussion.
Mr Senator Woods if we got rid
of oil and gas and David and
correct me no longer Dawn and
then directed to the budget
would be roughly about three
billion dollars annually.
What.
You Mr chairman.
But.
We found the secretary we're
gonna tax to bring that money
back.
Senator you can explore any tax
bills you want.
Well I think you understand what
I'm saying Mr.
What I'm saying what I'm saying
is.
It's it's very odd.
It's all the currents.
That.
That these.
That these executive orders come
down.
From Washington.
And it turns.
All in gas prices up.
That was was that the was that a
Related yes.
Or was that a notation from.
The producers that we're gonna
turn production all.
So in my eyes it's it's more the
producers saying.
We're gonna have to slow down
production but because we're not
gonna be able to do business and
then they get this market signal
that's all no wait a minute.
I need more that natural gas to
sell.
How long does it take them to
put that in the past how long
does it take them to drill the
well but it I know we're getting
off subject here not following
jazz.
Thank we've got all these bills
coming to us and and Senate
finance right now Mr chairman we
got all these bills come in
Addis to help stimulate the
economy in New Mexico.
And yet we've got our foot on
top of the businessman Sen
here kept we don't want to the
stimuli.
We don't want you to open your
door we don't want you to
operate at maximum capacity.
It's it's it's discouraging to
me to see these bills come
forward.
Expanding our nest egg so to
speak.
And we're not allowing the
dentist then those I sure do
that we're going to open the
doors for.
We're gonna get out of his way
and letting make money.
Small business down twenty eight
percent.
Both know why a small businesses
down twenty eight percent
proposes storeship.
And the sad part of that is
many consumers have figured out
they don't need to brick and
mortar guy thank you go by the
members are.
Are we spending more money at
the wrong place there in.
She would be buying very
abstract.
To invest in in that part of the
deal.
I'm chase I'm chasing a rabbit
sure.
I apologize to all my questions.
Thank you senator Senator I and
I do see your hand up trying to
find you again I don't know if
you have a question.
So Mr chair no I was going to
make comments about how we need
to be real careful but I think
Senator Woods pointed that out
so I put my hand out.
Thank you I don't see any other
questions from committee members
and I I do have some of them may
follow up with you guys but.
You know.
It's amazing to look at these
numbers and and have a thirty
seven percent are.
Number in New Mexico because I
was here in two thousand and
nine in.
And a few other legislators yes
a secretary Romero is rounding
and we were lucky to keep five
or six or seven we thought that
was a high number that and the
economy has changed and.
Everybody knows what's happened
in Robin Hood and gamestop.
That all of sudden they ran up
the markets and there's a bunch
of money and we're in the same
scenario we we have a lot of
money and we just need to
proceed with caution.
Fix the problems that we have in
New Mexico and give our reserves
in case something happens again
we don't know what's in the
future nobody's lived through
this and I haven't either and
and so.
My best recommendation is is yes
don't get anxious.
Quietly cautiously make sure we
take care of New Mexicans New
Mexico businesses first before
we do anything else and.
I agree Center what's our path
recovery is is leading
businesses open and not picking
winners and losers so.
I don't see any question from
committee members so thank you
guys for your presentation I
appreciate it a lot of hard work
goes into this I know and and
you guys throw the darts at the
dartboard as best as you can and
try to all have the same number
and and we appreciate it.
And so thank you.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you
Representative Chandler I I see
you there earlier.
I am here.
Share.
If you seen the amendment and I
think everybody in the committee
has the amendment.
the two one nine nine eight
three point two.
Yes Sir.
Are you in agreement with the
amendment let's start right
there well let me put it this
way Mr chair we will accept the
amendment agreement is a strong
term but we will accept it.
I was that.
But pretty much in agreement.
So thank you
We need to resend the amendments
from yesterday and then we need
to adopt this amendment for
discussion purposes and and let
me tell you what's happening
with the bill.
So because of the G. R. T.
portion in the lead up portion
we stripped that language or
rescinding that language from
the bill and Janet may claim
some just up force.
And.
We are basically keeping the
broadband language that we had
before in their and and that
amendment so that amendment this
amendment on bringing back on
and then we are just dealing
with the two hundred million
dollars in in requests for
businesses and so.
You may have a motion to rescind
the amendments are.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you was there Senator
second yes chairman.
Second by Senator Campos.
Representative from those
amendments Janet you want to
explain the amendments.
Your muted.
Okay.
Okay now.
Okay so the amendments address a
number of things that you did
talk about yesterday
and.
It is an overview or highlight
they
Senator Candelaria may
Comments about his concern.
This was not done on a quarterly
basis it was done on an annual
basis and so we did change to a
quarterly basis.
Comparable quarters of the
previous year.
Our.
There are concerns about the
employment gains being not
necessarily a net increase is
that we make sure that it's a
net increase compared to the
previous order not just the.
The person that replacing an
existing employee some concerns
about that language.
We put in a provision if of
recovery and sissy.
Comes in and gets the first
quarter but then leases
eligibility because they can't
hire new employees right away.
That portion of money that would
go to them just sort of sat in
reserve in and tell they can
come in and of claim again what
state start hiring people
the US number four.
Yes.
And we and the out the provision
that would have been in the bill
about confidentiality and being
not subject to improper left
that language in the.
They don't have any special
protection from from I'm David
Challoner if proper.
I think.
Policies that's sort of what
what the amendments to.
What can I have a motion to the
document for discussion
purposes.
So.
Mr Chairman this is so sure
again I think first we have to
move to take it off the chairs
taken off the table and so all
right make that motion first and
then we'll just Senator Diamond
makers second the motion to
taken off the table Mister
chairman Senator recurring
issues.
Any objection to the motion.
No.
Thank the bills back off the
table and so
Now we need to have a motion to
with that then that for
discussion purposes
discussion Mr chairman thank
chairman.
Thank you I don't know who
seconded the.
You Senator Campos yes.
Thank you.
So we're we are on the amendment
questions from committee members
on the amendment etcetera sure
you have your hand up yes thank
you Mr chairman so I I I very
much appreciate so what we've
done that certainly makes the of
the bill well at least from my
perspective a better bill of I
do have some questions on the
granting a and I touched on this
a little bit yesterday I didn't
offer any amendments on it and
but I might think about for
floor amendment depending on
where we go here so part of this
grant is so I get to of mortgage
rent payments paid for if I hire
somebody.
and I know it's capped at a
hundred thousand dollars and I
debated with myself and others a
bit today if this made.
Six.
so that I can get a hundred
thousand dollars in in rent or
mortgage payments as a grant by
hiring a a minimum wage
employee.
or even if it was somebody that
you know what fifteen dollars
instead of ten fifty or whatever
our wages today.
that seems like a pretty good
deal for for a small business.
Does it make sense that we that
we put some kind of language in
there that's that just tightened
up a little bit so in in well I
don't have the language doesn't
make sense to say.
you have to hire people at least
fifty percent of that grant so
important to get a hundred
thousand dollar grant I've got a
higher a fifty thousand dollar
or cumulative fifty thousand
dollars worth of worth of new
folks I don't know if that makes
sense or not but that that whole
thing that I could get I could
get a hundred thousand dollars
by hiring a thirty thousand
dollar person.
I'm that made me.
They may feel uncomfortable.
So Senator you asking that
question too yes to come to our
presented Chandler or whoever
wants to answer great thank you
Mr chairman and senator for that
question I will ask
John Clark to answer W.
secretary Clark if he's here I
assume he is.
Thank you Representative and Mr
chair Senator I believe with
this amendment the the bill
would now require that at least
one person is hired for each
round of quarterly payments it
would be impossible to receive
the hundred thousand dollars by
hiring one employee you have to
hire at least for Furthermore
the bill does set up a mechanism
for there to be a set dollar
amount employee hired it's not
the one set dollar amount it's
result of the set of
calculations we're
prioritization is given to the
reduction in the businesses
revenues and the
and we just need to that
employee but in no case with one
employee qualify for the entire
hundred thousand.
Okay all right Mister chair
Mister Clark thank you so.
Maybe I didn't see it here
because I didn't see that in the
amendment course the way
amendment right now is a lot of
things you can't see unless you
got a piece of paper and well
apparently we've outlawed paper
right recently but
Is there anything in here to
make sure that this is focused
on the smaller businesses so in
the in in the previous thing
with up
a revenue estimates we talked
about how G. R. T. was moving
and all of that and that's great
except the G. R. T. is going to
Walmart Lowe's home depot it's
not going to mom and pop.
Mr chair are going to be able to
get into this because they can
say and all this Walmart store
had to close for three weeks
because COVID and so we lost
that money and now we one
hundred thousand dollars back.
Mr chair and senator the
threshold in within the bill is
seventy five employees or fewer
and and and the intent was to
target smaller to mid size of
New Mexico businesses and if Mr
Clark wants to supplement my
answer but I I think that covers
the question that you and asked
Mister chairman Senator.
Yes Representative Mr chair
Senator just to add a little bit
to that again the bill does
provide prioritization for
funding to businesses that were
the hardest hit this for the
largest decline in revenues so
even if a Walmart had to be
closed for three weeks yeah we
have seen significant surges and
Revenue for a lot of the big box
stores what we've been hearing
across the state is you know how
rough at the pandemic has been
for a lot of our small mom and
pop shops so they would receive
priority because of the language
in the bill looking a
prioritization for the
businesses that were hardest.
Okay and and and and I
appreciate that thank you
it in finally Mr chairman so
there's a lot of businesses
that.
That have closed restaurants
that have just gone away they're
not there anymore with this help
them to.
To come back to life.
so you say all right so my
restaurants closed in close now
for months but I would really
like to re open it.
In that case this is qualified
because I've hired my new staff
and now I just need to pay my
back rent so the delivery able
in open restaurant.
You're just.
So it does that I'm sorry what
cut somebody off
Mr chair Senator yes it is long
is at the time of application
you are re opening and hiring
back at least one employee then
yes you absolutely qualify okay
all right Mr Chairman
representative thank you Mr
Clark.
Thank you senator share
Senator Rodriguez.
Right in here thank you Mr
chairman and thank you to
everyone for working on these
the amendment I do have a a
question for the Economic
development department Alisha
have a secretary of the shift
key we heard from Representative
Chandler that you would accept
the amendments but not
necessarily agree and so I'm
wondering about the economic
development department have you
seen these amendments because I
just got mine an hour ago but I
had an idea as to what would
happen what was happening
because I was asking about it
but I know it takes time and
with such little time between
meetings and staff for the staff
but I want to thank you Janet
for that too but I I do have a
question since I just fell money
they can then an hour ago does
economic development did you get
your so we show cabinet
secretary.
Mister chairman Senator
Rodriguez members of the
committee we got them about the
same time that you did we have
been working behind the scenes
well other presentations have
been going on we feel like if we
could
And definitely passes out of the
Senate finance today that would
be beneficial and then we do
feel at a bit of a disadvantage
because Marquita Russel could
not be with us today and MFA and
a lot of the burden of this will
come down on her so we would
like to speak to her at some
point this evening potentially
before it goes back on the floor
just to make sure that we're not
answering for her in terms of
what she's capable of the water
department is capable of but
we've been talking with that
chairman Andrew yes and we feel
comfortable right now with where
we are in order to get into the
committee yes.
You Secretary keys Marquita
Russel is on is on the on the
call.
Thank you Mr chair maybe we can
go to her and then I'll continue
with my questions if you want
that for your answer.
Thank you and then I I do have
another.
Madam Mr chairman that we're
going to Marquita thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
actually going to ask that I
have five minutes to read the
amendment I have not yet had an
opportunity to so I'm just now
heading back from my.
Conflict and so I'll be in a
position to answer a question in
a couple of minutes I apologize
I'm not able to respond to
senator Richard this is question
now.
Take your time and then we'll
come back to Senator Rodriguez
thank you thank you Mr chairman
that let me just mention that
you know while I understand the
timing is too short between
committees and things move fast
and I've been here twenty six
years so I do know how fast they
move
but it's somewhat disheartening
to me that we temporarily to
table the bill to do the parties
including the Sanchez and
opportunity to weigh in on the
amendments the purpose of the
temporarily cabling was to see
if we can reach a consensus
between the people the
legislators concerned and the
sponsors of the bill but to hear
that they just received the
amendments and not in a
discussion with them about these
amendments doesn't sit right
with me that is not how we do
business here and this is not a
one way street this is about
more than one party and it's
fair that we discussed this
especially since we took the
action that we did last night
but that means that I understand
that the parties have indicated
that they would like to see this
bill out of committee so that we
can take it to the floor it is
not surprising to me that.
Representative Chandler has
stated that
they will accept but not
necessarily agree because they
just saw it and secondly there
may be some other concerns with
it but I I just wanted to to
stress that because I am as I
said yesterday I support the
bill and I know there's been
some pretty major changes here
to it and and you know they all
may be very necessary from
what's been explained I don't
know but it's been drafted in
the amendment is before us
fraction so I'm going to support
the bill and to get it out of
committee so that we can move
forward with that this is a very
important bill that we're hoping
will reach many businesses and
that means that inevitably will
reach New Mexicans people in
general who are the victims of
all of this pandemic and
unemployment and economic drop
downs so anyway I'm gonna leave
it at that and then I know
Alicia keys cabinet secretary
want Marquita to comment on on
her concerns or her the problem
is because it was going to weigh
in heavily on her but all of
this I'm sure will hopefully be
addressed in the Senate chamber
yes in fact that is a place
where
it's going to be discussed thank
you Mr chairman thank you to the
presenters thank you said
Rodriguez for for your
information people are working
on the amendment late last night
all this morning and trying to
make sure that we had it right.
And there was a draft of senator
Candelaria is amendment Senator
Candelaria did not show up we
had some issues on the other
side so the staff was working on
it we're trying to get it right
it's hard to get things right
when we get home on the fly and
so they got it everybody got I'm
almost in the exact same time.
We know this is a crucial Bill
we just talked about small
business being down twenty eight
percent in New Mexico and
hospitality down almost seventy
four percent
and so
our staff work very hard and did
their best in the time frame
that that we we had in order to
get this bill back in committee
today.
So.
Be aware that and in their there
is a legal drafting issues that
they get that.
I'm not a lawyer that they got a
fix and so.
The staff was working very hard
to make sure we can get at the
earliest and and this was
earlier so thank you Senator
Rodriguez Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman and
reviewing my notes from
yesterday and comparing it to
the amendment that we received
today one of the concerns that
was really echoed yesterday
throughout the committee was the
concern that if we missed out on
a quarter payment would you
still be eligible for the next
quarter's there were some
current start about the the
movie under this this current
health order from red to green
and then back and and just if
any of our businesses would lose
eligibility and there it was
kind of some shady I really
appreciate that that language it
appears here and this amendment
in those concerns were met
there was also some transparency
concerns I think we talked about
how we wanted this to me are the
small business recovery loan and
I I really appreciate that the
language meeting that concern
from so many people was was also
met in this ammendment I do have
a couple questions so and my
district we have a lot of
seasonal businesses a seasonal
worker so let's say and again
shed or something is only open
for for short period of time
were the concerns of our
seasonal businesses are seasonal
employees Matt.
Yes.
Mr chair and senator I think
this ammendment actually would
help address that and I will
defer to John Clark to answer
your question if I may.
Mister chairman Senator and
seasonal businesses that
experienced a revenue declined
in the quarter ended two
quarters in twenty twenty would
be eligible for this just as any
other other companies would
and if they're in the process of
re hiring bring be bringing
people back on they would
qualify just like New Yorkers
would.
With Senator you still receive
the same benefits that
regardless of their operating
timeline.
Okay I just want to tell you.
Thank you thank you Mr Clark and
and thank you chairman for all
the notes that I had the
concerns that I expressed
yesterday in this it does seem
like they're dressed in this
ammendment so thank you I
appreciate it for the questions.
Thank you senator Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman my concern
is still.
About we're trying to.
Good morning.
I'm not sure that I understand
them and.
The amendment is saying that
we're doing away with the two
hundred thousand.
Two hundred million dollars.
I am completely confuse Graeser
please explain the number one
more time just give me a brief
overview of what we're doing
here.
Senator.
So this amendment removes the
bill and improves all the legal
provisions of the state and
local grocery seats right the
compensating tax for the three
hundred fifty four million or
more leader projects.
It removes all that language
okay believe that two hundred
million in tax for the grant
program right.
It changing the eligibility
requirements under the the grant
program based on quarterly
revenues.
Basis rather than annual.
And we did that because
businesses in the first and
second quarter of twenty twenty
is when the shut down came and
so that is where they're going
to show the greatest number of
decreases.
It clarified that increases in
full time employment as in net
increase of.
In the relatively creasing
quarter.
In additional call east to get
your next up in your next step
the twenty five thousand.
If you apply in the first.
Application and receive the
twenty five thousand then you
are set aside.
A hundred thousand for the the
seventy five thousand.
If.
Your business is close by the
pandemic warning health order so
when you re open you'll be
eligible to get your next twenty
five thousand thank you as you
increase and so if you applied
and they ran out of money and
cell phones are you can only get
the first twenty five we help
those people harmless saying
that you applied you made the
effort and the pandemic shut you
down and now when you re open.
We're gonna look at those
numbers again and so that pretty
much is the basis of the man
left the two hundred million in
tech for the program it's a two
hundred two hundred million
dollar impact on gross receipts
I mean on the general fund.
Yes one time money or one time
money.
And we still don't have any
assurity to these businesses
that they're going to get to
open up stay open.
Mr Chairman.
Senator you have to discuss that
with the governor thank you.
I don't see anybody else's hand
raised.
Have a motion to adopt the
amendment Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Have a motion by Senator Campos
and a second by Senator
Hemphill.
Any objection to the amendment.
It's been adopted.
Mr Chairman Lester's questions
on the path of the bill as
amended.
Senator Rodriguez any questions
on the on the bill from
committee members.
Mr chairman I'll second the
motion.
So we have a motion by Senator
Rodriguez and a second by
Senator Gonzales.
We call the roll on this one.
Senator.
Yes thank you for yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Campos yes
senator Candelaria is excuse
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn is excuse Senator
Woods.
No.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes and senator Munoz
yes.
Senator menu LCS so that is
eight yes and one no Senator to
excuse.
Thank you thank you
Representative Chandler.
will we'll still continue to
work on the on the G. R. T. for
lead and and you have a I'm the
ability to get that on line
Senate bill five or so we'll
still continue to work with that
I think it's highly important
that we get this money out and
economy that we get what we yes
Sir people don't realize if you
live in the real world what a
year being in a ditch and your
small business owner or you're
turning on your stove or
cleaning your grill
Your clothes then you have no
other source of income.
And you just need to survive
we need to make those
opportunities for for New
Mexicans in any shape way shape
or form can it's it's a lot of
money.
It's for New Mexicans and so
thank you Representative
Chandler for for helping out the
people of Mexico thank you so
much for your work on this bill
we really appreciate your input
and the attention of the
committee thank you so much
chairman thank you.
Senator Gonzales do you want to
do Senate bill twenty one Mr
Chairman yes.
We're ready ill Mr chairman
members on the Senate bill
twenty one.
All it moves the limited H. up
dependence children
participating in the program
from nineteen to twenty six
and deletes the requirements for
them.
To be on very or enrolled as a
full time student or accredited
institution this alliance
language with the retiree Health
Care Act.
With the requirements of the
affordable Care Act in this does
not have all fiscal impact yes
the agency has administered the
program according to the
requirements of the affordable
Care.
Care Act since two thousand ten
which applies to employers
Sanchez and market based health
plans the second part of what
this bill does system for
eligible child dependent over
the age of twenty six.
The bill replaces the term
mentally retarded with
intellectual disability in two
thousand thirteen the Social
Security Administration changed
reference from mentally retarded
to intellectual disability from
its listing of impairments.
Third party slowly deletes the
reference than requirements
associated with the discount on
prescription drug program which
became obsolete at the beginning
of the last decade and hasn't
been funded since FY eleven.
Mr chairman of.
The members of the committee
home.
I do have some expert witness
that they want to say a few
words and we have all.
Mr David Archuleta who is the
director and we have one doctor
Pauline rent only.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is David R. to let that
thank you for the opportunity to
present Senate bill twenty one
to you thank you Senator
Gonzales for for introducing
this on our behalf this bill the
only additional comments I would
add to this is this bill was
heard before the interment best
and pensions oversight committee
which endorsed this bill the
other thing that it did as part
of the amended version of this
bill wasn't deleted reference to
the public schools insurance
authority director serving as
the director of this
organization
it through since its inception
to through about nineteen ninety
three so basically this is
cleanup language to the retiree
health care sortie Act that's
been necessary for number of
years there were hoping to have
accomplished this year and with
that Mr chairman and members of
the committee and stand for any
questions.
Mr chairman let me see it's
called Dr Colin I see her now.
Go ahead drive only rental.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is pulling wind only.
As a member of the volunteer of
the A. R. P. E. and the New
Mexico educational retiree
Association I have had the
opportunity to meet many of the
retirees in Santa Fe and across
the state they depend on the
EDD's budget to help keep them
healthy Mr chairman.
On behalf of the state employees
and educators I think you and
the legislature for supporting
this benefit.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I urge you to vote to
pass on Senate bill twenty one
and help make their retiree
health care a more sustainable.
And if I may Mister chairman the
next bill one your agenda is
Senate bill forty two and I
would just like to say that the
New Mexico educational recovery
association also supports that
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman for giving
me this opportunity and thank
you members of the committee.
Mr chairman without will staff
question.
Thank you
We have anybody in support of
the bill or anybody in
opposition.
And Mister chair members of the
committee.
We.
I have on the call with us.
Sherri dot then with a a RP.
Very go ahead.
Thank you.
Maybe
chairman and members of the
committee this history Dobson I
am a retired school nurse and a
member of the New Mexico
association of Education
retirees and we do support this
bill and urge your support
of passage thank you.
Chair members of the committee
at that is the only public
comment we have at four that
fell.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Senator sure.
Thank you Mr chair so Senator I
just.
It sounded to me like this bill
doesn't do anything at all they
were not already doing
But maybe putting of the
affordable Care Act language in
New Mexico statute does it
actually do anything.
Change anything.
Mr chairman the Senator sure
what it does is that he does
bring tracking you know to be in
compliance with the language
with the.
You know what has been in place
from all I just lost my points
here to.
all last go Mr to let's also to
make a comment on that.
Chair Mister chairman and
senator share basically it
brings the language contained in
the retiree health care for and
retire Health Care Act in
compliance with the language
that's part of the affordable
Care Act so effectively there's
no conflict whenever in issue
may arise for example right now
delimiting H. as part of return
health care thirty act is
nineteen for dependent children
participating on our plan this
would sink this up with our
practice which is twenty six
which was part of the affordable
Care Act and then the second
part is it deletes reference to.
The mentally retarded children
for those over the age of twenty
six participating on the plan
seems set up with the language
included.
Are the it references
intellectual disability and then
lastly it the eight a program
that is it is basically obsolete
and no longer in existence such
as cleaning up the language in
the retiree health care forty
act.
Okay Mr chair Senator I I don't
have any problem with any of
that except to nineteen to
twenty six
you know there were.
You used to be able to take care
yourself what younger than that
and I I I I know that's the
affordable Care Act I know we
can't change that I know why
sound mean when I want to a
nineteen year old to go out
there and and make their way in
the world but
But the rest of it I think it's
fine but and I also know we're
not going to change that because
well that's just where we are
now thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
What is the cost for a nineteen
year old to get insurance on its
own Mr Chairman.
Mr chair Senator Woods so
the structure that they will
respond to that sure Mr chairman
and senator woods.
On our plan a dependent child
participating so under under the
age of twenty six currently
participate in our plant the
cost of a plan whether it be on
our pre med premiere planned or
the value plan ranges anywhere
between two hundred and twenty
and two hundred and sixty
dollars per month it is and some
on subsidized care so the
retiree health care thirty act
does not make any sort of
contribution toward dependent
children's care dependent
children's up cost of care
however we do provide them with
access so again on subsidized so
has no fiscal impact on on the
New Mexico retiree health care
forty but on average in order
for them to get coverage through
us it's on it it's between two
and twenty twenty sixty dollars
per month.
Thank you for that answer but Mr
chairman.
Mistrust to let.
What would it cost for him to
get insurance on his own.
Mr Chairman are Senator once a
I'm sorry I I should have caught
that is part of your question so
thank you went out on the
exchange for example or you've
got if you're nineteen years old
in here your employer offered
insurance it may very and it
depends on employer in it but it
depends on on the applicable
rates depending upon your region
of the state do you live in
as far as how much that cost but
I do not have an estimate of
what it might cost on the change
on the exchange probably
something in the same
neighborhood typically between
the ages of nineteen and twenty
six health care costs are
significantly less than they are
for the average retiree.
Senator with the senator would
sell your students.
This is a few years back the
experience in this with our son
once he rate was over the age of
twenty six and it was still a
full time student but it did
average about close to almost
like about a hundred eighty
dollars more.
Well.
And I know Mr chairman and and
and Mr Chairman.
I I know that.
That that was a few years ago
and so it may be up there are
two hundred sixty now you know.
And it all depends on what
policy is here and lots it's
hard to compare insurance.
Apples to apples I tried it lots
of them.
Every insurance I'd buy.
I tried to do that.
And it's intentionally done such
that you can't do that.
Thank you too much fine print in
there to do that.
But which is what you're saying.
I don't see the advantage that
we're giving.
The the pair guardian Fund
person the the president
of Insurance buyer however you
say it.
It seems that we're just.
We're just making it easier for
them to pay a bill we're not
really saving many money.
Maybe Mr chairman Mr Chairman is
that kind of rider only charge
letter Mister chairman Senator
what's what we do is we provide
them with access in this access
isn't going to change based upon
passage of this bill what it
does is it's going to remove
the.
The conflict that we have in the
retiree health care sortie Act
that contained in the affordable
Care Act going back to the
benefit of accessing care
through the retiree health care
thirty at it's a matter of
choice I would suggest to you
that anytime we have a customer
or retiree who's joining the
plan you know we always
encourage them to do what's in
their best financial interest
which is included which includes
actually going out there and
reviewing what plans are
available to them on the market
I would say that you know our
premier plan does offer PPO type
access meaning the you can go
outside of the network where is
if you're looking at a market
only type of plan in New Mexico
there's only HMO access meaning
there isn't any of any sort of
autumn network access so that's
sort of the benefit other than
having you know your parent
responsible for for paying your
insurance coverages yeah that's
that's that's the benefit I see
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Woods I don't
see anybody else's hand raised
the Senator Campos thank you
very much Mr chairman I move for
approval.
We have in the past motion from
Senator Campos we have a sect
in center regulated sister
chairman we have a second from
Senator Rodriguez of any
objection to that two passed
motion are spreading call the
roll because it's hard for me to
see.
Mr Chairman Senator Burt.
Yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria is excused just
Senator Diamond.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes but only because I'm
under twenty six.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn is excuse senator
would.
Sport mode good friend the gate.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Reduce yes and senator Munoz.
Yes the gentleman yes yes that
is nine yes and to excuse.
Thank you Senator Gonzales
congratulations you have a do
pass thank you Mr chairman thank
you members thank you David
since you're right there you
were there you want to just roll
into your presentation on
retiree health care and we may
try to do one or two agencies
and then and then.
Call today Senator I I can
absolutely do that and I promise
that I will that I will be brief
so if I can figure out the
screen share real quick I will
pull up my presentation.
And.
Jump right into it.
If I can do you sorry one second
here.
Mr chair.
Okay Mr chairman and members of
the committee again my name is
the result that the executive
director The New Mexico retiree
health care thorny to give you a
little bit of background
information about who we are
what we do we've prepared the
following week presentation
Mexico retiree health care story
represents over ninety one
thousand active employees like
myself a lot of the folks you
see walking around the state
capitol also participate in the
plan we have of those ninety one
thousand employees approximately
half of those come to us from
the educational system meaning
educators folks working that's.
For one of the eighty nine
school districts across the
state you can see there over
fifty percent of the population
twenty five percent of our
population our state agencies.
What ironically enough you know
one state all state agencies
representative one employer
group we have three hundred into
employer group so again all
school districts all state
agencies local government
including cities counties
and municipalities as of
February first we have nearly
sixty five thousand members
participating at our plant over
forty thousand of which are
retirees themselves we also have
a number of spouses and domestic
partners almost thirteen
thousand of those individuals we
also have almost seventeen
hundred are over seventeen
hundred dependent children so if
you look there we we provide you
with a little bit of the
breakdown about the average age
of the participants in our plan
including the retirees their
dependents and I think it's
important to note that as of
this last year the average age
of the member or someone enroll
in our plan was fifty nine now
the retiree health care story
has four major sources of
revenue those include employment
for contributions what we
collect from retirees in terms
of their monthly contributions
or their premium charges we
received a distribution from the
tax expense fund.
We also we receive miscellaneous
revenue in the form of Medicare
subsidies as well as rebates
from the consumption of
prescriptions that are retirees
consume we have an operating
budget it's just under three
hundred and sixty million
dollars that program support
amount we receive transfers from
the budget program where we
collect the bulk of our revenue
that send transferred into
program support so if you're
looking at our budget you'll see
it tops off it right at three
hundred and sixty million
dollars because we have to
account for the transfer from
one program to the other we have
we're a small shop we have
twenty six employees but we're a
little agency that does some
pretty big things so I'm but we
you know we basically have
members from you to your
communities that participate in
this plan now our investments
are managed by the state
investment council who do an
incredible job first by
providing this access would to
certain investment pools our
agency which is managed by a
board of directors
it has the biannual asset
allocation performed in that in
the last couple times we've gone
through this process we'll sure
has been the group that's
advised us they provide
investment advice to the folks
repair prior to that it was any
PC in providing advice to the
folks over the educational
retirement board and we'll talk
a little bit more about
investments in a couple slides
here but we recently updated our
asset allocation this last year
transfer answering investments
from active to index status in
index status to active status
and I will pretend to tell you
what I think that means other
than to say that some really
smart people had determined that
there was an opportunity for us
to to generate some better
outcomes than what we do.
Previously had as part of our
asset allocation couple of quick
items in terms of HSD updates
like most state organizations we
continue to operate with our
office doors closed I would say
that if any of your members have
called our offices and are
having a difficult time getting
a hold of us I would encourage
them to submit an email to the
organization but since act
Kochhar offices back in March of
last year we continue to operate
sort of on a routine basis but
people going into the office to
process the paperwork that we
received.
Just you know for your for
purposes of providing you with
what sort of our the medical
outlook looks for us in terms of
our cost this last year you know
increases of for our self
insured plans range anywhere
between two and five percent of
the Medicare advantage side we
had significant reductions
driven by the driven by the RFP
process last year ranging
between thirty six and eighty
four percent.
And then we have significant
there were to there was no
change in terms of the dental
and vision plans I would like to
mention that we're currently in
the process of developing in our
P. for consultant to help us
this next fall for pharmacy
benefit manager for a lot of our
spend actually occurs it's also
important to note that were part
of the workgroup created by this
this by Senate bill one thirty
one back in two thousand
nineteen in an attempt to
evaluate opportunities to save
on prescription drug costs which
is a major driver of our
liabilities as well as our
overall costs we've had
undergone a border organised
reorganization in the last year
with certain board members many
school many of whom you may be
familiar with our no including
Mr console then superintendent
for for many years Angelman
Tinio who were president vice
president coming off the board
we have new leadership in terms
of Sanjay pock of the New Madrid
from the state personnel office
in more encouragement from the
superintendent down the on the
school district board officers
this last year include adult
Crandall the retired public and
employees Representative Miss
Saunders who represents the
union groups and missed me and
not another roughie who is the
representative from the public
employees retirement
association.
Some some of the good news that
we have to report as as I heard
secretary Schardin Clarke
mention earlier is that you know
the investments for us have have
have have done well if you go
back in time ten years our trust
fund balances we're just a
little under two hundred million
dollars you fast forward to
December this last year and
we've we've we've we've gained
nearly seven hundred and thirty
three million dollars over the
course of last ten years.
That's not entirely driven by
investments I think one
important thing to recognize is
the fact that there's a fair
number of contributions at in
may actually contributions to
exceeding investment earnings
since that time meaning that a
portion of the dollars and I'm
actually contributing to day are
going and being set aside for my
Vigil participation in this
program in for anyone interested
in our investment returns as
reported to us by the folks at
the SSE you can see him in the
little chart below this graph
here how does that play into one
of two financial measurements
that we use to gauge the overall
health of the program we'll talk
about that and in the next few
slides one is our solvency
analysis which is a basically a
cash flow analysis of what we
get from our sources and what we
spend our money on here's a
history going back to two
thousand twelve where we were at
and where we were projected to
remain solvent so in terms of
solvency the way we look at it
is when will when we no longer
have sufficient revenues to
support the expenses we incur in
any given year Sen two thousand
twelve we're expected to become
insolvent by the year twenty
twenty
thankfully that's not the case
at that time we had two hundred
and thirty two million dollars
you fast forward to two thousand
and twenty this is done this is
something that's done on an
annual basis in its use by the
board as a tool to one gauge
where we're at in any given year
but also to make decisions about
policy decisions about how
they're going to administer the
plan in the upcoming year I'm
happy to report that as of this
last June last July the last
board meeting that we occurred
but measured as of with the
assets as of June got a little
over seven hundred seventy eight
million dollars in we are
projected to remain solvent for
beyond the next thirty year
period so that's an improvement
over you can see over the past
couple of years that we've been
coming to you to report that
information the other measure
that I would
it insert into to a large
extent.
More important measure of our
our long term viability along
with what we are required to
report by law are those are
those revenues in assets as
measured by gas B. seventy four
and also reported in can guys be
seventy five so similar to the
pension programs will parity are
being we go through a similar
exercise where we look at what
our investment holdings today
what we think we're going to be
on the hook for over the course
of the next thirty years what
interest earnings do we assume
that we will have over that same
time frame.
I would report to you that as of
the last report that we received
in November and again this is
done annually our total
liabilities were a little over
five billion dollars so while
really excited to report to you
that we have the investments
that you know approaching a
billion dollars our total
liabilities exceed five billion
dollars if you look at last year
what we reported to you then
this is all based off of the
work that the actuarial firms do
for us our liabilities had
dropped to just under four
billion dollars so what's
changed over the course of the
year what it they just pop up a
little are nearly a billion
dollars well the interest rates
that were required to use
that are prescribed as part of
gas B. seventy four takes a
blending of our soon investment
returns along with the and I I I
will spell it all just read from
here just the average rate of it
at double A. R. higher bond
because of this last year and
they blend the two rates and
that actually drops so that
boosted Water long term
liabilities were so if you look
at look at the net operating
liabilities for our organization
right now they're at about four
point two billion dollars which
is the difference between our
assets and what those long term
liabilities are that drive
funding status from eighteen
point nine two percent back and
and two thousand nineteen down
to sixteen and a half percent
now in two thousand in twenty I
would say though that that's a
significant improvement from
where we were at ten years ago
or when we initially when this
process was imposed upon the
retiree health care forty back
in two thousand six we were just
a little bit better than three
percent funded so the board
continues to make progress we've
got a very.
Competent a group of directors
are board of truck directors who
are responsible for making
decisions on behalf of the
retiree groups if they represent
along with active employees in
whose primary concern is making
sure that this this program is
viable for not only folks
participating in the program
today but also the folks paying
into the program with some
expectation receiving a future
benefits.
The last slides that I'd wrap
things up with here is that I
think most most folks should be
made aware of in case you start
to receive calls got a lot of
calls last year during the
legislative session about this
but there's gonna be an upcoming
will change in the rule change
does two things one of which is
part of our our long term
strategy to contain some of our
long term liabilities combined
with limiting what they're what
that growth this is limiting the
age in which we began to receive
a subsidy from the program so
effective July thirty first this
year and really it's anyone who
is not receiving a pension on
July first of this year will be
affected by this anyone under
the age of fifty five.
You'll we will have a minimum
age of fifty five in order to
receive a subsidy so what is a
subsidy for those folks that
haven't heard this presentation
before heard us mention this the
subsidies are contribution
toward their health care costs
so just a round figure if on
average if the cost of providing
this coverage is that is a
thousand dollars a month and
we're picking up sixty four
percent of that we're paying
sixty six hundred and forty
dollars a month in the members
paying three hundred and sixty
now those are just round figures
the numbers are actually
different up and that's just use
as and as an example after July
of this year in order for anyone
to get that subsidy Dolly there
had to be over the age of fifty
five okay can during the month
of their fifty fifth birthday
or the would be a return a
retiree who retired from and one
of the enhanced retirement plans
police officer firefighter
correctional officer or or judge
the other thing that it does is
that it increases the number of
years of service from twenty to
twenty five in order to receive
that maximum subs subsidy you
know we've long come to the
legislature seeking an increase
in employment alright
contributions and a lot of the
feedback that we got suggested
that you know why would we be
giving you any more money if you
know basically your your
retirement ages is as low as it
is because and you won can
basically retired at this point
in time with twenty five years
of service and you know receive
this benefit for longer than
they ever contributed to for
with this it it increases the
minimum minimum maximum.
Minimum years of service from
twenty to twenty five meaning
that in order to get the same
benefit after July of this year
you'll have to have twenty
twenty five years of service as
opposed to twenty so that's
going to affect the number of
members so even if you are ready
to fifty five.
In order to keep get that same
benefit if you retire twenty one
years of service the subsidies
can be less this next year we
still provide access to that
coverage meaning that if you do
decide to retire if I retire at
the age of forty five and I
decide to come on this plan
that's fine we were happy to
accept you you can either look
at something on the exchange for
you could pick up coverage with
the New Mexico retiree health
care thirty but you will not
receive a subsidy currently for
someone under the age of fifty
five participating on our pre
Medicare plan with twenty years
of service you can see the that
member pays a little under three
hundred dollars a month two
hundred and ninety to ninety six
if they're on the value plan
that cost is two hundred twenty
eight dollars and ninety three
cents after July of this year if
the members under the age of
fifty five our I'm sorry
regardless of the year if the
members under fifty five in the
do not receive that subsidy you
can see that the price jumps up
to eight hundred and thirteen
dollars.
For that same coverage six
hundred and thirty five dollars
and I plan and then for someone
after that after July who's over
the age of fifty five and only
has twenty years of service
you're gonna be paying four
hundred and sixteen dollars a
month compared to two hundred
and ninety two again this was a
this was adopted by the board a
number of years ago we went
through the rule making process
it's been revised to push back
the date.
By now initially the target was
in January two thousand twenty
is moved to January of two
thousand twenty one and then
last year after receiving
feedback from from folks a
particular school and school
teachers who are gonna be
affected by that during.
The middle school year we can
change that to to July of this
year if you have any questions
or concerns please don't
hesitate to reach out my contact
information is on this last
slide happy to talk to you about
that and certainly any of your
constituents who have questions
or concerns about it it's been
announced we've tried to
circulate and.
Make sure that people are made
aware of this by creating our
own employer newsletter in
addition to the re Tyree
correspondence that we have.
The most important Sir well well
aware this point now and with
that Mr chairman members of the
committee and Stephanie
questions.
Thank you do you have anything
that.
Mr chairman I do not although
HSC.
Action on the budget
Both of the executive in the LFC
recommendations were pretty
similar I think overall out of
the out of the four hundred plus
million dollar budget there's
about a twenty five thousand
dollar difference.
Thank you to questions from
committee members I don't see
anybody's hand raised.
I have a question.
For clarification quickly thank
you David representation to all
these changes that you're
talking about impact
retroactively indefinitely
retroactively or is that for
future people who sign up for
the insurance company.
Mr Chairman
Senator Rodriguez it only
applies to members returned
after July of this year so it
does not go back to change
anything for anyone currently
participating in the plan or
that retired before in will be
eligible so if I retired and I'm
forty nine years old
and I I joined the plan but I
retired you know four years ago
it's not gonna have any impact
on that member it only affects
members moving forward.
Thank you that is the good
clarification and I'm happy for
a moment there I thought my
goodness somebody saying they're
bill go up to four hundred
sixteen ninety seven if they are
used to paying so much but now
it doesn't affect anyone who's
currently on the retiree health
care authority insurance it's
for.
Thank you very much that's all I
have Mister chairman thank you
David for your work thank you.
Thank you thank you senator
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
We start to let it I if I
receives if I understood your.
Your message here.
You said that bond rates drop.
Two one eight six two our main
from four point one six two two
point eight six.
And with that.
It dropped your liability by a
billion dollars.
Is is that a correlation that I
can make.
Mr Chairman.
Mister chairman Senator once the
decrease and it in the bond
rates drops the the discount
rate that we're able to apply to
our investments which increased
the cost so it actually jumped
up our our long term liabilities
by that billion dollars that was
the bulk of it.
Part of it was moving back the
the effective date of the roll
change from from January to July
some of the changes and I think
there was an Asterix there you
know there's some uncertainties
regarding a comment and and the
implementation packed of of that
on our program.
But yes so Mr Chairman.
Restored.
Evidently I'm thinking of this
back page with the bond rate
dropped.
It increased your liability.
Mr chairman Mister chairman
Senator Woods that is correct
because of the way we are long
term liabilities are calculated
since our funding level is so
low there's a combination of our
we can't just use our our
investment person re investment
returns like the pension plans
of seven a quarter percent of
whatever it is there's a blend
between the two so when that
interest rate came down it
brought down are are clickable
interest rate as well.
what I was wanting to know why
yes.
which direction Mr chairman what
structure do you feel these bond
rates are going to go.
In the future.
You're you're you're you're
huddled up with your financial
groups which direction do you
feel that the bond rate should
go.
Mr Chairman.
Senator was interestingly enough
a bigger concern for us that we
did that I didn't mention here
as as part of that is growth in
long term health care costs that
that plays at the an even bigger
role than are soon investment
returns which in terms of the
interest rates and that the
calculation of those municipal
bond ratings are growth in
health health care costs so we
haven't really honed in on that
assumptions with regard to
Bond rating so I I I would hate
to.
I am far from an investment
professional site and I would
hate to give you my opinion
about
that I don't think bond ratings
can go much lower so my
assumption that is eventually
up.
Okay.
But with that if they go up then
you're in a better position.
Is that right Mr chairman and
instruction letter.
Better is just.
Mister chairman Senator what's
as measured on a year over year
basis as as part of our guests
be reporting requirements yes.
Okay well in also Mr Chairman
understand that we've had.
A decrease and and medical use
but because of COVID we've had
less elective surgeries and and
that kind of thing and I think
that rolls into the fact that
you said that you think that
next year you're you're pay out
you're going to be higher
because.
As senator Candelaria love to
say.
The man.
I guess that could be a true
statement destruction that
Mister chairman Senator Woods
that is our belief or assumption
is is that part of that some
some procedures will be done
this is a retiree group we
there's a there are a lot of
knees hips and shoulders that we
do
so may realize that they never
needed to be done anyway and
we'll skip out on some of those
procedures of the bigger concern
to us is sort of some of the
delayed detection of certain
elements of of certain
conditions cancer in particular
people not getting their annual
physicals there's been a
significant drop on on in the
number of.
When asked the screens that are
that are occurring that we
anticipate will likely have a
significant impact to the
organization in addition to that
specialty costs with we look
with regard to the consumption
of prescription drugs continues
to increase at a rate that is
unsustainable so if you combine
those things we we anticipate
date health care costs will
continue to grow maybe not as
much as they they have are
certainly greater than they did
this last year but only time
will tell in in Mr chairman and
destruction that I'm gonna ask
questions that you may have no
idea about but we passed the law
a few years ago to to try to go
to Canada to buy a bunch drugs.
At.
We are.
Did we did we accomplish
anything with that law that you
know of.
Mister chairman Senator Woods I
believe you may be referring to
Senate bill one thirty one which
was part of the group that we
are The New Mexico retiree
health care thirty as part of
along with the other are can't
entities and as well as of the
public purchasers the
pharmaceutical benefits I would
tell you that there there are a
number of hurdles associated
with the purchase of drugs I
think some some federal laws
that they need to be worked out
before we can just directly
start prescribed
Buying drugs from Canada on
behalf of our members but that's
just one of several items it's
being evaluated right now I know
this certain states have already
passed laws allowing them to
purchase drugs from from from
Canada the the only thing I
would say about that based upon
the information that were
provided by not only our
consultants but turned
professional development groups
in the are in the area health
care benefits is that the.
In the prescription drug
manufacturers will maintain
control of the pipeline and it
it doesn't seem likely that they
will increase the flow of drugs
into Canada have them we
imported into the US at cheaper
amounts are simply my opinion
but it it I I don't know whether
or not get cold as much promises
we made like it too certainly
there may be some one offs where
where people drive to Canada and
pick up their prescriptions at
pennies on the dollar compared
to what they pay for them today
here in the US but it's unclear
whether or not
It's it's a it's a solution for
us.
Mr Chairman a very much out
seeing.
A lot of my friends go to
Columbus and Allison different
places and.
Always wonder what they're
getting you know I wonder a lot
about that but I'm in the same
camp as you are on that as far
as as so why would a company
export and loud and import back
and.
That just doesn't make sense to
me so.
I believe that that drug drug
and and health care costs are
going to continually escalate.
And it's it's here's how good
health care and we want to pay
for.
As you have alluded to earlier
do you want to plan a or your
plan B..
And where are you at your own
life and work what can you stand
so I appreciate your.
You're a.
Your presentation here.
And just so you know I can't
believe bond rates can get any
lower.
The matter demand for money as
the rich.
We're we're receiving a lot of
money and it costs somebody
something to finance that money
so it you're usually of
government security or follow us
at from my understanding so
thank you Mr chairman Randall
ramble ramble on up with.
Thank you rambling Senator.
I don't see any other questions
from committee members of they
would thank you for your
presentation thank you you do
have one of the toughest
agencies work where you're at
your unfunded liability and I
since I've been here retiree
health care if trying to be
thanks and I don't think we've
accomplished that yet so.
Good job we appreciate you.
And so thank you for your
presentation thank you center
it's a privilege thank you we're
gonna finish up with the S. I
see stigma we sorry you still
with us and then for the parent
your B..
We're just gonna roll you over
and so.
Will wrap up with the.
Yes I see I see Charles on use
the wrong state.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
We.
Don that don this is your agency
do you want.
Go over their budget.
Chair Mister chair members of
the committee at you have in
front of you or should have in
front of you the the budget
packet materials for SI see
providing different sheets for
the LFC and Executive
recommendations the only
difference in the two
recommendations has to do with
personnel costs
the building executive includes
a a lower recommendation for an
agency personnel by by striking
I FTE that became an active
during
Espoo review that were inactive
for a period of five years LFC
only struck three of those FTE
HSC did take action on the
record on the budget
recommendations adopted the
executive recommendation I do
want to reiterate to the
committee that S. I see is
funded through non general fund
sources of the revenue for their
budget comes from the two
permanent funds land grant
permanent fund and severance tax
permanent bond
their budget recommendations
include excuse me their budget
request included a request to
decrease primarily due to a
decrease in asset management
fees I'm sure the agency will go
over their budget request and
both the LFC and Executive
recommendations supported the
agency's request for both
contract management
for contractual services and for
other services
And I'm sure the agency will
also go over there investment
return so I don't want to steal
their thunder I'm gonna go ahead
and leave it at that but I'm
happy to stand for any questions
on their budget or on either the
either recommendation thank you.
Thank you Steve go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thanks for that no one with me
on the call today members of the
committee our our our get to the
state investment officer and
chief investment officer Smith
whose picture appears right
below my aunt.
To his left on your screen is
our director of legislative
client affairs and
communications that are
terrible.
And a little bit further down on
the screen is our chief
financial officer Brett Shipp
whose for isn't out yet so we'll
move along quickly we only have
a few slides for you Mason has
agreed to move us along thank
you for putting up the first
slide and will move to the
secretary.
The most important thing that we
can discuss with you is the
distributions that we make to
the state.
This shows what will occur
starting next fiscal year in
July.
When grant programs fund is
going to deliver nine hundred
eight million dollars in
benefits to our twenty one
beneficiaries that's a year over
year increase of seventy two
million new dollars it's a
record.
More than eighty six percent of
this goes to the general fund to
fund public schools.
The rest goes to state
universities specialty schools
hospitals water and public
buildings.
This tax permanent fund.
We also have a job in
distributions another record
amounts this year now almost a
quarter million dollars.
Money is not earmarked it's a
tool for you as policy makers to
appropriate.
To meet the varying of the state
next slide please.
This.
What is the growth of the
permanent fund distributions
over the last twenty years.
And very in distribution
percentage levels during that
time so over there on the right
hand side under L. G. P. F.
percent you'll see a move from
four point seven to five point
eight to five point five and
back to five percent.
Since two thousand one the
program funds and increase their
impact by more than two and a
half times.
They've grown.
From four hundred twenty five
million in two thousand one.
To more than one point one five
billion in distributions today
what's the key takeaway.
A larger the funds the larger
the benefits they provide
over time the critical slide
slide for.
This shows where grant and
severance tax funds have grown
over that same time.
The differences are clear.
With
growing at a much higher rate.
No funds are largely constructed
though both funds are largely
constructed in the same way.
So when grant target seven
percent long term rate of
investment return.
Other line long term.
Severance tax chart target is
six point seven five percent.
Slightly larger because it can
be invested as you know
investments would benefit the
economy.
And these traditionally have not
received market rate of return.
The land grant Fund also has a
higher distribution right.
And the severance tax fund
budget and five percent
currently compared to the
severance tax four point seven
percent.
So the primary difference in the
funds is this.
Program grant Fund receive
substantial consistent inflows
from Orlando office those are
generated primarily by higher
oil and gas royalties.
This slide illustrates the
importance of balancing fund
inflows.
Distribution rates and
investment returns.
So we can create a healthy
permanent revenue in addition
for the state next slide.
This is all the assets we
manage.
It tells a story of numbers
about what a roller coaster last
year was for investors.
The funds began twenty twenty
with a healthy economy.
More than twenty seven billion
under management.
The pandemic yep in the first
quarter assets dropped.
Will point they were less than
twenty four billion.
Government stimulus programs
help the markets recover very
rapidly they climb to new
valuations on vaccine hopes.
And the economic optimism.
We hope to see when this cloud
lifts.
We use this slide is a reminder
to show how fast forgiving the
markets can move.
Even with very diversified
balanced portfolio like ours.
Valuation difference between
where our assets under
management are today.
And where they were eleven
months ago.
More than seven billion dollars
of four year budget for the
state.
Next slide.
Slide six shop which shows the
investment performance the and
of twenty twenty.
For friends like errors that are
very diversified we only have
about forty percent in stocks.
And which are positioned to
pretty much defensively.
Twenty twenty used stock room at
times was difficult.
We participated to the upside
but not as much as some.
We believe that given the
historically high equity and
bond market valuations we're
experiencing today.
We're structured appropriately
for what the market is very well
made deliver.
In the years ahead.
Fund is above its long term
return targets across all full
time periods.
You'll see that the severance
tax fund.
Achieved its target.
We are one five and ten year
annualized basis.
Next slide.
We're just to the committee
regarding legislation that was
introduced this session to draw
down additional capital from the
severance tax fund.
Which is you know can be
invested at the differential
right if you will.
If there will be some other non
financial return.
Right jobs or economic
development achieved by the
investment.
Senate bill three senator
Candelaria is bill is the
retooled version of the bill
passed during a special session.
It creates a small business loan
pool of five hundred million.
To support New Mexico small
businesses during the recovery.
The finance authority.
Awarded more than six hundred
fifty such loans last year.
And they will continue to
operate the updated program if
it passes.
Senate Bill I in the house bill
Mr Chairman your business grants
bill that was originally looking
at the severance tax fund for
funding.
Was amended to use general fund
dollars.
Senate bill three thirteen house
bill two thirty six the public
banking act from Senator
Steinborn and Representative
Patricia Roybal Caballero.
This bill creates a public bank
is you know using fifty million
severance tax dollars and fifty
million state treasurer dollars
as seed capital.
It's important to point out that
the council has not taken a
formal position.
In favor of or opposed to any of
these bills.
Those council members individual
you certainly have opinions.
We're glad to answer any
questions if we can.
So finally our last slides.
The general outlook we have on
the markets.
Yes please comment for us.
Thanks Steve so this last line
just yes and current
observations in in both the
economy the markets you heard
for today sent from from some of
your other economic pros here in
the state the covered some of
these some of these issues here
you know I think in both the
stock and bond market most
investors are recognizing the
the bubble that financial bubble
we're in with the both of those
those markets but Hey at the
same time the state it's a
rational bubble and on the basis
of how much money is floating
around I think you want one or
two of the senators mentioned
that that fact that sector to so
bond markets as we've been
talking very low that's
generated very high stock market
valuations we've had outstanding
performers from stock market
last two years up almost fifty
percent in total over that two
year period generally when you
get a run and in stocks or
really any market like that your
future expected rates of return
drop and that is the case we'll
be doing asset allocation
studies for the land grant
severance tax funds press one of
water to the other permanent
funds here this spring and into
the summer and we're looking at
lower expected rates of return
as we as we move into of into
those.
so what so this is a list of
some of the current things that
we're looking at today as most
you know we we rate of what we
call our annual investment plan
it's we've been doing that since
fiscal year two thousand
thirteen so we're coming up on
ten years here pretty soon with
that with that document the
first part of that doc is some
macroeconomic piece it's quick
created rents for five six pages
normally but it takes seven to
ten year outlook you know
markets price of cells what's
happening today and what's the
reasonably certain in the near
term future if you can push your
expectations out a little bit
farther sometimes you can get
ahead ahead of where markets are
going to go so we we take a
structured approach to doing
that with the annual investment
plan let me give you just a just
a little bit of highlight to
this year's plan terms of the
the macro piece and for certain
if you like to read that it's
it's always goes up on our
website as soon as the council
approves it which is in June of
every year or or email Charley.
Or myself and we'll make sure
you get a copy you for what we
look at several trends when we
look at the over that period the
first one I think of interest is
the pandemic we don't see as
making structural damage to the
global economy or here in the
and here in the US so while it's
cost a lot in terms of economic
growth and economic performance
on in the globe and and here in
the US your sense census
beginning we're not seeing why
the economy won't returns to
long term growth rates are long
term expected growth rates as
the pandemic eases and now we
get back to more normal Barbara
so so that's good news not
countering a little bit of that
news.
This
We think growth in the economy
both globally here United States
going to remain slow our main
our main push behind that is
says demographics you can see in
the last two or three of the
annual best plants we spent some
time talking about demographics
and we've talked about
demographics at other committees
here in the state we are
approaching sort of the low
point share our demographic
profile here in the US and then
also receives a they're they're
they're a seeing roughly the
same thing Bayview the baby boom
generation is retiring in droves
and we don't quite have the the
ability generation quiet in
entering their highest earnings
years yet so we've got this
little saddle for for for number
years be the rough roughly
twelve years and we're already
sort of five or six years in
this will saddle of of lower
economic growth just based on
fact workforce just isn't as big
as it has been you want some
flexibility state retired in the
last member was born in nineteen
sixty four so that's that's
approaching we start to see the
millennials move into their
higher earning years Allison
generation in between their that
Jen acts they're pretty small
they've been tending to
underperform a little bit terms
of economic performance from
that generation so we were we've
got some we've got to put some
bets on the lineal some terms of
terms of bringing back higher
rates growth at least here in
United States and overseas also
so.
You know even though we don't
think pandemic is made
structural damage to the economy
we're still going to be in the
saddle in terms of our terms of
our
workforce in in in potential GDP
growth you know a little bit to
touch on on Senator Woods
question you know we think we're
going to still see more.
longer period of negative real
interest rates other words the
rate of interest being under the
rate of inflation.
In a in a long quite a bit of
the curve so you know it's a ten
year portion of treasury Kerr we
still see those rates rise
riding under the rate of
inflation as as we go forward so
that's that's got some positives
and some negatives to it but but
we really think rates will be
held down whether that's just
naturally through the markets or
this at least during I'd states
of fed stepping in and with the
yield curve control in other
words buying bonds and forcing
rates down.
and we think that could
containerised late into negative
negative real rates we do think
the rate of inflation will be
rising over the next two years
are lots of reasons to think
that
is not the first one is that's
what the fed wants and that's
what many policy makers want to
see at least a federal level so
we'll see a combination of of.
A friend pressure on rates and
sort of maybe some natural
pressure on rates at the same
time inflation is is increasing
that gets us to a negative real
religious right.
Lastly I'll just mention one
more thing on a pandemic we
often get the question of how is
this going to affect your real
estate portfolio we see tons
businesses moving out of the big
big cities here in the US you
know which you'll see businesses
trying to move out and so will
that translate into less demand
for particularly for a
commercial real estate
yes Representative businesses
and things out of you know we
talked about a great deal and
all and also with our
consultants it sort of seems
fifty fifty here so on one side
of the question yes we think
your work from home might
produce some less demand for
office space within businesses
leaving some of the big met
metropolitan centers might be
less office space in those class
a markets but the same time if
businesses respond kind of
longer term to the to the
pandemic though though want more
space because the want to put
their employees a little farther
apart so we're hearing bill
spoke sides of that equation one
thing that is shifting in the
market the is the continued
shift away from retail
properties and we're we've got
portfolio underweight map taken
earlier and increased to two
industrial properties we're
online retailers like Amazon or
for storing their goods and
thanks for up for revisions
livers go out so we're seeing a
will continue to shift and in
that area overall though we
don't we don't think the
pandemic has a major impact on
our on our real estate portfolio
so that's just a few themes
you'll see in the next annual
annual plan which will publish
and in June and just let us know
if you want to copy or or
research website.
You are you done.
Yes Mr chairman less you work
comments on the budget and
Brandt will certainly provide
those if you do.
Do you want to come into the
budget stated you want to
comment.
It's completely up to you Mr
chairman I think we've been
through it several times with
the other committees.
Questions for any question from
committee members.
I don't Senator share.
Mr chairman I just one one quick
question so when we when we
moved to distributions from four
point seven percent to five
point eight of to fix schools
which apparently did wonders
force
had we not done that what would
be the the dollar amount
distribution today I've tried to
figure that out I came up with a
number but.
Well you're probably better.
Sure you could you respond to
that for us please chair Mister
chairman a.
Senator sure so the the actual
cost and we've kind of looked at
this over the years the cost at
the time was about seven hundred
and forty nine million dollars
over and above what the previous
base had been no I haven't run
those numbers recently I can
tell you in the last couple of
years they estimated that the
the impact would be the land
grant Fund would be about one
point two to one point five
billion dollars larger today
that's the best I can I can do
off of the cost.
Okay so Mister chairman
so what I did I came up a little
bit higher number than that but
but it looked to me like had we
not done that today the money
that we that we draw also that
would be about a hundred and
fifty million dollars more than
we actually got does that sound
like the number that's in the
right ballpark.
Senator so
basically
That's probably not a bad
estimate I'd like to to check my
my tables before I give you a
formalized it there's
significant value in keeping the
money in the markets over time
the value of compounding as you
know it's it's.
When you spend investment
dollars it's a very expensive
proposition.
So Mister chairman the only
reason I bring this up is is we
took money out to fix education
we didn't fix education now
we're told we need another
hundred fifty million dollars to
fix education but we would have
the hundred and fifty million
dollars had we not not fixed
education then so.
Just my point Mr chairman thank.
Thank you senator Candelaria.
Senator Candelaria are you
there.
And then Senator what did I see
your hand up.
And then I.
Mr Chairman.
Your honor are pretty
knowledgeable on investments
right now.
How much how much money are we
invested in.
Following gas stocks.
We do we invest in many oil
companies right now.
Mr chairman Sir was that we
wouldn't get your number on that
we're we're pretty much in in
terms of the publicly publicly
traded equity portfolio with
pretty much in line with the
indices we don't have any
particular overweight to energy
there in the private portfolios
and private equity portfolio.
In our in our real assets
portfolio we do have some
traditional energy but I get
your number okay no this.
I would I would like a the.
Actually a paper copy of your
report.
It that you were talking about
what will go.
Chair Mister chairman Senator
was we make that point thank you
very much that's all Mr
chairman.
I don't see senator Candelaria
but he did send me a text he's
on the he's next any other
questions from committee
members.
I don't see any so Steve thank
you guys for your presentation I
appreciate it
We're all be watching our
investments very wisely
And thank you guys for the work
you do so thank you Mr chairman
to appreciate that thank you bye
Mr chair.
Thank you.
Member we have our junior bill
meeting tomorrow after for those
committee members in and it'll
be on soon and we'll go through
those
So I think that any other
questions from committee
members.
Thank you guys in in New thank
you for no thanks for our staff
and and to Janet and everybody
that worked hard on eleven.
To get it.
Timely and to to get everybody
to agree on something.
So I thank you and I appreciate
that thanks to our staff.
Who's helping us here all the
time so thank you guys and that
with that I think larger.
Thank you to Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Google some of
that you want to run over to my
office real quick all right Sir.
