Chair also pray for the
prosperity of our state the
prosperity of our businesses and
our state.
I believe that this committee
has a direct effect on that and
I just pray that we are smart
with the way we do things in
this committee.
Thank you Mr chair.
Morning Mr chair and everyone
hear my name's bill Burck to
Senate district thirty three
which is the northern portion of
a Carroll County and all of
Lincoln County in the just a
smidgen of Travis county.
I'm glad to be here and I would.
Just pray for guidance in the
right.
With every single taxpayer
dollars we have thank you Mr
chair.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members my name is crystal
diamond I represent the bill
hello area of New Mexico it's
not an oil and gas generating
region but we certainly benefits
from them from the right
financial awards at that
industry has brought us and so
as we move forward we think that
industry in the workers of that
area for this opportunity to
really has one opportunity of
prosperity to all of New Mexico
if we do the right thing here so
thank thank you and good
morning.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm bill
share senator from district one
which is Farmington and I would
like to point out that everybody
in New Mexico's in oil and gas
business with you want to be or
not because that's who pays the
bills.
Thank
you Mr chairman morning to every
day I'm Nancy Senator Nancy
Rodriguez hi from St and hi Mike
Senator Gonzalez have been the
legislature for twenty years in
in this committee for many years
I think all of the years since I
start so I'm grateful for the
opportunity to serve you and to
work together with our committee
to do the best that we can
judiciously as we distribute
public funds thank.
Thank you the morning that I'm
charging you know etcetera yes
Representative Senate district
for which is Cibola McKinley and
San Juan counties which is
northwest New Mexico
it's an honor and a privilege
right to me in New Mexico and to
be a legislator and have this
type of windfall never seen
before right.
And if we really as a committee
worked hard and diligently we
can set New Mexico's future up.
That's our job.
To make sure that everybody's
employee the in poverty we
educate our children right we're
not gonna agree on every single
issue but we should fix a lot
issue so.
With that I guess we'll start
this committee meeting.
And there is also the chair.
The capital outlay meeting let
him let him start to get
rolling.
Of the store with all our staff
here.
Please introduce yourself.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman reserve
the committee thanks for your
time this morning I'm Kelly cars
well in the capital outlay
analyst with the legislative
finance committee I'm joined at
the table by Wesley Billingsley
Hughes the chief of the capital
outlay bureau at the department
of finance and and
Administration we work closely
with him and his staff
throughout the interim and the
session
also in the audience we have a
few more LFC staff you know
Chavez and Linda key have they
are members of our capital
outlay team and deputy director
John Courtney is also here
through our powers combined we
should be able to answer any and
all of your questions now or
later you know where to find us
so I'm going to.
Present this memo which should
be in front of you.
I'm gonna give you an overview
of the current capital outlay it
landscape and implications for
funding decisions the session as
you can see at the very top of
this memo and headline as of
December outstanding capital
funds totaled an estimated three
point three billion dollars the
first paragraph under the
headline details how those funds
break down with about half an
projects authorized by the
legislature so those are
projects that are funded through
the annual capital outlay bills.
other sources of these
outstanding funds are earmarked
projects balances in the public
school capital outlay fund and
uncommitted and unspent funds
from nearly a billion dollars in
special appropriations to
capital projects from the twenty
twenty one and twenty twenty two
special and regular sessions.
These are historically high
balances and there are several
reasons for that one we've had
consecutive years of strong
state revenues and at the same
time we got a significant influx
of federal funds they have also
been circumstances associated
with the pandemic that many of
you are familiar with that have
made it harder to move money
harder to get into construction
and harder to complete
construction in an efficient
manner those include supply
chain delays labor shortages and
steeply rising construction
costs.
Large balances also partly
reflect a large volume of
projects more than four thousand
public infrastructure projects
with state funding are active in
the state today and as LESC
reported on these issues
throughout the in from we heard
repeatedly from stakeholders in
both the public and private
sector that they had limited
capacity to take on a large
volume of new projects.
Importantly also systemic issues
unique to New Mexico's approach
to financing public
infrastructure that have excess
that have existed for years
exacerbate these challenges.
This doesn't mean of course that
the money you all have a
procreative isn't being spent
down at all as you can see in
the second bullet on this page
under key points between the
first and second quarter of FY
twenty three about two hundred
twenty five million in capital
funding was spent down and that
was primarily driven by the
expenditures for legislatively
authorized projects.
one more point as you can see in
table one of these out to of
these outstanding funds local
projects have the most
outstanding funds and the
slowest expenditure rates when
compared to state owned and
higher education projects.
I'll quickly on the second to
last blood on the page I wanted
to note that there will be
roughly another hundred projects
and two hundred fifty eight
million dollars coming online
this spring through the sale of
general obligation bonds
authorized last last session and
approved by voters this fall in
those projects are not yet
reflected in these balances and
in the last bullet on the page
if you're interested you can
also see the source of the
outstanding funds which are
primarily severance tax bonds.
You'll turn on to page two.
So what does this mean that for
new capital funding decisions
that you will all have before
you the session in the big
picture insuring that the funds
you've already appropriated in
future appropriations result in
meaningful improvements in New
Mexico communities and that they
do so in a timely manner will
require an effort to address
longstanding barriers to the
success of projects those
include issues like piecemeal
funding inconsistent project
funding and limited capacity at
the local level to complete
projects and manage existing
assets additionally the
legislature has an opportunity
to rethink the state's role in
coordinating state and federal
funding sources to ensure we
provide complete funding for
projects that are given capital
outlay dollars in helping to
plan and develop the projects
that you help to provide and
more effectively supporting
communities in managing those
projects to completion the LFC
has a committee endorsed bill to
create a central infrastructure
office that would be focused on
doing those things and all touch
on that a little bit more in New
in a minute.
Moving down to the second bold
heading on this page a couple
more immediate things to think
about.
With the request that you
receive the session here you'll
see a couple recommendations
from LFC is capital outlay
subcommittee and elsewhere the
first one is to think about
prioritizing new capital outlay
dollars first to existing
partially funded projects the
review of existing projects for
viability that this committee is
going to undertake in the next
couple weeks is connected to the
US and one important step toward
doing it.
Another key piece is to improve
local capital outlay project
requests in particular it's
important in this environment to
consider how ready projects are
and to really focus on trying to
avoid piecemeal funding so
providing funding to projects
where either the funding is
sufficient to complete a
functional phase of the project
or complete funding for the
project either on its own or in
addition to funding sources that
have already been secured.
You can see on the left hand
column of this page a simple
betting tactless the LFC
recommends applying to capital
outlay requests.
In the second set of bullets on
this page we highlight
appropriations and LFC is budget
recommendation aimed at
increasing capacity to manage
and complete projects.
But some of these are current
both are recurring and non
recurring budget scenario and
lastly on this page as I
mentioned you'll see a
description of LS LFC endorsed
legislation to create a central
infrastructure office that would
provide longer term solutions to
common issues that inhibit the
effective use of capital outlay
funds Senator Campos and Senator
Woods have generously agreed to
sponsor this bill.
The goal of this entity is
really to provide simpler and
better coordination and
navigation of funding sources as
well as more front and support
that come to communities that
need it and would wish to use
that to plan and develop
projects before they come to you
requesting funding and also more
FAQ and support to complete
those projects that you do
choose to provide.
I want to be really clear that
this proposed entity would not
infringe on legislators ability
to allocate capital outlay
dollars at your own discretion
it does not change that process
or put any new requirements on
how you use that money what it
is aimed at doing is increasing
the power of those dollars to
make a real impact in your
communities and to do so as
efficiently as possible by
creating more support and
coordination to answer to ensure
those projects are completed.
And now if you'll turn to page
three.
I'm gonna wrap up at the top of
this page you'll see some see a
potential re authorization
guidelines that have been
developed over the years
by LFC members and staff and
then under the heading LFC
project oversight we've included
some details on the quarterly
reports we complete during the
interim on capital projects in
the color codes assigned to
projects that we track on an
individual basis I'm not going
to go through these in detail
but they are there for your
information if you'd like a
little more explanation on why
projects might be flagged as red
or yellow.
I also wanted to make sure it
was clear that each of these
reports represent point in time
snapshots of projects and the
two most recent we've completed
on a project by project basis
utilized data from the last
quarter of FY twenty two in the
first quarter of FY twenty three
and there's more detail on that
in the last three bullets on
this page.
Finally if you turn to page four
you'll see that we've attached
the most current list of
authorized but unissued projects
so these are projects the
legislature has authorized for
bonding with severance tax bonds
but for which those bonds have
not yet been sold so that means
the money is not yet available
to start being spent on those
projects.
Usually bonds are not school due
to lack of audit compliance anti
donation issues or because
entities have not certified
readiness to proceed.
And those are all of my remarks
so all that Wesley take over and
then we'll both be available for
questions at the end.
Mr chairman Wesley Billingsley
DFA capital outlay bureau chief
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today regarding the
capital outlay and reporting on
the capital outlay in the state
the state agencies have received
almost three point five billion
per capita funds since twenty
nineteen that go towards their
own propped their own projects
or even local projects in
December twenty twenty two those
balances total one point seven
billion as Kelly mentioned this
is been done rate of just over
fifty percent on all of those
capital projects funded through
the capital outlay bills.
so obviously this is not include
other couple funding such as
your marks public school funding
and special appropriations
including junior bills you're
more projects we appear to have
higher balances two hundred
seventy six million is a lot of
money however most of that is
about two hundred forty million
in the last two years so you
know just on that note alone the
twenty nineteen to twenty twenty
of projects happened almost
fully expended
public school funding is more
complicated they've certify and
recertify projects and so I'm
going to timing their balances
it's really difficult but they
do have a fifty two percent
expenditure rate as well.
lastly the junior bills last two
years total about three hundred
twenty seven million
appropriations and as of our
last report in December there's
only about four point eight
million dollars there was about
five point six million reverted
I think from twenty twenty one
but that's actually a really
good balance for the Toonerville
projects you can find all of
that information on our
dashboards we have a cap on the
dashboard as well as a junior
build us board on our website.
The chart below just wanted to
show everyone the balances on
your by here and so you can kind
of see the color schemes
Representative a new year and I
started with twenty sixteen just
to show that you know you've
actually the balances to go down
and the funds are fully expended
that's really what I want to get
out of this chart you know that
is a cyclical thing and and the
expenditures do happen maybe not
as fast as we would all like but
they do happen over the four
year time period for these
capital projects the one I want
to note is the very last one the
twenty nineteen probation
roughly have two hundred million
dollars and remaining balances
but this is Kelly mentioned we
had almost two hundred million
dollars in expenditures just the
last quarter alone so I think we
can we can spend those about two
hundred million remaining
balances some of those will need
to be re authorized during the
session as you'll come to find
out during the session.
Next page
probably the project movie just
kind and and I know that most of
you probably are aware of these
that the cycles of the standard
time line you know the equipment
vehicles those are to your
projects as as outlined in the
bill and then there's you know
for your projects which are
major construction and
renovation projects
you know Kelly mentioned that
the other are some balances are
going to be lots of projects on
this red and yellow and green
reports are you all gonna hear
throughout these hearings the
next week or so I'm I do want to
point out though that there are
projects that are doing good and
so I kind of listed some of
these right here and I'm I'm not
gonna go through all of them but
some projects are being
completed and some high dollar
projects are being completed and
so the fifty percent expenditure
right is it is kind of where we
where we think that it should be
although we do want to to to to
increase right we want to show
that many expenditures as
possible so I guess I'm not
gonna go through that list but
there it is for you if you want
to see.
page three page three of the
timeline for for your projects
you know it's really hard
because I know everyone thinks
okay to have the funding they
can spend these projects right
away there are things that need
to happen before projects can be
expended it starts with the
planning process that usually
takes some time to plan and then
they have to go to an I. C. I.
P. once the I. C. I. P. is
created the they have to go into
a capital bill right and and
during that process they also
need to get into on a compliance
there's lots of things that need
to happen with these projects
and federation issues need to be
resolved so that's kind of give
you a timeline of you know a
typical for your project and how
long it takes to possibly see
that first expenditures but
first expenditure for
construction projects might not
come within the first year it
might not come within the first
two years but you should see
them you know rapidly through
years two through four that's
kind of what I wanted to display
with this timeline here.
Let's let's let's let's.
And the kind of piggyback off of
counties reauthorization
reauthorization our important
right there's multiple reasons
why projects are re authorized
any of the those number real
physicians are increasing year
to year
And so I just want to point out
that the yeah we work closely
with with account services to
make sure that we catch issues
up front when it comes to the
authorizations but when it comes
to Google appropriation sorry
that you know agencies might not
it might not come to the right
agency or the wording in the in
the language might not have been
completely accurate and so
sometimes those are reasons why
we authorizations are needed
that the agency is incorrect or
if the or the language needs
some clarification
but most of the time it's for
extending time and so I know you
know what to projects nearing
the end we we need to make sure
that they're able to go to the
finish line to complete that
project we don't want to you
know have that bill outstanding
and and then not be able to get
reimbursed just because they ran
out of time so sometimes it's
important that we do we
authorize and extend that time
or sometimes there is no
experiencing delays lifelike
Kelly mentioned with shipping or
even cost increases and they
might need a little bit more
money so they need to re
authorize it for another year to
get another preparation as well
those are some technical issues
and reasons for the
authorizations have the chart
below showing from twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty two
how many we authorizations we
have and and some of those
expenditure rates as well.
And I think that's it for me now
in their.
Will stand for questions.
Well thank you thank you very
much.
Number so.
Senator Woods thank you Mr
chairman.
So.
Excuse me a little bit of.
Still a little bit congestion.
Of.
Earlier this year.
We talked a lot about how much
money.
Was sitting out there nothing
was happening.
That we thought we was.
Putting too much money out in
the capital outlays and one get
in the spirit.
But I don't quite see that with
this.
Important to me.
M. I. A. misunderstandings you
Mr chairman or are we getting
this money out the door only
with the normal lags that occur
with the terrible way that we
have to to comply with all the
rules and regulations to spend
state money and I shouldn't say
terrible way the many hoops we
have to jump through to spend
state money with the timeline to
show me
so.
Mr chair and Kelly M. M. I..
Hearing right today.
Mr chair Senator Woods I think
we're in a similar situation
that we were and earlier this in
turn when we're having those
conversations the balances have
come down some and we wanted to
acknowledge that it's not that
money isn't moving at all but
there is there are far more
projects and far more money
outstanding than there have been
in the past and that reality on
top of the challenges that we
talked about that have come with
at the pandemic instruction
continue
and mean that it's more
important than ever to make
these decisions carefully and
contact and being conscious in
that environment because of what
I mentioned the limited capacity
in both the public and private
sector to take on a large number
of new projects and move them.
So with that answer question
with that thought in mind are we
at capacity.
Or.
You know what you're.
Describing this Mr chair and and
Kelly is that.
There's no capacity left to
spend money in the state of New
Mexico.
That can't be right I realize
you know many projects have to
be bonded.
And there has probably some some
contractors out there that I've
reach their bonding capacity.
But to say there's absolutely no
one out there that has the
ability to complete these
projects I think it's not true
either so.
Which get down into the weeds
just to hear more for me if you
would
because.
We still have the demand for
capital outlay.
So.
Give me up of.
At church yeah Mr chair Senator
Woods so I want to be clear
we're not saying no capacity or
saying limited capacity because
the basically the system is sort
of reaching a level of
saturation that we haven't quite
experienced in the past so a
couple examples on the state
agency side the agencies that
are responsible for
administering these projects
have higher workloads than ever
as well as the challenges that
we have throughout state
government of retaining and
hiring people to do that work so
that's one potential bottleneck
on the private sector side one
thing we've seen is that.
engineers for example have again
very high workloads they have a
lot of work right now they can
be really selective about what
projects they take on there's
been reduced demand for grants
through sources like the local
government planning funds to do
up front planning and
development of proud of projects
because the engineer is already
have a lot of work basically
issues I mentioned like
piecemeal funding.
So contractors also can be
choosy about which projects they
take so the more projects that
get into the system that have
insufficient funding that and
are sort of small projects with
not enough money to get them
done through either the source
for all the sources they have
put together those are projects
that are going to have trouble
moving forward and trouble
extracting bids for her to
complete their faces and then
with that Mr chair
I'm constantly told that when
these contract when these.
project bid.
They will bid on the the the did
prices far exceeds the the
amount of money they go back
they reduce the size of the
project they re Benham they're
still over.
did from from what we the money
we have someone go out three
times in a come back
considerably smaller projects
and.
They it the the.
One particular hospital of.
A gentleman that that was.
Working up the specs for
hospitals to Kerry told me the
the costs of of construction was
going up as high as one percent
a month Mr chair.
One percent a month.
how can we ever catch up.
When when we have inflation
running like that one percent a
month.
How how much do you have to
downsize a project to accomplish
that are how do we as you say Mr
chair how do we go back in.
And add the money to these
projects to get of bills and
follow income timetable.
That we have.
Do you see.
First of all.
Things showing up.
You know we talk about the
economy slowing up do you see
that in your crystal ball that
the economy is going to slow up
enough that we could actually
get some of these projects up Mr
chair thank you.
Mr chair Senator eight
I don't make too many crystal
ball predictions I think we have
seen seen some slowdown at least
and the increasing cost of
construction
and those issues that you are
just alluding to are very real
and you know these are some of
the things that
Right now it can be causing
projects to proceed at a slower
pace having to go out to bid
multiple times having to kind of
redo the design of the project
to fit the budget due to rising
costs
you know why it I think one
thing to think about and what we
try to think about in developing
the statewide framework this
year is identifying where those
holy holes exist and trying to
fill them
the legislature also last year
appropriated eight million
dollars to DFA to provide for
cost overruns for state run
projects we have a similar
appropriation for local projects
in LFC budget recommendation
this year was we might be able
to speak a little more to what
he's seeing it with projects in
those situations on his side of
things and how agencies are
taking advantage of some of that
money yes Mr Chairman Senator
logistics yes we do so we do
have some we had a million
dollars for cost overruns on for
state agencies and we have we're
about to award about half of
that we did get some interest
from some of the state agencies
however after speaking with GSD
just the overseas a lot of the
projects throughout the state
and GST even though they did
experience some of those cost
over runs that there weren't
they weren't enough to come to
us for this money they have
their own part of money that
they have for the Santa Fe
projects and so they didn't need
to to request any of this money
but yeah that's what we're
seeing at another level as well
with the state agencies that
there are some cost increases
and we're trying to take care of
those as they become third.
So if I hear that right Mr
chair.
We have got fund set up to
already take care of some cost
over rice.
That we can put in some of these
capital outlay projects.
And all they have to do is apply
for it he said that was it state
building is that also in and
local government.
Building Mr chair Senator Woods
it's just HSD buildings and so
we were about to award about
three point six million of that
eight and then we do have a
couple of more request someone
is from the Santa Fe magistrate
court there they see a big
increase I think from about
twenty something million to
thirty million and so we're
reviewing their request to see
if it's truly cost overruns or
expanding their scope it sounds
like they're wanting a little
bit more more room in that
building and so we're just now
going through all about making
sure that it really is a true
cost overrun I think there's
some other ones that are that
are potentially coming through
that we're hearing about I know
some universities are having
some some also runs as well
although we do address those I
believe in the statewide
framework but yet we can we are
not allowed to use that
particular amount of funding for
the local projects okay and I
know that I'm way over time
chair.
Just one last question.
Watson if if there are close to
runs and it's local the local
government literally has to
reduce our project has to to
lead a bid to a smaller project.
And it sounds as though.
I guess the question is is there
an oversight to state projects
to demand that they reduce the
scope of their project also with
the cost Representative.
It does that make sense Mr
chair.
Which of those you know what I'm
asking is is oversight to the
state project that says all
right guys.
Your bill into much you need
reduce what your question for.
And accept a smaller.
Structure.
What and build it for the money
you have Mr just keep asking for
more money is what I'm asking Mr
chair.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
yes that we we do do we do work
with the state agencies to make
sure that they reduce the scope
in order to fit within the
budget they have thank you very
much thank you Mr chair will
fall Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman echoing
everybody could to see you off
so I'm a few questions
number one it was good to see in
the LFC recommendation more
staff to help provide capacity
and so I think that's one way
that we dial up our ability to
be able to handle outstanding
projects to the extent we can
hire people and I see agency to
help but she can only handle
seventy five percent so how do
we do the other twenty five
percent
but no so that's a good thing
and and hopefully we fund that.
The other thing is to have you
broken down why I mean kind of
an analysis of why projects are
held up I think sometimes we
hear a narrative.
That they're ill conceived
projects in the money's just
sitting there and we know it's
legislators there's a variety of
reasons why projects are held up
sometimes they're waiting on DFA
but that's really a minority of
time so it's just kind of at the
beginning of the process but
like sometimes we're waiting on
local government forever for and
we're on some of these things to
do their thing they're waiting
I've got a project with lighting
and sidewalks and they're
waiting on the electricity
company to do some stuff before
they they love playing the of
structure so there's a lot of
mitigating factors that I think
are important part of the story
do you do an analysis on what
percentage just bunk projects
not moving versus ones that are
kind of in process.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn we do
unfortunately through the
reporting system we have right
now it's pretty difficult to do
sort of summary analysis on X.
percent are delayed due to
supply chain delays for example
we have been working with the
FAA this interim to revamp the
capital projects monitoring
system so we will have the
ability to do that going forward
and I think we're expecting that
new reporting system to come
online this spring.
Close to being done
so we're working to solve that
problem in the future otherwise
LFC as you all are familiar
familiar with does provide these
quarterly reports that do that
kind of reporting on an
individual project basis which
you can use to identify those
issues issues with projects
yours you've sponsored and to
the extent they you know are not
just an uncontrollable supply
chain delay you know you can do
what you can to help move things
along with your local government
so that's essentially what we
have at our disposal right now
you know just to give you a
sense of the task of doing this
right now between the two
reports we.
We do that track projects
individually we're reporting on
over eleven hundred projects
right now
and again our information is
only as good as what's reported
into the system
and there's quite a lot of very
ability in that
but that is the resource that we
have.
currently thank you Mr chairman
Yeah well just ask the question
for make this point the overruns
we talked about this a little
bit in other venues but the fact
that projects are now a lot more
money some of them may need more
money.
How are we approaching that
challenge.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn so I
I want to emphasize that this is
particularly problematic for
local capital outlay projects
more so than on other funding
sources and that is because
there's really no mechanism to
give those appropriations
flexibility to address those
kind of things other than you
know potentially reducing
project scope which.
Sometimes can do the job and
sometimes it's not enough so
just to give you an exam a
couple examples we kind of
talked about there being a small
pot of money at least to address
cost over runs for state
agencies other funding sources
like that your mark funds have
been able to set aside a
percentage of their annual
funding specifically for that
use for the projects they're
giving grants to so they've had
a way of addressing that and
essentially the only option with
local capital outlay projects if
that is the source that
communities are really going to
depend on is for them to come
back to you a year later and ask
for additional money which
obviously is going to.
The more the project proceed
slowly
that said it you know in this
kind of environment where we all
know that's going on a lot if
you can identify those projects
in the requests you receive you
might consider prioritizing some
some of your funding to them.
Thank you I just say this I
mean.
I realize it it's cumbersome to
get these projects built and for
everybody involved.
And I think capital is sometimes
gets a bad name but it's this is
such a vital source of funding
for all of rural New Mexico
there so many projects we all
represent we're quite certain
that we just said No capital
outlay we created some super
bored.
In most cities projects whenever
get funding and I'm talking
about could be lighting at a
park.
Or whatever it is you know
really crucial funds to that
neighborhood for public safety
quality of life economic
development and so
this narrative that you know
it's broken and we shouldn't do
more of it for we need even in
times of unprecedented that we
should capita smaller amount I
don't know that I subscribe to
that just because this is
economic development this is
quality of life and this is you
know their representatives who
know how to spend it so I like
that we're trying to meet the
capacity challenges I think
that's obviously super important
I see bottlenecks.
but as I saw the grant of how
how amounts are being spent down
I don't see this huge problem I
see is a volume certainly big
volume there but anyway I
appreciate it thank you very
much thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman.
We know we have a structural
issue and and and I'm not gonna
let LFC in the if they come in
here and change their monster
from from the interim to to the
session right we can pick any
project the UNM cancer center
right there twenty four million
one of the nineteen million
short of of doing that right.
We need to fix that problem.
Going to fix that problem and
we're going to do it correctly
so they get done with those
those are priorities that need
to happen
when asked one question how does
DFA have the authority to
appropriate money without the
legislature putting in that that
in there is that in is that in
the capitol bill the Miskito no
she's shaking her head yes is
that we give them the authority
to appropriate money and cost
overruns in the capitol
building.
Mister chairman Senator that but
that the eight million dollars
actually in the house bill two
section and so it was it was
directly to DFA for the state
agency costs around so that's
the forty that we have and
that's what we do with it.
His secretary Romero and I
talked about cost overruns act
that that's only it's already
have you can come back in and we
appropriate money to other
capital projects that are short
Mr Chairman.
So.
The problem we have is is we've
had reflection a pressure since
twenty twenty and faster more
right and members have gotten
any up and say I can't finish
the sidewalk project in Los
crucis and the sliding because
wires at fifty percent in New
Mexico increase at thirty five
percent and labour's up forty
percent and in those cities and
counties are saying but we don't
have the money so we're going to
do.
Right.
And so.
Here's a detail sheet that you
gave us for our capital right.
And they're targeting the of the
state in LA right.
What we can do about the
ineligible stuff is DFA gonna
come with the list and say these
are ineligible and go to the
legislature in that all of these
are right.
Harrison road improvement right
everything in eligible in a
separate page
in sixty three I'm just going to
get number right it's an
eligible for and doesn't matter
DFA can turn to DFA terms
eligible or not eligible right
but do you going back to the
sponsor and saying we have a
hundred thousand dollars in on
this road it's an album are
going to fix that problem.
Mr chairman senators from out
currently they have two years to
sell bonds for those projects if
they're ineligible so we kind of
wait that two year time frame to
make sure that they don't become
eligible but you're right we
probably could do more and
reaching out and seeing if the
legislators you want to maybe
authorized that funding if they
are stopped like that.
And I don't think Mr chairman
and and I don't think
legislators even know that.
What legislators know that all
state agency projects in
eligible we're sitting here
saying telling whoever that is
your projects not moving with
projects that movie for the
notes.
And so that's going to have to
be a bunch of cleanup.
You want LFC to go back in and
get a list of any projects.
And Sanchez and it's all public
information right now anyone DFA
in LFC to sit down with and
start calling those that is in
the city the notice projects in
eligible.
They've nobody no I mean I don't
know and.
I I'm not on the list but
there's some stuff that I see
that is ineligible and other
tribes eligible.
We're gonna have to go through
it and that's going to be our
first artist to go to
legislators and state.
The projects ineligible what do
you want to.
Do you want to do right.
Bonding never going to be sold
you never gonna get it done so
move your money and and move.
No the X. complete.
I think this is my first.
Capital is the heart of the
hardest things we do just like
because.
In the sixty day thirty day
everybody from everywhere is
running up here to collect
capital right at a one time shot
and they're saying just funding
just fund the right in me is
legislators want to do good
deeds and we want stuff in their
districts but when when it
becomes this monopoly I and it's
a comedy it's environment for is
it's not older than.
But we're gonna have to clean it
up in so.
That's the first thing we need
to do I'm if I if I got a lead
by example limited.
And the agent's gonna have this
list right.
I have a couple project in
Bluewater New Mexico right.
In a drill during my last but I
need to get rid of that capital
projects it's not going anywhere
it's not going to move right.
it was in twenty it's going to
expire in twenty twenty four and
never gonna get it done the
schools getting bills.
It just needs to go away thank.
And then I want to take my my
chapter list and I'm gonna use
Churchill call in is chapters I
have three bathroom addition
construction I want those
wrapped into one project put it
in and we off bill for the total
amount three hundred thousand
eleven completed a larger number
and and and reduce that number
cap outlay that with some of the
stuff and if I don't say I never
gonna get it done in LFC you can
leave it so my list it doesn't
help anyone sitting on a list.
Put my money towards a cancer
center put my money towards an
acequia that that can actually
get stuff done right that needs
it.
That's the thing that we're
gonna have to as long as those
choices we move forward right.
in in so those listening to be
compiled and and and you guys
gonna have to go to legislators
and state projects invaluable
expiring twenty twenty three if
we put in in the off bill.
In and it's a simple
infrastructure project thank for
choosing the furniture that six
months or your use of force
gonna go away.
It's very simple to purchase
furniture if you don't have the
settlement money you need to buy
that furniture you need to go
back to your sponsor Intel money
more money to buy this furniture
from the lose.
But at some point there's going
to be a reckoning in capital.
And we're gonna finish projects
that need to be completed like
the cancer center lagoon is
another example that I use they
have a four million dollar fire
station they need three million
more to complete it.
That's a life safety issue we're
gonna put the other three
million in there and then
they're gonna have two years to
complete that project instead of
sitting there for six or eight
years.
let me ask one question on the
losses interchange and data of
this right.
We did that in twenty seventeen
and I don't member forget of it
cash our capital but that
thing's been sitting there in D.
O. T. has not.
Started the project.
Any deal to start the project
then we get a federal
reimbursement for the entire
project but we have a certain
amount of money in the Los Lunas
interchange down it's not moving
but I think that's one of the
projects that we will be
required to pay the federal
penalty.
for not to the IRS for the bonds
being sold in the project not
moving.
I'm not gonna waste money.
Doing that.
I
mean this is a heavy lift but I
mean it's time.
It's time to fix something that.
Everybody wants but nobody wants
to worry about the back into the
problem in the cost overruns of.
As as we can and legislators
imagine lot house members and
everybody's kind of listening
that.
If you don't take the
responsibility fiction problem
you have zero six chance of
success.
you if you have what success
fund your project correctly
funded fully in and make sure
that your cities and your
counties one another more of
Albuquerque's and come up and
testify on projects and and tell
you that he can't complete.
That are just gonna lay there
for ever.
And add to that list in capital
could be one of the best things
we do.
If we do it correctly.
Tell me I'll get off my soapbox
but I mean.
In my in my terms I mean.
It's hard for the people the
Navajo Nation and I may be out
all that we may I may be the
worst offender be but it's a
process with the Navajos and
hangs it up.
I appropriated it goes to the
chapter house chapter house goes
to big Navajo Navajo frozen on
the desk in two and a half years
later they decide that they want
to shift the pile off the desk
and maybe move some stuff or not
move some stuff and that's very
unfair to those chapters in
those people when we appropriate
money that way there's gotta be
some cleanup so thank you Mr
chairman for the thank you.
Campos thank you very much Mr
chairman and I'm gonna take a
broader spectrum approach to
this this morning for a couple
reasons first of all.
We believe this is the next
generation session.
And in talking about it over the
years and some of its historical
but I go back when I served as
an analyst with the late senator
Alex Martinez in Senate finance
and at that time there were less
this that were hand written and
those were the capital projects
with the resources that were
available.
Going on right around the
nineteen ninety or so there were
over two hundred twenty funding
sources.
Money all over and as it was
resources were used transferred
and a lot of projects were not
completed.
Then we started in we're dealing
with specifically state agencies
we wanted to ensure that those
agencies where up to speed to
take care of the people that
were employed for state
government and then we broke
away from some of that and we
what we got into local capital
outlay.
All of those things are good but
right now we're at the point to
where we can take the session as
the chairman has indicated.
And truly plan and you're going
to see several of the documents
that we've already put together
particularly the
Concerned about.
Can we make this more efficient
can we make this much better yes
we can we're going to and I'm
gonna go back to again to the
historical components people
that have the knowledge the
institutional knowledge like
Linda key hole people that are
coming up forward with new ideas
and if you will ways responsible
ways to help us put this
together so that every project
whether it be a lighting project
part project and infrastructure
project or if you will the
public building projects where
if we do the proper planning in
essence then we'll have the
resources available even though
we understand that there is the
cost of goods is the cost of
services there's a cost.
If you will of labor the
continues to increase in some of
those things maybe at the time
on noted but if there is that
proper planning which our staff
throughout the years have really
tried to implement it's a lot of
times beyond their control it's
been very difficult to do but
we're definitely at a stage in
this whole process where we can
make the difference and we can
insure that hopefully through a
planning entity where all
they're gonna do is we're gonna
take the information they're
going to ensure that the
information is correct it's real
time it's going to be the
information that we can make
decisions from then the
legislature will figure out how
they're going to authorize those
dollars.
From there then we start talking
about the planning we start
talking about the way that we're
going to implement that we're
gonna construct that we're going
to maintains that within
operate.
We don't take into consideration
all those things right now at
the local level we say that we
do.
That we get the resources for a
library and we can't complete
the library we don't have the
staff to operate it and then
from there were left if you will
going back to the local entities
to find other ways to assist
them also means our our issues
that we're all very
knowledgeable about.
So Mr Chairman this is just a
statement but in closing I would
say a couple of things.
The first is we've already done
a lot of due diligence and my
compliments to the staff to DFA
to the people that have worked
on this the second thing that
the chairman has mentioned LFC
throughout this last Intrum has
done a lot of work and this is
not the time for us to unravel
all that work that has occurred
will look at some of these
things and possibly negotiate
some changes but the bottom line
is the work ethic is there.
The third piece that is very
important for us as a committee
is to take these new assignments
that we're gonna be dealing with
very seriously and I say this
because as we deal with it it's
not just going to be what we're
gonna do is take resources so
that every member of the
legislature.
Comes up with an amount of
whether it be through capital
outlay if you will through
junior bills it's not going to
go ahead and be that we have all
these extra resources and we're
going to find other ways to
spend them it means how are we
going to create and take care of
the needs how are those needs
going to continue to regenerate
resources and then how are we
going to build a better economy
so in doing this
It's academic.
It really is structural it's a
database driven we have all the
tools before us and so Mister
chairman what I indicate as we
move forward is that we do spend
some time initially to truly set
the structure in place as to how
we're gonna change the whole
process for capital outlay
capital outlay distribution
capital outlay effectiveness and
and the and ultimately boosting
the economy and again to our
staff I thank you all for the
hard work that you have put
forward thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator Senator
Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
guys for the presentation well I
agree with some of my colleagues
here the intent of capital
outlay is very powerful
important because it allows
individual legislators who best
know the needs of their
community to directly invest in
those needs that you there but
the delay is in the process
isn't just frustrating for
appropriators it's also
frustrating for some of of our
beneficiaries and so mostly my
questions really are to you on
page three to best explain the
process what's outlined here is
exactly how I understood the
process of capital outlay and
specifically the area just from
projects budgeted DFA between
when the grant agreements are
executed it's recently come to
my attention when I asked a
question for particular project
one of my counties why are we
waiting on the environment
department to release the funds
it's my understanding that DFA
all be very specific on here in
the same year that I allocated a
large amount of money for police
departments DFA has executed the
agreement the vehicles have been
on the road for months at that
same time I allocated around the
same amount of money for
equipment that would have an
environmental impact Jenner for
sewer and it's my understanding
that because there was an
environmental impact DFA
couldn't release the funds that
the environment department has
oversight of that to release to
to give authority is that
correct.
Mr Chairman Senator Diamond yes
Sir with that particular project
was appropriated in the capitol
bill through the environment
department and so census through
them as the administering agency
if they're the ones that have
the authority to get into the
grant agreements and to release
the funds
that particular project although
it was very positive piece of
equipment sometimes equipment
purchases actually go through
the local government division
and not the environment
department that one in
particular did go to the
environment department so they
are the ones that ultimately
have to do the administering of
the project in in my initial
research this really just came
came for the last few weeks and
my additional very brief
research it seems that that came
through rule under an executive
order to Susanna Martinez who at
the time her environment is
Department was requesting that
and I say this because of my
conversation with the secretary
of environment he seems very
open to the idea because are
understaffed of not having that
responsibility I would love that
to go back to DFA to streamline
this process and I say that
because in the examples DFA is
releasing that that money at a
much quicker rate than
environments and all of my
complaints and I've been
provided for very short time and
I've already had to sign to we
authorizations which I'm
hesitant to do each complaint
I've had Senator Steinborn and I
just had another very similar
project with the heck up in
hatch also sitting on the
environment department's desk to
release those funds so the delay
the delay is not with the
appropriators the delay is that
state government is not moving
at the same rate of speed as
rising inflation it's sitting on
someone's desk and we simply
needed to release the funds I do
want to make this point.
Let's let me let me share with
the committee the response from
Environment Department to the
more Mr more miss madam mayor
has not had time to look at this
again are you aware that I
manage a hundred fifty eight
projects large birds just one of
many if I drop everything to
complete your work that I heard
other projects in other
communities that have just as
many needs I I called the
secretary to see how we can
better assist them in getting
these projects off their desk
all we needed was permission to
release the three hundred
thousand I allocated and the
additional because of inflation
the county the city was gonna
make up the funds we just needed
permission to spend our own
money and the project continue
to rise what's been sitting on
someone's desk I do want to say
that the environment secretary
this was approved within minutes
when he became aware of it but
there's countless other projects
are sitting there how do we go
back and maybe maybe it's that
executive order this is Adam
this is an administration had
been and move these projects
back over to DFA to see if we
can at least expedite the
projects they're sitting in
environment.
How do we do that.
Mr Chairman sentiment I don't
know the answer to that I think
you know what I know that we're
here I don't see looking into
creating a new agency maybe that
new agencies the right direction
more staffing this leave I think
could help the situation at
environment
there's also that you know maybe
creating a new division within
DFA that could also help with
these kinds of things
unfortunately with the staffing
shortage that's obviously what
created the situation
and and the the other the other
thing that you could do is just
reach out to myself and I can
see if I can maybe help push
things along and I do have
working relationships with all
of the agencies capital outlay
bureau staff and so maybe I can
help in the future as well
that's the only recommendation
given at this point how you also
included.
Mr chair tell you you had some
recommendations is that just
staffing is that we need to do
Mr chair Senator Diamond so as I
mentioned before we did it look
at agencies that have a lot of
projects and that have had
particular staffing challenges
in their capital bureaus to
consider providing them more
funding to staff up the
environment department was one
of them and it's one of the HSD
is.
That's mentioned in here where
additional staffing for their
constructions programs purely
colluded in LFC is budget
recommendation in particular
there the funding was for
contractors because the
environment department has had
it a lot of trouble retaining
and then hiring new engineers
who are the ones that do the
technical side of capital
project administration so that's
a significant bottleneck there
that's kind of unique to them
and we have been working with
them to try to address it thank
you Mr chairman maybe the maybe
the answer is if they don't they
wanted it under different
administrations they don't have
the capacity and its bottle
necking they're agencies to give
it back to DFA you can clearly
expedite the dollars out the
door so that they're saying we
don't have the capacity.
We don't want it we don't want
the responsibility why don't we
take it back and give it
straight to DFA to start moving
these projects forward you know
with the my suggestion thank you
Kelly thank you both of you
thank you to the environment
secretary who immediately when
he became aware of it started
moving around promises I have
several more projects are facing
the exact same situation
situation all within the same
agency thank you Mr chair Mr
chair Senator Diamond just
really quite the environment
secretary did also make Wesley
aware of that issue in
particular when I came to his
attention so that's something we
can look at the session to if
there is particularly projects
that might make sense elsewhere.
Well.
Senator of the this question
thank you Mr chairman.
I want to thank you Kelly Wesley
Linda thank you for still being
with us and of course all LFC
sees staff
let me just ask a question let's
circle around a little bit back
to this form that you have okay
on the projects that deemed
ineligible and eligible tell me
once again help me understand
why why are these projects in
eligible point we just
appropriated them in twenty two
and so they don't expire or the
deadline would be twenty four
for example we just did it
eligible I don't understand for
example here's a road
construction on Harrison road
for you know how improvements.
What could be wrong with that
that it it and you don't have to
going to specific projects now
because you may not have it but
I want to know the rationale
behind this what what is
happening why are they
knowledgeable so friendly Mr
chairman vice chairman regions
so most of them are on here due
to all the complaints and so
they have not submitted their
most recent audits to the office
of the state auditor's office
that's the majority of them some
of them though could be on there
because they just weren't ready
to start the project they asked
you all or us the the governor
for funding and you know maybe
they just weren't ready to go
without funding because we don't
want to sell bonds on projects
that are ready to move forward
those are the two primary issues
I think Kelly went over some
other was I think there was a
third one that you had also
stated they can be fired for
anti donation issues by the
board of finance and the reading
this issue that Wesley certified
all the projects have to certify
readiness to the board of
finance before bonds can be sold
thank you very much for that.
And you know I I am aware of the
certification in the house she
place and all the paperwork and
forms that have to be signed
sometimes joint powers
agreements and so on
but when we see the word in
eligible we do it it looks like
it's a foregone conclusion the
project is gone.
That is not good because the
project is not done that the
organizations who and
governments governmental offices
whose funds have been allocated
to.
I have had a year now not even a
year because the bonds were just
sold if they have been sold from
the two twenty twenty two
allocations and so it hasn't
been nearly enough time to deal
ever to put in eligible on a
project can we not be more
specific input like
No audit submitted so far for
canceling complete a
certification or in process.
To me it seems like instead of
saying ineligible Mr chairman to
say in process R. because
there's so many
so many things here that are
keeping them.
From being finalized and it's
too soon they just started on
this so yeah when I first saw
this I thought only count here
goes all my projects last year
and I just appropriated it
breast one park why is it in
eligible and you know so it is
that it gives a it's it's a
connotation that they're gone
and so if if organizations and
governments see this there they
have no incentive to proceed
with the certification paperwork
because I think it there in
eligible for whatever reason
they look to us to fix it but
this line to fix their languages
provide the funding that's fine
the that went to the right
organization but the wording
eligible is a problem.
Wesley one of these only one
project is eligible thank you
for all the rest are ineligible
and all the ones that that I see
here the money thank you and I'm
I went on the tell me a little
bit how can do to change this to
make it more real and and
transparent for the public Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez so for
the Santa Fe issue for the Santa
Fe projects in particular that
is not a compliance issue issue
so those are likely City of
Santa Fe fiscal agent.
Projects and the city needs to
get its audit done in order for
these projects to go to sail
the reading a certification that
projects have to go through with
the board of finance before the
bonds can be sold that is an IRS
requirement
so that's not really flexible we
can talk with the board of
finance about whether it be
possible to add to this report
the specific reason that the
project has been gone to sale
yet if that would be helpful and
we do distribute these reports
with the sponsor point that we
send out every quarter also just
wanted to make one quick point
kind of circling back to senator
Munoz as remarks earlier
you know I want to be clear that
LFC it from LFC is perspective
our message to you is the same
and I didn't mean to.
In imply otherwise I did want to
bring you the most current
numbers that we have on
outstanding balances so you have
the most current data to work
with and that does reflect that
money is moving.
There is some money moving
so.
That does not change the fact
that the number of projects in
the outstanding balances are
bigger than they've ever been
and we continue to think that
makes it especially important to
think about things that we've
answered emphasized over the
years as being important to
consider at the front end of
these decisions things like
project betting
some of the especially important
considerations that I spoke to
earlier things like reading just
if we consider those factors
when we make funding decisions
in the first place hopefully we
won't continue to see projects
held up.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
based on that Kelly once these
audits are done by different
municipal governments or panty
governments this gets released
up for continued process Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez yes the
projects on this list are
constantly re evaluated for
their the ability for the bonds
to go to sail okay my
understanding was that the
cities of Santa Fe was delayed
has been delayed on their as we
know on their audits but they
were gonna completed by June of
this year so once they're
completed if they are then this
will.
Take a different route Mr chair
Senator right Rodriguez yes than
the bonds for their projects to
go to sale.
C. okay so basically it does Mr
chairman so this really doesn't
mean that we can do away with
these projects just because we
see the word ineligible we can
wipe them out during this this
time what we're doing so much
review of the capital outlay
outstanding projects that just
means.
Wait for the process to to
follow its course the audits are
something we always require by a
certain date turn time before
certification is that a we can
proceed so I guess I'm just will
look at these as we go on thank
you for your hard work it's not
an easy process but as time goes
by will be looking at what our
what is the true number and one
of the projects that are sitting
there the two we can't go
anywhere because they're either
too old or because they they
don't have enough funding or
whatever the situation is so we
can improve the system thank you
so much thank you Mr chairman
thank you Senator sure.
Thank you Mr chair.
Kind of long same lines or is
there do we have a a reasonable
way to vet these projects before
they end up in the capital
outlay bill can we say wait a
minute we don't have an audit
for this particular of entity
that's going to get the money.
Beforehand instead of waiting
till June find out we don't have
the audit we're we're doing this
do we have a way to verify
shovel rating this of before
that happens.
Mister Mister chairman Senator
so as far as the first question
we actually have done that in
the past we actually have seen
if they have if there are an
audit compliance prior to the
building signed one concern with
that is they could become
compliant right after the bill
is signed and so if that happens
then they lose the funding if we
were to line item veto it or if
you want to fund it I'm so we
wouldn't want to do that but it
has been considered has been
done as far so already all we
can say is if it's on and I see
I. P. that means the plan has
been done and in our eyes it
looks like it could be shovel
ready that's the kind of review
that we do as far as you know
getting into further review of
that we don't have a process at
this time.
Mr chair Senator sure if I could
add one thing to that so this
simple betting checklist that is
on page two there are a couple
questions on here that speak to
that readiness issues things
like land property rights where
easements that are required to
begin construction have already
been acquired
total project cost is based on
estimates provided by a
qualified professional so
they've gotten a real cost
estimate for the project
request fully funds the project
or functional phase these are
all things that we worked with
Legislative Council Service to
get included on the project
summary sheet that you will
receive for local requests to
make it we hope as easy as
possible for you to consider
this information when you're
making your funding decisions
although ultimately how you do
that and whether you do it is up
to you.
So Mr chair I think that's
certainly part of the part of
the process.
None of my projects are on here
of but that's partly because the
San Juan County legislators sit
around and we talk about it
we've got all of the state.
And there are some things that.
It happened before those
projects ever show up on our
desk but that doesn't mean that
we don't sometimes.
There's a by pass road around
asked tech.
It was a three million dollar
project it's not five million
dollar project and they haven't
turned a single shovel of dirt
and now it's on its
reauthorization time.
And it's it's frustrating.
In this particular case there
were several things that got in
the way one was elected a new
mayor they didn't care.
I wanted to use a baseball bat
to make that care but people
told me I should.
But then the but then department
of transportation discovered
some kind of critter dirt mound
or whatever that they had to.
Built around so the more of that
that's the only one in San Juan
County and we're really really
got stock.
I would like to see if we can
not just a checklist for me to
look at but a checklist for an
independent third party to look
at and say you know what this
one really not shovel ready
there's a lot of times we hear
yeah that's ready to go but then
there's a lot of planning this
to use with the planning with
right away accusation is two
years worth of environmental
studies or whatever and so it
doesn't happen at all for two
years.
In in if we can avoid that I
think that would help a lot get
all that done by the locals
before we put any money into it.
So that's that's kind of a is
that something we can do is that
something you can help us do so
that there really is we really
know that but the time to do
that that capital outlay bill is
ready
for us to vote on that
everything on there is we're
ready to spend that money.
The inflation is is huge and I
think we ought to consider that
to fix one percent per year per
month.
that really comes out to about
twelve point six percent annual
inflation rate so if you've got
a million dollar project anyway
the year to do it.
Well all of a sudden you've
added another hundred and
Two hundred and twelve thousand
hundred and thirteen thousand
dollars to that to that project
in for a lot of these
communities hundred thirteen
thousand dollar money.
for me that's an enormous.
So if you wait two years it's
even worse in so if we don't
have some kind of system to say
if you're not ready to spend
this money now and and we
legitimately understand that.
We need to build in that
inflation number.
Because the projects not going
to happen if we didn't fund it
right so.
And then as far as us Senator
Rodriguez goes on here's a.
Governor miles of road
construction governor miles
promised in nineteen thirty
eight that he was going to make
the road from Bernalillo
Farmington safe.
Sixty five years later it got
safe so you have sixty five
years before that the.
Thank you Mr.
So by the.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm just
glad the road is safe now so
that's that's the best part
so just that a lot of my
questions Mr chairman I I got on
the list pretty late that were
were answered and I I really
like the example that all of my
colleagues here again on
different things I want to think
of Wesley actually every time I
called you you have been you
know on the spot and help very
very helpful so thank you very
much for that
I do want to know a little bit
more about these and live a
Levin additional FTE that you're
wanting I see they're already.
Vote for almost from based on
what you have outlined here in
the in the LFC report
will any of them go to sort of
general type of work and not
specific
state entities like you have
most of their.
Mr chair Senator Padilla so
those new F. T. E. or requested
by agencies through the budget
process this fall and they go to
the agencies that are listed on
the screen it so specifically
the spaceport Authority office
of the state engineer
environment department and
department of finance and
administration on a more general
level the infrastructure office
bill we spoke about a little bit
earlier
would it current version having
appropriation attached to it and
allow for the hiring of up to
ten FTEs that would do I think
some of the more general works
that you're so you're
referencing thank you Mr
chairman you know Senator
Diamond and and others on this
committee talked about
individual things going on here
Senator share and others yeah
just seems like there needs to
be some additional support for
the the general type projects
that are maybe.
Smaller in the amount that was
requested so that these things
can move before like you heard
before they're just too
expensive to to to complete so
is there anywhere else in the
budget that's going to provide
some additional backstop and
support for people like Wesley
and others.
Mr chair Senator Padilla
before answer that question
specifically just to to get it
something you're getting at one
of the one of what we think is a
really important function of
this proposed infrastructure
office is a coordination and
navigation function for
communities
so what I'm talking about there
is a state entity that is
specifically charged with
providing assistance in helping
communities coordinate and
navigate state and federal
funding sources so that they can
provide complete funding for
their projects as quickly as
possible which is really the
first thing you need to actually
translate these dollars into
real benefits in communities
As far as specific help for
Wesley in his bureau I don't
think we had staffing increases
in the DFA capital outlay bureau
specifically but some of the new
F. T. E. that are referenced
here at the FAA are in their new
federal grants bureau.
Sorry yeah there's also some
special appropriations
referenced on page two and that
would include an additional
appropriation to and new grant
program that resides at the FAA
to provide support to the cogs
technical assistance providers
to help increase capacity
through those organizations
after more local level thank you
Mr chairman thank you I really
like appreciate your comments
there the first comment on
helping from navigation
standpoint again I know that
several members here senator
Cory Hemphill Senator Diamond
and I think a few others
Representative Sweetser when she
was here discussed it there was
a lot of discussion and and the
status of sort of a rural how to
navigate state services and and
all that into our more rulers I
think that's great when when I
sponsored the bill that created
the office of broadband access
and expansion one of the
requirements there is to have a
group of specialists that helped
put the broadband plan together
for the most the smallest
community in New Mexico or the
largest that with a link up with
the state plan the federal plans
for that so more and more that
is going to really be needed
because our state is still a
frontier state the entire state
so so so thank you very much for
doing that and and then the
second thing I wanted to mention
Mr Chairman was what is the do
utilize an application to track
a project a dizzy until it's
completed I know about your
dashboard on the DFA website
that does of has a lot of really
robust and helpful information
thank you for that but what
about like a like a CRM
application my business and I
own nothing ever gets dropped
because the moment an action of
begins we define all the
different steps whether it's
seven twenty seven ninety three
and one step number fifty is not
getting done everyone
responsible for that whatever
gets notified so therefore
there's no confusion there's no
forgetting things there's do we
have that established for
capital projects in in in your
office.
Mister chairman Senator we do
not we do have a couple of
projects monitoring system and
so what that allows the need to
do is to go in there and the
status updates and they're
supposed to be doing that
monthly right now for the grant
agreements but that's all we
have as far as you know what
kind of reporting we gather from
them and where we are where
they're at with the projects on
there's different phases within
that system that they can tell
us if it's construction if it's
in the final closed out things
of that nature there's also
places for them to put it to you
know architects and different
contractors that they're using
for the project but now we do
not have a system like you're
like you're speaking of Mr
chairman I I highly recommend
I'm more than happy to sit with
you and explain what I'm talking
about in the little greater
detail this does not so this
just makes basically you know I
love humans but unfortunately
you what you're doing is you're
relying on a bunch of humans
that have a lot of people
responsible for one project and
when something gets dropped or
does it doesn't proceed it
sounds this is the next step
this this would prevent that
from happening because everyone
involved in that.
Chain of responsible commander
whatever for that particular
project they get notified time
is dwindling you know this
project is now behind by seven
days by the way you know that
these three things have to be
done before the project proceeds
to the next step so I hope that
you look into that
And I I have to share the
concerns on on inflation and
is there a report I I
thank you I have a paper that
you could you know put a whole
sequoia tree that that's how
much paper I have at different
times it do we have a a report
that tells us which projects are
at risk simply for inflation for
as a result of inflation have we
done that yet.
Mr chair Senator Padilla as I
mentioned earlier we are working
on revamping the capital
projects monitoring system so
that it would allow us to
systematically identify those
things
through the reporting functions
the entities are required to
complete but as of now with our
current reporting system we
don't really have the ability to
do that on a systematic level
because the only way we would
know is if an entity sort of
volunteered in kind of an open
ended data field to provide that
kind of information.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd sure
like to see you know which ones
are at risk that way we we know
what we're more north star is a
more aiming toward to get things
done so so that out there thank
you.
I have.
Senator Steinborn Sen.
Of the one of the so.
Is
this going back Cole a lot of
history.
You know but we have a hundred
twelve legislators and the
governor comes up with another
portion.
And every legislators.
District is very different and
very unique.
And I'll give you an example of
someone provided that gets a lot
of requests.
And I remember when
Representative Rick metals in
the house he would not even get
one.
You know and the Senator Larry
thought on you have a you know
he would put all his his funding
to the engineering department
because he didn't have request
you know so that's really
different you know the other
part is so just one last year is
I had a community center that
they needed eight thousand some
dollars to hook up to the sewer
line.
It was vetoed because it was not
over ten thousand I think that's
wrong to to have agencies over
project because you know they're
telling you that that's what it
was going to cost you know all.
I guess somehow there should be
fate you know that the truth is
there and the in the some
legislators areas we have a lot
of us sick yes you know and
they're not going over the
majority are not going to come
for big big dollars it's going
to be other.
You know their water assistance
or what they're doing or what
they're working with.
The end of the.
The part that
senator the biggest brought up.
Is so maybe we could work on
the.
Of the different choice of words
and terms instead of the phone
ineligible.
You know maybe partial or maybe
or just a recommendation of
what's needed us it's going
along you know like if there's.
Three questions that are needed
but once complete then there's
two just as we go with us we
work with that no one part that
all really puzzles me my area.
And the on a yearly basis I get
requests for more to be the
water sanitation districts of
you have a the southern part of.
Ranches that the house and then
you have tiles which is the city
and then you have a North hello
and the need to have Tulsa
Pueblo.
The whatever funding I find
tools water sanitation
districts.
Of the they use within that
summer it's gone.
And then I have other projects
that they just sit.
You know it to me a lot of it is
like.
Maybe just not having someone on
task monitoring it and pushing
it you know to make it happen
instead of flight Mexico because
why can this water sanitation
districts do it so efficient and
then and some of my other
entities so he just really
really takes a lot.
No another part that is unique
is so.
Say like I Representative for
four counties the we have a
Senator what do this with one
County.
It's really hard for me to.
C. R. via second see every water
within four counties and we do
get together as a delegation you
look to see what could we but
you know taking the word of the
other legislators that's what
they're asking for you know as a
contribution by each legislator
to to work with so it's a big
area you know it's so it's
Senator Campos hassle you know
half of the state and the so I
mean I think those things we
have to keep our you know just
a.
In mind you know now all going
back to Senator share.
All in the house side.
And hi a chair that committee
for quite a few years.
Yes we still have exactly what
you're saying is you would have
a hearing.
And then we have the different
agencies press of.
And right at that hearing the
agencies the state you're in
complies with audit you're not
complies with audit here with
this so the requesting group
have for information or
technical assistance or
resources to work with but it is
very time consuming.
And of the seventy members from
the house so.
You know somewhere really good
about it that some members did
not show up to the hearing sent
to but once it did.
No to the other part that a that
I really.
Notice of when we used to do
that process.
Is it really encourage for those
communities to work together
from the county commission to
the city to the to work together
and the wants to work together
we're very successful.
You know they they got things
going you know they really
worked but you know that's
something that we have had in
the past and it worked very very
well.
No of.
Another part that I kept and
maybe you could help or Miskito.
Yes we get a lot of time so.
It's sitting on the board of
finance.
It's it so what is.
Do they have are they backlogged
or they have a large volume or
or do they only need every so
often or.
Maybe if you just want to share
some process thought of that.
Mr Chairman so that kind of goes
back to this list so
recommendation of the board of
finance it could be this list
here these eligible product
projects it could also be trying
to draw the funds down I know
that there's special conditions
that are put on some projects
that deal with anything reduce
methadone nation issues to to
other special conditions and so
sometimes the on board of
finance might not authorizing
the pay out until that special
conditions have been met those
are the only times I know
there'll be held up four of
finance I think the the primary
reason though is the
questionnaire process and and
I'm making sure that all the
projects are eligible and not
and not showing up on this list.
The I am with the the US of
chairman you know we we can
improve the process if you can
prove a making sure that of
projects to get done.
And in another part that we
might have to look at is so.
I get seventy five requests
there's no way I can find
seventy five requests you know
we might have to go down to
where.
You know I don't know if it's a
dollar amount or maybe each
legislator only have three
requests or you know to if we're
talking about being complete.
In order to complete funding
we follow we have to work it
that way because so there's just
no way that I could fund that
many projects you know for the
amounts.
And the.
Well health.
You know
There's a lot of us that are
willing to work very hard to
make it you know the most
efficient and the best way for
our state so all these comments
are very welcome and you know
we're doing well and will and
with the.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
question do we publish these
capital outlay projects on the
status of them online.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn on on the dashboard we
have all the projects for their
status I think Kelly you guys
also do something as well Mr
chair Senator Steinborn so for
the projects that we track in
these quarterly reports on an
individual basis we do post
these online
and just to be specific about
which projects we track we track
projects that are funded for
more than a million dollars and
then on a somewhat less frequent
than quarterly basis usually
about bi annually we track
projects funded for between two
hundred fifty thousand and up to
a million dollars so there are
you know I think as I said
earlier we're currently tracking
and in the ballpark of eleven
hundred projects across those
reports projects funded below
that level if you think back to
the number I gave you overall
about forty one hundred projects
that are active overall we don't
have the capacity to track on an
individual basis although you
can look them up through the
dashboard or through the capital
projects monitoring system is
that a thank you Mr is that a
public process the public
dashboard Mr chairman senator
Munoz it's on our website and
you can there's also different
filters you can filter by agency
responsible for overseeing that
project you can filter by county
you can also download a
spreadsheet with all the
information from the dashboard
and down that's president look
through that special yourself as
well.
Is it connected to the sunshine
portal I don't know that that
would increase disability but Mr
Chairman now it's not it's just
on the DFA website on if you go
to the DFA website there's a
vast boards tab and just click
on the dashboard it is the
capital outlay dashboard that's
what I'm good at Mr chair as
this might be something if it
was visible it is visible from
the website sometimes things are
buried in what I can find of
those being visible and there's
being visible but maybe that
would kind of spur people to
move projects forward if they
knew that.
You know they're out there in
the public the status of the
project if it's not in
compliance are there waiting on
the city that people can kind of
see that stuff granted people to
lose with information it doesn't
mean that they look or care but
it's not just.
Thank you would be helpful to
transfer to the sunshine portal.
The people of the passionate
for.
And I'll just leave it there
thank you we don't know.
That.
Thank.
Senator Campos for the second
thank you very much Mr chairman
just very quickly on that point
thank you very much Senator
Steinborn because transparency
is very important so we know
what the LCS that the go ahead
and they get our permission to
go and post our projects and I
really encourage everyone to
ensure that would they have the
authority to post those projects
people know exactly the way that
we're spending their capital
outlay is very good point
Senator Steinborn thank you
thank you Mr chairman.
Hello.
What's your thank you Mr
chairman just quickly and truly
before I go on with my last
question let me again thank you
this is been an arduous task to
say the least for everyone one
thing that was revealed today
for sure is that we have a lot
of work to do it's not something
that is done in a few months or
overnight it is a huge system
that needs to be revamped but it
needs to be done correctly and
with that needs that time you
need more more staff you need
more information from
organizations from all of us so
it's it's gonna take a
collaborative effort to do
something it's a meaningful
change thank you last question
on that office that we're
talking about for this office
we're talking about is a great
idea for health advocate
clearinghouse in a way to assist
organizations governments
legislators everyone where at
where was this good what was our
plan I I don't see it anywhere
in our member discussing where
this office would be situated
would be part of the FAA part of
the state bureau HSD how would
it do it do you have any ideas
where we would want that Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez the
concept for this office is for
it to be a standalone entity
although it would probably make
sense to administratively
attached it to an existing
agency
and to this point the options
we've discussed are either the
office of the governor or DFA by
okay thank you very much for
that that's all I have Mister
chairman of the point total for.
I would prefer standalone.
I think if we attach it to
another.
You just bring some other layer
of.
Thank you.
Probably.
For a much better.
we want to thank you and thank
you very very much members we
have one more presentation that
will thank you for being here
thank you for the information
thank you and though it's will
continue working thank you Mr
chair thank you.
Tribal.
I don't know what the this
year's.
And so in the last.
We've probably got about three
hundred million dollars which
will be leveraged when I sold
you guys.
It'll be leveraged to about.
And then there's a bunch of
parts of the office also.
Is the is the.
How the state would by
leveraging these dollars of our.
A lot of good stuff.
I have.
Because I wasn't paying close
attention no.
Okay.
Convention.
I know.
Before we go.
Our.
Restaurant right now.
I think it's.
I I.
That.
Is it over for a.
Have the water discussion and.
More.
Local news.
We.
As you know in these facilities
talk about reforms if that we
don't really reforms from.
It almost needs to be.
Thanks committee works year
round you know I have to go in
presenting so project for the
committee noted for you can see.
Because all these questions we
need answered.
I.
That the that.
Notes on.
And.
Process.
We don't have to.
Yeah I do.
I was looking.
It's just.
No.
The.
Senator yes.
That.
Is.
Just.
Good staff.
To.
Status report.
Tractors.
Five four
sessions.
We can.
Yes.
That was right all of that is.
Thanks for.
This cap six well a.
Representative.
It's.
Not.
Like this.
For
those.
So we'll talk about okay.
It is
kind of like the.
Service.
Thank you.
We.
dollars for that just yes.
I'm just doing.
He looks just like I I.
At.
Your.
News.
Find some section.
According.
Right now.
Thank you so much is that.
Yeah.
Hey this is this.
They ran away.
Senator.
I mean.
Go head start center.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee from members of
the public the digital resource
in which I'll be discussing is
available it is available
through the committee websites
if you go to and I'm Legisla-
out of the committee tab in the
banner go down the Senate
finance and it'll be right there
it is titled.
Capital outlay training manual
and that's one of the items I'm
gonna be going over the second
item this is the public publicly
available report that was
prepared by the state governors
water policy and infrastructure
task force that has been working
throughout the interim I and
that resource is available at
the in center dot UNM dot EDU
and on there you would basically
search for quote state water
task force and the report will
pop up you in its spell do T. T.
O. N. for those members of the
public who want to access that
resource.
Mr chair in the capital outlay
manual this is a resource that
was prepared during the interim
in anticipation of these
initiatives and relation capital
outlay.
This Monday every single
secretary.
And legislative assistant from
the Senate side has been trained
to offer you all the necessary
support to do a lot of the
things that you just discussed
right so I want you to look at
page six really quickly on page
six days now this menu yes Sir
of the capital outlay manual on
page six you have leaks and here
secretaries have this manual
including an instructional video
of how to navigate the FAA's
dashboard how to access it how
to use it to get you the
information you need to have.
At and be able to make an
informed decision in relation or
capital outlay and for those who
are applying for capital we have
a resource for them that they
can look at to see it and but
themselves to see if they are
prepared to move the money if it
gets appropriated their way
in this resource we've included
contact information within the
very state agencies in the state
so this way your secretaries or
your legislative assistance can
reach out directly to get that
type of support in case there's
a question that they're not able
to answer themselves if you go
to page eight and nine we
basically provide on page eight
the legislative council's
recommendation of
The criteria that should be met
for capital outlay project to be
funded and on page nine
basically like a check mark
system using LESC system to
check the viability of a project
so if you all want you can have
your secretaries of legislative
assistance literally checked all
the projects you want to
sponsor.
And that them ahead of time what
you know give you a check mark
and make it easy for you to see
it's like this is what this
project is missing and then you
can make a determination about
funding.
If you look on page fourteen
we've included an example of how
the re authorization request
could be formatted changing the
language in the event you decide
to shift funding from existing
projects that are not gonna move
or having a lot of issues to
something else so we provided
that for you all and we provided
that training for your
secretaries who can help you
navigate of course the staff and
Senate finance the analysts are
more than ready to to help out
in that process as well from
pages fifteen through nineteen
is an item that was prepared by
the state engineer and it's
related to water law and
permitting specifically for
capital outlay projects given in
the crisis of the fires that
have gone on throughout the
state and the flooding and the
various water issues that we're
facing I think it's important
for your staff to have this
reason for you to have this
resource so you can find your
constituents the necessary
information to navigate the
bureaucracy that we have in the
state right so you have that
available and lastly on page
twenty twenty one which is the
appendix we've included a list
along with hyperlinks of pretty
much
state grant and funding sources
that can supplement capital
projects if you have any
constituents who might qualify
for some other existing funding
sources they can apply for that
and get capital so that way
there's a synergy between the
two funding sources to get
things done and to get things
moving on page twenty one
we've basically prepared a
breakdown of not only state and
local resource but also federal
resources that can be leveraged
so for example you have the
national referral list for all
federal resources not only
related to capital also included
to human resources Medicaid at
anything under the sun we have
that ready for you and your
staff.
So if anyone calls in anywhere
constituents Colin your
secretaries can navigate them to
this and they'll have that
information and help them
navigate that
this is a dynamic menu.
Which basically means that the
links that are here we can
periodically updated as new
information becomes available so
stay state agencies to send your
grant program all they would
have to do would be contact
either myself at age or not a
law or a Debbie sites and we can
add it into the existing
document that these things going
into so at all times this manual
will be current
so this is just a summary of the
steps that we're taking and help
the process along when it comes
to water crisis and oversight
We were tested kind of finding
out where all of the money is
what it's doing and that's what
page twenty one does it's
compiled into basically and
easily accessible and digestible
report that each individual
legislator based on your
interest on the issue to
navigate
and with that I would like you
all to find the Senate finance
staff guidance on the next steps
for what you would like to see
us to and what role you would
like us to take in regards to
the water crisis of New Mexico
so Mister chair I turn affected
okay before we go on a so do we
have all Darby size screen of
the percent also worked there
this sizes unfortunately unable
to be with us today.
Very well.
Okay members of.
Any questions.
The term.
Sen yeah so were we going to
break to go to the floor and
then come back or because we're
gonna be starting here
momentarily downstairs I don't
know how you want to handle it.
For.
Understand is that we're going
on the floor at eleven thirty is
that correct it was all.
Committee.
there are.
We're starting at eleven is what
was the goal is the plan
Thirty well if we get down there
though than it actually starts
so yeah let's try to finish in
the then that we would want to
come back to one thirty.
Open the floor session is over.
So any questions because it.
To make sure I know that I'm
sure.
Well these of state gives these
these water district's easier
Goshen district everyone I'm
telling the same story there's
not enough engineers out there
to to get this infrastructure
money back in place there's not
enough.
Professionals out there to
accomplish spending money.
When you ask what we can do.
I don't know what we can do but
that's a problem that I hear
from these guys.
So.
If there's money out there and
we're not getting it put in
place not putting it in the
better getting the the the
ditches the the the the
diversions rebuilt the flooding
problems cured.
A lot of it has to do with the
process of the of the
engineering and and it's flat
getting the paperwork done
before we can get the money
spent so how we solve that and
how we can help that I don't
know but that's the problem that
I as I see and again the many
regulations so many hoops to
many surveys.
It's amazing if you had
interrogation ditch that Bender
honored years.
And now we need to do a survey
to rebuild it.
I don't know thank you madam
chair Mr chair.
Anyone else.
The a little thank you we'll
keep this of the final rules.
And will stand on the.
It
does require I just wanna thank
you and put this together
while working at a helpful
resource for those that.
Available.
Thank.
What part of that we have for.
Will will stand on Reese's until
one thirty or after the floor
session yes.
We have a state of the state.
This one is the judiciary.
