Gonna tell you the outline. I'm
gonna turn it over to 10 Bodo to
talk about it a little bit more
Last year, we passed Senate Bill
131.
And it gave every district in
this state.
A more of a local share.
For, uh,
We did 30% across the board
except for the micro districts
and for them we raised. There's
two. We
To 50%.
So this is a state match that
we've increased. We increase the
state match by 30% for everyone
except the micro districts we
raised by 50%.
That
We inadvertently ruin the
ability for the small micro
districts to get a waiver
because we raised their, uh,
state match to 50%. So all this
bill does undo that for those
micro districts. It's just on
Page seven, and it requires us
to use the previous formula.
Just for that, So that's kind of
general and then turn it over to
Tim to do a little bit more.
Thank you, mr Chair. Actually, I
believe Senator Stewart did a
great job of explaining the
bill. I'm not going to add
anything to introduce myself. My
name is timbered. L I am a
senior analyst with L. E S c
Legislative Education Study
Committee focused on Capitol
anybody in the audience and
support
But when on zoom some over
strong motion for a motion for a
do pass place. Do it. Thank you
so much. I don't think that's
ever happened to me here. Oh,
yeah. We got to do a roll call
vote center brands in the room
to filibuster together College
with the clerk called the role
Cos. I mean, Oh, there he is.
Campus, So yeah.
Senator Bert
Oh, Senator, Boat, Senator Bert
votes. Yes, Senator Costas
Senator. Compost votes? Yes,
Senator Bradley? Yes, Senator
Bradley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzalez votes. Yes, Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill votes. Yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Sheriff Senator Scherer
votes Yes, Senator Stein born
Stein born votes. Yes, Senator
Woods.
Senator. Uh, let me go back.
Excuse me, Senator, Vice
Chairwoman Senator Rodriguez?
Yes?
Senator Rodrigues Associates and
chairman Oh's Yes. You have a do
pass correct.
Senator Stewart
Stewart. Do you vote in this
committee O move the table.
Yeah, we're gonna table the
bill. Now, uh, expert witness
has just justify this senator
slows your up.
No, I'm just I was but you
weren't here and I
Maybe him real quick.
What's that? How long have you
been five minutes. You got five
minutes. Uh, five minutes. All
right, Senator Brandt on Senate
Bill 87. This bill is, uh,
allows
Mainly your first responders to
return to work. Um, so yet
includes a lot more than it has
included in the past as far as
individuals.
Um, you can see a list of
remember what page but anyway,
it includes almost all all of
your first responders, fire
Um, you can see a list of
remember what page But anyway,
it includes almost all all of
your first responders. Fireman.
Your dispatch your police.
You're all of them, And that's
on Page eight. Sorry.
And the reason Senator Stewart
was talking about a bill that
she had it was similar is
because J. C representative J. C
and Senator Stewart has started
Bill with
Mr Bundy on the other side, and
we actually put that bill in
here.
And then merged the groups that
we wanted with that.
Uh and all of us have worked
together works for the unionist.
It's really all it does allows
them to go back to work. They
have to start entry level. They
can't start it back in the
management role they used to
have or the detective lead
detective role they used to have
the the the newly started
firemen if they're firemen
Members of the community. Thank
you. Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee carted by new Thats
me. We want to thank Senator
Brandt. Of course, President
Stewart Leader Chases center.
Padilla has worked with us on
this for a number of years. Um,
for a long time since
representative Rolla was able to
repeal the double dipping return
to work legislation from the
Richardson years, um, we have
advocated for a number of
protections and limitations. If
this were ever to go forward.
And we believe we have that
here. It's time limited. There
is a sunset of the truth is, as
the county's pointed out, and
they've been great partners in
this process, Um, as the
county's pointed out last year,
we could start paying our
correctional officers $100,000 a
year and you still need four or
five years of academy to get
them through into fully staff,
our prisons or at least to get
them.
Closer to what they need. So
this does have all the
protections we need happy to go
through some of those if you
have any questions, but we're
really grateful to Sandra Brant
and the other leaders who have
been working on this for a long
time. We think this will
alleviate our frontline
problems. It's only for
frontline. Um and then give our
employers time to raise their
compensation.
Which hopefully you can help
with this year as well but to
raise compensation for public
safety positions.
Uh, and get us to say for
staffing for everyone. Thank
you.
Yes. Let me go to zoom first. So
Val West Fault is on. Zoom you
before I go
Good afternoon, Chairman and
committee members. I'm Jalal
Westfall with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
And we've all read the headlines
of how hard it is for our law
enforcement agencies and our
jails and our fire departments
to hire and retain officers.
And Senate Bill 87 offers a
concrete financial incentive to
help encourage trained officers
to return to work or moved into
Mexico to continue their public
safety careers. It allows some
retired members of of Pere to
return to work and keep their
pension and qualified officers
and other states or the federal
government to purchase service
credit from Pera, and it has a
real chance of increasing the
number of experienced law
enforcement, corrections and
probation and
Roll officers in our state,
something that we desperately
desperately need, and there's
some smart changes in this
committee substitute and with
all the collaboration that the
sponsor and the expert witness
talked about their good that's
going to eliminate any chance of
abuse by double dipping. Having
early retirees come back and
fill the top ranks. It's going
to put the rehires where they're
most needed in the front line
positions.
SP 87 is now designed to deliver
more officers in positions
that's going to keep our state's
safe and so we're here to
encourage you to support it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
But there's gonna be
Uh, those in support.
Counties. Um I, too want to
thank Senators Brand and also
leader Chase E and and President
Stewart for the collaboration
along with the unions. The
counties have been, uh, voicing
the alarm about staffing in our
Dettori year now, um, we need
help. We have facilities more
than half with
Over 20% staff vacancy We have
many with over 30% 40% 50% the
juvenile facility and
Albuquerque has a 68% staffing
vacancy. We need help. Um, and
it's at the front lines in
particular. And this bill, um
Provides that help it provides a
bridge gives us an opportunity,
hopefully to staff up provide
the training and the stable
staff that we need going
forward. And, um, it has the
guardrails that the unions
needed and that we have, er
Scott, are you in separate?
Yeah.
In support. Correct? Yes, sir.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name's there,
Scott. Um I'm a prior law
enforcement officer myself
actually ran for sheriff Better
Leo on one side of the aisle and
did pretty good for myself,
considering I was a no name.
Just brand new person.
But I still the reason I did.
That is because I wanted to
help. I wanted to get back in to
law enforcement and help because
of a miracle that happened with
me and my disease.
And a miracle that was performed
for me, so I'm back to walking
and ready to get back in the
force. And, yeah, this is one
obstacle that is, I think not
allowed me to get in, and that's
why I'm looking forward to this
bill getting through and getting
back to work. It's already
hooked me up with maybe a
department that could use me
already, so
Yeah, This bill could really get
people like myself. There's a
lot of other people out there
like me that are probably either
have a minor disability or just,
you know, had other issues that
kicked him out for awhile. Went
on sabbatical. Whatever they can
get back in, you know, because
this is going to get us back to
helping. We just want to help.
We just want to help the
community. That's what we took
the job for originally, and we
still want to do it. That's why
we swore that oath and
We just want to continue to do
that. So I really appreciate you
guys taking the time to listen
and PJ Montoya.
I'm sure the Supreme Court
justice needs you back. So be
quick.
Mr Chair members of the
committee.
Uh, thanks for sponsoring this
bill. Um, I am a I'm your name
for the record. PJ Montoya.
Sorry.
Um, I'm the court security
manager for the administrative
Office of the Courts, Retired
Albuquerque Police officer and I
spent 10 years with the county
Sheriff's department.
In court security at District
Court in Albuquerque.
I know firsthand about, um,
trying to protect our courts.
Hmm. And having law enforcement
and how important it is to have
long force mint there at your
courthouse. Uh, are threats to
our courts have end to our
employees, Judges and staff have
gone up.
Quite a bit.
Uh, over these past couple of
years, so to have
Retired law enforcement be able
to come back to work is huge.
Um, somebody who actually knows
how to handle the public and
what to do is a huge plus for
us. I don't have
20 or 30 weeks to teach somebody
how to handle the public and and
what goes on in the courthouse
in and I just don't have that
luxury.
So they have somebody come back.
Who's retired and wants to work
as they say, you know,
enforcement and these type of
security. It's in your heart.
Um, I've been doing this for a
long time.
And it's in my heart and I care
about the staff and what goes on
there and to have
The ability to have our law
enforcement coming back to work.
Who wants to be there?
Uh, and want to work is huge to
us again. It
Drops my training time
significantly and this is a huge
help to us, my staff and and the
people in some of my courts and
district and magistrate
courthouses around the state are
worried they're worried about
They don't have anybody
screaming. There's nobody
screening from their stuff there
in that building by themselves.
So again, this is this is a
Big important. Thank, you know
Either one but
I'm just trying to get one could
have got the short one chair.
Thank you. Senators I wanted my
name is Miguel Tinman Represent
Albuquerque Fire Rescue and
Bruno County Fire as well as New
Mexico Threshold Firefighters
Association. So the 3000
professional firefighters across
the state of New Mexico want to
thank the senator. I want to
thank the leadership every
other, um legislator that has
tried to tackle this, including
center Padilla, bringing up
Bill's in the past.
This has been a conversation
about a
A lack of workforce in public
safety for a long time. We have
opposed this bill for many
years. I think I want to thank
the people involved, including
Carter that that puts provisions
that protect and safeguard
unions and the workforce. Um
from certain things. So we
support this bill, and we want
to thank the sponsor and we urge
your support. Thank you.
I think I'd carry this bill at
some point. Right, Greg? Thank
you to senator
Well, they have Carter Bundy on
here, but I don't think we need
Troy.
Here to talk about the angular
alert center. Stein born right
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee Troy
Whistler, Chief New Mexico State
police. Uh, I want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill.
I think you've heard, uh, at
length. I'll be benefits, but I
just want to reiterate State
police. It's just stand or
currently sits in strong support
of this bill. Uh, we feel that
it will help improve public
safety statewide basis,
especially and so in the more
rural counties
And as you heard earlier from
Miss Phillips, that detention
centers and in the courts, I
think that it will be especially
beneficial, um in those areas
and support public safety
overall, statewide in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Questions from committee
members. You hurry.
Lambert.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Just a
couple of mechanics questions.
mechanical questions on how the
supplies if someone is retired,
drawing from their initial
retirement
And they go back to work.
Do they does their initial
retirement going? Hold at that
point, or do they continue to
draw on it?
Actually, they would have a
choice. They could actually stop
their retirement, go back to
work and gain more retirement
years. Okay, they can go back to
work under this and their
retirement would continue to
accrue.
They would not get any more
years of service or the top
three. Okay, so and Mr Chairman.
So the new money will go back
into the original.
Determinant or do they start a
separate new retirement plan?
They would they would not be
able to gain any service years
unless they suspend their
retirement. Okay, so what will
happen is and that's the way
this actually helps Para
Is that money would go into the
fund.
But without any liability on it.
Great so that would have a pere
Everything.
Looks like a win win to me.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Oh, thank you very much. Mr
Chairman and Senator Brandt. I
really appreciate you bringing
this forward. This is important
for all of us. But if you can
just kind of go through the
scenario in terms of here's this
retired individual, a lot of
experience, they rose to a
certain level. They're coming
back. And when you say that they
started the entry level
compensation amount.
Is it minimum wage, or is it
going to be commensurate on
years of experience? How are you
anticipate that work?
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Senator. It's a good question,
but it would really be based on
the salary for the position
They're coming into their
probably years of experience
actually wouldn't play into what
their salary would be. Um, I
don't think any of these
positions actually pay minimum
wage, but it would be coming in
at that.
Hey, let's turn to work. So Mr
Chairman, tied directly to that
in terms of the individual
coming in their credentials.
And they moved forward and let's
say, for example, it's a mid
range position. Uh, are there
things that are taken into
consideration as an example if
it's going to be a rigorous
position? Do they have to go
through any additional training
or bit right into that and be
able to use their past
credentials in order to go ahead
and
Qualify for that position to
move forward. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
I will let our experts answer
that. Thank you. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Mr Chair, Senator, um, they
would need to any applicant
would need to be qualified for
the position and some of the
qualification requirements and,
um the the legislation provides,
for which positions they would
be eligible to go into so the
pay scale for those positions
would depend on whether they get
additional crisis. I appreciate
that, and just Mr Chairman, I'll
just close with this as well.
You know with. We want to make
sure that the people that do
qualify for these positions that
do have the certification if
there is additional testing, or
if you will physical
requirements that, uh, that
really be taken into
consideration as well because we
really want people to be healthy
in these positions and, more
importantly, to receive the
compensation that they're
they're worth as they move
forward.
That's it, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much.
Senator Steinberg. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I just want to compliment
you. I'm talking about this for
so many years as interesting as
stock. Carter walk in.
Then I didn't see you.
And I was literally looking
around the room. I was like
Carter left. The room is
inconceivable to me that you're
sitting at the table.
I'm like, Wait is sitting at the
table. He's in support of this.
Um, but you've been such a great
supporter of of of our
Looking after their in chest.
People of Ah
First responder agencies. So,
uh, just glad that we found
That's all it happens. Just
Rodriguez chairman, Um good
afternoon to everyone, Thank
Grace. And, of course, Carter
and the many others I'm sure
they're rather contributed just
quickly. I think on page. I just
want to make sure I understand
So a person can come in after
they've been retired. They can
get rehired for
Three years. From what I can see
here retiring. We limited to 36
months. And so what happens
after 36 months if they leave
after three months after 36
months, we just went three years
than they would be able to come
back after they sit out for a
while, or they're just done
After three years, they can't
anymore. Chairman Chairman Um
Madam vice chair.
It's just like we did for so
this is really meant to be a
bridge bridge to to help us fill
some of those
Really needed. We're gonna
crisis right now in our state
when it comes to law
enforcement, our first
responders were trying to fill
those gaps temporarily.
While we work with the academies
and work with the monies that
we've put aside, you know, for
years we've put money into the
fund to recruit
To to retain and so we're trying
to get more officers in the door
at the beginning level so that
this isn't necessary.
Um, the only way they'd be able
to stay longer than three years
is that they actually suspended
their retirement and came back
to work. And then the position
restrictions aren't there so
they could come back as a full
born detective, if they want to.
Suspend their retirement or they
could go to her tone and be the
chief of police that tone if
they wanted to suspend the
retirement. Does that make
sense? Yes, it does, Senator.
Thank you. And thank you, Mr
Chairman. Let me ask you this
question. Then when they suspend
the retirement, Uh, does that
mean that
Then they can continue to accrue
retirement after that, and that
was a purpose for suspension,
they would be able to accrue
additional time service credit
and retire with more. Um,
Hopefully I wouldn't see any
other incentive to
To suspend the retirement. They
would come in and retire with
more but all the time they would
have been contributing anyway to
P e r a of both employer, Um,
okay. And so Is there any limit
on the amount of years that they
would be able to come back after
they've suspended the retired
after 20 to say 30 years back,
and then they worked for three
years wanted to so after that
time
Um, can they just like another
10 years?
Five years. Whatever There's no
limit. I don't see any here, but
I wanted to make sure German.
Um, Senator, I think as long as
they are able to do the job
times in these are these are
hard jobs. These are not easy
physical jobs logs are able to
maintain their certifications
and continued to be able to do
their job. They be able to stay,
and then they've retired, and Mr
Bundy was actually telling me
when we raised the pay and as
we've seen pay go up. They've
actually had some come back to
get a new top three.
You know, so they suspended
their retirement came back got
got more years got a higher top
three so that their department
and our shortage because they
would have already confirmed
whether they want to stay. So
thank you. Thank you for that
last quick question And you
better from what I see here. It
seems like they would have a
three year window to get in.
They have to start make a
decision by 2027 0. No, it is
27 right before July, So we're
giving them a window just to
stagger it again, Miss.
Chairman. Um
Senator. It's because we're we
want this to be a bridge. We
don't want this to be a
permanent program. We don't want
this to stay around forever. We
have to come back and visit that
if we see that it's that we're
not getting
You know, but
We really wanted to fill those
holes. Why we come and recruit
young people into those career
fields and filling those gaps
the way that we really want it
to be so that the latter of
promotion stays the way it's
supposed to be. So that's really
the goal of this is get over
that bridge. Get over this time
when we're having a really hard
time recruiting things that are
coming through that will
hopefully help. Thank you. And
it's a good bridge because the
department and the employee
To extend that bridge if they
want to continue to come back
after they suspend their pen,
but reached a consensus and
that's what we're about. So
thanks again, Senator and Carter
and Grace and everyone and I
know you, You may have bruises
somewhere. You're working so
hard. I'm just joking. Thank you
very much.
Yeah, reading this and I'll get
to the page, so the person comes
back for the top three average
years, right?
Pays for their
What is the cost to that?
Mr. Chairman, are you talking
about somebody that comes in
under this program?
So in this program, they're not
adding to their high three.
They're they're receiving a
salary as well as their pension
and not accruing any additional
benefits, so they're not
increasing. The right discussion
just wasn't in page four line 12
member shall Cure service credit
for the period of subsequent
I mean, I looked at all the new
language looking at Mr Chairman
and members. That's that's
existing law.
Where did where in the bill, so
that strike that turned to work,
Mr Chairman, So today if
somebody returns to work, they
don't have the option to also
receive their pension so they
must suspend their pension and
they will accrue additional
service credit for years that
they're working at the higher
rate. Mr Chairman, correct. They
are just receiving their salary
plus their pension and not
occurring future benefits.
Interrupt, but they can accrue.
Wouldn't they after three years
if they decided to suspend
saying, Mr Chairman, if they
would have had to suspend Mr
Chairman, he asked if somebody
Still loves her job. After the
three years they would have
stopped their pension and then
they would start accruing
benefits.
At a higher rate.
Yeah, Mr Chairman if the salary
is higher than what they retired
at, then they would start
accruing at a higher rate. An
employee.
So, Mr Chairman, so if if a
state policeman retired at 25
years, they retired with 75% of
their height if they suspended
their pension and came back
there, adding 3% a year, so
they're going to retire at 84%
or whatever their next highest
36 months of salary is and so
they're going to pay in for
that, but they're also stopping
the pension for three years, so
they're not taking money out for
three years, so they're paying
in not taking it out to
Um
Pay for that increased benefit
going forward.
How many years did Mr Chairman
all all plans, with the
exception of judicial magistrate
can earn up to 100%. In most
plans, they must work 33 years
and four months to get retired
at 20 work. The seven
But solve it.
Yep. Mr Chairman, uh, they would
because they're paying in. But
while they're also paying in,
they're not taking out for that
seven years at a certain rate.
Seven years of short service.
To 90.
Hit the ship. If I worked the
six years to get the hunter, we
can look at it in more detail,
Mr Chairman, but also that six
years of not taking benefits
out. I understand that, but the
benefits were that they retired
32 and 80,000 instead of
25 or six
At 100.
You better come to the mix so we
can hear you.
The only thing I would add Mr
Chair if I could. Is that, uh,
the possibility that you're
laying out is going to exist
whether this bill passes, build
a higher pension and come back
to life for how's that? How's
How's that's actuarially
affecting the, uh, in that? So
if they're if they're accruing
Additional benefits. There is a
cost Mr chairman. Under this
bill, there's not because they
are still paying it.
And restricting no additional
benefit.
I mean, uh, you left us for like
Benedict Arnold over there. Um,
page 10 of your bill work.
What if there are better there?
An award winning can run a
selective minute mile and he's
desk. And why would we not let
that in? Because you're returned
to
Mr Chairman. Thank you for the
question. So I think the idea is
that first of all somebody
returning to work has only a 36
month shelf life.
Ah in that position and well
because WalMart greeter has 36
month shelf life, so so there's
only a brief period of time the
employer can get the advantage
of that, and the goal really is,
as Senator Brent said, is to
provide a bridge to allow the
academies to do their thing to
allow, hopefully with support
from the state.
Um our cities, counties and the
state to recruit and retain more
people, and you don't want to
kick out somebody who's 25 years
old and still has 20 years of
career in front of them. They're
really the heart of the
workforce for the next 20 years
because we passed this law we we
think that would be a really
bad, unintended consequence. By
bringing people back. We
squeezed out some people who are
the future of the department. I
mean,
I agree with me.
And
If you have a better employee
And so why would I want to
Mr Chairman, I think for your
aunt
What was her name again?
And Ethel that she could she
could alleviate that issue
completely by not using this
program and just suspending her
retirement going back to work.
Were you telling her? This would
only apply to those who have
gone back for the 36 months
where they only get the 36
months.
Um, and it wouldn't apply to
anyone else so if they just
returned to work, suspended,
their retirement started
accruing retirement again. None
of this applies.
This would only apply to those
who have
Kept their retirement. Um let me
ask you understand what question
different phrase and Sandra, who
is 25 years and five complaints
of Ethel because you came back
to work, and you just
That's an employer's
prerogative. I don't know if I
violation.
So, Mr Chairman, First of all
Sam's widow statue, Sandra would
have already been fired. Well,
that may be true. I'll give you
that.
But especially when you're
looking for I would I would have
to, uh, to to
To add
One of the issues that the union
and system
Mr Chairman, Um, we I totally
understand our members want the
best employees working alongside
them as well. If someone is on
tiktok all this time, even
though we may have a contractual
obligation to make sure there's
fair process.
Good management should get rid
of someone who's spending all
their time on tiktok instead of
chasing down criminals, So that
is something that the in and
respectfully does happen even in
public service. Um this was an
important thing to our members
because we didn't want a
situation. We think we're very
far in any of our facilities
from facing layoffs because we
have so many vacancies. But if
if we were to be in a situation
where we did have layoffs
We would hate to have people
have put in 10 years.
Who are doing their work and
have those people laid off when
there's somebody who only has
another six months. Um we would
hate to lose that part of the
workforce. Um and and you can be
fired for calls.
Sandra doesn't do her overtime
required officers.
And Sandra reporting to work.
Mm hmm. Currently, they're
they're required to do
Why would we still pick someone
that did their pension and does
good work? Because
You're
A good employee to stay in and
She has to go.
Mr Chairman, I believe that
would be insubordination and
tell you to show up for work.
And while it least in
Mr Chair. This This was a
compromise provisions on the on
the part of the counties as
well. But, um, in terms of the
point that you're making, um,
this doesn't
Effect and employers ability to
discipline for cause. Um, and it
would only
Be invoked if there were a
layoff, which is a without
cause. Um, we have too many
employees or we don't have
enough money or whatever the
circumstances are, where
literally people are being let
go without cause. And in that
case, um we would agree as we
have in negotiating this bill.
That the the short time returned
to work, Um, category of
employee would be released for
no cause.
Question point here that one of
the points of for discussion
here for your work that you
continue to do on this, Um, one
of the pure, you've worked it
out. Believe me, I'm ready to
listen. But if a person has
retired
And we know that yours ago and
they hardly made any money. I
mean, I know several people that
retired even from the county or
the city with 25,000 a year.
You know that that is a
retirement.
After 25 or 30 years of work.
And so they come, and we
understand the three years is
not an issue at all, even for
discussion because they don't
have to pitch in the period.
They don't approve anything. And
so while they're pitching in,
but they're not accruing. But
after the three years if they
choose to suspend their pension
and start again like a new
employee, Okay, you're really a
new employee. At that time, you
can start accruing your
benefits. You start paying into
the system.
And you and the employer
salaries today are much higher
than they were not that they're
high enough, but they're higher
than they were back then and so
automatically an employee comes
in with instead of the 25,000
that that person retired. It's
going to come in with the
beginning salary of maybe
50,000. I would think something
like that.
Um, just to start off with But
then, after three years that
employee could be making maybe
60,000 depending on whether they
even move them up. He does so
just say maybe 60 70,000 the
main question, really here would
be that we are calculating the
difference because that it's
going to cost the state by
virtue of the fact.
That those three additional
years that the employee worked
for at at a salary of 50,000.
Now they're also the highest
years, for example, but the
employee isn't limited to three
years after that, they can work
for another 1015 years, right?
And so that being the case they
can make up to 80 90,000. And so
the difference between the 25
today
And the 80 or 90,000 is the
retirement and the cost would be
for the employee and the state.
And that's fine. The employee
has worked in there that we
figured out that difference in
calculation and Greg, you're
really an expert in good at what
you do on that. So can you
quickly just tell me to help us
all be on the same page.
Uh, Mr Chairman and Madam vice
chair so people can do that
today, and there have been
situations where members have
done that. So depending on the
situation, we are going to pay
out a bigger benefit, but
they're paying in on a larger
salary, and like I said there,
they are not taking out. Um
A pension during that time while
they are working. So if you
wanted me to run in a specific
scenario, free wall, I'm I'm
happy to do that to to give you
a sense, Dollar wise what you're
saying they're not taking out
during because they're like new
employees. You know they're
painting in and they're working
in the state pays their portion
considering
The circumstances that we're in
today. We try to do things as
perfect as we can, but tweak
them right to adjust to new
scenarios. We find that appear
as we're going along, so thank
you. Thank you Give you one
other scenario, I think you if
in Gallup
And media to recruitment class.
How do we bring that new young
you were trying to fill that at
some point it may feel And how
do you do that Return to work
employee?
I mean, it's not a budgetary
issues. And so how do you handle
that? I mean,
Mr Chairman, one of the
protections we wanted, and we
actually discussed this exact
scenario you probably as a
policy matter don't want to fill
the last spots in, um in your
department with return to work
employees so you can only bring
somebody in under this program.
if you have a vacancy rate of
10% or higher
So that way if people are coming
out of the academies and all
they've ever wanted to do for
their whole lives, is worked for
the Dona Ana County Sheriff's
Department.
If you cannot bring in somebody
as a double Dipper as a return
to work employees if you have a
vacancy rate of under 10%.
You can only do it if if you
have 10%. So that was there are
spots open of the last spots are
never going to be filled by
people employing this program.
I mean, it doesn't matter when
you're requiring staff.
Many is morale is low because
the C Y F D working are building
up. You want to go try to work
on some of this, Mr Chairman,
just so you know where it's at.
It's on page 10 paragraph 10,
But if I'm in a prison in the
law requires me to have
Mr President.
Carter just said Mr Chairman,
they cannot hire additional
return to work employees if
their vacancy rate is below 10%.
What's the correction varies
from facility to facility, but
it's 30 40% in a lot of
facilities. I think Miss
Phillips probably has specific
county information.
68% in Albuquerque at
Bacon's. That's why they're
pulling
Yeah, point that buddy.
Higher returns.
I mean, William your original
scenario, if if they hired the
return to work person, and then
then this wouldn't apply because
they're not laying them off, so
they would then be able to keep
them on and take care of that
situation that would at that
point, it would be a management
of that department would be able
to say, You know, we want to be
a little bit over.
Because we have people have a,
um the other situation on C Y F
D.
In the real world. Things don't
work that you wouldn't want it.
Real world.
Candy lands in there. I
completely understand what
you're saying. Mr Chairman, and
I'm
Senator Byrd. Senator Bert votes
Yes, Senator Comp.
Senator Brantley votes. Yes,
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Padilla. Yes. Votes?
Yes.
Senator Scherer.
Senator share votes. Senator
Stein born boats. Yes, Senator
Woods.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzalez boats. Yes,
Vice chair Rodriguez.
Yes. Rodriguez Boats? Yes.
Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill Boats. Yes, Chairman.
Minnows boats? Yes. You have a
do pass.
Mm.
Hey, I would prepare. I would
prepare those amendments for the
senator Souls and then we're
gonna quit past time is fluid
up. No object.
There's holes.
You're this bill comes about it
has to do with per diem rates
that that we all get, and when
they're trying to fill out our
per diem, they've got to look a
couple of different places for
which rates apply. Actually came
aware of this when I had to pay
back over $1000 because the L E.
S C was looking on one sheet
instead of another sheet on the
per diem rates.
It simplifies all of that. It
puts all of them on the G s a
system and whatever those rates
are at the federal rate, whether
you're for your per diem for
your mileage by car, whether
it's flying in a personal
aircraft or writing a
motorcycle. It follows the same
system all the way through the
for diem rates for aviation was
set in statute back in 2004.
And it never been updated since
then, and inflation as about cut
the value of that in half. And
so this just very
Um, puts it all under one system
to make it easy. And then it
escalates every year based on
whatever the federal changes and
pretty, um rates.
Question. Anybody. Anybody in
support?
Anybody in opposition?
Rodriguez? Thank you quickly,
unaware. Beat already. Tire
center. Thank you so much for
this. But tell me again, you
mentioned LSE, and that's what
threw me out here. These are
just making sure that the podium
rates are, um, streamlined for
is a specific
To L. E s C or specific to
anybody else.
For Matt, Mr Chair, and Senator
Rodriguez. It just makes it so
that the system is the same.
Whoever is doing the
reimbursements for legislators
that they are all following the
same system. You don't have to
look two or three different
places, depending on what the
motive travel was or who it was
or things. Thank you. Thank you
for explaining Mr Chairman.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman and Senator. So does
this change anything about the
way we
Mm. Mr Chair and Senator. No.
When you're actually traveling
by commercial air, it is usually
buy the ticket price that you
get for that and I don't follow
whether I think it's the lowest
first class. I mean, there's
some things in there, but this
is not this is for privately
owned vehicle reimbursement
rates. It doesn't really
commercial, Mr Chair and Senator
not commercial at all. No, I
just want to double check in the
Public square motion by Senator
Gonzalez, second by
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes.
Yes, Senator Campos. Senator
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley.
Brantley votes. Yes, Senator
Gonzales.
Senator Gonzalez votes. Yes,
Senator Hemphill. I'm sorry.
Senator Hatfield votes. Yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes. Yes, Senator Scherer?
Yes. Share votes. Yes, Senator
Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods Center Vice chair.
Yes. Rodriguez votes. Yes, Yes.
You have a do past 10 in the
affirmative zero in the
negative.
Thank you. Thank you. Committee.
That's what a five minute bill
looks like Candy. Okay, take
care,
Great. That's it, So we're at
the point while wearing bills
and the problem here, this next
Bilko centers are wanted or at
the point center compost where
we're stripping appropriation.
A and for our bill analysis is
the l to the friends of my left
side. The left side of me over
here. They don't. It's a factual
of the
