I think, good afternoon
everyone. We're gonna go ahead
and get started.
The subcommittee this afternoon
and so uh I think what we have
on the agenda this afternoon.
Uh, for those that are
Listening online, let me put my
eyes on so I can.
We
Overview of her early childhood
and welfare investments, uh,
Rachel Mercer Garcia, analyst
with the LFC and then Kelly Clin
and who's the other that's.
Uh, chair, my name is Sarah
Duns. I'm a program evaluator
with uh LFC. OK, great. All
right. So, um, I will go ahead
and I just turn over to Kelly.
OK, great. We'll go ahead and
get started then. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members Committee, again,
Kelly Klund with the Legislative
Finance Committee to my right or
my two colleagues, Doctor Dents
and Doctor Garcia.
Um, I've been the principal
analyst for early childhood for
LFC for over a decade, and
Doctor Dents is mired on many
of.
in our health and human services
area and Doctor Garcia is our
principal analyst for children,
family and youth along with lots
of other agencies.
So we're going to begin this
presentation, but before I start
with the PowerPoint, I just want
to highlight in your volume
documents before you.
There is volume one, which is
your thinner document, which is
your policy document and
starting on page 23.
There is a good write up about
child well-being and that both
includes um early childhood and
child protective services and
might have some differing, um,
Data, then this presentation.
And then I'd also like to
highlight for you volume 3.
This is gonna be a really good
one for you. So volume 3 is your
spiral round one with the black
rings.
And starting on page.
79 and then it goes for several
pages. There's a lot of um
really important data points
both on juvenile justice
population, uh, CPS caseloads,
early childhood spending and
breaks it down by programs. So I
would encourage you while we're
having this conversation to flip
through those to get some more
detail. And with that, we will
start with the PowerPoint.
So if I could get to the first
slide please.
Thank you.
So in this presentation we've
been asked to give kind of an
overview of what the early
childhood system is, how we've
been with the history of the
spending is and where we are
today and what outcomes and
population services we've been
getting. So that's the
presentation today.
This is a visual representation
of the really large early
childhood programs in New Mexico
and the way you read this chart
is you see that pinkish arrow on
the top.
As your age range and so
prenatal to 5 years and older,
and each block below that is a
program in early childhood, and
it spans the length of the ages
that it serves for children. So
for example, home visiting and
start prenatally, and it can go
until age 4, depending on the
model, and so you can see each
one of these programs, either
title, and what age range of
children that it serves, so you
can have a visualization of what
our
the next slide, please.
Right, this is our most recent
birth data in New Mexico, and
you're gonna see a trend here
that we have had a declining
birth rate since
Early 2010. Now, when I started
this position over a decade ago,
our cohorts were closer to
26,000, and now for each birth
cohort, we're closer to 21,000.
This is important for a lot of
reasons. One of them being that
we have to build systems to the
right size. We can't build an
early childhood system for
26,000 kids per cohort, when now
we have more like 21,000. So
every year when we're making
these funding decisions and
we're looking at commuting
investment or having to readjust
to that declining birth rate
every year, and we need to be
really smart about investing
those dollars and not
oversaturating or under
saturating communities based on
these.
birth demographics and we have
these at a community base, but
it's just really interesting to
look at it at a population base.
So with that, I will ask for the
next slide.
Alright, this is a slide.
That just shows some of the
history of early childhood
spending over the last decade,
and you can see that tremendous
growth and each one of these
bars.
Is those early childhood
programs we saw in that first
slide.
by their, uh spending.
So you can see that for
instance, that blue childcare
assistance is our largest
spending area, and you can see
that it rose from below 100
million in FY 13 FY 12.
To closer to over 300 million in
the current fiscal year. So by
program you can see the growth
stacked up together and we were
spending below $200 million on
all of these programs in FY 12
and we are closer to 800 million
in the current fiscal year. That
doesn't include growth for the
recommendations coming in this
fiscal session. This is just the
growth of what exists right now.
And so there's lots of funding
sources that go into this.
There's State General Fund, when
you know the early childhood
Trust Fund, there's federal
revenue.
Um, matching Medicaid revenues,
and those are all mixed into
this, but this is a lump sum you
can see the overall system
funding growth.
And if you want to see how each
one of these programs is broken
down by revenue source. There is
a table in volume 3 that does
that for you. You know, I've
been doing for this 12 years and
I still get nervous every time.
So on page 85 of your volume 3,
which is your spiral bound
again.
That'll break down each one of
these programs. So for instance,
your childcare assistance is the
first program, and it gives you
every revenue source for
childcare assistance, uh, lines
1 through 8, and you can see
whether it's federal funds,
general fund, trust funds. So
for each one of these, if you
have a curiosity of what's the
main revenue source driving
these programs for us. This
table will show it to you. It's
this page and the next page.
So with that, you can see that
we've grown over 251% since
fiscal year 15, which is 25 now,
so we're 10 years, we've grown
251%.
Next slide, please.
Oh, I will note also on that
last slide, that doesn't include
federal direct programs. Many of
you have Head Start programs in
your local communities, Head
Start does not go through the
state. It goes directly from the
Fed to the Head Start providers,
so there's about another $80
million going from the feds
directly to Head Start providers
on top of that revenue source.
Kelly, does that include those
head starts that are in tribal
communities or are they excluded
from that to I don't, I think
that's uh Indian tribal had
starts are not included in that
80 million.
It's probably additional if we
add that on.
We should.
I believe that, but let me
triple check that I'm gonna
bring it back for you.
OK, so, um, the next slide I'm
actually going to turn it over
to Doctor Dents. This is some of
the recent program evaluations
that we've done at LFC in this
policy space.
Alright, thanks, Kelly. Uh, so
since 2020, we've had three
different evaluation reports
that are focused on some of the
different factors within, uh,
the early childhood space,
including home visiting, uh, or
over, overall early childhood
landscape. What we do is we do,
uh, every other year we do an
early childhood accountability
report. And we also did an
evaluation looking at
pre-kindergarten. Uh, the
evaluation that we did in um
pre-kindergarten in 2020 showed
that pre-kindergarten has some
really strong positive outcomes
for kids, including uh increased
likelihood of high school
graduate.
situation, um, and the other
thing that we found that was
partial particularly uh
concerning was that the
standards were different for the
programs that were run from, uh,
public school providers versus
the programs that were run in
community or childcare
providers, and we're doing a
follow up on this evaluation
right now. Uh, there should be a
progress report coming out in,
uh, late spring, uh, early
summer that looks at how pre-K,
uh, has changed over the last
few years and whether there's
been a change in impact.
Uh, the next evaluation I want
to point out is a home visiting
evaluation. Uh, what we saw here
is that home visiting has many
positive outcomes for families,
but that our state needs to
increase the number of
individuals who are completing
the program. Uh, what we see is
that relatively few families
actually go through the full
dosage of home visiting as you
would expect, and this is akin
to, uh, if someone, if someone
is prescribed an antibiotic by
their doctor, and they take it
for half the time or 1/3 of the
time. And so maybe that's all
they need, but they.
may end up needing uh additional
or more, uh,
Uh, specific, uh, treatment if
they do that. Uh, we also wanted
to point out that home visiting,
uh, serves a relatively small
proportion of children from
birth to 5, and this is
especially true for our Medicaid
home visiting. Um, and so this
is something that we'll talk a
little bit more about later, um,
but we had some recommendations
around ensuring that our
Medicaid and state-funded home
visiting at the same rates so
that they were getting the
providers are getting paid the
same amount regardless of which,
uh, model they were using.
Or which method of payment they
were using, excuse me.
And then the last report I want
to point out is our early
childhood accountability report.
Uh, the main finding here that I
want you all to remember is that
uh we were we were finding that
capacity for our infant and
toddler care seems to be below
uh our need. And um this is
something that we've probably
brought in front of you all a
number of other times, but
that's a point that I know is
reflected in some of our budget
recommendations. We also see
that for the recommendation from
this report was that our early
childhood, uh, agency and our
partner states and she should
continue to monitor both program
implementation, as well as the
just programming to meet our
family's current needs. And with
that, I'll turn the presentation
back over to Kelly for the next
slide.
Thank you.
Given the really immense
investments that have been in
early childhood. We have an
early childhood evaluation open
almost every single year, so we
actually have a really robust,
um, history of evaluations and
how these programs have been
going. And so I really encourage
you if you want to talk about
details of your community or the
history of the evaluations that
happen in all these programs to
reach out to Doctor Dents or one
of her team. We have.
Forestors reports on how these
programs are running.
So let's focus in a little bit
on the programs themselves. This
is childcare assistance,
childcare assistance is an
economic support program. It
pays for childcare costs for
families that in certain income
level who are working or going
to school, so they have to be
having it participating
activity.
And the state a recent not
recently, a few years ago raised
that income eligibility to 400%
of the federal poverty level.
Now, this table that shows you
the most recent 2025 of what
that means for income. So if you
see that green part, for a
family of 2, that would be
$840,600.
would be federal, so you'd be
eligible at that income level as
long as you were, um, had a
participating activity. Now,
given that that 884,000 is well
above the average income for a
household in New Mexico, that
means that most families fall
eligible into this program.
Um, and obviously the escalates
by the size of family reaching
to 172,000 if you were having,
um, I will note that, you know,
we've done a lot of evaluations
on childcare assistance and we
do know that it has effect on
family income.
Well, child visits and dental
visits, but we haven't seen the
longevity that it would have
educational impacts. It fades
out at the 3rd grade and so
When you're looking at early
childhood programs when you're
looking for your investments,
you want to look at the types of
outcomes that each one of these
programs provide.
The childcare assistance does a
really good job of family income
support and work support.
But if you were looking to
change educational outcomes.
This program has a fade out and
so you might want to focus on
pre-kindergarten instead, so as
you're building your
recommendations from this
committee for financing.
You want to be really strategic
both as we talked about the
size, how we're investing in
communities for the saturation
and the focus of the outcomes
you want to receive by investing
in those programs that you want
to change the outcome for.
So let me get to the next. So
here's some more data on
childcare assistance. This
shows, um, on the far left, the
enrollment growth since the
poverty level was changed, that
big dip is COVID, um, and so
that wasn't like everybody left.
It was just the pandemic at the
time, but then you see the
change in FPL.
And we used to serve around
21,000 children in childcare
assistance any given month,
pre-pandemic, and now we're
serving about 30,000 kids, so
quite a big growth in how many
children are enrolled in that.
The next table shows the average
annual cost we're spending for
these children, and you can see
that we've been increasing the
rates for those children. So not
only do we have more kids, we
are paying more for children.
And so that's increasing your
costs.
And this last slide, uh, last
table on this slide shows what
um rates are for early childhood
for infants and toddlers in
particular in New Mexico. So
what the rates are versus what
the state average cost is versus
what the national average cost
is for those two cohorts. Why am
I focusing on infant and
toddler.
Infants and toddlers are the
most underserved when it comes
to childcare assistance in the
state.
They're the hardest to serve,
the imagine your job was to take
care of 4 in a tough job. It's
also not necessarily the most
profitable for the childcare
businesses because of the size
of personnel to child.
If you're paying for one
caregiver to 4 infants versus
one caregiver to 10 children who
have a so.
It's also really important that
we reach infant and toddlers
because it's the point in their
life that it's the largest brain
growth. It's the biggest risk
for milk to possibly happen.
And it's also when childcare is
really expensive for families.
You're not usually earning a lot
at that point in your life, and,
you know, this is a stability
for them, and as you, the
children get older, the care
options get cheaper and you tend
to grow economically and so this
is kind of where the game is at
when we want to change.
Who we're serving for childcare
assistance is really focusing on
infant and toddler care.
If I could get the next slide,
please.
So speaking of who we serve,
this kind of shows you the age
ranges of who's kind of enrolled
in childcare assistance and so
as I was saying just before the
slide that infant toddlers were
receiving less care than the
rest of the system. This shows
you know, 14, 12%. I believe
this has shifted up for the most
recent data, but it's still,
there's still the minority of
services being received by this
program.
Next slide, please.
OK, next program,
pre-kindergarten.
Now I'd like to remember
pre-kindergarten and childcare
assistance. Well they are.
Implemented by the same
businesses, same school
districts. They are not the same
program. They have very specific
particular criteria for delivery
of um early literacy, um, early
math, and so it, because of the
way we implement it, because of
the um educational and training
requirements. This tends to have
a bigger outcome on educational
gains, and so you can see here,
um, some of the literacy and
math proficiency of children who
receive printer.
pre-K in the FY 24 and FY 25,
and I will note that that's
higher than kids who do not
receive pre-kindergarten, uh,
pre-K also has other really good
outcomes that the other states
in the nation are not seeing.
So we can show that kids who
receive at least pre-pandemic
kids who received pre-K in New
Mexico. They have higher
graduation rates in high school.
They have higher college
attendance rates.
Um, and they have less a lower
designation of special
education, and those are really
good long term outcomes that.
You know, have a high ROI, so
keeping pre-K as an educational
uh program and making sure that
we maintain those outcomes is
really important to making sure
we're improving our early
education.
Next slide, please.
Right, home visiting some you a
little.
Right now.
Home visiting.
We talk about home visiting,
think about home visiting as an
overarching term for a type of
service. There are many types of
home visiting models, and those
are curriculum and and um.
Training different, so you might
hear in your communities that
you have first born or nurse
family partnership or Healthy
Families America. Those are all
specific types of home visiting
models that fall under
The home visiting umbrella.
And not all of those models have
like our programs have the same
outcome effect or um the same uh
return on investment. So you can
see that um there's family
partnership here and Healthy
Families America.
Um, child first have higher um
improvements in maternal and
child health, um, both NFP nurse
family Partnership and Healthy
Family America's have effects on
reducing child maltreatment,
while other models don't. So
when you're picking your home
visiting model for your local
community, you also need to
focus on picking models that
change the outcomes that you're
looking for as well. Oh, sorry,
can we go back? So I, I didn't
know, but as I'm going through
each one of these programs, um,
I've put the operating budget
for that.
Program and the estimated
capacity that we're serving and
I didn't go over this for each
slide, but you have them in
front of you so you can go back
and look at.
This is another slide that shows
the different home visiting
models in the state of New
Mexico and there's a check mark
for the boxes for which those
models have been shown by
research to affect the outcomes
in that. So for instance, um,
If you're looking at maternity
and health child's outcomes, uh,
child first, Family connects,
healthy family in America is a
nurse family partnership have
robust research showing that
they have effects on improvement
of outcomes of those. So when
you look at the malls, it's kind
of an easy way to digest which
models might be right for your
communities.
And this is my last slide in the
presentation. This is a forecast
from the consensus revenue
estimating group on the early
childhood trust fund.
Both what the corpus will be and
the distribution estimates if we
don't change the distribution.
Um, so you can see by 2029, the
corpus is estimated to be at $12
billion producing an annual
distribution of 523 million.
And with that, I will, I, I'm
Mr. Chair, are you, do you wanna
do questions on early childhood
and then moved to child welfare,
or do you want to do both
presentations, right, then I
will turn it over to Doctor
Garcia.
Um, and for SFC team, yeah, this
is the other presentation that
looks very similar on the cover,
um, but it says, uh, New Mexico
child welfare system funding an
overview. Um, so as Kelly
mentioned, my name is Rachel.
I'm the LFC analyst, uh, for a
variety of agencies including
CYFD. So Kelly talked to you
about kind of the population
level approach investments we've
made broadly in early childhood.
I'm gonna now focus more
specifically on this stage child
welfare system, namely
child protection within CYFD and
I'm gonna talk about a few
things. One, high-level data
about the system to, some
recommendations LFC has made
over time to improve outcomes
and then 3 kind of um
investments you all have made to
try to address those things as
well as um an overview of the
executive and LFC uh budget
recommendations related to CYFD.
So that's kind of the road map
for me. Um, would you go to the
next slide, please? Thank you so
much. OK. Um, so Kelly left off
with what our programs that we
know, um, but through research
reduced child maltreatment. Why
do we care about that? Because
in New Mexico we do have a
higher rate of child
maltreatment than the rest of
the country. So this is 2022
data, um, we use a little bit
older data because we're able to
compare using uh federal data to
other states, and you'll see
that in 2022, New Mexico's
rate of child maltreatment. This
is the rate per 1000 children,
um, was 12.7 compared to the
national rate, which was 7.7.
Um, if you look at the
breakdown, uh, this is data that
CYFD reports to the federal
government of the breakdown of
maltreatment, um, reported, the
majority, the vast majority
tends to be neglect, and then we
have a lower rates and incidents
of things like physical or
sexual abuse.
The 3rd chart on this page, um,
is the state's rate of repeat
maltreatment. This is a percent,
um, and it measures whether
there is a substantiated case of
maltreatment and whether it
reoccurs within 12 months. This
is a really important measure
that we look at as a state
because it really evaluates the
extent to which our systems are
intervening appropriately and
preventing a recurrence of
maltreatment. What you'll see is
that um the national benchmark
is around 9% and we as a state
have been higher than that for
some time, and we ticked up to
about 14% last year.
And so that's kind of the data
grounding the conversation we're
having. So over time, LFC has
done a variety of program
evaluations, research and report
and really recommended kind of 4
key levers for system
improvement to move the needle
on child maltreatment outcomes,
and those are implementing
evidence-based prevention and
early intervention programs,
investing in recruiting,
training, supporting and
retaining a workforce within the
child welfare system, um,
expanding access to
both behavioral health services
as well as community-based
placements, and here I mean
specifically for children in
foster care.
Um, and then for strengthening
oversight and accountability. So
I share these because as I talk
through funding, you'll see
connections across these
different strategies, next
slide. OK, so I'm now gonna talk
big picture about the children,
youth and Families department
budget and FY 25, that operating
budget was 387 million.
If you look at the chart on the
right, that is the breakdown by
program within CYFD. So CYFD has
uh kind of 4 budget program
areas, juvenile justice
services, um, protective
services, children's behavioral
health services and program
support, um, and you can see in
the chart on the right that
growth over time.
Now what I'll note is that um
CFD had experienced some pretty
significant increases, um, going
back about a decade between FY
21 and FY 22, CDs operating
budget grew by about 22%
overall, and general fund grew
about 15%.
If you look at the chart, uh,
the, the chart on the left,
that's a breakdown of CYFD's
budget by revenue source. About
2/3 of COFD's budget comes from
the general fund. The remainder
is federal funding and a
transfer mostly from the
temporary assistance for needy's
family program and the vast
majority of the federal funds
are the federal Title IVE
program, which provides states
with reimbursement for costs
associated with providing foster
care.
But I'll note that is that.
In the last fiveish years, 21
through 24, we were seeing
trends that included significant
investments in CYFD, um, large
reversions, um, and money going
and spent and so in FY 25 you as
a legislature took uh a specific
approach when it came to the
agency's operating budget held
CYFD relatively flat on the
recurring budget side in FY 25,
but made some specific targeted
investments in non-recurring and
so that's what's mentioned at
the bottom. So in FY 25,
relatively flat operating
budget, but about 24 million in
non-recurring, um, and about
18.6 through the growth funds,
that's the 3-year pilot, uh,
fund that that focuses on
specific programs with
identified measures to be able
to track and have oversight.
Related to those investments for
the next.
Um, I'm gonna hone in a little
bit on the protective services
budget. This tends to be an area
of interest that's 228 million
in FY 25. If you look at the
chart on the left that shows you
the protective services budget
growth between FY 14 and FY 24,
so a 10 year period, um there
was a there was growth of about
$100 million. Um, that was at
the same time that we actually
had about 200 fewer children in
care in foster care.
You can see that trend, um, in
the in the bar chart on the
right. So as a state we were
experiencing declines in the
number of children in foster
care that predated the pandemic,
we kind of experienced a low
point during the pandemic and
since that time we've seen an
uptick and an increase in the
number of children in foster
care. That number is now around
2100 children in any given
month.
Uh, next slide.
Um, I'll also talk a little bit
about the protective services
budget when it comes to federal
revenue because this is, I know
a particular area of interest
for you all. So as I mentioned,
the federal Title IVE program
provides reimbursement to states
for the provision of fastster
care, um, and it reimbursed that
two sort of different rates. The
first is direct the maintenance
payments. Those are the
reimbursement payments made on
behalf of children in foster
care to foster parents, um, to
reimburse them.
For the cost of care.
Through Title 40, this uh
federal government reimbursed
states about 75%. It's the, the
FAP rate, so the vast majority
of that money is actually
federal.
And when it comes to the
administration of foster care,
there's a little bit of a more
complicated formula, but
generally speaking, the title 4E
program will reimburse 50% of
administrative costs related to
foster care, um, multiplied by
the number of eligible children,
that's essentially, uh, it's
called the state's penetration
rate, and that is about 50%. So
it's 50% times 50%. There's
certain administrative costs
that reimburse at a slightly
higher rate, um, but what I want
you to take away from that is a
lot
of the funding for the provision
of foster care is federal.
But you'll see in the first uh
bar chart is the federal revenue
that was budgeted as well as
collected over the last few
years. We would expect that as
the state spends more of general
fund on um the provision of
foster care and we would draw
down more in federal funding
because there is sort of that
match rate.
Um, so what you'll see is
between FY20 and FY 25, uh, we
were projecting an increase in
federal revenue.
But we actually saw, um,
In 23 and 24 was drawing down
both less than budgeted and less
than prior years.
22 is the high point um that we
experienced within Title 40 and
within Federal revenue. Part of
that is uh connected to the
pandemic. We also know during
that year CYD probably do drew
down more than they actually
could and had to do some
repayments, but the key point is
you'll see, um, we experienced
an increase in what was uh
projected and a decrease in what
was actually collected. And so
that is one of the core
differences between um
LFC budget recommendation and
the executive. So specifically,
um,
The executive recommendation
requests a backfilling of about
$10 million in federal revenue
to account for that kind of
difference and drop in federal
revenue. Um, the LSC
recommendation does not include
the recommendation to backfill
that federal revenue instead,
the LFC recommendation.
Recommends kind of spending
money to make money specifically
some non-recurring money for
COFD to engage more deeply,
potentially with technical
assistance, um, and, uh, affirm
to potentially help them dig
deeper into reimbursement and
drying down federal funds. So
that's kind of that chart.
The chart next to it shows you
what the ratio has been
historically in general fund to
federal fund. So what you'll see
is that not only have we
experienced in the last couple
of years a drop in what was
actually collected, but it is a
decrease in the ratio or the
revenue, so again, that's where
one of the places that you'll,
you'll hear about, um, as we
talk further about the budget
that there is a difference in
the two recommendations, um, and
we think that this chart
actually kind of helps paint a.
picture about what is going on
and has gone on over time.
Uh, so that's federal funds. In
the next slide.
Um, OK, so now I'm gonna talk a
little bit about, I talked about
the recommendations LFC has made
over time for system
improvement, and now I'm going
to talk about where you all have
made investments in those
things. Um, Kelly talked a lot
about population level
prevention strategies, things
like early childhood income
support that broadly serve the
population, um, those programs
may not be as directly connected
to the prevention of uh
maltreatment and repeat
maltreatment, though they are
very important. So
We as a state um have gaps in
the availability of services
that are kind of in the
secondary or tertiary level.
Those are programs sometimes
home visiting that are
specifically targeted to
families that have multiple risk
factors and have been shown
through research to prevent or
reduce maltreatment and repeat
maltreatment. Um, so over time,
LFC has recommended implementing
evidence-based prevention
programs, um, and in particular,
um, the federal Families First
Prevention Services Act.
which is the component of
federal Title IVE allows states
to draw down federal revenue if
they are implementing a certain
set of programs um that are
proven through research to uh
reduce child maltreatment. So we
as a state don't yet have a
federal plan. CYFD has been
working on it for several years,
but that's a key strategy um to
bringing in funding programs
that are shown to reduce child
maltreatment.
Uh, I'll call out a few specific
recommendations you all have
made in recent years related to
prevention and early
intervention. There's about 25.5
million in CYFD's recurring
budget, that's a combination of
a TANF transfer that's about $18
million as well as um general
fund that's been set aside as a
match for federal revenue for
prevention programs. So there's
some money built into the
recurring budget already, and
then, um, last year within the
grow you all funded uh two
specific pilots.
and projects that are related to
prevention and early
intervention, um, specifically
4.2 million to implement
differential response statewide
and 9 million to pilot and
evaluate um evidence-based
prevention programs.
This kind of prevention funding
specifically for next one.
Um, I'm gonna now talk a little
bit about the protective
services workforce because as I
mentioned, this is also a really
key lover to improving system
outcomes. Um, in the chart on
the left, you'll see some pretty
significant appropriations, uh,
over time, and then, um, kind of
a drop in actual field FTE, um,
this challenge is not new, but
CYFD does face significant
turnover in particular in
protective services, and that
really kind of hinders system
improvement, um.
That rate improved a little bit
in FY 24, but as of October of
last fall, the turnover rate was
about 38% in protective
services. Uh, and so over time,
LFC has recommended, um,
strategies to recruit and retain
specifically a professional
social work workforce, and so
you'll see, uh, in the bulleted
list some specific investments
intended to do that, uh, that
you all have made. I'll call out
a big one that's not within CYFG
is an $80 million investment and
an endowment for
schools of social work intended
to increase the number of social
workers in our state. Next
slide.
Um, these are some specific
investments you all have made
related to communities based
placements and behavioral
health, uh, the chart on the
left you'll see this continues
to struggle with just having
sufficient numbers of
community-based placements or
foster care placements for
children in the community. And
so you all made several uh
investments to address that
challenge, um, and that
includes, um, money directly to
CYFD to pilot and evaluate
strategies to recruit and retain
um foster families.
Uh, $20 million one-time
investment to to provide startup
costs associated with children's
behavioral health services, um,
and then 60 million over the
last few years, um, specifically
to enhance Medicaid behavioral
health rates, uh, and that is
outside of CYFD but it is
connected to providing
behavioral health services for
children.
Um, to the next slide.
Um, OK, this is my last slide,
and this sort of concludes with
sort of a high level summary of
the differences between the
executive budget recommendation
and the LFC budget
recommendation uh for CYFD and
FY 26.
Um, the biggest difference is
kind of the strategy and how
funding is recommended. So the
executive recommendation uh for
the operating budget total is 3,
389.4 I'm sorry, 398.6 million
and the executive made
investments directly in, in the
operating budget to address some
of the things I mentioned,
workforce and other things. The
LFC recommendation continues a
strategy and that you all
pursued last year, which is
holding the operating budget.
relatively flat while making
some targeted investments on the
non-re the non-recurring side
and you can see those
differences in the chart, and I
call those out for you, um,
because unless you put the two
pieces together, it looks like
really big differences in
overall money when you put them
together, you can see, for
example, the LFC recommendation
is going to invest in things
like workforce, but in the
non-recurring side to enhance,
uh, oversight and accountability
and ties and performance
measures um to those things. So,
Uh, that is the summary, uh,
that I have for you all, and I
think Kelly and I stand up for
questions.
All right, I have uh Senator
Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, OK, so
I think I heard you basically
say that there's a $49 million
ask in total. Is that correct?
I'm, I'm looking at page 10 of
the second slide deck. So you,
you're saying LFC is
recommending 39 million and then
the executive an additional 10,
uh, uh, let me, I'll clarify one
thing. Thank you. um, Mr. Chair,
Senator Tobias and, um, so it,
it's uh not a $49 million ask,
but it's a, a highlighting where
there are differences in how the
funding would be would flow uh
within the budget. So, um, the
executive primarily invests on
the operating budget side.
The LFC budget recommendation
primarily invests in
non-recurring or growth funding
and um that 49 million is a a a
roll up of non-recurring, um,
funding that the LFC has
included within the LFC
recommendation.
OK, and then on the same slide
deck page 2, your pie chart.
What category has improved year
over year?
And do you have the percentages
of each of those categories?
And
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Bay, will
you direct me, uh, slide to the
child maltreated slide.
This 2nd deck this time right
the stage 2? Yes, OK, Mr. Chair,
the, this high chart in the
very, yup, there you go. So on
those categories, do you have
percentages for us instead of
just the pretty colors and then
secondly, is there any
improvement in any of those
categories, your rear?
Uh, so Mr. Mr. Chair, Senator
Jason, I apologize. I realized
that we don't have the, the kind
of specific percentages and so,
um, I will likely need to send
you a follow-up that has the,
the precise percentages there in
terms of improvement, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator, it's, it's just
a breakdown of maltreatment, so
this doesn't, this pie chart
doesn't reflect a change over
time, um, it's just a breakdown
of among cases of child
maltreatment, how did those?
breakdown. It's pretty
consistent to see over 60 to 70%
be neglect cases as opposed to
abuse cases. Um, what is
probably helpful to look at in
terms of change over time. For
example, uh, is the chart next
to it which is repeat
maltreatment and that's the rate
at which maltreatment reoccurs
within 12 months, and what
you'll see there is we were
seeing a little bit of a
decline. It ticked up in FY 24,
um, and our rate is back above
14% while the
national benchmark is about 9.
OK, Mr. Chair, could you
actually give us that
information based on those
categories, just if one category
has seen improvement in maybe
another uh dramatic decline. It
would just be interesting data
to look at. And then, um, Mr.
Chair, on the first slide deck.
Um, oh, I didn't mark the pages,
so I just have the questions.
So, one,
With the additional ask that you
have, how many more children do
you anticipate serving because I
think somewhere here I saw a
10.3 million. So,
How many more additional
children, let's say over next
fiscal, do you anticipate
serving?
So, Mr. Chair, um, members of
the committee, um, I, this is
not my presentation doesn't have
the FY 26 requests, but I do
have those standouts
anticipating that maybe you guys
wanted to talk about that.
Nice, Mr. Chair. Good move
somebody can hand these out for
me. That would be really
helpful.
Um, so I would know that, um,
This is gonna be, uh, you're
gonna have a hearing on this
separately.
And in early childhood right
now, the conversation about
funding a lot of it is um
regarding the trust fund.
And um the permanent school
fund, also known as And so, um,
once you're, I don't wanna talk
about it until you.
Follow me along on this because
We'll get a little
E.
And apologies to the audience. I
don't have a you just gone right
now.
OK, so if you turn to the 2nd
page of this chart, um, you can
see there are 2 tables. The
first one is the um early
childhood trust fund, and you
can see that the executive
recommendation.
I request or executive rec is
requesting to increase the
distribution from the trust fund
which would require legislation.
And it would bring the
distribution up to $500 million
in the upcoming fiscal year.
While the LFC recommendation
stays with the current formula
of distribution, so you can see
that the executive
recommendation recommends 430.5
million additional or 40,030
total of there's 250 now and the
LFC recommendation um adds to
2.2.98.9 million. So the biggest
difference is, is mostly in
childcare assistance, the um
executive would like to make
childcare assistance, um, more
universal than it is now, and so
there's large, um, some
differences you can see online
42.
Uh, 96.5 million of them they
increase for childcare
assistance, um, the LFC is below
that.
And then the secondary chart is
the Landgram permanent fund, the
permanent school fund
distribution for the childhood,
you can see um by program what
the recommendations are. So I
would say service wise outside
of the big number changes. Um,
the executive recommendation I
think wanted add 5000.
So from around 31,000 to 36,000.
Um, the, for pre-kindergarten,
it really depends, um, it
depends on applications and so
you'd have, I'd have to do an
average cost. Um, but a few 100
additional pre pre-kindergarten,
um, the executive recommendation
expands home visiting, um, the
LFC recommendation is focused on
rates for home visiting and
hopes that expansion can come
from Medicaid dollars, which are
severely under leveraged right
now and so those are kind of the
big policy finance differences,
but we
We're gonna go over this in a
lot more detail when we have
In early childhood. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and then an
additional question, um, even
from the training I went to, um,
in the morning with you. How is
there a real detailed plan of
how you're going to reach the
families that you know you could
be serving right now and that
you aren't cause we had a
conversation centered around
families not maybe thinking they
needed the service or not really
being aware of the full spectrum
of services available, so with
additional funds, how do you
plan to reach those
Those parents and serve those
families.
Um
I think that's a question for
the department opposed to the
LFC.
OK we do have some
recommendations on that, but I'm
happy to
give our opinion wanted to
address that policy piece of it
and then we'll yeah.
Uh, so, um, sure, so in the
particular conversation that
Senator Devison was talking
about, we were focusing on home
visiting.
And um this struggle of family
to even really know what home
visiting is, much less, um, not
to be a little bit intimidating
to bring somebody into your home
when you're a new parent.
There's a lot of strategies that
um that there's a marketing
campaign, the executives doing,
there's also um some new uh
websites to help referrals, um,
but I would note that one of the
biggest things that we can do in
this state is improving our
trusted referral points in
particular.
to medical providers. It's a
point in which a referral comes
from very trusted. It doesn't
feel targeted that you're being
referred to her cause you're at
risk or anything else. It's just
another referral point of this
is a service that you could
benefit from, and it's a less
intimidating thing we found.
In LFC that in our evaluations
on a small scale that a lot of
primary care or um early birth
providers don't really
understand what home visiting
is, and so if we can improve
that referral point, it probably
would be a less scary and more
universally accepted program.
OK
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It
Yeah,
is that a centric device with
your questions.
OK, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman.
On the early childhood deck, um.
It's just really one question
just right out of the gate, um,
on page 4, when you
Talk about the 251% increase in
Um
I came to the legislature right
when that.
Things start
Wow, this is exciting. I can see
it, but my question then is if
we could go to page 2 then and
maybe you said this Kelly at
some point, but I just wasn't a
good student or a good listener
here. If you go back to page 2.
And this great
Yeah, that you have laid out
here. What is the unmet need in
each one of those areas? Do you
have that list outlined
somewhere here in the deck.
What, what still remaining in
terms of unmet need in each one
of the categories.
Yeah, so, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator P, I
think unmet need is um.
An interesting conversation that
we're still having at the state
level because I think we, we're
still moving the goalposts on
what do we think the service
level for New Mexicans should be
so do we think that 50% of the
population should be receiving
home visiting, or do we think
30%. Um, now, when it comes to
childcare assistance, in
particular, which I'm sure is an
easier way to focus on it. Um,
we have 21,000 kids per cohort
and I
believe that the agency's goal
on.
That I think is.
Yeah, so.
I mean, given that we're serving
me put it this way. We're
serving 31,000 kids in total age
a couple of weeks till they're
hit 13. And if you have 21,000
per cohort, you'd have to
multiply that by 12, and that
would give you a really big
number and we're serving 31,000.
So,
There is, um, availability to
expand services. Now we have to
focus on making sure that we're
not just expanding the system
but focusing on infants and
toddlers and providing quality
and so.
Um, I think the goalposts and
the standards are still kind of
things we're working towards in
the state to define.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you,
Kelly. So I think what I'd
really like to see here and,
and, you know, I, that way we
know we have sort of a a a
something to aim toward and a
goal to get to is in each one of
these.
categories and this lays it out
very well, by the way. So thank
you very much for doing that.
Uh, maybe something that says
Uh, just as an example, home
visits, you know,
19,000. I'm just throwing this
number out there. But, but we
know that we're, we're, we're
achieving 15,000. Well, that's a
very nice goal to understand
and, and when we see all of
this, well 251% and increase in
funding and we've got these this
million and that 10 million,
that 150 million going there.
That'll tell us exactly what we
need to be focusing on to fill
that unmet need. And then
ideally, this is the map that
tells us how we focus then to
graduation rates and math scores
and reading scores and all that.
Do you have that sort of ability
or do we need to spend a workout
session doing that and figuring
that out Chairman
and Senator, we actually do have
that, um, I don't have it with
me right now, but by age range,
I have, we have a chart, um,
that shows the level of service
for every age range both in care
options like pre-K and childcare
and support options like fit and
home visiting. Um, so I will get
that to you, um, tomorrow.
That'd be great to see. That's
all I have. Thank you.
Senator Brown, and then after
that I have Senator Trujillo.
Anybody else?
Thank you Mr. Chairman and, and
I have a couple of questions on
each slide deck.
Um, first of all, on the early
childhood education.
funding on site for um.
Massive increase, right? It was
under 200 million um.
Now we're at over about 750
million, um, what kind of
results have we seen?
Mr. Chairman and Senator Brown.
So depending on the program, um,
each slide for each program has
shown some of our evaluations on
things we're getting, but as a
generalization.
For childcare assistance, we
have seen improvements in
economic support and care
options for families for
pre-kindergarten, we've seen
higher literacy in math, um.
Efficiency rates, we've seen
lower special education
designations, higher high school
graduation, higher college
attendance, um, for home
visiting, depending on the
model, um.
That's delivered, those are
different outcomes. Some of the
models really.
You good at improving family
health outcomes. Some of them do
well at reducing maltreatment,
uh, or the preventing the risk
of maltreatment. And so we have
lots of evaluation on that, um,
but generally those are the
things that we have found in
evaluations coming from those
programs. OK, so you said we
have a higher rate going to
college.
Yes.
Um
Of if you received pre-K
services.
If you look at, if you do a side
by side, so about the only one
you could do that on is FY 13.
Um, Mr.'s information for that
because it would be now that
they'd start college.
Um, Mr. Chairman's committee, we
started pre-kindergarten in 2005
in New Mexico,
so we have I'm talking about
from when we started increasing
the funding. I'm sorry.
Uh, so Mr. Sherman, we've been
following the kids since we
started the funding in
pre-kindergarten and that was a
very small cohort, um, but since
we've started massive and um
increases, we actually have a
pre-K evaluation happening as we
speak, to be published in the
early spring to make sure that
we are still receiving the
outcomes that we had seen
pre-pandemic to the massive
expansion we've seen now. So we
have that evaluation currently
happening. OK.
So we have a huge increase in
the number of kids that were
That we are serving.
A massive increase in our state.
I know you're saying it's
31,000.
Your
Uh, right now, um, I was a
little confused where you said
it should be type that times or
21,000 times 12.
Um
We
144,000 possible?
We are we serving them till
they're age 12?
So Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt,
that was a very specific
question about childcare
assistance, one of the early
childhood programs, so childcare
assistance, um, age range,
you're eligible at the first few
weeks of life until you reach
your 13th birthday. And so the
conversation senator Padilla and
I were having was about if you
took the average cohort for
births and you span that age
range.
How many possible children fall
into that category and then I
was saying in childcare
assistance right now, we're
serving about 3.
So we were talking, Senator was
getting at the difference
between the population we're
serving now and versus the total
population.
an age range, that could be
receiving services. But we get
something showing that broken
down by age. I'm a little more
concerned with, you know, how
many
Infants and 1 year olds and 2
year olds are getting that than
12 year olds. I think that's a,
that's a big difference because
a lot of them are.
So, and then the, the, I would
also like.
You know, you're talking about
studies and, and um
I'd like to see some of the
longitudinal studies that you're
using and how longitudinal they
are. Um, there are some very,
um,
Famous studies that actually
tracked for 40 years.
Um, that show actually what you
guys have shown in one of yours
that showed by 3rd grade,
there's not really much of a
difference.
Between those that were in pre-K
and those that were not.
Um, and I will tell you, we've
been like massively increasing.
The funding
Oh
Almost 4 times as much funding.
Since I came in to now.
And our performance.
The, the script just came out
the other day is worse.
than it was 12 years ago.
So I'm really skeptical.
Of the studies.
Um, that you're, you're bringing
up. I don't know that they're
longitudinal enough. I don't
know that they're uh complete
enough.
To say that they're actually
making a long
Lifetime.
Difference for the money that
we're putting in. Let's just
some things I'd like to, to
have.
Um, on the second one.
Um,
If we can go to slide 2, maybe
it's 2, maybe 3.
Yeah.
So you, you talk about um
Basically recommendations that
you've made.
Over I'm guessing the last
several years.
Which ones were adopted?
Because you didn't say if they
were all taken by the
department, and put in into
effect or if they were all
ignored by the department.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Branch, I
think that's probably a question
for me, um, related to the child
welfare system improvement, um,
so I can walk through kind of
each one. when it comes to
implementing evidence-based
prevention and early
intervention programs. This is
an area where LFD has had some
concern as the legislature has
made some specific investments,
um, and we have not yet seen the
implementation of programs. Uh,
we've also seen some concerns
around the state's ability to
to get a, a title for you plan
in place, which would allow us
to draw down funding. CYFD has
made several attempts to submit
a plan they've submitted another
one, but that is an area where
we've had some concern on
implementation.
Uh, when it comes to recruiting,
retaining, supporting,
developing a professional social
work workforce. Um, I, I noted
on a few of the slides some of
the investments the legislature
has made as well as some places
where money did go unspent. Uh,
so for example, $3 million
non-recurring that was intended
to address, uh, uh, a workforce
plan, uh, and that money largely
has gone unspent. Um, and then
in the third area, expanding
access to behavioral health and
community-based services, um,
that's another area.
where we've had some
implementation concerns. Um, we
have seen, for example, the
investments you all have made
and behavioral health rates and
Medicaid start to translate to
increased provider rates. Um, we
have not seen and you'll see
that on the slide kind of
substantive change when it comes
to the number of community-based
placements or foster care
providers. Thank you so
basically 0 for 4.
Um, uh,
It's a no, no, no, no, is what
I've got.
So we've made recommendations as
senators.
CYFD.
You've made recommendations of
program evaluators and they
basically ignored us.
Is that a good way of putting
it? Or am I stretching it a
little too much, I say this
chair, Senator, we've seen some
activity in these areas when it
comes to CYD there are, though
there are places where we have
not yet seen impact or results.
Thank you. I appreciate that and
I, I'm
To me, that's one of my most,
one of our most concerning
areas, and I know they'll be
here at some point so we can
address those directly.
But I think all of these were
good suggestions.
And especially number 4
strengthen oversight and
accountability mechanisms. I
think that CYFD needs to do that
within CYFD, but you know what,
we need to do that.
As a legislature.
Over CYFD.
Because what we are seeing it,
it, you know, honestly, it's how
many children have to die before
we step in and do something as a
legislature.
Um, how many times do we have to
have the governor say, oh, don't
pass anything this year, we're
gonna get it fixed this year.
It's very concerning to me.
It's heartbreaking to me when we
see one of these little children
being abused and dying, and I'll
tell you their foster program.
I was a foster parent before.
It's a freaking nightmare.
To be a foster parent.
Because of the lack of support
that you get.
As a foster parent.
So I, I hope that some people
Don't shy away from doing it,
but it is not.
Something I would ever do again
in the state of New Mexico.
Because I don't think it's been
fixed. I don't think it's been
addressed. Thank you.
true.
Uh, Senator Trujillo.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you, um, Kelly and Rachel. Thank
you for being here. I appreciate
this information. Um, I actually
don't see.
with lower berths because we've
got more money, which means we
can invest the money that we
have, um, into children at a
higher level. So I see that kind
of as a positive.
Um, but going to uh and killing,
I think most of these questions
are gonna be for you at the
beginning just because I'm
sequential in the way that I
think.
Um, on this recent early
childhood evaluations and
finding page where you've got
the chart with the home
visiting.
Do we know, um,
Why the completion rates are
low.
Like, do we have any information
about why those rates are low.
We evaluate, do we ask?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Doctors actually um
Occupied her now, but yes,
sorry, that's OK, um, we do, I
believe we do have some data on
some exit, and I will have to
follow back with you on that,
but I think we do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That
would be good to know so that we
could kind of figure out like
how could we change that
trajectory, um, and then I had a
question and I'm really kind of
new to some of this, so please
forgive me, but is the um home
visiting services, are they part
of the Kara program, the
comprehensive addiction and
recovery services. I know we've
got some challenges that they're
not required, but they are
voluntary. Is home visiting in
this capacity.
part of that.
Um,
Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
there are home visiting models
that would likely be a good fit
for families involved in the
Kara program. Kelly mentioned a
few of them, safe care, nurse
family partnership. In 2023, LFC
did a program evaluation of Kara
and one of the things that we
noted um was that many families
were unaware that they had plans
of care that they were not being
referred to services and there
was sort of a gap in the
connection point. Um, so,
while the state has made some
investment in some of those
programs. We've seen real
implementation gaps. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I will
say that's kind of, uh,
How my medical appointments go
when I go to the Mayo Clinic,
they schedule the appointments
for me and I go when I go here,
they tell me to go get an
appointment and I don't.
Um, so I can see how that would
be a low completion rate. We
aren't all um as responsible as
others, um, and I put myself in
that bucket in many cases, um,
Mr. Chairman, on the next page,
page 6, I am concerned that
we've got a listing here that
there's weak evidence of impact
on school readiness under the
Childcare assistance, um,
because it goes on to say that
The impacts are in like in
kindergarten, there seems to be
a great impact, but by the time
they get to 3rd grade, that
doesn't seem like it's a
childcare assistance problem.
That seems like it's more of a
K-12 education problem.
So, Mr. Chair, I, what I would
say to that is that.
Same children receive
pre-kindergarten, we don't see
that fade out.
So it's kind of a, we talk about
it as a stacking of services and
so a child who is in childcare
assistance and receives pre-K.
Probably won't see that in past,
Mr. Chairman, thank you for
clarifying that. I appreciate
that. Um, so that takes me to
page 9, where I just, you know,
uh, these preparations in
regards to math and literacy,
that's.
Exactly the opposite of the test
score results that we see for
4th grade and 8th grade, right?
So, and not only is it the
opposite, right? It's like math
is higher and literacy is just a
tad bit lower when you look at
4th grade, math is like way
down. I think it was like 25%
cause I was, I was saying like,
hey, there's 75% that are at
risk and reading is at like 40%,
so we got 60%. So I think
This is like a really good
outcome. We just have to figure
out how do we keep that carrying
through and how do we get more
children into the services. If
these are the results, then
should be seeing
higher impact in those kids. So
this really pleases me.
And then, um, on page 10, Mr.
Chairman, I noticed that um the
reduction in maltreatment risks
or like the nurse family
partnership is 5 to 8% in the
healthy families is 1 to 3%.
Safe care augmented is 1 to 3%.
How are we?
How are we, um, tracking
something that doesn't happen.
And Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
thank you for that question.
These are the potential results
kind of based on rigorous
research associated with these
models. Um, we don't have all of
these operating, not in a robust
way. So this is the kind of the
potential impact. OK, um, Mr.
Chairman, so that's like the
national evaluations, OK, so
then, um, on page 11, if you
look at the
All of those.
Um, programs, except for child
first and safe care augmented
have positive parenting, they
teach positive parenting
parenting practices, I'm
assuming.
Um
And yet
One of them, the family
connects, doesn't show that
there's child abuse and neglect.
It seems like if you're teaching
positive parenting skills and
practices than you would in fact
be reducing. So how did they
make that determination that
that program doesn't necessarily
impact child abuse and neglect.
The chair, Senator Trujillo, uh,
what that table is showing is
it's showing a summary of the
national research
program't studied the impacts on
things like.
child abuse and neglect. And so
they just simply isn't enough
data out there to tell us it
does or does not have an impact.
OK, that makes more sense to me.
Thank you. um, Mr. Chairman, and
then on the next, um, uh,
Slide presentation. What does
medical neglect mean?
Does it mean they're not going
to doctor's appointments,
they've not been treated.
Kind of what does that mean? Um.
Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo, I,
I would need to follow up with
you on sort of like, what is the
precise definition of that. It's
one of the federal categories,
um, of neglect, um, and has to
do with not providing, you know,
essential medical care that's
related to a child's well-being.
Um, but I can follow up with you
on like kind of the precise
definition and like that would
be great um and then in follow
up to that, uh, Mr. Chairman,
neglect. I'm, I wonder how much
of neglect is actually related
to poverty.
And um I, I think that we could
make a, we're making a
difference in our state. I
reducing the child poverty
levels. That's just a comment,
not a question, um, but my last
question is on the next page,
page 3, and it says one under 2,
recruit retain support and
develop a professional social
work workforce.
Are we looking at other
professionals because it seems
to be a nurse might be a great
asset, it seems to me, uh.
Retired doctor, I mean, it just
seems like there's other
professions outside of social
work that could be a huge
benefit in these, uh, Mister T
Senator Trujillo, uh, yes,
that's a very good point. I will
note that this slide is really
specific to child welfare and
protective services and is
connected to the uh one of the
next slides on workforce where
we have seen over time, um, the
vast majority of the workforce
within protective services no
longer has a licensed social
work degree. So this
is not as a comment on the
statewide, but kind of really
specific to protective services.
All right, and Mr. Chairman, I
just have one comment, so that
the secretaries, I see them in
the audience, um, can ultimately
be prepared, but in Santa Fe
public schools, we've got a
childcare center that's been
licensed by ECECD and they tell
me that they're not able to get
funding for it and so they're
taking it out of their school
operating budget. They're
serving 44 children of staff,
which is a huge benefit.
for our workforce in Santa Fe.
Um, I'd like to find a way that
our um regional education um uh
cooperatives and get funding for
buildings, for infrastructure,
um, because they know there's at
least one and I, I won't mention
them, but they're providing
nearly all of the early
childhood services in their
neighborhood, in their
community, and that's a huge
problem for them, Mr. Chairman,
thank you.
Um
I have one question on page 8,
Kelly in your presentation, I
think slide that.
Uh, the enrollment. I was
curious, you know, like in
fiscal year 16, there's a spike
of 27% and then it kind of
drops down then in January of
during COVID, right, there's a
spike, so it's kind of
interesting what, what's going
on here or why was it?
So Mr. Schumer's me, this is
snapshot data. We tried to do
um.
6 month intervals is cause
depending on school.
Um, childcare assistance can
look enrollment can look really
different, and I don't know if
we can like drill down to like
what happened at that very month
in July, but I think the point
of this slide is to show you
that.
Infants and toddlers are
underserved
of the total population, and we
like to call attention that
future childcare assistance
investments really need to be
targeted to those underserved
because children of older ages
have pre-kindergarten and they
have school, they have after
school, summer programs funded
by the state, but young
children, this is kind of it for
them when it comes to care
options. So that was really more
of the
What I was trying to get at,
maybe I was being too obtuse.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
I think I don't have anybody
else, uh, so I think that
concludes our presentation.
Thank you for both of you and uh
I think
Let's do it.
it, ladies. Thank you.
All right, thank you.
We armed the secretary up for
her hearing, so.
I still got a list of questions.
I did my homework.
We're gonna kind of wrap up. Let
me get a capital subcommittee. I
know that had an interest in
their Senator Woods is not here.
Uh, this would be the capital
committee that's gonna negotiate
with the exactendo chair, and
woods anden Gonzalez.
So let's
I'm gonna put that subcommittee
because we're going to start
working on capital as we're
still working on capital. Kelly,
did you meet with everybody and
get their comments in our, our
meeting yesterday.
When do you plan to
yesterday.
So as soon as you can so we can
get that, and then we're
We're good. So
Um
Let's chat for a few minutes,
OK?
Oh, I forgot Lanier's on there
too.
