Well I'm just going over some
high level points about the two
recommendations.
The LFC recommendation for
general fund revenue was five
hundred twenty point two
thousand hello the executive but
eight hundred three thousand
above the executive in fund
balance resulting in a two
hundred and two hundred eighty
two point eight thousand
difference and all revenues.
The difference in contractual
services in personal service
counters most a result of the
executive recommendation for in
home services in the adult
protective services program I
will know that that wasn't
included in the department
requests and so therefore not it
was also not able to be
including the LFC recommendation
was not part of part time line
feel to analyze and ask
questions and go through the
LESC process.
Majority of the difference in
the person category resulted
from the LFC recommendation for
three hundred thousand dollars
in the adult protective services
program the stock ones are are
we up on webcast is our okay
thank.
Mr chairman I just received a
text message from my counterpart
from DFA and they're saying
they're not being let into the
zoom room so if we could
MaryBeth Dennis Morris her name
so we can to allow room to this
you haven't paid their fee to be
let in.
The person Mr chair so like in
the same difference major the
difference in person is taking
the needle protective service
program LFC recommended three
hundred thousand dollars for
what's called appropriate
placement otherwise known as
person spending to bring up
salaries of adult protective
service workers closer to that
of salaries of child protective
service workers for a few years
now aging has reported an issue
with losing person between CYFD
and their department because CFD
child protective services were
making slightly more than adult
protective service workers so in
order to address that bill C.
recommendation put some money in
there to address that pay
compensation issue.
In the other category the LFC I
have one point four million
dollars above the executive
recommendation mostly as a
result of increases for the
aging network and the Indian
elder fears and aging network.
So as you can see on that
general fund high level the main
differences are that online
eight that three million dollars
that the executive up included
that the LESC was not able to
include our records it was not
requested by the agency.
On line seventeen the LFC
included a million and a half
for the aging network which the
executive did not include on
line twenty five the LFC
included three hundred twenty
four thousand for the office of
Indian Affairs.
And online thirty three DLC
included some additional money
for I. T. support and then
finally on thirty nine and forty
the LFC put in a hundred
thousand eighty thousand for
continued Care Act and some I.
T. report so those are the main
differences pretty small
differences over all with that I
will turn it over I hope my
counterpart was able to enter
but then for the executive on
the zoom.
She doing I have somebody else
for long term.
On the.
Eight your.
There's I'm getting text
messages they're saying the
meeting hasn't started using the
meeting has not started could we
possibly.
Resend the link to.
Both MaryBeth and to the
Department.
And I believe the secretary is
on.
Madam secretary.
Katrina.
Thank you but why don't you
start well we can get them to
leave the FAB link in.
Absolutely thank you so much for
having us on today.
But I lost so I.
That meeting.
So Mr chair members of the
committee it's always
done thank you services to you
I just want to introduce my team
members who are on the panel.
Strong.
Information officer we.
Our administrative services
director.
All the budget our budget
director
That is our director of the
office of the.
He he are director.
Where I do want to point out we
got a lot of.
About to that million
are new to to to use what is the
general counsel.
Martin and we now have a state
OpBud.
Now
her name is Carmen so we're glad
to have them join.
Course had tires one which is
not bad either you know.
To the Department and heart
disease
we just wanna also thing DFA
the.
That worries there are working
including recommendations
together
We traditionally have senior
day.
Let's see here here another tool
to see your constituents that
way and our our in our your
voice and
what we want to do that because
of the COVID in the search for
so we can quickly right
legislative session and it's
sent everyone in by.
provided you could you know
already your.
and
those foreign with our seniors
because it was really insightful
and you want to.
Waste and we were going to do
more of these.
Legislators from seniors.
Easy and a.
In a way with the loss of.
That well as lieutenant I'm
happy to monitor that what if
you're just like what we get on
senior day she is very quickly
in order to.
For the past few years the
pandemic you don't know that you
did everything here's a look
at how.
There's a
adult dating here as well as
home office and easily for
taking the time disability for
the development just able and
all of.
Yes the and also the rapid
responses today's pandemic and
I've had over nine hundred.
Seventy
you know it is a lease on it.
Full
do we just try stopping we're
going out to our COVID.
Take a lead on energy and
introducing for the department
of health so we do those losses
that we have.
Working on not only the vaccines
in long term care facilities and
home health care hospice is one
but we also.
in the community as well so
we've had a lot of senior
officials.
Put us thirty seven thousand
almost three thousand vaccines
and.
To date
and sixteen registered over five
thousand people and
At over ninety five in rural
that.
Communities just for seniors and
adults with disabilities product
we're done you know you might
see that some of our homes on
our traditional role we didn't
necessarily need a report.
Because it is you need our our
this page is our resource center
has taken over seven thousand
calls based on how long they
take all the overflow calls for
the department of health.
For for your.
And we are that in order to.
and you said that require.
There's a little.
Proud of the work that we're
doing
and we're making a difference
for New Mexicans I just really
want to thank you for your
support and your full
legislative budget we do want to
point out that we did ask for
three million dollars.
Services and.
Why.
over the past two years we have
about fifty five hundred claims
department.
Services about the lack of staff
the.
Services this is
means that you know especially
in rural New Mexico somebody
doesn't show up somebody senior
stated that
were related
to the time these state so we
really working hard on creating
staffing and trying to get.
We can't we feel like we have an
obligation to respond
and we feel like we should have
a plan.
In these types of.
Asian is actually workers
the point
need special times of crisis is
here.
So we put that in some of us got
pieces eighty
I.
Plans for that money last year
did you get the money or we.
To try.
We haven't spent we have plans
to spend.
Eight years ago the here on
tribal lands to Mexico lost you
know he was with.
Monitor or minor staffing
agencies to to start recruiting
and
Such as you know with immigrants
and refugees together.
The numbers so we've got a lot
of ideas plans these are
mediation project so that once
that.
On it another funding source.
You a lot with that so we
specially your plan we would
create more money into that.
Grow new projects I want to
remind everyone.
To do the work.
Populated state per capita
seniors and they're not
necessarily in Albuquerque Las
Cruces these folks are in our
rural and frontier areas where
we are going to target and what
services.
Capacity and Monsignor State all
if you ever there usually.
Our programs thank you so much
in thank you for the additional
consideration.
Also.
Pieces that.
It is our DFA I don't I don't
know Mrs Densmore's doing that
or who's doing DFA yes.
Morning thank you secretary I
apologize for that I have the
incredibly so I actually don't
really have anything at this
point is for the secretary
already she
I have ready the so so rather
than we committees
all over and can I.
Thank you thank you questions
from committee members Senator
Woods anybody have the handout
funds and Senator Steinborn
thank you Mr chair.
Madam secretary I was
Wondering I was looking at your
your overall budget and your
contractors service.
Actuals fruit last year.
Was for twenty twenty two.
Was five million three hundred
and fifty one thousand.
And you have a request for
twelve million.
For this next budget year.
Twelve million seven hundred and
twenty seven thousand.
Could you tell me how you're
going to expand.
are those programs you're
talking about expanding you do
said earlier about
of feathered I don't think they
care that kind of stuff.
Mr chair at I just wondered.
That's pretty big increase thank
you madam chair and senator.
Madam secretary please could you
tell us about.
Learning center one.
And you look nice with you gloss
okay thank you so much.
Mr chair of Senator
so that's a great question we
did have a reversion last year
the rivers it was mostly and I
don't protective services and
that is because we had a
building close and and Salinger
is getting especially those were
on the front.
Is to care for folks who were
impacted system service however
you're starting to open and and
we are are are looking at how
the vote is eighty eight and our
service and so the six million
that we're asking for is
actually easy to start and we're
really focusing on rural areas
Include the metro areas but
we're really looking at capacity
building in the world areas
takes some costs up front again
in twenty as well as some
additional development also one
of these and I well hello as we
have heard from them they really
wanted to hear their elders not
necessarily by the twenty four
hour services like you would
want care facilities but they
really want to.
More adult day care services and
that we're going to have to do a
lot of hand holding.
Fighters on the bill for
Medicaid house set up a business
structure how do additional
income and revenue and so that's
where the additional projects.
Thank you for that denture madam
secretary.
You could you send me a list of
those contractors that you
contracted with last year and
the approximate you know the
amount of the contract in of the
services provided and also I
would like to hear you describe
a program there
I would like to see
kind of your.
Your request for a bid to do
those services if you could kind
of give me a general idea of how
you requesting.
that bid to to do those services
madam chair I'm madam secretary
and the.
Mr chair.
Hi
From around and believe in their
thank you thank you senator
Senator time on.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary good morning.
Want to start off by thanking
you very much for how ten if
you've been every time I've
called for constituents of mine
during what has been a really
rough couple years and you've
always been amazingly empathetic
and quick to respond and I
really want to thank you for
that.
So I have a question about the
adult protective services.
And.
You're requesting three million
more than the LFC so that you
can be I guess more responsive
but I want to dig into that a
little bit more on page twelve
of our hand out on the
performance measurements.
The number of.
Of investigations I guess with
with forty three hundred and
then it's.
Well and then this current
budget year it's the goal is
sixty one hundred so so the
actual number of the last fiscal
year was kind of a lot lower and
I'm just curious why that was
that because the COVID.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn lot
was.
so that when things were closed
down your normal referrals.
Operating.
Here were you seen.
You don't have sort of a little
to the individual that activity.
It typically have in addition to
that need some transformations
so I don't protective services
also has the ability to go into
nursing facilities but you know
during this pandemic we have to
figure out the resources because
we also have a program called
the.
Program and in the long term
care facilities also.
Let exploration work very
closely with the department of
health to get issues resolved or
have additional referrals made
sure that it can be a.
We have decided services is not
first tier it's your service
after the.
so you'll see some of those
numbers kind of wonky and it is
an extra well as it is working
really hard on services K. and
really got me how we are only
just.
Yeah individuals after he's
close close and so we're putting
in thanks in your.
Services we want to be able to
put in the respite and caregiver
services like we're talking
about with restorative here so
that we have last three for what
we call friends faces back into
our program to certain want to
make sure that they're
stabilizing communities so we're
working really hard and I'm I'm
happy to also provide.
Case number.
Are accepted right for in any
sort of indicate how many in hi
increased to over seventy five
percent.
Get into better partner we're
looking at the community what
what explication what self
determination is from an
individual living in the
community and how we can help so
that we get referrals get more
stability for seniors and adults
with disabilities in the
community the final thing that I
say about that is we saw a
decrease not necessarily in
those sixty and older but those
eighteen to
you know thirty five returns
reporting of suspicious used for
replications.
Is here and trying to figure out
why that for but.
So you'll see things like social
media now.
Federally applied for promotions
UCCS on advertising.
Limitations so we're doing more
education I mean you gotta costs
three years so we're we're
looking at how we explained
last batter and introducing both
to apply for reporters Committee
when they suspect.
Thank you in Mr chair madam
secretary when you said you're
focusing on eighteen year olds
to however whatever that range
was you are you looking at them
for people who need services for
people who are committing elder
bees.
Mr chair that's a great question
so with protective services
Senator.
We we focus on anyone who is you
who is eighteen and older so
this is not just a sixty five
and older this is really
eighteen an hour and so on we
did a decrease in that number
just that population on.
What is it that.
And we want to make sure and so
those numbers decrease that for
the right reasons great but we
want to make sure that we're
targeting that population what
uses it could look like for you.
Mr chairman secretary so that
three million extra that you're
requesting for adult protective
services what would that be for.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn you want to develop
the program either in house or
externally that focuses on here
gate in specially in your own
frontier areas so that when we
get it we have over five to six
thousand complaints over the
last couple of years
that you simply show up from an
agency day after day after day
I need to respond to that
besides just telling the the
provider the agency that last
also either you know development
programs specially in those
areas that increase the rate
for caregivers Cassidy we find
that out so that can you respond
to make sure people are stable
and able to remain in their
homes longer.
Okay thank you madam secretary
and I just want to thank you for
your work and I think looking
after our seniors.
One of our most vulnerable
populations is a definitely a
top priority of mine and I hope
you always come to us and
educators about what more we
need to do to do a better job
looking after him so thank you
for your work thank you Mr.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair so.
I want to start with the I guess
it's a concern madam secretary
to talk about new projects in
this time of plenty of my
concern is that yes we have
money this year but.
But our budget has some dramatic
ups and downs and so we put
money in recurring.
issues new projects today two
years from now that's my guess
is of we'll be fine next year
but two years from now we're
going to be then cut and all of
those services.
Because we have been here long
enough to know that when we have
twenty one year we have nothing
to years from now.
So.
I would just caution that we
don't want to start a lot of new
projects what we want to do is
make sure that the projects that
we have or functioning as well
as they can function.
In so that's just a
The concern I have and some of
these things to were talking
about the war well aren't we
aren't we doing those things
today are we helping the seniors
that are in the front tier parts
of our state today.
because it didn't sound like
that ought to be a new project
that are to be something that's
at least twenty years old.
Mr chair Senator share thank you
for this question is so first of
all I'd like to say that you
know we're putting dollars to
easy to say it's really and that
is often moving and have
different funding sources and so
would we want to revolutionize I
put in charge into how we hear
it individuals who have
disabilities for our seniors
indicated projects that would
funded by the state I and that's
kind of our meeting Medicare
Medicaid and we want to be able
to revolutionize that were
managed care organizations to
really develop a comprehensive
you know service delivery for
our seniors and adults with
disabilities it's getting better
but it's still fractions these
pieces could have pilot projects
could certainly health and many
other managed care organizations
will that take on about service
so we're looking at but I I
totally get what you're saying
and I've been around long enough
to go to those can happen to
this I think he's we are trying
hard to provide services in
the world and I hear parts of
the state the question is having
successful and we really and I
don't know that we have what
kind of resources and capacity
building and has which is what I
think we need to.
In addition to that tribes as
well as that come out.
Come out and show us how to do
things differently we want you
to partner with us on I don't
here's and again with the
revenue generating after we got
them up and running because that
please four point that and a lot
of the managed care
organizations are are are you
interested in
in adding to those types of
programs and so we wanted to
start that.
On this sort of thing but in
rural areas it is really hard
for us to pay for I can't ever
at the rate that we're paying in
Albuquerque where you might be
able to get in on it for twelve
to fifteen to sixteen dollars an
hour not enough and we need to
actually develop programs
interested in doing.
and create real you know we all
say this is real career paths
but I'm talking people who will
help tutor people who will help
you hands on sort of training
who are interested in
restorative therapies who are
interested in not only the rest
that but families actually
looking at doing co losses and
they did share the burden that
other at the other ones.
Right so we're looking at
creative ways to do that and
that does cost money but I am
very very mindful that we don't
want to start of the funds new
programs that be sustainable and
that's really why we're focusing
on one small but but my where we
can sustain and build off of
that the reason I want this is a
case that they have and it's not
a very and so we can do it he
can start rolling this out I
don't have to have twenty
project here that perhaps you
have to cut down that we can
start building this capacity
thoughtfully and strategically
so that people can stay in on.
Thank you madam secretary I I
have another question so right
at the end you you mentioned
the.
Of clients that were eighteen to
thirty four in in the that
surprised me a lot is is is that
in our laws that is that a group
of people that.
That statutorily you're supposed
to deal with.
Mr chair Senator share of the
loss for adult protective
services eighteen and older we
were dissecting the some of the
information and the data and
realize that there was a
population.
We've got a little too much in
terms of for reports on the
explication but yes in statute
eighteen and older it is.
I've services service.
The prices Mr chairman specially
because I believe it was
yesterday we learnt that if
you're twenty one or younger
you're still a child.
So I'm confused by that which
which one it ought to be.
But I'm also I'm also.
I don't know I just didn't I
didn't.
You know it's aging and long
term Services Department in
The whole idea of eighteen.
So when we're talking about
people that are that have some
kind of disability or we just
talking about.
Gets it just right out of high
school.
So so Mister chairman Senator
share those are the right
questions and basically anybody
needs eighteen and older meters
Services AP
they could have a developmental
disability a physical disability
pass it to the issue but we're
not trying to do what they had
capacity to make decisions bad
decisions decisions decisions
then they have that choice but
there is a vulnerable
populations that we need to
serve at eighteen and older and
we do work with CYFD to make
sure that we you know that
anyone on that.
Eighteen and twenty one already
served by somebody else should
be easier to them are they under
the.
Protective services and I just
want to remind body this is how
old I am but I remember with
with CYFD was created The Dallas
time I was in graduate school at
the time and I remember don't
protective services was under
CYFD for a very long time it
wasn't so I think I believe
Representative.
Where date of services was
transferred over to aging in on
services.
If the.
Mr chairman Mr the madam
secretary yes I believe our
governor was the not department
head at the time but the head of
that group.
So anyway thank you Mr chair
thank you madam secretary.
Thank you nobody on them.
Madam.
Senator dynamic okay Sir Senator
moving into your hand.
Mr Chairman.
I have a question for the
secretary was taken
to my concerns and understand
that is I have some concerns as
far as expanding in.
Possibly duplicating services
you quite often mentions the
hands of rural New Mexico Mexico
we have service providers we
have some.
Is that and you were talking
about the FTEs responsibilities
and roles which is one of those
but clearly does would be
duplicating services that we
already have our our local
providers there in in the
community as far as home care
and respite care I think our
concern right here.
This is the need to be increase
inflation rate is far as
investing the programs that we
are half their we have people in
resources are rooted in our
community that are under
resources under each other
resources that are not able to
provide the services at a level
that we like and so instead of
taking kind of a a top down
approach maybe more of a a
bottom up approach is yes in the
programs.
Before talking continue to grow
state government is how do we
invest in the programs that we
already have specifically in
small rural communities that
helped so many give you a moment
to kind of comment on that we
have phones instructions there
we're just testing in house
programs yes Mr Chairman Sierra
that is.
So but I I want to just just
it's just like anything you need
for health care.
Intervention and harm reduction
right.
Treasury sort of systems right
and some of them have that
capacity needing your community
to build those pieces right
we're not looking to take over
we're looking at.
Hi and the fact that in our
response and all those who do
have service providers many
telling us that they can't yeah
the direct TV that type of that
individual that worries me not
statewide that means that
especially we're seeing in these
rural and frontier areas where
people are needing can't.
Eight point one governor and
that stress can really see that.
Or they get their opportunities
and now what and so it is really
looking at not only the
resources the state doesn't want
to start providing programs what
we wanted to do is working with
its community see what works and
also want to wait to respond and
so you know and some rural areas
have no services no access even
you know health benefits if you
canceling options counseling and
so those areas that we really
need to focus on build capacity
no there's also that community I
I know I ask talkers I hope in
my mind so I hope I said out
loud which is either you know we
provide in house or we
contracted but something needs
to happen so we're if you see
not only is dollars and
resources to
to make sure that people in the
area our kids but also resources
on how to trade.
On you know where to go for
really on building capacity in
alternative options and that's
what we're looking at we would
more be more than happy to have
community able to to do that on
their own with our support in
some cases in this state not one
that we've been working on you
know and and you.
Where there doesn't seem to do
much at all and so you know
providing the necessary
stability resources even if it
is for a couple of years.
Cassidy just keep us safe and so
I'm looking at all of those
options and we look at adult
protective services and I'm
getting twenty five thousand six
thousand calls every year
complaining that people aren't
showing up and so that person
that needs that help NATO you
know one to five days without a
care giver that's talking to me
and what that does is taxing the
system because the person that
sourced me and I'm not
interested we now have we have
all sorts of problems at the
center and.
On Senate has to start in so
it's just really hard to say
that we're expand programs I
would say that we're probably
the ability that that Cassidy
for this purpose yeah so that
once we're stabilize comment
that can actually operate again
and so I would say it is really
expansion but really trying to
build it up and hold it
together.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary and I appreciate the
conversation I I understand what
you're saying Hopson additional
issues Orange County why perhaps
what's happening in my district
have statewide I would like to
visit with my local providers
service providers there to make
sure that they're getting what
they need and at the same time
as your what we need from that
and then just wanted I
appreciate your time this
morning and thank you for your
Mexico state.
Thank you thank you.
Senator Burt thank you Mr
chairman and thank you madam
secretary just looking over the
budget request as little late
the meeting today my apologies
the executive is recommending
three million for in home
services and LFC is is has a a
line there
are you short on in home
services what what would that
money be used for if I may ask.
Sure Mr chair US senator Byrd.
we had talked a little bit about
this the LFC didn't didn't put
that in there but not because
they don't like because I think
you get at the last minute but
what we're really seeing in a
community and this is what I was
talking with senator Dodd was
really developing and rebuilding
capacity and so this number on
the front.
Five thousand planes about
staff.
Need to shell out for personal
care so we've got to do
something and we're not talking
about a day.
We're talking you know five six
and and and and a couple of
cases without later on it was a
few months and this is
unacceptable and it's not that
these providers are not fine it
is because we haven't really
developed that half of the
develop the workforce in wages
so if we're doing these types of
emergency services we ought to
be looking in the community and
also saying how do we do
restorative how do we make sure
that that will happen in their
operations whether it's in the
house or are we contract out we
got it paid more money we've got
to make sure so that people show
up and that you're the to
respond exactly one with one
care giver that may have
contracted out for three or four
seniors rural or frontier
community
past services and and we're not
seeing the devastating effects
of you know if you will serve
malnutrition or dimensions that
then that people are able to
live in their own community and
so I think that really the three
million would be spent on in
home services so that we can
stabilize our communities.
So thank you for that Mr
Chairman so miss madam secretary
you have enough people you just
don't have the funding to
provide the service in my off on
that.
Mr chair September it's the
opposite we don't have we don't
have the the staff and the staff
are not wanting to work for low
wages working for X. specially
in rural areas so re energize
this were I've got it taking in
some cases
is it house so that we can
provide services directly or
respond to any emergency in
these times so that people can
get services AT okay in the Mr
chairman of if I may ask Kelly
if you could and little maybe
color to that the so I
understand what better.
For the three million dollar yes
the three million dollars just
so that didn't come through the
regular budget process so there
was no time for the LFC staff to
do the analytical process and
they'll committees legislative
process of you know trying to
decide recommendations this only
came in the first time LFC staff
heard about it was when the
executive recommendation came
out a few weeks before the
session so it's not the feel of
the takes a position on this
either way it's just that this
team so late that they did it
didn't allow us to do what we
normally do through our process
okay thank you for that Mr
chairman one quick question also
madam secretary LOC has two
hundred thousand there for I
think IT infrastructure I am a
big fan of making sure agencies
have the right tools to do their
job
we always seem to be behind the
curve on I. T. services in just
about every department software
upgrades and and in some cases
hardware upgrades and so on so
forth just just a quick question
not too deep in the weeds then
secretary are your systems up
and running in are they capable
of of helping you and enhancing
the work that you do or do you
need some upgrades to the I. T.
systems in your department.
Mr chair Senator thank you so
much for us question so when I
started
just over two years ago the I.
T. and infrastructure was it is
terrible it was terrible stating
that we had in some cases it had
and apparate and Services or
just just you know right in in
about eight years and so we're
getting to the point where we're
stabilizing now we're also.
Really had a program called
senator Ian is painful to
implement with our providers
because it's something new but
something necessary once we get
is up and running because in
real time council of who was on
how many people were certain
meals who was going to exercise
and they're not going to have to
go through this
you know counting process as you
go through now so we're getting
to that point but we still need
a lot of two hundred thousand is
really just need to Haiti
Services are putting it in now
also I know that there was a
quest for position and then the
LFC is supporting but you know I
have a staff of four I. T. folks
and you know you got unity and
Senator providers three hundred
senior centers across the state
of New Mexico and the topical
service because they simply
don't have the money to do it
themselves and so we're getting
this is an ask that we can
assist state group on over the
next year.
Thank you very much ma'am
security for that
yeah I just I just wanna make
sure people have the tools to do
what they need to do and is
someone whose mother in law is
turning ninety four this year
and her whole long life is
taking care of her son who's in
his sixties and has multiple.
Medical issues and has a lot of
doctors appointments and
unfortunately now she's
developing dementia these are
some of the services that are I
I'm becoming a lot more familiar
with very quickly
and so and so is my wife is
having to do a lot of this work
as well so I appreciate the work
that you do this department does
it's it's kind of the is not
very high visibility quite
frankly because we talk about
seniors who have problems and
all the stuff but critically
important
There are no less important
citizens of the state New Mexico
and then anyone else and they
need to be taken care of and I'm
hoping that all the services in
the support infrastructure such
as I. T. is is being provided to
make sure that you are able to
do that and again then secretary
thank you for your work thank
you Mr thank you thank you madam
and madam secretary first of all
thank you for your passion about
this and in those of us that are
getting older and our parents
are older or doing the role
reversal so some of us are
beginning to comprehend what
actually happens with seniors a
note from my family and so it's
it's a struggle out there to get
people to show up and providers
to show up and everybody getting
comfortable and especially in
rural New Mexico I do have one
quick question I I have some
stuff for office elder affairs
for a native American the
coordinator it's about one point
two million do you know anything
about this why would we need
those FTEs and.
yes share
we have to folks that work in
our office.
Other at over nineteen tribes
levels we've got several senior
centers on those prices follows
and we are trying to build
capacity
on those in place in order for
them to serve their seniors
anyway they want to see us
individuals.
R. to.
to take to provide consultation
and time with only two focus
areas
and right contracts and so it
was I think it was around
three hundred twenty four
thousand workers would begin to
build capacity.
And so madam secretary let me
ask you something so the two
coordinators and I mean a little
bit then inside the try because
of the federal government they
also fund senior long term aging
and so then that is to go to the
tribe in so then what happens
after that.
In order so what you're you're
asking I think I'm really
talking about service delivery
not necessarily funny he said
that so we do fun the senior
center and they are now have
access to title three dollars
which is about a dollar stated
this is dated may access for
them before we got all that
sorted out and so but the E.
they need a little help.
The and.
The standards in.
You know contract compliance
plus what they do when you know
services are you know the not a
letter expressing hope that
we're a lot of problems and try
to.
Lately I had to you individuals
that were working night and day
sure that we're the server food
boxes for getting out of the
city connection from the pueblo
and try to the state to make
sure that we're we're surveys
all Mexicans.
And it is not in your budget
request I did see that here.
Four thousand.
Secretary.
I'm sorry
Mr Chairman we really appreciate
LFC to to it I.
Mr chair the in the LESC
recommendation there is that
three hundred twenty four
thousand and those FTE which is
not included in the executive
recommendation I would know that
the HFC is already heard this
budget and to the LFC
recommendation at this point
thank.
Madam secretary thank you and
and again thank you for your
passion about elderly because
those of us are all in role
reversal of taking care of our
parents and we learned a lot
that we don't know in so it's
it's very interesting about
where you can get services where
you can get services and and how
you take care of the elderly so
thank you for your time today
appreciate you
looks like we a house
appropriations is has pretty
much covered everything you
needed in the budget so thank
you I will move on to the next
one that Kelly did I know this
is a re hearing at the
department of health and.
Our secretary do you want to go
over that again or.
Mr chairman if however you want
to do what I can do just a quick
highlights for the committee or
we can highlight because we've
we've heard him once and they
had to leave and so let's see us
so Mr chairman of the committee
were agency code six six five
which is the department of
health leave their passing out
the agency for the.
Both from last time just high
level
there is about a fifteen million
dollar difference between the
LESC and the executive
recommendation with the
executive being higher most of
these are differences were in
the public health and feed if
you need response program
program support and DDS di
program.
You'll see recommendation for
other transfers included one
million in revenue in public
health from the early childhood
education and care fund
contingent on eight passes
passage of legislation similar
C. recommendation for federal
fund revenue supported the
department's request will be
executive was three million
below for miscellaneous
adjustments.
If the committee could turn to
page three really quickly that's
your general fund rack up has
we've seen before
main differences can be found in
public health and at the
response of those first two
programs
As for I know this is committees
really interested in the PTSD
program and what that's going to
play plan going forward for
removing the weightless moving
everybody into services even
though there is technically a
one point five million dollar
difference between the two
recommendations both
recommendations are sufficient
to move forward with that plan
the executive recommendation put
a million and a half in person
that was it requested through
the US agency up process and so
was not included in the LFC
recommendation but even without
that one and a half we still can
move forward on that plan.
with that I'd I don't want to go
to for details that the agency
or.
Thank you Mr miss them more if
they have any cat.
Thank you Mr chair no.
I think.
Pretty well learned most of the
differences public health as
well as the
I think it is an epidemiology
Services aside prevention
initiatives one of the governor
from the top funds services
online
there's righties otherwise
you'll see personal higher on
the seconded and several
programs on this
just on TV which operating rates
although it wasn't an easy
request that was part of the
executive recommendation so you
will see that process and
purpose
aside from that I think I will
leave it up to the secretary to
talk about the the biggest
discrepancies in.
The needs so thank you very much
Mr chairman and committee
members.
Thank you Mr secretary we are
your presentation before I don't
think you need to go through
your whole presentation again if
you want to go over the
highlights and in the
differences that would be good
and then we'll go to committee
questions.
Hi Mr chair just exactly the
same thing and also wanted to
know if it's appropriate in this
setting to mention some of the
discrepancies in the CTE funding
as well or you just want to
focus on that
The budget.
I would just focus on the base
budget can and then the.
We can see we have a long time
before we when the bill one and
house bill two comes over here
to make that discussion so okay
great is that those those
discrepancies are really
important to the success of the
department I think I would just
very briefly mention the top
priorities one is yes and they
mostly actually fall under
having the right people enough
people to do the work that we
need to do and a lot of the
track and retain and so we
talked last time reading
state employees fifteen dollars
an hour this is critically
important in our facilities and
not something that we actually
have to address.
Last four seven percent increase
enhance is a very good further
and some doing something focus
on that smaller group of
employees was fifteen dollars
critical for us to maintain
facility operations a second we
talked last time also letter
stating that you're losing the
neighboring states for twenty
thousand dollars more per year
for the same jobs the LFC is
proposed funding a little over
half of that we really need to
line item in behind it
yes thank you for your patience.
We lost so many people I think
third again in the people
category the the waiver is going
to require additional
Division D. H. high and it's
just a matter of having a lot
more facilities to regulate to
in fact the licenses as we
double the number of people
receiving eighty years and also
managing a program we're not
asking you double the number of
staff immediacy we do not people
to make this work and we don't
want to say we don't want to
program the successful we don't
want to pause for a moment
because well as resources which
I'm not I'm not supposed to talk
about includes press and also
some and I do I do and so I
think for me those policies and
get any competitive in state
government I.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes in this position
where folks providing direct
care and help to the people in
our nursing homes hospitals
other facilities are making
substantially less than
it's just not attainable
approach and the our facilities
there for appreciation on
not suffering on the program
citing security recently that
that suicide prevention efforts
really sponsors are part to
request the LFC to come up with
the suicide prevention programs
across multiple departments it
was included in our budget
request most of it centers in
dealing with balls of the
departments as well really a top
five states for suicide rates as
brief.
I raise animals and we believe
that our public funding this
program will help and I know
there's a funding eight budget
is some of the funding and the
LESC puzzles based on actually
other bills passed by
we're really open to however
Fund like to see full amount of
four hundred and so those kind
of things that we can set our
nation on trauma
I think we're willing to take
time to develop more robust
program and I have been in
discussions on that line in
terms of weather related thing
is that in a little bit
different way and so were
amended sizzling that focuses
the LFC to talk about that as
well and then I.
if I left out anything that.
My colleagues dire yes please
now I was also asked to travel
to speak up if she's like about
the facilities there was one
thing that did happen and it
really appreciate we have had
some money for granted in any
disability and contracting in
the past we move that up to our
budget and I think our one of
the eight the last hearing
mention of the LFC was looking
at and to the base budget has to
use their and the priest the
on a hundred and and I think
that's something over we agree
to as well I can't do this is
very important Senator
Cappelletti additional comments
on the Senator.
Thank you Secretary screws
Mr chairman members of the
committee I.
Program record but I do
secretary screams it's extremely
difficult to use that facility
was rated on some we are doing
our best but we can't compete
thank you for your
consideration.
That Mr secretary look we'll go
to committee for question this
one second before everybody
raises their hand.
Mr secretary tomorrow we're
gonna here's follow on correct.
This afternoon I would urge our
members and don maybe send out
an email to every secretary or
every agency they should watch
that spoke presentation because
hello and agencies have the
ability to hire and a higher
rate in they've chosen to hire
at the lowest rate instead of a
middle level or higher rate and
there's a lot of flexibility in
statute where they can get those
rate increases up and so I I
urge you guys to pay attention
that full meeting this afternoon
on how you're doing hiring and
we're working on the pavement
and the contraction issue in the
minimum wage issue and nobody
may like the number but we got
some problems to resolve in the
state one other thing Mr
secretary and and then Senator
Rodriguez chair for a minute is.
When you guys sent out COVID
testing everybody can get a free
test in the state.
You said it had to go to their
mailing address our home address
there's an issue in rural New
Mexico and throughout that we
don't have ruled the mail
delivery McKinley County or
rural mail delivery in somewhere
else any use appeal box because
we don't have that and so you
can't Senator your business.
You have to send it to your home
address and so there's a problem
with that so think about that as
we go through because all come
back and want to answer that
question I think the committee
members will want that for
anybody that lives in rural New
Mexico once have a COVID yes I
think that's very important see.
Mr chairman I just address that
briefly because that's the
federal program the state is
also gonna have a program for
people can order yes as well and
and we're happy to send them to
an address I think the federal
government the physical address
and not a post office box
because they're trying of we
a duplicate sense probably to
control costs and we understand
that you're in Mexico as we're
distributing additional
Matt Santos those will right now
they're being sent to the
communities in pick up spots
that we get to the direct mail
questions we will allow for PO
box addresses thanks good that
that some clarity to to question
that that was braced I
appreciate that
Senator Rodriguez once you
chairman Senator Steinborn had
his hand raised first.
Thank you hello Dr Scrase.
Right let's go to Senator
Steinborn next thank you very
much madam chair and secretary
good morning I'm gonna pick up
right where the chair left off
asking about COVID first
question Mr secretary do you
believe COVID is going to go
away and twenty twenty two.
miss madam chair Senator
Steinborn
members of the committee I have
the answer is no I could press
for a better diet
definition of what we might go
away but I think the question is
on December thirty first well
our hospitals still.
Have a fair number of
complications in that and the
struggling to manage resources
I think at the present time I
that is yes.
Mr secretary.
Does anybody really now with
with the global vaccine
situation the way it is and some
of the people.
Not being vaccinated or fully
vaccine even with winning
winning protection and the need
to continue to get re
vaccinated.
Does anybody really know the
path of the virus is going to
take over this coming year.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn
members of the committee I can't
speak for anybody but I can tell
you hi.
And there's one person on this
call would know better than I
and that's Mike Edwards and you
tell me the other day he wasn't
sure.
I don't doctor Edwards if you'd
like to make some additional
comments.
We might we can't hear you.
There is now I can't.
Several times in.
Is
that.
The.
The.
Thank you Mr secretary and you
know as we watch this unfold
every prognostication from the
best experts in the world
haven't been able to project
because because we don't run the
virus the virus runs itself and
mutates and it's and it's just
sciences nature and so and it's
going to keep doing that as long
as it exists in the system.
Virology epidemiology one on one
so my question is this with with
the tools that we have to fight
this and to protect New Mexicans
we know the federal government
has launched a testing program
we know that the state of New
Mexico is also purchasing a
million yes we know also that
the federal government is now
giving free mass which by the
way is a public service
announcement with micron UNM
School health the same if you
want to wear the can ninety five
mask if you're wearing a cloth
mask digit.
or double math you really want
to be wearing a can ninety five
math with super important which
is ninety five percent protected
by the way we can do this the
only dollar dollar and a half of
peace we can get on the Mexicans
doing this if you go to a
grocery store if you look around
at the distribution what people
are wearing you'll see but
ninety percent of them are not
wearing a can ninety five mass
and so when we see our hospital
school we see twenty thirty New
Mexicans are they dying we can
improve what we're doing very
easily and it's kind of
disappointing we haven't yet but
it's good to see the federal
government the state changing
and improving its policy but my
question Mr secretary is.
With the mass that are now
coming from the federal
government in the state and the
tax how long will that these
programs last in terms of months
how long will this take within a
this coming year.
I'm.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn
in the committee ATMs questions
with item now that would be the
most truthful answer one thing I
will say though is we rely right
now very few months and the
funding through the Medicaid for
grant to pay for mask paid for
all of these our system supports
that we're bringing to bear I do
have early mornings from the
Vietnam that your ability to
support the pandemic in December
well we're not gonna have
anything after April first the
first time it happened again the
secretary of health and Human
Services
federal government extended the
public health emergency our
ability to provide maximum tasks
and things like that in our
state can.
The rings I believe that we
could potentially see as an act
between do not provide any
resources in the moment and then
the secretary of health
community service is no longer
the players public health
emergency and that could
potentially be is.
Thank you Mr secretary so my
just if you look at the numbers
of of masks that are being
ordered by the state that are
being provided by the federal
government you look at the
number yes.
My rough math Mr Secretary is
that that could be a three month
programs more or less
and of course we're pacifist go
budget for this whole year so I
guess my question to you and you
know this is what we've been
working on it you should the
legislature be giving you the
department of health the COVID
contingency fund.
With the seven hundred million
and part of funds that are
sitting there should we not
would not be prudent for us to
set aside ten twenty thirty.
Plus million dollars for the
department of health for mass
for six months from now.
COVID yes maybe therapeutics.
So that way we're able to be on
the offense to to protect our
citizens would that not be a
prudent thing for us to do Mr
Secretary.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn.
Members of the committee that's
really a legislative decision I
think in time it's nine eleven
or the LFC budgets that we
proposed because we just can't
see that harm future there's no
question of that the not
reimbursement sees thirty.
Then and there is a legislative
appropriation it looking at
on that and September we will we
would all agree it was approved
and signed you know.
Up to the legislature's inside
that
of course.
We because of the budget cycle
is probably the perfect time to
consider this as well and I
don't have an official position
