You want to introduce yourself.
Yeah.
There was going to start I.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Pat Woods critically and
you can districts of.
Thank you Mr chairman of bills.
Thirty three
Otero Lincoln in Chester County
I think you're gonna yourself as
a new commissioner.
But.
Senator.
Bill here Senate district one
which is important to.
Hemphill was texting away thank
you both thank you Mr.
and Senator Siah Correa Hemphill
from Silvercity represents
Senate district twenty eight
which is Grant County catching
County and most of the current
county good afternoon everyone
thank you for being here.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Michael Padilla represent the
southwest quadrant of Bernalillo
county.
The picturesque in traditional
and historical part of New
Mexico.
Rich in culture and we love
everyone of you.
Senator what do you.
I don't think those dispensaries
have opened up yet.
I'm said Jordan yes
representative and miscible in
McKinley and San Juan families
work with Mexico so
Amanda you want to get us
started with the PRC I think
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst with the legislative
finance committee we are going
to be assumed although he might
be having some technical
difficulties and not quite sure
of by DFA analyst Diego humana's
from the executive we are also
joined by chief of staff of the
public regulation commission
Andrew prostor to my right we
will be starting with the public
regulation commission agency
code for thirty the bullets
provided for you have lots of us
background information on the
PRC and some of the stuff that
they've been adopted this fiscal
year hand last fiscal year
including a re organization I
will defer to the agency to
inform you more on that though.
Mr
Mr chairman members for the
budget at the LFC recommended
recommendation reduce general
fund revenue by.
Six hundred forty.
Yes but that's not correct it's
it increased revenue by six
hundred and forty seven thousand
or eight point two percent and
supported the agency request to
increase the budget pipeline
safety funds the executive
recommendation included slightly
less general fund revenue for
the agency for a seven point
seven percent increase in
general fund HDFC did adopt that
of lower executive request and
with that I can turn it over to
Mister Propst.
We want the if they Mr Chairman
I'm not sure I think you might
be in Diego if you can is there
anything you'd like to add for
the PRC.
Mr.
Not that it is the the executive
recommendation really just to
support the agency in our
efforts to reorganize.
Applies the appropriate agency
right.
Thank you.
Thank you thanks.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee again
my name is Wayne Propst I'm the
chief of staff for the New
Mexico public regulation
commission.
It's nice to be back here with
you Mr chairman I'm joined this
afternoon by we're not a parent
get one whose it administrative
services director for the PRC.
Program number of staff were
also turned tuned in Mr chairman
I want to start off by
recognizing the members of the
commission.
The chairman of the commission
Joseph Maestas vice chair
Cynthia hall commissioner
Fishman Commission presented to
our and commissioner Byrd.
Mr Chairman I'm I'm not gonna
spend a lot of time this
afternoon going through our
presentation and getting a
little bit of a late start so
I'm gonna keep this as brief as
up as possible I do want to
thank both Amanda and Jack go
for the work that they do on the
PRC throughout the year and all
the hard work that they put into
their recommendations to the
legislature for FY twenty two a
budget as well as our FY twenty
three request.
Mr chairman I think you're aware
that when I took this job eight
months ago.
And then I knew that the.
PRC is no.
A time of transition.
And that this job Mr chairman
as.
Henry the eighth sent to his
fourth wife might be brief.
In less than a year.
The PRC will transition from a
five member elected commission.
Two or three member appointed
commission.
And it's entirely possible that
there will be changes when that
new commission comes on sent
relief possible they want a new
chief of staff and if they do
that's fine.
But knowing Mr chairman that
there is a potentially short
period of time for me at the PRC
in some ways it's helped me
focus on what I think is really
important what I really think is
important is to set up the
commission the new commission
help the current commission
finishes his job number one.
But also turned over the keys to
the best administered.
HSD possible we're not new
commission takes office on
January first of two thousand
and twenty three.
What that means Mr chairman for
me is focusing on three.
Three specific facts.
First of all is making sure that
the operations of the agency.
The finances of the agency.
Our operating at the highest
level possible.
Means filling vacancies that
have been vacant for years.
It means correcting audit
findings have been exit in
existence for years.
It means bringing on the best
possible administrative services
staff possible.
And that has been the first box
that I wanted to check as chief
of staff at the PRC.
I think Mr chairman that we're
well on our way to being able to
check that box I'm going to
embarrass Sir but I also believe
Mr chairman I think a lot of
people who have been around this
building for a long time will
agree with me that I've hired
the best administrative services
division director in state
government in or not sitting
behind me.
For the first time in history
the PRC we've hired a chief
financial officer to help us
with some of those audit
findings to help us make sure
that we have the strongest
possible financial controls that
we can make sure that we address
prior audit findings and so
Mister chairman I think we're
pretty close after eight months
to be able to to check that box
of having the administration the
finances of the agency in a
better position than where I
found them.
The second box Mr chairman
members the committee that I
want to be able to check for the
new commission in particular.
Is ensuring that they have the
resources and the budget to do
the extremely important and
complex work that they will be
asked to do beginning on January
first of two thousand twenty
three.
That's what we're here to talk
about today Mr chairman and I
think Mr chairman in some ways
we're pretty close with the
executive and legislative
recommendations the LFC
recommendations.
Being able to check that box as
well.
Both LFC and the executive
recommended supplemental
appropriations for the current
fiscal year to help us resolve a
deficit and personal services
employee benefits.
We've also made recommendations
for us but for special
appropriation for FY twenty two
to allow us to furnish properly
on the new building but we moved
into this past August we're down
in the Boca building which is
just across the plaza from here.
Senator Woods actually had the
pleasure of him stopping by to
see the building.
It's an old building built in
nineteen fifty four.
It's got quite a history to it
we'll go into all of that
history but we do think that
there are at least two ghost
that occupy the building along
with staff.
But with any building that's was
built in nineteen fifty four
taking all of the furnishings
that we had when we had to leave
the pair building across the
street here and putting it into
that space it's not working very
well so we we we have asked for
special appropriation to help us
with that for the current fiscal
year moving into FY twenty three
we ask for about a fourteen
percent overall increase in our
operating budget.
As Amanda noted of the between
the executive and the LESC the
recommendations are between
eighty about a seven and an
eight percent increase that's
very good we appreciate that
very much it's going to help
that commission I get off to a
better start also Mr chairman
I'll cut to the cut to the chase
here in terms of our our budget
if the legislature could
consider accepting the executive
recommendation for special and
supplemental appropriations
which is slightly higher than
the LFC for FY twenty two would
be grateful it's about a hundred
fifty thousand dollars we would
be appreciative of your
consideration for that.
And for next year for FY twenty
three if we could get a little
bit closer to our request we
would also be grateful for your
consideration of that as well.
Also for FY twenty three Mr
chairman we did request
authority to retain up to five
hundred thousand dollars in
application fees we expect to
to receive under the community
solar act which was passed in
the last session that
legislation is Senate bill
eighty four I believe authorize
us to retain some of those fees
that we neglect to be able to
administer that program going
forward so having that authority
as well in FY twenty three will
help ensure that we carry out
the intent of the legislature
and implemented to community
solar act in a manner in which
you expect us to.
So Mr chairman that's our that's
our budget request if we can
check that box that's box number
two third box it will be
focusing on over the next year
obviously Mr chairman is
insuring that we provide
whatever support is necessary to
the nominating committee that
will send nominations to the
governor for the new commission.
Are nominating committee must be
formed by July fourth first of
this year.
It must begin meeting by
September first and it must have
a minimum of five nominees to
the governor.
To a point four by January first
of twenty twenty three so that's
sort of the third box that we're
focusing on and I'm focusing on
is chief of staff is providing
support to that process so would
go smoothly and that the those a
new commissioners those
nominations are are are sent to
the governor and the governor
once she is medicine on those
appointees that we have a
process in place orientations
strategic planning.
The things in place so thank you
commission is ready to hit the
ground on January first.
So with that Mr Chairman hello
stop happy to answer any
questions that you have thank
you Mr probe you have as many
boxes you do ghost Senator Woods
is raising his hand.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Thank you very much fully of.
You took over a job that.
It's tough under any
circumstances and move out of
the building and relocate put
back up and and then.
Take over a lot of assignments
that.
The.
I'm I'm on new mailing list for
the community solar stuff and I
see all that stuff coming into
the and all of
things that that you have to
weed through and and you know
make try to make rules my
question is Mr the question is
what do you think that's going
to cost just just the rule
making for community solar.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and Senator Woods
that's a good question I'll
answer by big beginning to say
that we had to go to the board
of finance.
to request a hundred million a
hundred thousand dollar grant to
allow us to enter into contracts
because we we have some great
staff at the CRC.
But we don't have all the
expertise necessary to implement
the community solar act and
that's that's that's this.
So we did have to seek a hundred
thousand dollar emergency loan
from the board of finance to
hire some some folks from
outside on contract to help us
get ready to have the community
solar a rule in place by April
first which is a deadline so
that's a direct cost right there
fortunately and thankful to the
board of finance we didn't have
to that they converted the loan
into a grant which is good but
it's hard to put an exact figure
on on the cost going forward we
do anticipate that I mentioned
if we have authority to retain
up to fifty up to five hundred
thousand dollars to administer
the community solar act once the
rule is in place we anticipate
that we will use all of that
five hundred thousand dollars so
it is we're and that will be
whether we try to bring people
in house and hire them to to to
administer the act or if we
bring somebody again from the
outside to help us administer
the act.
I would I would certainly put in
the number I five hundred
thousand and above in order to
get us to get that rural done
and get it implemented properly
in in we share the reason I ask
about this in particular because
there's a bill being.
Representative.
To have the PRC study the option
of the state utility company our
state electric utility.
And.
I know that you probably haven't
got any idea what that might
cost.
But I would assume that would be
a
even a more greater cost to that
study.
Then it would be to anything
you've got going on your plate
maybe not to this got through
with the possible merger study
so that was pretty expensive
deal.
but.
What I'm asking is is your
budget that you that laid out
here.
Does it lay out anything about
that possible bill being passed
in the cost that it will cost
you for contract services to
different things to do that
study Mr Mr chair lane of could
you just give me your idea on
that Mr chairman and members of
the commission commission Mr
Representative and a commission
meeting for about four hours
this morning my apology Mr
chairman members a committee of
Senator Woods.
one of the items on the
commission's agenda this morning
was that very topic.
Of the best ballpark figure
we've come up with in terms of
the cost of that study is five
hundred thousand dollars.
I would estimate that it would
be higher than that and in the
end.
but that's we have reached out
to some folks to do those kind
of studies and again Mr Chairman
about five hundred thousand is
the best figure that we have
this this budget even if even if
you fully funded our request for
FY twenty three would not cover
the cost of that study.
Well and and what I'm getting at
Mr chair.
Is that as legislators.
Maybe we need to put
appropriations in according to
what a study would cost.
In in the bills that we're
running.
Have some good estimate of what
it would cost in that go along
with that bills to be passed to
fund it such a study and that's
just my opinion Mr chair the
appreciate the term for the
question thank you Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman
and thank you to the presenters
and thank you Wayne this real
quick on page seven I'm sure
it's just a typo on the line two
hundred there it says personal
services I think that's what the
person is that right Mr chairman
members it's actually in the
bill it's personal services
it's.
That we okay it's been that way
for years but it is for person
funding but it is Senator
noticed well good deal thank you
very much for that then this
might be for for a Mr chairman
for for Wayne so now that we're
gonna be a transitioning to this
new form of the commission
and one of the concerns that
I've had along the way because I
find myself in front of this
commission quite regularly
talking about bills that I'm
working on and things that they
would have some some thoughts on
I think it's just simply
staffing in the specialty areas
that the commission oversees now
I I don't think you're being it
all premature if you start
thinking about that with how the
person dollars will be spent or
personal dollars will be spent
is there any thought being given
to how the staffing look post
with the new commission are you
waiting for them to come around
and decide how they want to do
things because in the
telecommunications which I'm
there frequently you know
discussing things with the
commission I mean I just feel
like they needs more help in
maybe in a couple of years but I
know myself in particular I'd
love a lot more heck of a lot
more analysis from from the PRC
with regard to
telecommunications as an
example.
Mr Chairman members of the
committee and senator first of
all I've been doing this for
about eighteen years and I
always thought it was personal
services minutes to remember I
never noticed that so
Mr question Senator absolutely
we're thinking about it now
and thinking about how the new
P. Garcia will look from a
staffing perspective.
I'll give you one example of
that.
For a number of years in statute
the commissioners have the
authority to hire what is called
technical advisors because we
have rules appropriate rules at
the committee at the commission.
They keep for example our
advocacy staff for utility
division our legal division from
being able from discussing cases
with directly with the
commission the commission as an
office of general counsel that
that that advise them on legal
issues but for a number of years
of those positions have existed
and have sat vacant
and there's really been no from
what I can tell no real effort
to try to to fill them I'll give
credit where credit is due
commissioner Maestas in
particular when I came on board
made it a priority for me to get
those positions advertised and
filled
we had to take some position for
example for one of the positions
a technical adviser calmest.
We took a vacant Attorney
position that hadn't been filled
for two or three years we re
classified from classified to
exam so we can get the salary up
level and long story short Mr
chairman members the committee
and senator all three of the
technical advisory positions
electrical engineer is locked in
a utility economists the utility
accountant all those positions
have now been created they've
been approved by DFA they're
exempt positions and they're all
being actively advertised that's
one example Mr chairman and
members the committee and and
senator of exactly what you're
talking about which is.
What is the staff of the new
commission look like we have
good very good strong technical
staff right now but it is not
enough is not enough for what's
happening in New Mexico with.
Our mandate and our mission is
not enough with what's happening
globally so absolutely there's a
lot of talk going into that you
know the the new commission may
come in and have an entirely
different structure but I don't
want to wait until it happens
give you one more example Mr
chairman there's not a deputy
chief of staff.
I have certain skills I think
perhaps others can judge not but
my so I'm not a I'm not a
utility expert so I I think at
some point the commission needs
to look at having a deputy chief
of staff that maybe fills in
some of the holes of my resume
and has some of that expertise
so again Mr chairman and senator
absolutely I I we're we're
working on that night because I
just don't think you can wait
until until January.
Mr chairman thank you Wayne I
I'm really glad to hear that
you're thinking that way because
I don't want to then spend
revenue commission come in and
spend all other two or three
years rebuilding the place
because that would not be what
we're trying to accomplish if
you'll just to be right with you
Mr chairman can you talk a
little more about the
telecommunications area works
even before that can you talk
what will be the major functions
are focuses of the PRC and the
New World for the piercing I
don't think everything remains
with the new the new body is
that correct.
It Mr chairman members the
committee and and senator
currently at least although I
understand the maybe legislation
during the session that might
take for example the transport
the transportation division of
the PRC and move it out of the
PRC.
But assuming legislation that
nature doesn't doesn't pass I
think the kind of the the bones
of the of the commission will
remain the same the division's
will generally remain the same
will have pipeline safety
transportation.
Hearing examiners cell
communications exciter so again
that might change the session
but it's not we're still gonna
have the jurisdiction that we
currently have with regard to
you know telecommunications and
merry that we know is near and
dear to your heart your spent a
lot of time on with the
commission we appreciate that
Mister chairman Senator your
outreach to the commission I can
tell you that you're attending
our meeting I think was last
week was was appreciated very
much I the commission
you know.
It's an area that
It's hard to get your hands arms
around we got some good people
there now I don't know if we
necessarily need to expand the
number of staff that we have in
our telecommunications division
but what I want to do Mr
chairman as part of kind of
preparation for that nominating
committee that will start
meeting over the summer
preparation for the new a
commission that will take office
on January first of two thousand
twenty three is have the staff
spend its own time on strategic
thinking about what that new
commission will look like and
I'll take a lot of that
direction from the staff in
terms of what they think the new
telecommunications Division
should look like and what the
needs are so that's something
that we want to do as I
mentioned and spending a fair
amount of our time on over the
next.
Six to seven eight months thank
you Mr chairman and that I don't
think more the committee's time
and I know that the PRC does not
oversee necessarily broadband.
Service delivery but we have
this new office of broadband
access expansion myself and and
my colleagues were able to
create this our last year.
If I could maybe get of of not a
memo but any information on on
how you would see interacting
with that office because I think
that's also gonna be critical to
the work of the PRC because a
lot of the telecommunications in
our world today really is
broadband it's really not
telecommunications anymore so
I'd love to have more
information on that thank you Mr
chairman happy to do that and
and senator we have met with the
new director of broadband office
already we're very interested in
a partnership with them and
supporting the efforts under
the.
The things you know has on his
plate many of which are the
result of legislation to help us
over the last couple of years
thank you Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman thank you good
afternoon.
And our staff and other staff
thank you for your work
I just wanted to maybe ask one
question before Google hacking
Mr chairman but one of them went
on the first page of your
presentation would be labeled
page I.
I know you mentioned that the
the operating budget is eleven
point nine but to fulfill these
are the shortfalls I guess right
and quickly and because you you
indicated to fill all positions
all the positions according to
quote at the PRC would cost
eleven point seven
That that I'm a little bit
explain that to me how is that
related to them point nine one
is that a part of it or
something additional Mr chair
members of the committee and and
senator thank you for asking a
question of this entire
presentation if I will would ask
the committee to focus on.
one bullet point it's not bullet
point our operating budget for
the current fiscal year the
total budget that we have to
spend is eleven point nine
billion.
If we were to fill all of our
current existing authorized FTE
that would take up eleven point
seven million of that Levin
point nine leaving us with two
hundred thousand dollars to do
everything else whether it's
community solar.
Paying the rent
any number of things that every
agency has to.
I have a budget for in order to
operate that's how tight our FY
twenty two budget is which is
why we ask for supplemental
appropriation for FY twenty two
that's why we ask for special
appropriation for FY twenty two
that's why we ask for increase
for next year as well quite
frankly because it's very very
difficult to operate a budget to
operate HSD to fill the
positions that we have which I
am absolutely committed to
filling the authorized positions
that we have
with that kind of a tight
budget.
Thank you and I'm happy you've
explained that I was afraid that
maybe the case but let me ask
you this your existing employees
that you have Mr chairman when
how can make their payroll
basically your hundred twenty
six thousand in the whole to pay
existing employees that's on
your third this their second
line here on page five.
You know here you have a
shortfall of one hundred twenty
six thousand to pay raise
employees now so I guess I just
want in the public safety
program program support so I
guess I just wondered are you
gonna be able to cover that are
you having to come before.
Mr chair Mr chairman and members
of this committee and senator
dancers yes we we're not gonna
have to furlough anybody we're
going to we're going to be able
to to pay everybody every two
weeks the supplemental that is
banned recommended by both the
LFC and and the executive will
fill that hole.
By the.
Unfortunate Mister chairman
Senator what that means is even
if we fill out a whole we are
currently holding I believe
twelve positions positions
vacant on just to make sure that
it does not hold doesn't get any
bigger and I don't want to hold
those positions vacant I want to
fill them but we're having to do
that our FY twenty three.
Budget should help free us up
because we have some additional
resources to begin filling those
positions but when you have that
kind of a shortfall the only
teacher the only real choice you
have is is not the field many of
the positions many of the
technical positions that you're.
That you have
You think that this answer I'm
sorry I didn't mean to I can't
hear real well with on if it's a
mask or just the way it seems
like even when we have our mask
in her mouth but not our ears we
still can't hear it's kind of
strange thank you very much for
your explanation of that just a
final quick question of when
you're you need security for the
Boca building his which you
indicated here for your special
request and what kind it's two
hundred sixty thousand
for for the office space for
this teleworking staff but as
well as security what kind of
security with that be are they
live security pads to getting in
or partitions or what is it can
you explain Mr chairman and
members the committee and
senator the majority of the
special appropriation would
actually go to furnishing but I
appreciate you pointing out the
issue of security.
one nine eight in a former life
the public employees retirement
association we unfortunately had
a situation there where a staff
member was threatened by someone
who came into the building.
And that was a real wake up call
to me and every sense and I've
taken the security of our
employees whether it's a parent
or the PRC very seriously.
We did a para is we we hired
someone to come in and set up an
act alert system which means
that every employee at their
desktop every employee on their
telephone have the ability to
send out an alert if for example
there was an active shooter in
the building they could push two
buttons on their computer that
sends out alerts the entire
building tell them where it
tells everybody in the building
where the alert is so that they
don't run towards the alert they
run away from the alert
and so that's an example of
something that I would like to
have installed in the building
that we're in right now but also
potentially Mr chair and senator
we would add some key cards
swipe type cards to make sure
that it's a little bit more
difficult to just wander around
the building it's an old
building as I mentioned it's
difficult to do some of those
things with them but but those
are some of the things that
we're we're thinking about if we
have the resources thank you
very much wine and gentleman I
just want to thank you and your
staff for for really working
hard at improving things and
making things better to the best
of your ability and we
appreciate you having work with
us here to and thank you for all
that you do and thank you to our
staff all some of the
governor's.
All I have Mister can you when I
just want to ask you these
questions and and and maybe how
many staff for showing up daily
and in do we really need office
space or are they not showing up
or do we need to be remotely
here I mean we want security we
we won all this but if you don't
have the people in the
In the meeting are in the
building I'm sorry in the
building I mean where we gaining
ground.
And you're going to struggle
over this next year with the
changes if those people aren't
in the office.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it's an excellent
question and one that probably
every set of every agency in the
state is struggling with.
When I as a parent I actually
made the decision to close the
pair of filled in before the
governor made the decision to
close the rest of state
government buildings two years
ago at the beginning of the
pandemic I thought that was a
difficult decision to close our
building.
Right now of course at the time
how long it would last week
closed at the time we close it
for two weeks part of that was a
difficult decision to make it is
to decide to to close the
building it's been far more
difficult Mr chairman and
members the committee quite
frankly decide how to bring
people back safely and we are
struggling with that I will say
this the book the building that
we in the right that we are
currently and does not have
sufficient space to comfortably
house or even uncomfortably
house all of our current
authorized FTE.
We have a bit of flexibility
because we have the
transportation division we have
a pipeline safety that the
vision those are staff that are
on the road a lot so those those
staff don't really need
dedicated offices but it's going
to be difficult even if the
pandemic went away tomorrow Mr
chairman would be difficult to
bring everybody back into the
building and provide space for
them so and I believe Mr
chairman and members of the
committee we're gonna have to
continue offering some type of a
telework hybrid system to our
employees even as I said Mr
chairman if the pandemic one
away tomorrow currently we don't
have a lot of staff in the
building I was working on a plan
to bring back some more staffed
and have been in the building
and then of course micron came
along and and those plans kind
of went out the window but it's
it's a struggle to determine
what the in office presence on
the PRC will look like in the
future but I do hope that we
will have more of an an office
presence in the future than we
have right now.
That's a question and I know the
committee heard Spokane FTEs
yesterday and you're doing
exactly the problem that we have
throughout every state agency
and the funding FTEs and Hiram
correctly we're we're saving
vacancy savings to hire
employees that that are
currently there so
I don't have a committee a look
on you since you left this from
last year's.
You may want to have a chat with
them they made me have some
resentment or no reason at all.
By the previous time in in you
being here is here.
And make sure you get the
security so and Senator Padilla
shows up.
Mr chairman as I think I
mentioned to you while I was
working have the honor of
working for the committee
briefly during the last session
and it was an honor the best job
I've ever had in my life was
working at a gas station when I
was in junior high school and I
mean this with all sincerity the
second best job I've ever had
was and was working here briefly
during the last session on I
truly enjoy that thank you Mr
chairman thank you to the
committee thank you for all your
help last year.
We're gonna move some stuff
around here real quickly and and
so we need to do workforce
solutions because Ricky has
another meeting that I Ricky if
you're there and then we're
gonna do the racing commission
since they're here live and then
all the restaurant lines so.
Breaking.
Eric want to start.
All right Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is action
EA.
I am the LFC analyst for the
workforce solutions department
and refer solutions is six
thirty one.
This leaves are passing out the
handouts right now.
With me today is as the chairman
said secretary srna.
secretary designate certain and
then also the executive analyst
I believe is on who is Simon
Miller.
The LFC recommendation for the
workforce solutions Department
continues the transfer of one
million for the workers
compensation administration.
The executive recommendation
would be to replace one million
transfer from WCA with general
fund revenue.
In total the LFC supported a
four point two percent increase
in the executive supported an
eighteen point five percent
increase in general fund
revenue.
Aside from replacing W. CAFé
finding with general fund
revenue the executive
recommendation supported a large
base increase in the other costs
category.
Both rex supported the expansion
request to fund the department's
efforts in implementing the
healthy workplaces Act passed
during the twenty twenty one
legislative session LFC
supported seven hundred seventy
five thousand and the executive
supported nine hundred thousand.
in the unemployment insurance
program.
We'll see did not recommend
increasing the number of FTE
while the executive would
increase safety by a hundred
seventy one.
LCS not support increase in
weekly unemployment because the
end of the unemployment claims
decreased from about two hundred
thousand at the peak of the
pandemic and now they're down to
about sixteen thousand and so
the workload should start
decreasing also.
In recent months the federal
temporary assistance for needy
families employment and training
program transferred from Human
Services Department overly
workforce solutions department
so that explains the
The increase in FTE in that
program.
with that Mr chairman I'll pass
it off to I believe Simon for
for the comment.
Thank you very.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee decided
V. Hey my name is Simon Miller
and I mean it was yesterday
so federal funds may be
available DWS budget with less
than ten percent of their
operations funded by anyone
Eric said the executive
recommendation is one point
three million dollars or higher
than the LFC recommendation for
you general fund and there
there's two things that make up
that one point three million
dollars thanks so the first heat
transfer from the workers
compensation industry chain I
could mention the executive
recommendation replaces that
transfer of money with the
general fund so that the workers
comp one is limited to expenses
within its statutory purpose
and seconded the executive
recommendation a little bit more
funding for the enforcement of
the health of workplaces Act
Act which requires most private
employers provided minimum
amount of currency and that goes
into effect July first twenty
twenty two and regarding the FDA
recommends team in the
unemployment insurance program
it looks like you to increase in
FTE for FY twenty three but that
is not that's actually not the
case most of the that increasing
at the place seeing FY twenty
one in response to a larger
surging unemployment claims you
know this is because of the
pandemic and so the HSD had to
create a lot of that he ordered
to
administered unemployment
insurance program and so the the
number do you see very executive
recommendation that's the amount
of receipt that existed in the
program when it budget was
submitted on December first.
the HSD will obviously continue
to decrease the number of that
he in that program as time goes
on as as mentioning the number
of unemployment claims are
continues to drop in so you'll
see over time the exceeded not
program go down and
get more of what these level
that he was for the start of the
pandemic
and so I just wanted to clarify
that.
The Senate over to our
secretaries thank you.
Mr secretary hold on one second
Eric you want to comment about
the FTEs in the drop off and
let's.
That's that's act Mr chairman
that's accurate and and I just
wanted to point out a couple
things to cause another question
that comes up in.
Workforce solution hearings is
the I the fund balance of the U.
I trust fund so I just wanted to
point out your that are booking
page one seventeen there's a
good chart in there that shows
you what the balances are the
insurance trust fund then we've
also got a
a projection of the balances on
page eighteen of your following
three this this file spiral
bound one there too so you can
take a look at that also with
that Mr chairman pass it over to
secretaries are.
And.
We were dying to see you again
that's why I moved you up on
the.
Thank you Mr chairman we do
appreciate you are commenting on
Committee horrible New Mexico on
it is easy to do.
Local lawyers to talk
specifically about how we can
use in their proceeds so
a little bit your comedy
I was thinking the value to you
all right on this one is always
more in line to receive.
I created what I see is a this
is a change in our claims
January twenty he is on a
hundred fifty thousand right now
we're down to one eleven
dollars.
Created to see the different
reviewers anyone twenty to
January twenty twenty two is
about seventeen hundred ninety
so if you wanted to
a place for.
was.
Please overall unemployment
insurance claim still see.
Women are program for members to
the Mexico right now as a member
of the two one we look at.
A difference of the two thousand
one hundred workers in the
workforce this CD Mexico and.
A combination of those who are
looking for for.
And those who are unemployed and
looking to work with
which is essentially drive lower
three point of the state.
and and so we will see here on
this line is changing jobs going
back to January we need to
determine this in December one
BTC wrote in from
the
early eighties and and that and
that is when you look at the
slide when we started to all
members of the we clearly have a
gap in the.
This is available for New
Mexicans in the number of
MexicoSocorro hello.
If you're interested in
identifying what is
particularly.
These are these are no longer in
his own right hand side so where
are we from the pandemic levels
so.
Attention to learners started.
Bottom
line is is our has been a long
study programs that in order to.
As it has.
The sectors that we are really
focused on.
within two years the committee
determines whether or not you
can
these jobs are no longer
available or perhaps you.
for one reason or another but
you will is actually being held
transport and we're on the
progress is made or return.
Employment.
Employment numbers when
compared.
Certainly there of course is
includes more than in the
private sector not only your
any.
The previous job the local
government so this
is really where was from the.
we work on.
During our our our
I was earlier.
Identifying importers of we're
not worth the perhaps we're the
axes there was a lot going on in
with the engine.
Costs to workers or work.
You know what is going on is you
need to relax and and our
numbers.
Need a force we also in order to
see how clean is.
What do you disease.
Not
a.
And so we don't see.
And this is for the committee.
The there was be cleaning tax
benefits at the time so this is
this is the.
Of the two thousand.
A sample size of.
the largest.
The also sixties or secretary.
Twenty one thousand eight
hundred species why the largest
amount that it was also with the
so as to why you know or are
interested in an offer it was
access to the these other ones
Women and you'll see that it.
all of
this share.
We're trying.
One of the
and.
More
workers need those jobs for
workers time for the.
It is for our community and
accommodation services eight
eight the committee for our
workers it is
reader.
The workers and.
Are you called you know some of
our.
These employers in in your.
So what that is hello this is
workers easy have identified
opportunities outside of the
agencies like the
the labor force participation
rate is
New Mexico this is one percent
or one and a half percent in
nineteen twenty is the overall
is you know workers workers.
you know that it that it should
be receiving that are so the
Tripura's Department solutions
on line.
I want to
work on those areas you just
feels and the skills.
We know workers party and not
just not workers so we're using
a lot of money
for the years one percent
earners were unemployed you
know.
We need to be wise and now at
the end of the calendar year one
how many long term and.
Why everything you learn about
that and where they are is the
hi Education the New Mexico
where are the you know the
strategies what those areas are
one particular area.
Members of the work.
All parties the availability of.
On this show how you are the New
Mexico.
Hi I need someone to not a lot
letters you know mother topper
problems children six years old
you need so
Employers who are calling the
CCC Mrs you.
We're.
With us to articulate some of
the options hello there and even
to them as warriors looting is
more money you to.
Senator Ortiz.
we do we.
For more LESC.
Intern about partnerships.
I'm talking about.
This presentation required
for most.
This.
And we lock our communities is
easy communities where you're.
initiated into.
This is the office to CDC.
Hi this is a lot of the things
that we and and the good news is
for state government entities or
is it is it was mission.
We were very close to
tourism department the long
program hold our soldiers and we
created over the last two
hundred dollars.
Hotel restaurants finally the
workers and as.
Otherwise we refers to thousands
under need all those our
training for sixty
And and we've already obligating
nearly eighty two eighty six
where processing five hundred
and you know workers and not
very soon in the next you can
also click on the.
The
one hundred thousand dollars
working as a partner in the
hospitality industry and these
activities that we tried line we
still see us being able.
We do all the partnership with
ready.
She apartment which is Mexico
and.
The twenty twenty one there was
a way for us to do this.
The higher ed and working women
and work opportunities for New
Mexico the website.
This is
where New Mexicans.
Get help with this
with the higher a direct offer
consultations
Hello this is it's also goes for
the along for years to require
and it would.
The program is about one of the
meeting is about this project is
mediated dollars to help
In terms of oversight and and
client but also extremities to
employers.
for our questions about their
responsibilities so also there
shared and answer your questions
Academy and you know that it was
Williams calling
for permanent positions are what
we do not and.
Thank you Ricky and let me let
me first tell you thank you for
doing both cabinets at the same
time I don't think people
realize you know just running
one cabin that and you run into
agencies help how.
Or that is so I want to know
that I appreciate that I think
the members of the committee
please I think the people of New
Mexico bill realize how hard
that is just workforce solution
is is a giant itself and I don't
know what love match you are
left with by the prior director
but I imagine was one so I
appreciate that I want you to
know that and and I'm looking at
something and salary for cabinet
secretaries are working to
agencies.
Members Ricky has to be in a
meeting in ten minutes.
Senator Padilla your first on
the list.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And as I mentioned yesterday you
to Senate Mr chairman thank you
very much Secretary certainly
you're doing a phenomenal job
and we are all very very
grateful I mention that
yesterday and I called the
yeoman's work if you want a
great great job just to get to
the point of the question that I
had I spent an awful lot of time
Mr chairman with with the
workforce solutions last year to
help them fix their call center
I offer the services full
disclosure free from my company
and we we got a lot done and
made some tremendous
improvements in the I think that
folks are very happy with the
outcome but the question I have
is some of the items that we
discovered Mr Secretary work
around
You know just just like software
that's needed by the call center
does to do monies for the
contact center do they come from
some other source that I'm just
we're not seeing here are there
some staffing positions as well
that I've recommended I don't
know if you decided to adopt
them or not for things like
workforce planning also
resource utilization reporting
and analytics training quality
some of the things that are
crucial to managing a call
center
I don't know if you have those
somewhere here I'm just not
funding them right away or to
the does the money come
somewhere else and then also on
the the software front these are
packages of software and
applications that are needed for
managing a contact centre
successfully so I'm just curious
where those appear here in this
budget.
so the the unemployment
insurance division is funded
largely by
this.
You will appropriations for the
ministration of unemployment
insurance and so.
The program does we see some
Reasons for the surprise for is
funded by.
I'm sorry then also shared to
your question about the new
positions absolutely yes so
we've been working on the
implementation of a of a
reorganization to the
unemployment insurance division
focus on a couple of areas first
of all this we are finalize the
higher our next.
Director so we have officially
as you may know the previous
acting director retired he did a
wonderful job we to go back
directorship of permanently
we've also have permanently fill
the assistant director positions
so we have our leadership in
place we work to create
additional positions are
consistent with your
recommendations namely
compliance how do we better
manage the federal guidance to
come down with a few people and
policy decisions.
Of course focusing in on call
center operations.
Attention to customer
satisfaction with ironically
enough a piece that gets
overlooked right under normal
circumstances you don't expect
that there's a lot of needed
that money come from you likely
meant until you realize you know
you can cancel.
Thank you Mr chairman and and Mr
secretary I want to continue to
offer to help in anyway I can
this was a great exercise to
learn more about that department
but there are some critical
elements that are needed by the
call center so I hope that that
we continue the conversation to
get those positions filled as
well as the applications they
need to actually manage the call
center I know you're short on
time so maybe you and I can
follow up on this later thank
you Mr chairman.
Finally.
Mr chairman Mr chair good
afternoon quick question
There was kind of a well it was
obviously a really
crisis situation before where
you Department was overwhelmed
with people needing services
because of the pandemic and
people really couldn't get
through on the lines the phone
lines at all and even a year
into it that kind of remain the
case and then Senator Padilla
got involved and helped out I'm
just curious right now can
people get through if they call
the workforce solutions
department and do you yes this
independently.
Thanks Mr chair Senator is.
Yes okay great.
Thanks for the question yeah
we're we're in four places no
question about it I have hi if I
can just ask or or you want to
record.
Talk a little bit of our call
for you to how well we've been
doing managing that situation
clinics today.
Four or better place than we
were just speaking.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
thank you senator.
all of your help I was I was
glad you brought that up we
certainly did appreciate all
your help and we definitely do
plan on
losing your in your.
Willing to do that thank you so
much yeah when I came on the
scene on last year part of the
The position our telephone and
telephone performance was pretty
pretty.
we at that time for example
were OCD's some six hundred
thousand calls we are we're
probably.
Forty percent of those and so
great great strides not make
sense.
we do a lot of senators of the
is suggestions actually and as
we have to
all of them but one of the
things last was called on.
Hatters and.
That so really changes there we
overly.
checking call right.
Hi res
and staffing listening out of
the.
And staffing levels.
And
we're really happy that for the
last seven months.
we're seeing our average wait
times of around eight to ten
minutes.
we are answering
eighty percent.
Percent but it it is
we are not sitting on I also we
know these important meetings
that I have to continue on with
the times.
For us and processes.
Some.
And actually act and.
Call center is fully long term
so that.
And.
Thank you Mr secretary ma'am I
think the main thing is that you
ask for the help that you need
and and so that you're better
equipped to deal with this kind
of situation in the future.
And so thank you I know it's
hard work we appreciate what you
do for the working people of New
Mexico in the unemployed people
who fall on hard times thank you
Mr Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So my question is probably too
long for this but where does
seventy thousand people go that
are no longer in the work force
participation we have help
wanted signs everywhere in we've
got seventy thousand people that
appear to.
Be here but not working if we
look at these charts so.
Why.
Question and that's why we
started a process of elimination
to be sure that it was trying to
you know other state resources
are available to them so this is
one of them is there are
individuals are actively looking
for work to have a committee the
work.
Most people are out there
in the meeting that every you
know every place of employment
for the most part is not our
study but there there are
workers are looking forward
to seeing the unemployment
figures for the mission of the
state.
Senator there are the third
there are workers on any point.
So when those workers falloff
this is not which is the right.
They're not actively looking for
work and I could be for any
reason from.
At this point it could be this
is a half this is and New York.
Yes it is I have no.
we're we're tracking EDD's
EDD's increases in terms of the
state of New Mexico limited as.
Public charter but you're to
answer questions were were
looking for earnings on the
online and ends right where they
are.
In New Mexico in order for us.
We rely on we this is.
Mr Khan and I'm working at all.
Those.
Workers team one insurance
during
that period then on one of the
reasons that it is.
When they provide you with the
you know what occupation
industry report for what they're
heart disease the number was and
so.
Wirth is now.
One is really really first full
quarter of the need.
That we have this is we needed a
little extension number so we'll
have by the middle of the river
is very.
Everyone key into the system
over the course of the pandemic
and photos gone back to work.
One question is this.
What is your and how we can
overcome.
So Mister chair Mister
secretary.
The some of this makes some
sense to me as I just looked
around and in the world that I
live in of when we keep closing
school for keep closing day
cares eventually somebody says
well I just can't go to work you
know somebody has to take care
take care of the kids
And so while that's frustrating
to me that we're doing that I
get why those folks are not the
work force anymore although I
think that's something that we
ought to consider changing I
also understand the people that
have health concerns I don't
want to go to work because I've
got a compromised immune system
or whatever it is I get that.
There are two other groups that
I did.
That I'm worried about one is
that there are people that are.
Making more off of public
assistance benefits then off of
working console you know people
all people I think do what's
what's best for their for them
and their family and so we have
incentivize them not to go back
to work which ultimately harms
our economy.
And so some will say well gosh
if you paid fifteen dollars an
hour.
The problem is.
They're they're offered fifteen
dollars an hour.
That's a common number out there
for the fast food restaurants
now maybe not always fifteen but
it's pretty high.
In it you know one anecdotal the
thing here's a with the sonic
anything to push the red button
in the state we don't have any
in all of our schools are closed
to all of our schools are closed
but our drive thru is open.
The regionalist also close could
have anybody to bring the food
to you.
And they're trying to they're
offering fifteen dollars an hour
to fifteen dollars an hour
wasn't enough for somebody to to
haul food from the kitchen to
your car.
Not to fifteen dollars is
something else.
But the other thing is.
I think that there's a growing
underground economy out there.
We'll just figure out gosh I
know I have to work for anybody
here I can just go out there and
do these other things.
And get paid cash they don't
have to pay taxes on it nobody
to rescue me about it and I
don't care if they give me an
hour paid time off for family
leave or whatever it is we call
it.
Because they just decided to go
underground and I think we drove
them there as well with our
policies.
So these are my concerns in in I
know that this is a long
conversation and I know we're
not going to come to an answer
here Mr Secretary.
But those are things that I
would like you all to look at
and see what if any of those
work or the did I just miss the
other ten that are real so so
the long answer today I know
you're leaving but I just wanted
to share that thank you Senator.
And Rikki finance.
And then I know you got to go.
Okay good those three points so
one of the things you recommend
where is the latest to on field
positions as well Senator and so
it's not only that point
somebody to work as much as I
can see people to do is our our
people here doing this or
because nobody's seventy eight.
Across the street at all so that
is.
From recovery.
Increase where the.
Because workers the highly
competitive four workers from
one another to come to work.
What's happening on this this
recovery is there.
Please wait workers work as
opposed to workers.
Back to work a recession.
On
a problem the other is often
point is to be here to
release
understand Senator in the first
time you as well role purpose
specifically to self employed
workers.
Thirty five dollars in New
Mexico is access program over
the course of the pandemic we
need to get us now those workers
are because as we.
and you want to partnerships for
example TRD to our hardware
individuals previously that
these but I'm not pretty you
know so one of the reasons that
because someone really think
about was one.
We need to account for the
number of workers that are
being.
The over is where you're gonna
worker and now we have an
opportunity with that what we
call the pandemic on the this is
needed to try.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary thank you thank you
know you gotta go weekly may
bring you back to the committee
has a request to do that as we
move forward I had a whole bunch
of questions but I know you have
a five o'clock Eric
Are you doing the racing
commission.
Thank.
Hi Tallman.
How you doing today.
It makes it thank you recent
going to town as well on on one.
For.
All right Mr chair members of
the committee can everybody hear
me all right yes all righty so
we're gonna go over the
recommendation for the state
racing commission this is agency
code four six nine join with me
today is is my own try call the
executive director we've got
amber Trujillo.
The CFO apologies and Samberg
then I believe a commissioner
for the state racing commission
chairman.
I'm I'm going to go over the
highlights and then handed over
to Donna Rivera she's on the
call as well.
Both recommendations of for the
recent commission supported a
general fund revenue increase
over FY twenty two LFC provided
a general budget of about two
point five million or three
point two percent increase well
the executive recommendation
provided a slightly lower
general fund budget of two point
four million which is nearly
flat with FY twenty two both
recommendations you can also see
on page two recommends three
hundred thousand from industry
racing revenues and seven
hundred thousand in projected
revenue from the resource
testing fund.
Are the LFC recommendation funds
a slightly higher amount for
contracts us specifically for
things like independent audit
staff veterinarian services and
IT contracts the executive fully
funds the agency requests for
other costs where is LFC
recommend slightly lower for
other costs like travel in
vehicles and then just a note on
the contract piece the executive
recommendation reported that
they did not include costs for
some contracts but supports
inclusion of these costs of the
committee adopts the executive
recommendation both analysts
have come to consensus on
performance measures and targets
and I'll go head handed to Donna
Rivera at that DFA it's also
came a searcher.
Read on.
I'm not into that I just did an
excellent as we.
Thank you is it going to.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee is the trailer
director The New Mexico racing
Commission since March twenty
sixth two thousand sixteen I
have to meet with me today
chairman Sam Bregman our CFO
amber Trujillo we're all going
to be open for any questions
after I do a brief presentation
the staff and I considered honor
and privilege to serve the
citizens of New Mexico in
regulating horse racing.
a tough job a big job with a
small staff but we're we're
always happy to do it and we
enjoy it we worked hard work
blue collar agency loves the
horse racing is the industry has
a great passion for it.
As I always say the cornerstone
of our industry is drug testing
of the racing animals
the agencies made quite a bit of
headway since I come on board in
two thousand sixteen we've
increased our drug testing
between two thousand seventeen
and nineteen I would give you
twenty numbers but we were up
close down quite a bit we want
to compare twenty in there I
believe increased drug testing
on post race samples for forces
by over a hundred twenty four
percent during the same time we
seen drug violations decreased
by over seventy five percent
it's been effective and we feel
it's affected because we've
increased our out of competition
testing program and that's when
we go in drug test forces that
that are just in training and we
feel and we sing the numbers
dictate that we're not a
competition numbers have
increased the post race
violations have decreased so.
We think we're on to something
with with that testing program
we we've kind of reached our
pinnacle right now with the
funding that's available and
we'd like to do more with that
would like to implement a drug
testing program for training
hours for these horses they do
they do get injured during the
mornings we would like to ensure
that they're not out there on
any therapeutic medications that
like that is the equivalent of
aspirin a drug called penalties
on training well they have
infirmities where they should
really stay in Stalin rast with
that we do need extra staff such
as another official veterinarian
to help us execute that program
we think that would help
decrease the catastrophic
breakdowns in our industry which
that are catastrophic breakdowns
or when our injures itself on
during the race and has to be
euthanized but I am happy to
report that in twenty twenty one
The New Mexico racing Commission
in the New Mexico horseracing
industry experience probably one
of the lowest catastrophic rates
in the nation only point eight
seven two horses per every
thousand force that runs a
suffered a catastrophic injury
or is in twenty twenty the
national average was one point
four one horses per thousand
starts are they suffered a
catastrophic injury.
Are we we were happy with the
performance of we've done but we
feel that we could do the public
the betting industry a lot
better we just need a little bit
more resources to do that a
little bit goes a long ways with
this agency we're very small or
so it's a very budget sensitive
a little pot hinders us a little
game really benefits us quite a
bit and then with our if anyone
has any questions I would prefer
to pass it to CFO amber Trujillo
to discuss the budget a little
more than I'd be more than happy
to answer any questions
afterwards.
Germany having that.
briefly Mr chairman thank you in
senators thank you for allowing
us this opportunity our racing I
can tell you I've been given the
honor of being put on the
commission February is a great
honor and horse racing for the
most part is doing very well in
New Mexico I have to say I'm I'm
I'm really bullish on horse
racing and the way things are
going the two biggest priorities
we have at the commission or the
health and safety of the
athletes the horses the jockeys
that is key that's the most
important thing right along
right behind that is making sure
that the game is fair and square
to the betting public so they
have faith in it this the horse
racing industry has a huge
economic impact I know you've
heard that all before on the
state of New Mexico with all the
jobs it creates
in all in the in the tourism
creates the economic viability
with all that said this staff
with thirteen people I'm amazed
about what they're being able to
accomplish but they do need a
little bit of help one of the
things we want to focus on is
auditing the racetracks more
than we do we need to do that
that's important to make sure
that this game that everybody's
following the rules I'm not
suggesting that anybody isn't
but we always want to make sure
because we are dealing with
family here and with that they
take it requires to make sure we
have the resources to do that
and so I think that's very
important that's one of the
reasons why we're asking just
basically I think to get back to
budget that we will we were at
here before the pandemic that's
all we're really asking for the
racing commission is to get us
back there the testing is a huge
part of talk about a number
priority number one priority is
the safety of the athletes that
take in the fairness of the game
that's all about testing because
when we catch them at the racing
commission we punish the
cheaters we at since I've been
on there I can tell you the
entire commission is focused on
making sure that people who are
willing to drug animals for the
benefit of themselves and for
the harm the animals are going
to be punished and we're doing
everything we can.
To make sure we catch up to do
that it does require testing in
a lot of it in and I think the
message is gotten out and racing
Committee that we're very
serious about this with that
I'll stop and happy to answer
questions and perhaps amber can
go over any specifics for but we
do have to just answer questions
that whatever the chairman
prefers.
Questions from committee members
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr so my first question is about
the budget directly.
The industry pay for any of this
testing or is this all coming
from the state budget is twenty.
Is a yes Mr chairman members of
the committee senator share.
budgets a little unique and
there's a budget line for seven
hundred thousand dollars that
the for two that's for testing
that that when that's in our
budget actually at the beginning
of the fiscal year that that
number is zero that money is
generated by half a percentage
of the capital outlay tax on
every one dollar wagered on
track in a race tracks it's one
to the agency every week and
that comes to the tune of about
six hundred to seven hundred
thousand every year I so that
the projected number that we try
to hit now with the carry us
through the fiscal year and one
thing that we're hoping for.
In the future is to.
We have six hundred thousand fit
in an account and number mystery
you may have to correct me here
she's the expert on this.
Because we started zero at the
beginning of every fiscal year
it's tough to come up with a
strategy for testing for the
next year because we don't know
how much money we're gonna make
it's all dependent on how much
money is back at the race tracks
racing but have a great year one
year we've been very this is
easy we could yes quite a bit
but then the following year
should recession occur sports
wagering poem on and and for me
to have a fronte conning that
means less money for testing so
our plan our strategy goes right
out the window for that year so
to be a lot easier if we could
get use of the six hundred
thousand dollars a certain in
accounts that was it really
sleep reverted back to the state
a couple years ago if we can get
use of that money and start
every year without we six
hundred thousand at least with
the plan with the strategy for
the upcoming fiscal year and
then meanwhile we're we're
spending that six hundred
thousand we're generating money
for that the point yes fund for
the previous year.
So.
Is there a the percentage all of
may change of of how much of
this is how much of the testing
is paid for by industry versus
how much is paid for.
Or is it all paid for by
industry.
Yes.
Chair Mister chairman Senator
chair members of the committee
it's a.
Our budget comes from Jack
procreation but that as far as
the testing if we don't generate
enough money from the parimutuel
taxes we have to pull it
directly from our operating
budget and that's what happened
during the pandemic when there
was a lot of racing going on and
the attendance was limited other
racetracks.
We weren't generating enough
money to pay for the testing the
agency was losing money every
race day that we ran and it was
is a little I mean we weren't
sure if we could do our job as
regulators so we do have the
operating budget that it would
be pulled from and in the case
worst case scenario I'll see
that was the worst case scenario
so in general are you.
You generate not counting last
year with.
Would you generate enough money.
Just as the as the racing
commission.
Of to to take care the expenses
I see one of these services in
in maybe I'm reading it wrong
average regulatory cost per live
race day.
Five thousand two hundred ninety
one dollars I think for for
regulatory for that one race day
listeners thousands in or
something.
That's a lot of money for one
day for regulation the service.
That's the all this do to our
budget I'm I'm sure they're
dividing it by race stays Mister
chairman Senator and and I think
one of the things it's important
recognizes New Mexico is doing
very well in one sense we are
the the horsemen in the purses
are running for sixty million
dollars I mean we we that's just
the persons that are the
winnings this this industry
generates over half a billion
dollars in economic value to the
state so I do know that yes that
may sound like a lot but we're
doing how many raised.
Two hundred and six restasis
Year two wanted six race days
this year that's a lot of racing
compared to most of the states
out there Mister chairman
Senator so Mr chairman I think
what I'm.
What I'm not asking will this
this this this.
Senator is this right run is is
can they run a black to raise
their own money yes I know it's
got to go back through the
budget but the but the raise
your own money or it is a state
because we sixteen million
dollars.
The billion whatever number you
said service center metals I
think the the the the way it's
structured right now statutorily
that the Feds and and the way
this the gaming statutes in the
racing commission statutes or
that we can we could fund that
without getting the budget that
we do from the legislature it is
I don't see that happening.
In my last question you talked
about the audit on here it looks
like you're what you're looking
for is to budget for one audit
per year.
We only have five tracks.
This will address the excuse we
sent this gentleman center thank
you.
Mr chair Senator members of the
committee.
We put that as a start we wanted
we do have five race tracks
however on because we're getting
so late in the year we are we're
starting with one for now we did
hire an accountant auditor so
you know to kind of keep the
work flow down right now is is
it's a learning curve.
That's kind of what we're
starting for striving for is
just one at this point in time
however our goal is about two
for the year possibly three
again depending on money our
contracts were cut by sixty six
thousand we're hoping that we
can get the contract for about
thirty thousand so basically
that would be to contracts to
audit two tracks.
Thank you Mr chair thank you I
do think if if there's an agency
out here that could be a revenue
generator it's that go for under
way we ought to move thank.
Center the reverting funds right
when we get a speech at the end
of the year is what puts them in
that situation your cash
positive but when you're very
back to the general fund that
make some cash neutral so they
have to rebuild the funds every
year and so that's their
starting from zero every year
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
chairman and the chair Brickman
it's always good to see you have
to you know a long time
So I learned something new today
Mister chairman I did didn't
know a lot about the commission
but this whole structure where
you have to raise money to
basically do it for Smith.
Of protecting animals and
testing it's kind of like
there's a perverse incentive in
a way
to to not have you be.
You know flush with money to do
more testing I guess in a way I
I don't think that's a I'm not
I'm sure that's not what's going
on but I I don't think it's
probably an appropriate way to
to do enforcement anyway I I
totally agree that you need to
have a stable funding base
somewhat independent of revenues
so that you can do robust
testing and I think whatever
language we need to look at I
think we should we should
consider that as opposed to you
having to raise money and then
your ability to enforcement is
tied to that I just think that's
not appropriate for for a lot of
reasons.
That's number one and number two
on the oddity of the auditing
request it's interesting Mr
chairman that the LFC is one
requesting and supporting your
requests for more auditing which
to be tells me they probably did
evaluation they'd look at these
numbers and
chair pregnant question to you
within your staff your team
there if you were to have more
resources for auditing is it
possible that that money would
come back to you basically in
the way of a fuller accounting
of receipts and I don't know
that I'd go that for there's so
many different avenues of this
mutual betting their simulcasted
there's all kinds of the so we
want to get a handle on I'm not
suggesting by any means that
we're going to that the tracks
for example are doing anything
in particularly wrong by any
means but I think we owe it as a
responsibility in betting public
as well as everybody involved in
horse racing that we make sure
that the game is completely fair
at all levels not just with the
horses not just with the
trainers jockeys with that the
tracks because we are doing this
with with taxpayer dollars here
and so I think that's very
important one to address the
first thing you mentioned if I
can Mr chairman and senator
about the issue of regular.
This is just to a certain extent
to be able to do the kind of
testing that we're doing I want
to make it very clear that we
would love to yes as much as we
could we could do because that's
what makes it fair and that's
what makes the difference and
that's why our our numbers of
positive tests are going down I
think that this I think you can
see the correlation because
we're doing so much more testing
we're doing more testing and
there's a whole nother issue of
Tessa coming up and that's the
thoroughbred racing we're doing
more testing and I think they
even anticipate doing under the
federal legislation so I just
want to make sure we'll do as
much testing as you give us the
opportunity to do financially
thank you Mr yeah I'm with you
and I think whether it's animal
welfare just making sure people
are cheating at all all those
kinds issue so.
and finally on the audit yeah I
mean it's what Reagan say trust
but verify so you know you gotta
keep people honest and auditing
is is part of part of the deal
so anyway I hope we follow the
LFC racked and we follow your
request so thank you again this
see everybody thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Thank you Mr chairman because
we've kind of seen in the media
we've seen the play up to the
disconnect between the
commission and tracks in New
racehorse owners I'm gonna ask
you to comment on some of the
losses they're surrounded so in
twenty twenty the horsemen's
association filed a lawsuit
against your commission seeking
the return of more than eight
million dollars that the
committee that the horsemen
allege the commissioner has been
collecting improperly from the
horsemen then again last year we
saw another lawsuit brought on
by the horsemen this time for
ethics violation and conflicts
of interest among commissioners
can you come and give us an
update status on those lawsuits
please certainly I'd be happy to
Mister chairman Senator
as you know
I am the chairman the racing
commission but I've also been a
lawyer for thirty years and I've
never seen in all my days more
frivolous lawsuit that was filed
by the horsemen in this case in
my life they're suing their
regulator saying the US
following the statute that they
should get more money so now
with us from the statute.
Completely you're responsible I
know the lawsuit in federal
court the point already put a
stay on that they're filing
lawsuits like thank you Mr
excuse me and giving out ice
cream sandwiches it's ridiculous
I've never seen anything like
this I don't I don't know why
they're doing it other than they
they want to be regulators
themselves to our I can go
through all the specifics of
this because that would take
several hours to talk about all
the intricacies of this but I'm
extremely frustrated we should
be acting as one industry right
now we've got a hiss of bill
coming down the federal
legislation we have to deal with
we should be promoting the kind
of things in use unity the
horsemen the breeders the tracks
the racing commission altogether
being one who is the better the
sport instead we don't have the
breeders join and by the way
with the horsemen they don't
believe in what they're doing
they'll tell you that themselves
the horse racetracks as well
thanks to everybody this is soo
happy I mean talk about some
that's just ridiculous to me
Mister chairman Senator I can't
get past that but they're losing
the loss of the well the federal
case been state for a long time
I can tell you in the most of
you all know that in the in that
litigation world things take
time to resolve themselves out
but I I can't believe what
they've they've done and how
they're defining the industry
forcing right now thank you Mr
chairman I appreciate your your
opinion on the suit but what is
the judge's opinion where the
corner now right I'll be very
specific again with you they're
all state right now.
We have not not a judge's ruling
on the basis is that correct no
there's one judge ruled the put
a stay on because the qualified
immunity because of the type of
complaint that was filed in
federal court the other is this
the judges a put a stay on at
the request of all the parties
so that we can get together
which I call upon all the
parties to get together in a
room trying to solve our
differences everybody agree sent
the New Mexico horsemen's
association thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Senator Rodriguez.
and I just have a quick question
I think we're all pretty beat.
Hello Sam by Senator chairman of
Mr chairman I sent that to see
you that great Nancy in your
staff and of course our staff in
the governor's staff thank you.
you know that sometimes we we
see lots of paperwork here from
different budgets and many times
we see small budgets like
basically we just wonder how you
do such a big job with so much
responsibility being looked at
with a magnifying glass all the
time with such few resources and
so I want to commend you for for
B. resources will in every way
that you can I do have one
simple question and maybe for
staff for whoever wants to
answer this I looked at the
budget recommendations here and
I'm wondering you know why is it
that that we are recommending
both the governor and the LFC
recommending seven hundred
thousand dollars S. projected
revenues so we're projecting
that they're going to get seven
hundred to a thousand dollars
from the resource testing fund
and is there and and when
they're revenues actual revenues
are only two hundred and to give
me a second here
I think okay the ending from
about the projected revenues are
only two hundred and seventy
five half of what they're what
they really get you know so I'm
I'm just wondering when that be
quite under funded can you can
you tell me a little bit not Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez I am a
little bit newer to this box so
I'll do my best but I would also
offer comment from Donna Rivera
DFA education has any additional
comment but I would say you know
this is I think historically how
how this is been funded LFC has
been in conversation with the
agency to kind of investigate
some potential options to
eliminate that issue that you're
mentioning you know there's the
potential for establishing a
separate fund things of that
nature however I don't know that
I I can speak directly to you
know why that was kind of set up
at the budgeted in that way in
the first place but I know that
this has.
been kind of the historical way
that that's been broken out that
it's been in anticipated revenue
but all also have done a repair
has any additional comment on
that okay maybe Dawn I can help
us but I hope that my question
was clear so I don't take too
much time and I'm having a hard
time with this mask but
basically what we're saying is
they are the revenues are only
two hundred seventy thousand for
twenty twenty one but yet we're
projecting in their in their
budget that they're going to be
that there seven hundred
thousand so just like twice as
much when they're really not
getting that much someone make
sure we just don't short change
of that's all I'm asking so
maybe somebody else would who
choose with their.
Mr chair Senator Rodriguez
either daughter Sarah DFA and I
believe I amber the CFO might
have additional comment as well
thank you either one's good.
Mr chair on the Senator road yes
of the reason that the both the
LFC initiate recommended the
seven hundred thousand in
revenue is the agency requests
that the reason why you're
seeing two hundred sixty three
thousand is that a lot of
respect we're actually open so
that is significantly lower than
what she anticipated.
will be that is next year he
will go closer to your actual
revenue and in previous times
I don't know the agents would
like to add more to that.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Rodriguez I'm
if I may add to that.
so we're talking about two
separate types of revenue.
This year I'll give you current
numbers for this year
we have the equine yes fund
which by statute the agency is
allowed to keep up to six
hundred thousand dollars.
I know question was asked about
the seven hundred thousand
dollars appropriation and we
submitted some language
requesting to use our fund
balance of the six hundred
thousand as appropriated by
statute and hopefully that will
give us some breathing room to
set up the testing.
Because that six hundred
thousand is designated only for
testing nothing else.
Thank you
Revenue that the agency has is
the racing receipts that revenue
is completely returned back to
the general fund.
So as of December the total
revenue has been generated just
three hundred and fourteen
thousand so this year for the
equine yes one that seven
hundred thousand dollars that
we're talking about in the
budget will be pretty close
absolutely because a half the
year has already gone by and we
have already half of that
revenue.
As far as the recent receipts.
As of December of what we
already turned back into the
general fund it's four hundred
and seventy three thousand
ninety five dollars.
So we are are looking very good
as far as our revenues to turn
back to the state I hope that
kind of clarifies yes some of
the questions as to why it's a
little bit that's why we're
asking for the language for the
six hundred thousand to
basically help us have a full
bucket of money as our executive
director indicated.
And that we that we don't have
to keep on wait stop can't test
as much or continue to test
because then what happens at
that point is the general fund
money that we use to float the
test Fund until we generate that
revenue.
We can utilize that we end up
returning it back to the state
and it looks like our agency is
not spending the money properly
and we're not being good
stewards of public money just
returning it back so that's kind
of the second reason that we're
looking for the special language
to best utilize our fund balance
not to just supplemental
supplement our budget to buy
anything we want it's highly
restrictive I would like to note
that thank you thank you for
that explanation I can
understand the rationale behind
your request I just wanted to
make sure that that you're not
being short changed by us
projecting you're gonna get this
much knowing that you don't you
know as you know that you only
get this other amount so thank
you very much for that
explanation I have Mister
chairman.
Thank you center you know I can
in that problem with the
horsemen.
Pretty being quick.
I'll make a transfer that that's
your operational money.
And I'll go to the agency and
then the horsemen can can follow
suit against the state we can
resolve that issue in about ten
seconds but when members of the
Legislature texting other
members of the legislature to
ask questions about a lawsuit
it kind of irritates me.
And in this committee were
pretty self thank you we should
have to to to do that and so but
I can in that our agency debate
in a matter of minutes I'll just
give you that in your general
fund and let the horse then
figure out how they're going to
do that that's a simple solution
to a problem that we can resolve
pretty quickly and fix to
problems at one time.
We understand that the need to
backfill because you are not an
enterprise agency and so we
understand on the swipe the
general fund to started zero it
is a very hard budgeting
requested specially when you're
trying to do some other complies
in show that year for pride in
what you want to do in the
number six and so I think we'll
we'll see what house
appropriation comes out with if
they don't make some adjustments
and chair Senator Steinborn is
one to make those adjustments
force.
And so what he.
Share time here today we do have
some more with the thank
Representative but I just.
Questions that come that we just
kind of irritating thank thank
you.
Representative thank you thank
you.
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
we're gonna do Indian Affairs
and I think we're going to quit.
lane secretary trailer there I
know and everybody we've we've
kind of run late on the floor
and we get in the situation but
some of these agencies like the
racing commission you just don't
know until you hear from them
where the little **** are
anonymous and how to fix them so
I think that's very important
for us on the smaller agencies
that don't get the attention
that we hear that system you
will be addressed.
Today now what we're gonna
question tomorrow it's five
thirty right now there's some
to me mean events you guys need
to get on the road so you don't
get an ice storm.
Quickly the this is small agency
madam secretary I know you're
there I know you're small agency
want to make sure we fear you
because you guys are.
In my heart really because
you've struggle along through a
lot of situations on tribes and
pueblos through the pandemic
there is going to run through
this and then the this will be
our last agency for the day all
right Mr chair members of the
committee as he said this is a
Indian Affairs Department HSD
six oh nine my name is Eric
Shinya of the LFC analyst for
the first apartment and I
believe on with us is the
executive analyst nickel
Misia's.
The the general fund revenue
recommendation for the
department is a line from the
LFC is a nine point seven
percent increase in the
executive recommendation is a
sixty four point four percent
increase.
In the base the LFC
recommendation would feel about
one vacancy and executive would
feel about two vacancies LFC
maintain contractual services
spending commensurate with the
twenty two operating budget
while the executive would
increase contractual spending
forty four percent.
the the main difference actually
if you just flip to the the
second page
You'll see the little table down
there at the bottom for the
expansion of the executive
recommended a total of six
hundred eighty four point seven
thousand LFC recommended a
hundred eighty nine point one
thousand.
HFC took the LFC wreck but then
asked us to go back and figure
out if there were any ads that
we could do it we're looking at
that nothing's been adopted and
with that Mr chair I'll pass it
over to the executive analyst
for the current.
You have eighty there.
Yes.
Mr chair members of the
committee I just want to add a
couple more points to Care Act
sat on the executive is asking
for additional FTE for
exemptions
to a point where are to consider
the LFC that was a couple.
Chair of financial supervisors
the executive is also requesting
additional FTE for the public
information officer tribal
environmental specialist data
analysts haven't consultation
specialist a suicide prevention
specialists
permanent Assistant Secretary.
Also it is requesting
Funding for aids
tribal communities depending on
what you see is going to be
recommended for this agency the
executive recommendation are
requesting an additional four
hundred and fifty thousand for
accident prevention initiative
for tribal communities
And then I just want to mention
that for the agency there are
you know fifteen activity.
positions the funding the LFC
providers only for one
additional FTE posse the lady
that is not quite ready to
accept.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you madam secretary.
Chairman and members of the
committee I really
opportunities here Senator
budget said be free on before I
begin I'd like to introduce
You need to be a strategy for
the presentation I also want to
add Senator drops you thanks to
are creating analyst pelos seus
and are LFC and Eriksen.
the analysts did a good job of
running through that differences
in the LFC recommendation on
the executive recommendation and
the that disparity between the
two the executive recommendation
provides the necessary to
support our department and Mr
chairman and members of the
committee our department has two
parties on the first one entity
most crucial is staffing is here
requesting a excuse to Cassidy
on in the office as a secretary
I as well as our administrative
services division since twenty
nineteen the work of art
apartment has increased but
there is no corresponding
increases in staffing or our
operating budget
as you know very well.
we are involved in every issue
across state government our
tribes are and our work
continues to grow on in addition
to the policy areas Kamber I
also serve on my act towards the
commission task forces the
department on it is a point
thirty boards commissions and
task force task forces so I do
rely on staff to assist with
those not serve on in addition
to their Ortiz carry out on a
daily basis with respect to the
administrative services division
Recent capital investments in
our tribal communities thank you
very much to the legislature.
Really wanted to do that in our
hearts capital outlay for fully
which is over two hundred
nineteen million dollars on an
overseas four hundred and fifty
active projects you look at cars
across the border in US cities
using anywhere from four percent
and project managers managing a
portfolio.
So we've included a slide a
slide to just so
And again because of the
generosity of our nation our
governor the anticipated another
year of much needed investments
in our tribal communities we
will add to our existing
portfolio and increase our
workload
we're in dire need budgeted
staff to ensure that we continue
to on meeting the needs of our
tribal communities and people
and citizens of New Mexico we
also need to have those
resources I'm not only to
recruitment continue to retain
that highly qualified staff that
we have at the department so
that we don't revert back to a
loving door at the department on
these position is clearly within
the structure of our department
and they're really violence
moving on is yes for that online
Communities we do have small and
that in our budget that we
utilize these don't go very far
NEO that that additional funds
would support the department's
work to address this crisis that
is significantly impacting our
tribal communities we know that
prior to the pandemic American
Indian Alaska natives in our
state have some of the highest
races you inside and
unfortunately this pandemic is
only exacerbated that so these
funds will go towards hiring a
dedicated staff person to move
this forward as well as
providing programs and services
that are in line with what our
communities are asking for any I
wanted to Senator members of the
committee I can't emphasize
enough the importance to this
body of support in this area of
work
this past year my family has
been personally impacted.
By this and I can attest to the
fact that as a state we are
doing enough to support our
tribal communities and
maintenance people I'm as nickel
mentioned I am proud of and I
have a twelve percent vacancy
rate sounds hybrid absolutely
result of the CDC's and W. and
that are set to so the two
remaining agencies and just the
school year we're very dedicated
and committed to ensure that we
continue on keeping in line with
the higher retention rate this
apartment has had on and in the
past
just to the right side this is
the overview yes you are.
Range of issues that continue to
work on we Soto student support
administrator so many
initiatives family significant
progress
and I also wanted to on chairman
and members of the committee
that again and we had a a claim
on was there on my knees we
continue to work very hard to
understand what do you see.
So chairman and members of the
committee and with your support
will be able to expand the
capacitive Department to make
sure that the meeting the needs
of our tribal communities equal
weeks.
To me is that the work of our
department is continuing to
increase in our own state why
adders Madam is growing and I'm
thankful to you legislators this
to see the cities that are
exclusive of our apartment to
address on the season and in a
fair concerns on including I
just want to thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee for all of your
support NA with that I will
stand for any questions thank
you.
Thank you madam secretary center
what.
Madam secretary and notice that
you have contract services for
six hundred thirty eight
thousand dollars and you ask for
about to a hundred thousand more
in your budget request.
What was you expecting those
increase contractor services to
be what what did you need that
increase what what did you
think.
You Mr chairman and madam
secretary.
Mr chair Senator.
we contract services to contract
with
for other individuals who have
expertise outside of our
department a lot of times
because he lacked the capacity
and then also it's you really
and data indicating that on
certain issues so that's what we
use our contractual budget for
and will continue to do that to
support large initiatives
Senator Woods does give you an
example at present our
department has become heavily
involved and engage with our
customers on tribal leadership
and then fifty year water
currently has taking place for
the office of the state engineer
icy we use our contact budget to
hire on someone to help us to
facilitate a water working for
so we have that high level
engagement with our tribal
leaders and tribal water experts
National example one of the
pieces that we on instructional
services I for.
I would.
Request from you to have a a
list of your contractors.
a list of the in that.
Read she that like to see the
actual.
Value of that contract in the
services they provide.
Mr chair Senator was able to get
her in I notice you had
reversions this last year.
seven hundred and sixty.
Seven hundred eighty thousand
dollars.
Is that unusual set just the flu
for.
Could you tell me anything about
that Mr chair and madam
secretary Mr chair and senator
I made some of that funding is
actually from the other
nonrecurring items that have
gone back it's not further
recurring budget I believe madam
chair Mr chairman and madam
secretary you could fill us in
on how much the actual
Reversion amount was from your
audit.
Mr chair Senator eight thank you
that is price discrepancy in
terms of the amount of reversion
you know some of the reasons
that we had on our on within our
Senator Woods organizations use
patterns on.
But I want to hire presenters to
our online.
are versions of the one hundred
fifty four thousand dollars
eight eighty
so we really need to do all that
it stands to spend money on the
legislature approves to us in
terms of our general fund and
the state has decreased it is it
is since twenty nineteen some of
those orders do you reflects
capital outlay reversions and
then last year we had house and
house bill two we had on someone
else's hand he Carmen.
There was a high there was a
number of rivers there on you
too
that the COVID communities being
able to Sierra Fund okay that's
a hundred thousand is not a bad.
That's pretty close budget to
make thank you madam chair Mr
chairman and madam secretary.
Figure out that our freedom of
call me madam chair Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chair.
That.
Madam secretary good to see you
thanks for a thanks for
testifying for the committee
today and I and and thank you
for your
You know you're a comments about
where you'd like to the
Department go I have a few
questions for you one thing that
kind of surprised me just I
guess I'm not educated on it.
They did your department does it
manage capital outlay for New
Mexico tribes are.
The need for a capital outlay
chair can you explain that a
little more to me the committee.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn says
the from of our we do on at the
major capital outlay on is
administered through the Indian
Affairs Department there are
some other agencies that do you
have some tribal related
projects such as an aging and
long term services division and
of course through the eighteen
but the majority of them as you
comments the Indian Affairs
Department the next order as
well separate from capital
outlay eighty as you know we
also happen to have an
infrastructure fund I thanks to
the governor and the legislature
that is appropriating money
where their infrastructure
projects as well.
Thank you in
Mr chair madam secretary.
Do you have a dedicated capital
the person on staff.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn we do
that's the one exceed that I was
referred to.
Okay so madam chair madam
secretary so we're requesting a
second one is that what we're
doing.
I miss Mr chair Senator
Steinborn we're and we're seeing
uh and just small person to
oversee and manage the capital
outlay unit we do have one FC
axle and then I think of we have
two hundred and sorry the other
person would be a financial
services in person to kind of
help with the the payment
processing and a suicide.
Okay thank you and then I want
to just ask you about the
suicide issue that you brought
up and
We have heard you know during
the pandemic that we had a
pretty good spike in.
Suicide and lots of problems
overdoses and what not can you
and I'm sorry to hear about your
family secretary can you
do you know like a lot of raw
aggregate numbers for.
Of those surveyed your
department how many suicide
attempts or suicide suicide
there were last year.
Mr.
One I don't have that data
I think this is an important
according to highlight in terms
of the advocacy of this F. T.
and even the X. you that would
be related to doing that data
and analytic analysis we
currently don't have that
capacity within our own
department to do that we do work
hand in hand with our great
partners the department of
health and in the larger role
health collaborative though we
don't have the specific numbers
in relation to tribal
communities.
Thank you Mr chair note that the
secretary of health and their
requests as well they're trying
to get more money for suicide
prevention as well so maybe
there's a way to have a
listening there because that's
what that this department asking
for as well so I just put that
out there since they worked
together on public health issues
but that's really interest thank
you madam secretary thank you
for those answers thank you Mr.
Thank you and Senator Steinborn
Lennar madam secretary I I just
want to commend you have to
Indian Affairs is kind of
changed under your guidance I
really do appreciate that
it's transforming its use and
it's not just numbers it's a lot
of hard work and it's a lot of
hard work to get people to
collaborate especially in tribal
communities and nations and
pueblo.
If people understand how
different every pueblo and tried
to has there's a lot of
difference I wanted to highlight
two things I would also like to
see those contracts I want to
know where you are was this
tribal libraries program in this
push on tribal libraries and how
we're handling that and maybe
you can just create me a sheet
of how that structure working
whether located I did go look at
the tribal libraries in the
which is the one room tribal
library not really of tribal
library but I don't I don't
understand the concept I don't
know of any other ones on the
Navajo Nation that I could go
see some kind of confused about
that tribal life library
initiative.
You know we had suicide
prevention at UNM and in this
request that you have I think
we're gonna transfer that you
native American suicide to.
Do you and and then you guys can
manage that I know what
happening through about eight
years ago with young use and
suicide I can tell you that and
one of my son's friends and his
brother committed suicide and so
it is an issue and we need to
grab our our hands around but
it's an issue through the
statewide but it does affect
native American communities even
harder and so we need to do that
but I think we need to grab.
At least some of the suicide
programs in these people have to
understand how how tribes and
pueblos operate in order to go
in there and talk about suicide
and and the religious beliefs
with that and so I I think I
want to transfer all that from
you to Indian Affairs and that
way you'll have a better handle
on it and you'll know how to
collaborate and you have the
contractual service anything you
want to add madam secretary.
Thank you chairman thank you
members of the committee
I really appreciate all the
support we received and I know
this is a very grateful to the
enhanced position to serve our
immunity for on our tribal
communities
you know anything it can do
we will follow up and get those
requests to use.
Members of the committee is as
follows but I just want to thank
you so much for the overwhelming
support that we receive from and
all okay we'll see how house
bill two comes over from house
appropriation and and see if we
need help with some adjustments
thank you madam secretary.
So members the committee I know
we run a labor regulate on the
floor and and we're gonna have
to play one day catch up and and
just kind of here agencies and
would really limit our questions
and I know Center order him to
like to talk all the time and
social.
To get blame somebody mobile but
you might as well be on the
freshman year Senator Diamond.
And so will we'll have to play
catch up but some of these
little.
Agencies are have a lot of
detail in that we don't really
hear a lot of C. lot about until
they come in front of us and so
I think it's important to do
that well we're gonna try to
start again relief center but he
gets a rest because is house
bill two comes over I'll keep
saying capital's gonna get
rolling in the house bill two
years ago juniors getting framed
up learn moving that the
subcommittee may meet on
Thursday tomorrow.
More time tomorrow I should have
a list.
Right so we we may get your list
tomorrow for the subcommittee to
start reviewing that the junior
bill and and there is some some
issues with members trying to
add new programming in the
junior bill which we said please
don't do so we'll we'll get that
back to me you guys are the the
framework in in then that
subcommittee well in this
meeting on Friday so we can get
things drafted and and ready for
a Monday for the committee pass
out.
for Friday afternoon you will
see a Friday afternoon goes.
But we're gonna have to.
Keep the role and and and roll
out everybody's got a lot of
questions and yeah.
Thank you keep last.
Thank you everybody.
In the appreciate your time and
have a good evening.
