Afternoon Mister chairman
Senator Jacob Candelaria
district twenty six which
includes most of the west side
of the City of Albuquerque thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
Senate finance committee in the
course the presenters and guests
today instead of great to be
here with you on a beautiful
Monday morning state senator
Pete Campos Representative Marty
stern New Mexico basically
there's seven counties all or
parts there and include Colfax
why the party what I where they
send me an email and House
scraped again to be here thank
you very much Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman in the
afternoon it is build work here
Senate district thirty three
northern half of Otero County a
good portion of Lincoln and into
west Russell Chavis County.
Kicking off another week in the
city wonderful session that we
have going on here.
Thank you Mr chairman in.
Good to be here.
Thank you senator woods and then
Senator Diamond and Senator
Here and senator.
Mr Chairman thank you Mr
chairman Pat Woods sent district
seven curry queen you counties
thank you very much.
Mr Chairman still Diamond Senate
district thirty five the
biblical of New Mexico Dogo
lunacy Erin Dona Ana.
So Mr chairman senator chair
from Senate district one
Farmington unlike all those
other people that have thirty
nine tax.
Thank you Mr chairman I am
science Senator Siah Correa
Hemphill from Silvercity Senate
district twenty eight Grant
County catching County in most
district for a County.
Thank you Senator Hemphill and I
think that's everyone if I'm
correct there's a lot of people
online so that the judicial
magistrates are there I'm saying
Jordan yes that probably drove
through almost everybody's
District this last weekend from
them to.
To McKinley County and and so I
am from Senate district for a in
a Representative McKinley small
and San Juan counties so I guess
we'll get started Senator
Candelaria you are first up with
Senate bill three and so if you
want and we're working office
up.
And so the sap was introduced on
on Friday.
Everybody should have the sub
available and
Senator Candelaria you want to
go over the steps to briefly
again to make sure we got it all
correct and and will introduce
expert witnesses I know
Representative Matthews is with
you I believe I seen her on the
screen so any point if you want
to introduce our you're going to
go.
Thank Mr chairman
So to to recap The presentation
from last week Senate bill three
re authorizes the continuation
of the small business recovery
act until may of two thousand
and twenty two
as we discussed at the last
meeting and having as we heard
it as testimony from members of
the public who testified in
support of the committee
substitute
even the lowest cost loan makes
no sense for businesses that are
currently shut down
or for many firms but for many
others it makes a lot of sense
and quite frankly in New Mexico
I'm the best thing we can hope
for in terms of our recovery is
that firms across the state
began to grow again and take
risks taking out loans taking
out credit to build to invest to
grow to employ more people to
make capital improvements and so
that's what the legislation
before you will do there's a we
can of course answer any
technical questions the members
have about the committee
substitute if they have any
questions about the comparison
of the original bill Mr chairman
this dress those as well with
your Lee I would yield to
Representative Matthews she
didn't have the opportunity I
don't believe that our last
hearing to address the committee
so I would if you would allow me
if she has any remarks before we
go to questions Mr chairman
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Matthews right.
Mr chair thank you very much and
members of the committee and
thank you Senator Candelaria on
the house sponsor of this bill
and was the house sponsor when
we did this originally and they
for special session we learned a
lot from that experience and
from the also the hundred
million and in requests that
were made in December and we've
made a number revisions in this
bill which I think is going to
make it even more useful to New
Mexico's small and medium size
businesses it's still called
small business but I think we've
upped the size a little bit of
those they can apply
and we see this as a absolutely
uninsured torture church excuse
me on a short term.
As a way to help some of the
business is still struggling
to the pandemic but even more so
in the long term to provide them
some economic support to be able
to grow and we hire and thrive
as we recover this economy.
From the effects of the pandemic
and the shut downs so and I did
notice that the Marquita Russel
is in the.
participant list and she.
I don't know if Senator
Candelaria would like to go
ahead and have her join us but
she's been running this program
on behalf of the finance
authority.
Mr Chairman if she can I guess
of the web those are my stricken
letter and Mr chairman I am here
okay.
I would thank you members of the
committee and.
Senator Cappelletti and
Representative Matthews I'm
Marquita Russel in the CEO of
the New Mexico finance authority
we've been operating the
original version of the small
business recovery loan fund
since the beginning of August we
opened that application period
on August fifth and it ran
through December thirty first
that was the last day by which
applications could be submitted
I would note before the public
really understood some of the
specific requirements of the
program that is to say the
thirty percent decline in each
of April and may of two thousand
twenty over the same period time
periods of two thousand and
nineteen and some of the new
wants related to the residency
requirements for the owners of
all of these businesses we had
some fairly healthy demand in
the first day alone we had more
than two hundred applications in
that first month of August as
people were really starting to
understand the program we had
more than six hundred
applications and those are for
loans they knew these were loans
they knew they were not requests
demanded started to fall off
after that time period when it
became clear that you needed to
have at least eighty percent
ownership by New Mexico
residents and you needed to
demonstrated that specific
decline the way in which it was
prescribed in statute
demand fell off fairly
significantly after that and we
alternately will make about
forty million dollars of loans
from that initial of four
hundred million that was set
aside we believe that the
finance finance authority that
the changes in the US Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three that you will
address the major issues that
stopped businesses from being
able to apply for these funds
and we would
Urge you to consider its
adoption and I'm happy to sample
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee will yield back to
you.
Thank you Senator Candelaria
Senator sure your hand popped up
first.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
Senator Representative and
Makita on.
Of course a question about how
this is administered
so for the PPP loans from the
federal government actually went
to a bank so
in this case so they're just
going straight.
Straight to you is that right
there's no bank nothing else in
the middle there to look on
anything verify anything Mr
Chairman this is going to the
application to be made to the
NMFA I I don't agree with you
that.
The fact that the NMFA is
reviewing these applications
means they're not reviewed not
receiving a full thorough
vetting and if miss Russell
would like to address perhaps
Mr chairman I would testing he's
out doing these are are vetted
we're happy to get this Russell
could you address that issue.
Certainly Mr chairman the
initial legislation also allowed
for
the thanks to play a part in
reviewing applications
ultimately though the because of
the way in which the
qualifications were set up it
really was looking mostly at tax
returns so we get in tax returns
and additional information from
the bar were from the applicants
and review them line item by
line item and ultimately what
banks do is an underwriting
which includes a fairly in depth
review of industry and things
like that this does not happen
in this program the program
itself is looking at decline and
is looking at expenses and
really think spending a lot of
time with the tax returns of the
underlying businesses we also do
additional projects and things
like that but thanks alternately
didn't have the level of
expertise that they were the
agency initially thought that
happens ultimately didn't we
didn't end up with a lot of
banks participation so yes I'd
like to keep keep keep program
finance authority taking these
applications directly the PPP
runs directly through local
banks.
So yes Mister chairman first I
wasn't suggesting that to that
we weren't.
adequately reviewing them I was
just wondering why
Why there was the difference
because it makes sense to me so
the PPP loan was guaranteed loan
of those guaranteed by the
federal government in and
eventually became a grant
So why did we just guarantee
these loans through a local bank
that's really my.
Really my question on how.
Why that wasn't of considered in
here would suggesting that that
The applications were being
reviewed properly so just muted
the bank actually did something
for.
Or for the PPP loans anyway Mr
Chairman at the.
you Senator share it if I might
respond to that.
The agency representative I
think we've covered it I'd I'd I
don't think Mr chairman we have
anything more to go on that.
Phil sorry Mr.
Great Senator.
All right would somebody else
ask question.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chair and that.
Thank you all for bringing this
bill forward and and I certainly
agree you know the time that we
did this last thing we want to
do is go further into debt by
taking out another loan even it
was it and one percent water
just Mr just a couple of quick
questions I guess
In and I'm I'm trying to
remember what we did with Garces
substitute with regards to the
original bill and so if you.
So if you plan for the first
amount of money
can you also apply for this
money I mean.
The first loan what are if you
took out a loan the first time
around can you go after this
money as well.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the legislation does
contemplate
that an individual who received
a loan under the twenty twenty
version can apply to refinance
that loan
if they want to refinance there
is not a super hit specific and
Representative Matthews can
correct me if I'm wrong but
there is not a specific
prohibition in the legislation
against an individual who
received you know a lower level
of of loan amount in twenty
twenty from coming back right
because for example in the
original bill
and in the original program the
loan amount was capped at
seventy five thousand dollars
with nose with no personal
guarantee or collateral in this
version of the legislation it
goes up to a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars above seventy
five thousand dollars there is a
now a personal guarantee
collateral requirement and so
in two years sooner Mr chairman
I do believe the business could
calm and apply for additional
financing up to that debt limit
of a hundred fifty thousand but
all yield Representative
Matthews if she has some
observations on that.
Mr Chairman at the Senator
I agree with Senator Candelaria
in in in addition we we had in
the first round we had
businesses that came in and had
took loans for less than fifty
thousand which was a maximum at
the time and some of those may
come back and ask for some
additional funding and they will
be processed and they will be
able to participate if they meet
the qualifications there's no
there's no barrier in the
statute that we're proposing
that limits that.
Okay good thank you for that
yeah I think we're trying to
help people out here and make
sure that everybody has access
to funding
we talk a little bit about
disclosure and
And
She seemed like I had one of the
one.
Yeah and and I guess I'm just
nitpicking here a little bit but
I mean somebody were to default
on the first loan.
Conceivably.
Would they be able to take this
long to pay off the first
loaner.
You know I'm I'm trying to
understand a little better how
the the the loan actually plays
in with this particular grant
because I want to make sure that
people have the opportunity to
get out and get the business
back squared away.
So is there any it are there any
prepayment penalties on the
first loan me can they pay it
off immediately.
I just wanna make sure that they
have they don't there's no
problem problems according this
loan if they had the last if
they actually on loan for this
grant.
Chairman I yield to miss Russell
because I think there's some
technical aspects of that
question but from up from
strictly a policy perspective
Mr Chairman
there is no penalty I think this
is important and Representative
Matthews and I've.
Worked on this particular issue
since since the inception
because it was an important part
of
of this whole of this whole
initiative is that.
with regards to the loan amounts
in question.
I lost my train of thought so
can you ask what you know I
forgive it is Mr chairman of
what was your what was your your
question again Mr at the end if
I could for the Senator.
It is is there any problem with
it no no there is not there is
no penalty there is no penalty
for early payments escalated
payments one thing I will
highlight in the substitute bill
before you Mr chairman is that
initially the program
contemplated an annual repayment
schedule Senator Griggs in the
last committee recommended that
we have to allow the NMFA
discretion to establish a debt
repayment schedule with the
individual borrower right some
annual repayments make sense for
some quarterly repayments make
sense for some I don't know if
you do monthly but maybe monthly
make sense on that so on the
technical side Mr chairman if we
could yield to miss Russell.
So Mr chairman there is as the
senator mentioned there is no
prepayment penalty of the
statute contemplates that there
would be re financings and
importantly this legislation
over the original one allows for
up to three months of expenses
where the first bill allowed
just for two months and it
actually allows for a slightly
larger amount because the first
iteration of the legislation
required that we deduct from the
amount that a business is
eligible to receive any cares
Act loans so it it actually
didn't reduce the amount that
they were eligible for so a
larger amount of money is now
available as the senator
mentioned earlier this goes from
seventy five thousand two
hundred and fifty thousand about
half of our rural forty percent
of our loans maxed out at
seventy five thousand dollars
last and so we think that those
folks would a have even greater
access so we artificially
limited the amount that they be
able to apply for the first
round this eliminates a lot of
that concern.
Well thank you I appreciate the
clarification and.
Just trying to see how.
Again maybe I should connect the
first round of with this
legislation at all but will the
last question actually Mr
Chairman is I think we mentioned
earlier that about forty million
dollars worth of that money for
the loans have been asked for.
I don't know if it's all been
dispersed as yet but to that
left I think there's four
hundred million in the pot
originally if I remember
correctly so with this money if
there are no and I think it came
to to an end the loan
application came to an end at
the end of the year so with this
money roll over to accommodate
that is there any provision for
the remainder of that money to
be used for this program or or
to be clear the deck in and
start all over with in regards
to of funding.
Because there's no I'm is there
any provision for X. amount of
money to fund this or is the FAA
just gonna.
It.
So this so Mr chairman DFA has
no role in this program NMFA I'm
sure Hey so there's no cost to
DFA the authorization here is
not an appropriation it is
directing and granting Wesley
Act analogize it is we are
setting investment policy right
that there's an authorization
given by the legislature to
invest up to five hundred
million of the severance tax
permanent fund in this program
that is not you know require
that tomorrow there's going to
be a four hundred and fifty
million dollar check written the
legislation provides that the S.
I see and NMFA must develop
collaborative Lee and enter into
a scheduled for transfers as
needed and so over the next year
and some months Senator it may
very well be that there is
tremendous pent up market
demand.
And the full five hundred
million dollar authorization is
used it may be that there is
only a hundred million dollars
more demand so one fifty is used
right so it's there's actually
and this is an important issue
because I think it came up
earlier during session and
regards to other bills that
we're looking to sort of
cannibalize off of this program
there's not a pot of money right
sitting someplace it's it's just
an authorization so requests are
made to take money out of the
investment fund to be invested
into the program on an as needed
basis if that makes sense yeah.
That does make sense and I
appreciate the clarification on
that.
my only point was that.
If we have a what the four
hundred sixty million dollars
still or three hundred sixty
million dollars still sitting
there.
That might be the place to go
look for this money initially as
opposed to.
You know tapping general fund or
something like that for for
these appropriations just trying
to look up taxpayer dollars
Senator Mr chairman that's all
the question I have at this
particular time thank you thank
you senator great questions.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Candelaria so just reading over
the FIR the bill do you are.
It says that one of the major
changes in the bill from the act
we passed last year is the
paperwork that we require
applicants to show demonstrating
that they've been affected by
COVID so my first question is
what under this new proposal
what would we require that they
show to the state demonstrating
that they've been impacted by
COVID.
So Mr chairman as so I will
yield to Mr Russell because I
think ultimately.
The the major policy change in
this committee substitute is
that instead of requiring a
business to demonstrate and hit
that threshold of thirty percent
revenue decline in April thirty
percent revenue decline in may
of twenty twenty eight the
legislation has changed chair a
substantive requirement that the
business demonstrates to NMSA
satisfaction that it has
experienced a substantial
decline in revenue our a
significant disruption and its
operations due to the COVID
nineteen pandemic order the
governor's executive order so in
short answer to your question
those details are what
specifically MSA would look at
in order to determine whether or
not a and F. burn has
demonstrated right or met those
toothbrush holds would now be at
the discretion of the New Mexico
finance authority and so Mr
chairman miss Russell I don't
know if you're prepared to give
us a sketch of what the NMFA
would be looking at I suspect
it's largely some of what you
were looking at before there's
only so many ways broken
creating the fact but Mr
Chairman if we can build and but
miss Russell may be addressed
Senators question from a
technical staff.
Thank you Mr chairman so in
addition to the very specific
requirement of the thirty
percent decline in each of those
two months as opposed to even an
average the step the legislation
initially work requires that the
that that decline be evidenced
by reports that the that the
applicant files monthly with the
department of taxation and
revenue and so about forty
percent maybe a little more of
New Mexico's economic activity
is it captured in those gross
receipts reports and so it left
out large portions of business
that might otherwise.
Not to participate and and could
potentially even have that
specific thirty percent decline
so that's one area in which it
gives now NMFA some to
discretion to help those
industries that don't file whose
businesses don't file gross
receipts tax gross receipts
reports with taxation and
revenue to participate in the
program we anticipate in those
instances that we would rely on
some financial reports provided
by the borrowers we do that for
nonprofits under the original
small business recovery act
they're able to give us of tax
reports and then show us of the
monthly declines there in so
that's what I anticipate we go
to but again this legislation
allows for applicants to apply
through.
This yeah this legislation
through may thirty first of
twenty twenty two and so we are
going to have to have some of
the metrics that allow it to
operate over a longer period of
time so we're still working
through the specifics but I
anticipate it would be a
combination of things based on
the industry okay so thank you
madam.
Mr chair Senator Candelaria this
Russell so I just want to make
sure so it it will include more
than just someone signing a
statement saying we suffered
hardship.
Please give us a long Mr
Chairman yes there will have to
be evidence of it and and we
have to promulgate rules as to
what constitutes that evidence
okay another question FIR says
that we are now extending the
terms of the loans for up to
thirty years did I read that
correctly from.
What had been several years now
we're gonna extend these loans
to up to thirty years every that
correctly now Mr chairman the
committee substitute before you
addresses that issue okay right
conversation NTT and so Senator
to your specific question the
maximum period of a loan issued
under this act would be up to
ten years.
Okay.
All right thank you that's all I
have thank you Mr chairman thank
center would you Senator.
Who's next.
I had a question but I think
Senator Woods **** handed before
may Senator Candelaria chair
here.
All right Senator if you miss
madam chair.
Okay thank you very much
thank you for the opportunity
for questions certainly a lot of
very smart people on this bill
and I'm going to try to make
some kind of sense that it might
be more in so.
What the secretary receive.
The loans the first wait wait
wait.
I heard a word Representative
Matthews you made the statement
while ago at least I think you
made the statement and call
these requests.
Was it my completely wrong these
are loan try they're not
requests.
Representative Matthews you
Madam chairman.
At that Mr Chairman Senator if I
use the word requests I think I
think I was referring to the
care money grants in December
that the finance authority was
was using but under this program
that is always been loans there
are no requests.
Okay thank you very much the.
Madam chair.
Am I speaking to madam chairman
rod Regus our Mr chairman
Candelaria.
Who's the chairman was
chairman welcome to the chair
Senator Rodriguez thank you and
I didn't know that senator Munoz
hit stepped out maybe he's not
here I didn't hear it thank you
yes proceed as senator would you
have another question thank you
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you very much
So what what did the secretary
receive these the first forty
million dollar loan what what
been a secretary did we
encompass what those loans madam
chair thank you madam chair off
that I will yield to miss
Russell NMFA did an excellent
job tracking the data throughout
the course of our for six months
with this programs all you'll to
her on that.
Thank you madam chair there was
a variety of businesses but the
largest of applicants secretary
that applied was the hospitality
and leisure industries
and so those are the they were
both the ones that got the most
loans and ones that suffered the
most declined declinations of
loans so the highest approval
rating the highest disapproval
rate fell with hospitality and
leisure industries also behind
there was construction industry
received a significant
application of demand of the
ones we did not see a lot from
would be ones that don't pay of
course course receipts tax so we
saw very little in the way of
agriculture those that actually
have a finished echo culture.
We're eligible to apply but not
anyone in a
just agriculture business that
wasn't subject to taxation so
gross receipts tax so that we
didn't see any from them.
Thanks for taking notes as we go
so are are madam chair so it
takes me a little while to.
Get from paper to PM tough to
bring so.
All right what.
When we change the rules of the
game with this legislation madam
chairman we change the rules of
the game.
We are now expecting.
A higher.
use level than we had before
because we had four hundred
million before in ways when we
send out.
Forty million.
And so we changing the rules to
see if we can.
get more money left out and one
way we're changing the rules was
were no longer.
Going just by reports of gross
receipts now we're going to go
buy a quarterly reports.
Show that they have declined
what what the my question is all
those quarterly reports what
exact targets
Months and years are we talking
about here madam chairman.
So madam chair and and senator
from up from a public policy
standpoint the legislation
Only deals with that to the
extent that it says that the
decline in revenue and the
disruption to operations must
there must be a causal
relationship between that and
the COVID nineteen pandemic and
the public health orders in New
Mexico so you know all you'll to
miss Russell about which
specific terms are looking at I
think that under this new
legislation that is variable
it's no longer the firm set in
stone we look at these two
months out of all the other
months in the world which was
one of the you know one of the
feedback we got from the
business community was to give
NMFA the authority to look at a
broader period of time and to
take a more holistic approach to
revenue decline appropriations
decline xterra miss madam chair
representative use all yield to
miss Russell and I have made a
preventive Matthews had anything
she wanted also that all yield
here.
You too ms Russell this.
Thank you
Senator I think the likely
answer is that there will be
several different metrics that
will have to use when we looked
at administering the cares
grants which was at a separate
program entirely but also try to
service businesses that have
been hit hard by the pandemic we
went out for public comment in
that instance we were given
overwhelming response from the
business community said please
look at profit and loss because
in fact you could have a revenue
not declined quite so much but
still have your expenses
increase pretty dramatically and
so that those were really
important factors in looking at
impacts of the COVID so we are
going to my my first answer to
you is that we would probably
continue along those same lines
to ensure that we were looking
at profit and loss and not just
at revenue decline or expense
declined because those are
really in a related so that's
the first answer given to the
second is that we still have to
go back out for public comment
honestly and try to address this
forty in terms of metrics to see
you know if you were so if you
had interrupted operations for a
longer period of time you know
even ten percent over a long
period of time could really hurt
and a business that has high
cost of goods sold or very thin
margins so we'll be looking at
that and my my expectation is
that there would be not one set
but several different ways in
which you could demonstrate
impact so that we have is very
gauges possible across the
industry that we hope to serve.
Madam chairman on I didn't get
an answer that as well.
What I'd like to know.
Is we're going to determine that
someone lost money in business.
Due to the COVID due to
disruptions.
Pretty vote then no that.
What are we talking about.
From.
From the date this bill goes
into effect this law goes into
effect.
For the next ten years.
We're going to make loans for
the next ten years under that
same guidelines that that we are
we expecting COVID to last the
next ten years.
I don't I don't understand this
bill please madam chairman
please please please explain the
built in.
Madam chair I don't know what
else I need to export LC want to
explain Senator I mean I the
also to your specific question
the application period ends may
twenty twenty.
So if you want to apply for a
loan.
You need to submit an
application under this bill
before may of two thousand and
twenty two at twenty two twenty
two okay once that's the
deadline right the the term of
those loans as you suggested
Senator would be for to up to
ten years but they must be
applied for prior to may of two
thousand and twenty two as
provided in the legislation.
Okay.
Madam chairman Madam chairman
of.
The reason I ask this question
and thank you for that Sir
Senator about the twenty twenty
two I'm sorry.
I came home I left two dead gun
bill and substitute in Santa Fe
it held operate out of two spots
but that's what I'm doing sorry
about that Sir or so so what we
have the way I see is that.
And the other part of that that
the last time they can apply is
may of twenty two.
Okay so.
If they can prove any
disruption.
Up to that point in time they
can apply in other words if they
were these disrupted from
January one of twenty one to
two any time up to may of twenty
two any time any disruption
they're going to be allowed to
take this long way understand
madam chair.
So madam chair and and and
senator I I don't think it's any
disruption or just any sort of
you know diminished or.
You know per se disruption I
think you know that this is the
double edged sword of running a
bill like this which is when you
do a hard.
Right in the legislation the the
month to month and the revenue
cuts and be very prescriptive we
have the problem of people being
excluded and people demanding
more flexibility.
And.
Now we've we've changed course
and what I can say Senator to
your question is those are the
details that are now left to the
New Mexico finance authority in
issuing their rules and adopting
their policies for the
management of this loan program
now I will say as a matter of
just basic fact you know I I
this is an open ended into the
future open ended into the past
right because you have to
demonstrate a causal
relationship with the COVID
nineteen pandemic the very very
hard for up for a potential loan
applicant to try to get the NMFA
to job to finance a long when
they're trying to use evidence
from three years ago let's say
because COVID has a start date
god willing it's going to have
an end date that's sooner rather
than later right but it to your
question the period of time
we're looking at is basically
March of twenty twenty two may
of twenty twenty two.
That is when someone can file an
application right and that would
be the period of time that would
be relevant now what NMFA's
gonna specifically look at I
couldn't tell you I mean that's
going to be decided by rule and
your consultation but what I can
tell you is this NMFA's
performance on this bill is
going to be looked at in the
future by NMFA's own rating
agencies and NMFA's all in all
financial oversight bodies so
from their perspective there is
a significant incentive to
really make sure that loans are
given in strict accordance with
this act and you know not just
sort of given if someone can you
know demonstrate well let's just
say you know my my mood was
depressed and so I could do less
business and so I had a negative
impact on the pandemic right
those sort of controls are
naturally built into the fact
that this is a financial loan
process Madam.
Madam chair we are so open ended
in the middle here.
That.
You know we have to have
complete trust and miss Russell
here because she's gone right
the right the deal and she's
gonna write it according to the
public comments that she gets.
And that's not I'm afraid
Senator that is not sound
financial policy.
Senator I shouldn't you
shouldn't you shouldn't write
bills so open ended.
That that anything's possible in
the Middle we are asking for so
much transparency in government
now and this is the height of
non transparency the stuff that
we're trying to right here I I'm
I'm very sorry and I know that
you worked hard on this bill.
But.
You know.
We open the downstate optional
think about that the ator ma'am.
Trying to to to get his theater
open think about the the the the
the theme parks that are trying
to open up and and and get their
money back.
And they need to be open.
I know I know this is way off
topic I apologize Senator don't
need to give you a headache.
Madam chairman thank you thank
you very much.
Senator I I really you know I I
I I disagree with you we're spec
fully and wish you had read the
substitute bill.
Candelaria you have a question
that had a COVID.
Senator Rodriguez your.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Candelaria for
working so hard on this bill and
of course Representative
Matthews I hate for my
understanding please continue to
educate the I'm here because I
have written some bullet points
and hopefully I correct in
understanding what this bill
does and so as I'm going please
stop me Senator if you you Mr
chairman if you disagree by it
seems like from what I wrote
this bill re authorizes the New
Mexico finance authority to
continue to accept applications
for small business loans number
one.
Number two is that you can apply
until.
Maybe may thirty first of twenty
twenty two.
And from the beginning of the
pandemic and the business is now
small business needs to
demonstrate substantial decline
as opposed to the very limiting
thirty percent decline that was
inhibiting the ability of small
businesses to apply for loans.
And the other point I wrote is
that the term is ten years up to
ten years not thirty years and
with FY but regional we propose.
The other point is that it is
one half of crime for the
interest.
And I'm not hearing a stop stop
so that means I guess I'm going
okay in the total is one hundred
and fifty thousand dollar Max
for the loan for the loan amount
and the first seventy five
thousand there would be no
collateral required or requested
by the New Mexico finance
authority the additional seventy
five thousand at the New Mexico
finance authority can seek
collateral based on the rules
that there's going to promulgate
the next point is for the first
year there would be no interest.
For the second and third years
it would be interest only.
And again these are notes I
wrote for myself is nine so
please stop me and then after
three years the payment schedule
would be would be designed by
the NMFA for payments.
Furthermore Mr chairman
Senator is is that the loan can
be use also for general
operations for example the they
can finance construction now if
they're required to do outdoor
patios for example or to
required to serve twenty five
percent capacity outdoors but
it's too cold or whatever they
can do and restructure their
business adding to be able to to
have some customers because it's
all due to the COVID and
The final point I wrote is that
any applicant who applied under
the twenty twenty small business
recovery act I can apply for the
business recovery act is now
before I process that are those
are my main point the crosscheck
what I say is the fact is that
correct Senator Mr Mr chairman
that's as if you wrote it
yourself those are that is an
accurate summation of the terms
of the committee substitute for
that thank you Mr chairman and
static on the line I thought
maybe if I let you down I help
quell some of the questions in
some of the.
Fusion that may or may have
occurred so that's all I have
Mister chairman I think that
other than that I wanted to say
that he's terribly very
difficult hi basing it requires
laws to do you think the little
bit differently obviously and
because the time.
And you have a great to provide
grants for everyone every
business in New Mexico when we
don't have requests for
everybody there's nothing wrong
with providing an additional
week call.
And that is the vehicle for
small businesses to apply for
loans that if I had a very small
interest rate with terms that
they find palatable to be able
to bounce back into the
economics that back that we're
facing in so you know that's how
I see this bill in that I will
move on Mr chairman thank you
for for Center candlelight and
Representative Matthews Marquita
and everyone who worked on this
of honesty chairman so others
can see thank you.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez
Senator Diamond.
You Mr chairman thank you
Senator Candelaria I thought
that I understand this bill and
we started discussing it today
so.
Mr Chairman representative
Candelaria just have some basic
questions we originally started
out with four hundred million
dollar pool only forty million
dollars of that was dispersed
and so we had a remaining three
hundred and sixty million
dollars is that not the funds
that were accessing this time is
that is what wasn't spent last
time.
No.
Madam chair now this is not an
appropriation there's not a lot
of money our account sitting
somewhere with you know three
hundred and sixty million
Senator.
So so what this how the bill
operates a sort of two sides of
one coin one side establishes
the loan program that Senator
Rodriguez sort of walked us
through the other side of the
coin is basically directs the
state investment officer to
invest up to a dollar amount of
the severance tax investment
fund into the program right so
in this case we're both making
an investment but also creating
by statute the investment
vehicle right we're by you know
we're investing in which is this
loan program it's corporate
paper right the carries a half
prime interest rate so so there
was no sort of residual fund
balance from the first program
that money just stays in the
severance tax investment I okay
if the state there likewise with
this bill if approved what would
happen is moving forward PSIC
would make investments into this
fund
continue to make investments
into this fund as an add on a as
needed basis on a funding
schedule determined by the S. I
see and by New Mexico finance
okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you Senator Candelaria for
explaining that that my next
question may be Mr chairman
actually for miss Russell can
anyone explain why so little of
that four hundred million that
we had last time actually got
out what why did we only get
forty out what what was the hold
up there and the and the
challenges so I'm thank you of.
Senator I think the answer is
it's multiple events occurred
the first is that the specific
requirement of thirty percent
decline for April and may hit
those folks what maybe had
business in the pipeline when
the pandemic kit and so there
months really work their hardest
hit months for maybe may and
June or they have an average of
even over thirty percent but
couldn't meet that specific
recall declined.
Percentage the other is that
several businesses don't report
their gross receipts to taxation
and revenue because they're not
subject to to G. R. T. and so
those folks got left behind so
those were the first to there
were some businesses that
weren't operational in
Let's say April of two thousand
and nineteen but were
operational at the point at
which the pandemic hit so they
didn't have a base month against
which they could do a comparison
so they were unable to apply
there were just about in eighty
percent of the declined seventy
five percent of the declines
came from folks that could not
meet that specific thirty
percent monthly requirement for
April and may of two thousand
twenty over the same month in
two thousand nineteen so that's
the largest we also had an
eighty percent residency
requirement so particularly in
the border communities there are
business owners that may have
you know maybe a family owned
business owned by four family
members and one of them lives
twenty miles away but that
happens to not be in New Mexico
anymore those folks could not
apply because they could only
demonstrate seventy five percent
residency so the eighty five
percent of the eighty percent
residency requirement
particularly in the border
communities counties that
stopped a lot of businesses from
moving forward.
I think those are the two and
then at the time again around
that same time that's when grant
money started to become
available so we certainly saw
initially a lot of demand for
the four of the loan program but
it became clear that that
because of the limitations we
just discussed that that that
businesses were in a position to
apply and at the same time grant
money started to become
available through the cities and
counties that cares Act money
and so we saw a decline in
demand during the period in
which there was a lot of grant
money available that demand
kicked up again at the end of
December again with the
limitations in place so we
saw early demand and the late
demand and in between when there
was grant money available from
the cities and counties we saw a
lesser demand so I think there's
a number of factors that went on
and so I think that that was
part of the reason for the lower
level of interest.
That makes sense so Mr Chairman
just a follow up miss Russell
are we waving that residency
requirement this go around.
Mr chairman and senator no it's
been read tweet
so if miss Russell wants if it
mistrust of you feel comfortable
if you want to kind of walk the
Senator through the re tweaking
I will say Senator from a public
policy standpoint one of the
major reasons that we did
undertake a reworking of the
residency requirements was also
many
many firms in the hospitality
industry in particular
basically had or ownership
structures that precluded that
from from being able to budget
some is Russell if you could
address how we reworked the
residency requirements of the
bill thank you Mr madam chair
thank you so the requirement is
that there be at least fifty one
percent ownership or they be a
business that employees at least
ten of full time New Mexico
residents.
Full time employees at our New
Mexico residents so it's an
either or so if they can't meet
the residency requirement but
they are still in every other
way really in New Mexico
business their physical location
is here it's just that they're
ownership isn't necessarily up
reside a hundred percent or even
fifty one percent with New
Mexico
residents that they're still
able to apply so long as they
employ at least ten New Mexico
residents on a full time basis.
Thank you Mrs Russell thank you
senator Mrs Russell you you
broke down for us how the how
the previous money was
distributed by industry you
mentioned that that I think was
hospitality was the number one
that we can we access
information to see which small
businesses by county receive the
last go around the funding.
Is that available information.
Mr chairman not under the
current legislation I can tell
you of the names of the
businesses the with that it's
actually called the loan
recipients so for that we have
been translating that as both
the borrower name and
potentially the business name
because sometimes those are
different so that's what we've
been able to disclose and that's
what's allowed for under the
existing statute.
I will met met madam chair and
and miss Russell I think even
under the existing law I think
the NMFA can report broad
demographic trends and broad
demographic data and so I think
I don't think we would be able
to there may be some issues but
counties that maybe one or two
loans right you're always
worried about if you disclose
broad data about one county
where there's like three people
you you identify those people
are but I do think miss madam
chair and senator your point we
could under the existing law
actually run that sort of
analysis it wouldn't be bite
broken down by for but I think
you could still report the gross
number for County that's correct
so we can report the number of
applications received by county
we can report Senator the of
applications funded as well and
we do them actually even by
industry within the county so we
do have broad demographic
information by county we simply
can't tell you of the names of
the businesses and their
location under the current law
sure sure fair enough thank
thank you senator and Mrs
Russell fair enough but do you
have that information available
for the last forty million that
went out by county just to see
the disbursement was there a was
there disparity between
Bernalillo how daga county is
what I'm getting at or where did
we find our small businesses in
rural communities.
The Senator Mr chair I can tell
you that I can get you that
information the what we saw were
that the applications came based
on you know demographics of New
Mexico so we obviously saw the
largest number of applications
received from Bernalillo county
in the fewest from I believe
Harding County right so we saw
similar trends I can get you
that information that we look at
that very carefully we try to
examine early on we were looking
to see why application demand
was not as great as we
anticipated that it took us
awhile to nail down it was the
specific thirty percent decline
issue so we really spent a lot
of time looking at that data
looking at it's G. R. T. that's
reported out of those
communities to see where we
might have just gaps of
information and education that
we need to to fill but so we do
have the information I can
provide that to you separately
the to the committee thank you
Mrs Russell I'm also to that
point Mr chairman will
businesses who applied in the
last round and we're not funded
have priority with this pool of
money and this application
process.
Madam madam madam chair and and
senator no there's no priority
given choose to a farm that had
a a an application did not under
the bill
there's nothing in the bill well
now the bill does require that
well I don't know if they can
have multiple rounds so it can
have multiple periods
you know I could say we will
accept rolling applications you
know they could say we're gonna
open applications in these
months how they want to do it
that the applications to have to
be considered on a first come
basis that made everybody in
line it's going to get approved
I just means they get to the
application based upon when it
was submitted.
Madam chair I did think madam
chair though that in the center
raises a good point one thing
that over the intercom we should
be sure to work on through the
NMFA sub oversight committee is
even though we don't provide for
priority it may be wise of
NMFA's able to to send notice to
those applicants were denied
perhaps especially to those
applicants who who were denied
because of the thirty percent
decline you know there was one
thing keeping them away from the
relief I think providing notice
to them would be absolutely
appropriate are trying to do
some outreach there but in terms
of priority our privilege now
there's no preference given in
the bill madam chair and senator
Diamond.
Thank you thank you senator Mr
Chairman probably again for for
Senator can't Candelaria it
seems to me if I understand this
right that is a bit of a loan
and a grant at the same time so
for example if I borrowed not
seventy five thousand but a
hundred and fifty thousand and I
defaulted on that seventy five
that's wait correct and then the
first initial seventy five if
there's no consequences as much
like a grant and it's above the
seventy five in which would be a
long.
Is that Mr Chairman on its face
the entire the entire investment
is alone
regarding the first seventy five
thousand you know it it is not a
grant because there is still the
right expectation of the state
is paid back albeit at a very
competitive and below market
interest rate now what I will
say is even though the
legislation does not require a
personal guarantee or collateral
that does not mean that NMFA is
without you know recourse as a
lender under its on contractual
of agreements with that loan
applicants to try to recover
that dat but without a personal
guarantee or collateral what
that means is that for the first
seventy five thousand New Mexico
finance authority is an
unsecured creditor which means
that you know let's assume a
business causes to bankruptcy
right or defaults on the loan
and MFA is not gonna have a lot
of priority in trying to recover
data for seventy five thousand.
in in your example though if the
if the borrower took up to a
hundred and fifty thousand.
NMFA would be coming secured
creditor after the seventy five
thousand dollar level and so
would have more recourse so I
think I think what the issue is
madam chair and and senator is
the first half of the loan has
lower let's say
sort of.
Recall ability or or recruitment
you know
Recruitment tools for NMFA
about seventy five does and that
was a policy choice.
Share Madam chair representative
because it's an actual question
it was a policy choice for two
reasons number one there was a
lot of feedback from the
business community that the loan
amount just need to be increased
especially for for mid size
firms but secondly it listening
to the concerns of the
legislature which are exactly as
you've suggested which is well
how do we call the money back if
there's a default and so that's
how this new bill addresses that
issue so it's a little more
complicated than you know the
first off the ground the letter
house alone I think it's more a
question of how many tools in
the toolbox does NMFA have to
recover that money and for over
seventy five they have now a
personal guarantee requirement
and a personal collateral
requirement that they may
impose.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman so Senator follow up
with that and then would we
consider why don't we consider
Securing the the initial seventy
five thousand if we intend to
get our money back in the state
is in a grant then then why
don't we make all of that alone
why did we why did we started
above seventy five we're going
to come get you with under
seventy five we we which which
most of the ones being made I'm
gonna assume are probably going
to be under seventy five
thousand in which the state has
no way of recouping those
revenues if every bar or decides
to default on that so we did we
did we consider should we
consider I'm making all of that
just secured long.
Thank you Mr Madam chair
representative that so so I'm
gonna disagree respectfully for
the first seventy five thousand
there's not no recruitment
ability right so so it's not as
if the lender is just off Scot
free
there is so insurance your
question yes there was a lot of
debate in the legislature in the
first national session of twenty
twenty about requiring a lot
more securitisation of the
admission of any loan amount
I I tend to think and would
argue that that is on the whole
not the policy direction we need
to go it is not lost on me that
this program has higher risk
than other investment type
material or poor investments
that the S. I. C. would invest
in but it's risk that we must
say and that is well worth
taking which is it's basically
taking a risk on the
entrepreneurs and small firms of
New Mexico and and so you know
we considered Representative
having stronger barriers to
entry but the reality is the the
countervailing public policy
concern here is that we also are
able to push out as much funding
as possible to have a both a
stimulating and stabilizing
effect on the state economy and
so on the whole that is why we
argue decided against it the
other reason is an all you'll
their president of Matthews a
lot of followers I don't come to
the borrowing table with a lot
of privilege with a lot of
capital with a a lot of those
resources and so when you put
those kind of requirements you
also sort of necessarily say but
a lot of your small.
Our firms are true entrepreneurs
I and many of your on banks
businesses are just kind of out
of the out of even being able to
be considered Representative
Matthews and say I know you had
something you wanted to add here
I may madam chair thank you
madam chair at Senator I would
you stand as a as an attorney I
spent a lot of time working with
debt collection and businesses
and that kind of situations and
the first seventy five thousand
is unsecured debt but it is
still alone and it is a debt it
is just like your credit card is
just like many of the other
bills you pay on a regular basis
even though you do not
personally guarantee them orders
no collateral in the state will
have a all the legal remedies
available to answer your
creditor is someone defaults and
the and the borrowers are
required to sign a document
which they acknowledge they
understand that whatever they
borrow is a loan not a and not a
grant or gift of some kind.
It's and and then this is the
second point I wanted to make
when because we were focusing on
small business which has been
especially hard hit by the
pandemic
they frequently do not have
substantial financial resources
to provide collateral to provide
a a a personal guarantee that
would be particularly meaningful
and so if we want them to stay
in business we had to have a
little flexibility and we did
not want to impose on them
thanks it would keep them out of
the market and take as market
for these loans
and many of them will absolutely
pay this money back I have no
question about that some will be
able to insure but we thought it
what we thought of the the value
of helping these businesses say
in business find jobs and
provide of economic value to our
communities was more important
than wearing whether or not we
got a hundred percent collection
we hope you get a very
substantial collection and I
still think it's a very good
risk of and a good value for New
Mexicans.
Thank you Representative
Matthews thank you Senator
Candelaria in this effort to
invest in our communities and
small businesses what what we
want this to our community banks
instead of NMFA was that
considered.
So madam chair and under the
first iteration of the program
yes the reality is I think just
in in practice is is miss
Russell explained earlier the
level of expertise and just the
type of review at this program
requires is just not something
that our banking partners are
custom to we're really
interested in doing and so you
know moving forward you know
we're gonna have the NMFA will
be the clearing house here
because I think that's basically
what the experience taught us we
wanted to to to do that that was
there was in fact pushed by your
predecessor Senator Smith as as
an important issue in the
original bill out but I think
you know just practice showed us
that practically speaking it's
it runs better and smoother if
it's all going through NMFA.
And if you sorry sorry Senator
if I could just feel to
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator
we actually originally wrote the
bill that the loans would be
made through the community banks
and we work I spent hours
talking to bankers about this
bill and they because of the
regulatory scheme they have
imposed by the federal
government it turned out that it
was just not practical and they
ask not to be the lender in this
process and that's when we
worked with the finance
authority to make them the
actual lender but it was at the
request of the banks not to be
asked to do that.
Thank you representative that's
that's very interesting I knew
they did a phenomenal job of
dispersing PPP money very
quickly to the businesses who
needed it most that's surprising
to me that they didn't want to
but but didn't didn't and I'm
just going to clarify so I
assume that they had no role in
the in the initial forty million
that got out and either correct.
Miss miss Russell with whether
any loans that were actually
originated or work process
through a community bank under
the first round thank you
Senator
Mr Chairman the the applications
came to the finance authority
because that's the way in which
to prescribed and then they were
sent out to a couple of banks I
would say probably ten to twelve
banks ultimately signed up in a
couple of CDF eyes and they were
able to then do the review it
was important to them that they
not be pulling any credit
reports and we pulled credit
reports on every single
applicant they came through it
was important to them that they
not be the ones actually
declining the application even
if it didn't qualify so the way
in which it was set up is that
they review the application and
then it was sent to the finance
authority forced to pull the
credit report and for us to
review their findings and
ultimately either decide to
approve or decline the loan
based on the qualifications but
they did not want to be in the
position of having to make a
credit decision which this
ultimately is.
Thank you Mrs Russell thank you
Senator and and and they won't
be involved at all in this round
if I understand correctly we'll
just go straight through your
office.
That's correct okay thank you
one last question probably to
the both of you as well
now that I know how that
community banks role in this
does the state investment
council have any authority or
any oversight of this loan at
all.
Do they have any role to play in
the loan of this
Senator Candelaria.
The madam madam chair and
senator the the loan decision is
made by the New Mexico finance
authority the role of the S. I
see is to invest the funds as
directed by the legislature so
they do not have any other role
in this in this system other
than to make the investment of
the necessary funding into the
program.
Mr Chairman just further to that
point Senator we report to them
monthly on the status of the
portfolio which at this point
we've had a couple of bar we're
start to make monthly repayments
in advance well in advance of
what they were required to do so
we've had several start the
process because it it means a
lot to them to pay down the
state immediately so we report
that information and monthly
send over any loan or payments
we get to the S. I see.
Thank you guys thank you both
for your time this Russell
Senator Candelaria and thank you
representative please I yup my
time.
Thank you Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator and representative
for bringing this fill forward
it's obvious you both put in a
lot of time and plot
thoughtfulness into writing this
so appreciate your your efforts
my question is on page four line
for
graces crossed out and replaced
with net revenue of less than
five million.
As determined by the thirty can
you explain a little bit about
what the motivation there once
motivation there Mr chairman and
senator was to ensure that more
firms were able to access this
financing of a gross five
million dollar threshold right
well it in one way one can look
at that one piece of data is a
that's a big business but if you
don't look at profit and loss
net revenue you lose I think the
real picture of of what the true
financial status of the firm is
and also what what real effect
COVID is had on the bottom line
of the farm and so that was that
was particularly one of the
changes that we had our heard
pretty strongly from the
business community to change
that the gross net revenue
threshold
wasn't was also very
discriminatory let's say against
firms that have very high cost
of goods sold right so while
they have may have high gross
receipts if if a lot of that is
just going out in a very high
cost of goods sold basically it
also is sort of is the
disincentive for them so it was
just a bra I again loosening up
the requirements
while still trying to keep this
targeted in some way trying to
find that balance madam Mr
chairman and senator.
Thank you for that response I'm
also wondering to health care
providers qualify like a
doctor's office or a dentist's
office they would qualify as
well yes madam chair and and
senator I will let you know so
transfers yes to your question
and I would encourage our health
provider sector and health
industry sector especially this
all providers to seriously look
into this as a source of
financing especially in rural
areas I will note that prior to
the launch of this program NMFA
had launched with some residual
money residual money but with
another pot of money a separate
program specifically targeted at
rural health care providers to
also provide similar Sir to
financing and that program has
done well as well so insured and
your answer your question yes
and I would just I would really
encourage that you know at is
specially for a sector like
health care right if your doctor
is seen at a temporary decline
in in revenue due to the fact
you cannot perform certain
procedures or you can't do is
certain in person visits this
financing makes a lot of sense
because in about eighteen months
you're assuming that your
revenue stream is back to where
it should be right so short
answer yes and we encourage
folks to apply.
Thank you and how many small
businesses are you hoping to
that will benefit from this
program.
Madam chair Mister chairman
madam vice chair and senator
you know I said last time
that I would be the happiest
person in the world if no one
applied for any of the loans
because it would mean the New
Mexico economy is completely
strong it will mean that folks
to say that everybody is bank
and there's enough credit for
everyone and the system works
perfectly they would be right
unfortunately we know that
there's pent up demand here
you know even that I would spend
mention today that the program
and its first iteration let
fifty million at the same time
that this program was operating
a small business investment
corporation which invest funds
pursuant to Senate bill ten from
two thousand nineteen which was
a bill by the late Carl cease
narrows on a micro level have
also been doing this same type
of low interest rate lending for
many of their clients throughout
the pandemic so I will answer
your question as a lawyer all we
should it depends right it
depends on a lot of factors are
outside of our control all we
can do is set up the most
accessible attractive policy
oriented program we can and it's
up to the market to decide truly
what the update will be I
personally as I began this
presentation said and I do hope
this to be true that we went out
the entire five hundred million
that all of that money gets put
into the economy that business
owners decide they can start
taking risks again right because
that's what keeps recession's
going and makes them hard and
long is ultimately recessions
are about consumer confidence in
their economy we need to restore
that confidence in New Mexico's
economy as soon as possible and
perhaps provide more confidence
than we ever had before we went
into this.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Senator Burt for a second time.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
just a quick question
Representative Matthews mask
what thanks to talk to a doctor
with the not the one participate
in this.
Mr Chairman Senator up certainly
I've spent a great deal of time
with Jerry Walker who at the
time was the head of the
community banking association
most of my my conversations
would have been with him because
he was representing the entire
community of banks I also worked
with the from a from the New
Mexico department of banking and
the problem is that banks if
they are the lender had these
federal rules for example being
sure that it the money's not
going to terrorists and there's
all kinds of things like that
this was different than PPP
because PPP was guaranteed by
the federal government.
The banks this wasn't this money
was going to be getting these
loans are going to be guaranteed
by the state of New Mexico and
so it created this this huge
regulatory problem for them to
be participants as the lender at
any level at best what they
could do was reviews some of the
paperwork and the even that
turned out not to be a good a
good fit for them but
we we explored that literally
for weeks and originally wrote
it with the with the idea that
the banks would be the primary
lender and it just it did not
work and at their request a jury
Walker's request we change to
the structure and program.
Mr chairman I I appreciate that
and I I understand that
explanation the.
Because we it that was on the
original concerns that we had
with the PPP bunny before
guidelines were were set forth
for a banks the P. P. money was
very easy and and and to get out
forms are easy the banks we're
comfortable dealing with that
because of the guarantees.
I do know that that there are
serious at risk.
Implications for banking with
regards to where the money goes
and how it's going to be used if
it's not just in a normal
business or who the principles
and that this is our meeting get
really down and we saw this
things.
The explanation is is.
Very well.
Versed in I appreciate that
explanation the.
You know Jared Walker worked
with you for many years and and
the in he's a stand up guy so I
appreciate that very much thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator Byrd I don't
see anybody else on the list
I guess personally go to to miss
Marquita Russel and how many how
many people requested loans as
well as the dollar amount that
requests in total before that
and I.
So Mr chairman we received a
doctor
when the six hundred
applications.
and unfortunately the way we
capture the information we
didn't necessarily get to the
point at which we knew the
amount they qualify for if we
if they were denied so the way
we set up the application Mr
Chairman is that we first had
them run the revenue test in
that they were had more than
five million dollars in gross
revenues than they were
automatically declined and they
weren't given the rest of the
application to review similarly
they then were to put in their
gross there.
Their gross receipts for the
month of April and may for two
thousand nineteen and twenty if
they didn't meet at least that
thirty percent test they didn't
get to the rest of the
application and then lastly the
the application itself the
amount you qualify for is based
on average adjusted monthly
expenses and so we didn't end up
capturing a lot of them if they
could not meet that thirty
percent decline they never got
to that point so we have some
information there were a couple
of for residency we certainly
have that information but I
don't have enough information to
give you a good answer I can
tell you the average loan was
just under fifty thousand
dollars and that's for two
months of monthly expenses.
Thank you and so.
Hundred.
How many were denied.
The we ended up
The north just about half.
Thirteen hundred were approved.
I apologize my math is off about
nine hundred were approved so
less than half.
Thanks about.
Seventeen hundred or disapproved
that's correct and then.
Let me ask you a question about
red and seeming to this loan
program is is really for
residents in New Mexico in so in
an ideal world.
Blender president what happens
if the president of the company
is is a non resident in this
scenario that you described
And the president decided any
disconnect.
close the company a lot after
you got a loan
then are the members of that
company been liable for the loan
are they all provide guarantees
are they all funding of loan
documents when.
When I go to the bank and yeah
I'm my wife's on Google my
business issue got to provide
documents to so are all the
members required funding in Katy
escort for liability purposes.
So Mr Chairman there is on their
current program there is an
authorized officer that signs on
behalf of the corporation
so for instance if a nonprofit
signs you don't have the you
know you don't have owners but
the but the board authorizes one
person to sign on behalf of the
corporation we do a similar
concept for for profits at the
point at which guarantees and
collateral come in handy we will
be changing that because it'll
be clear that you can't find a
guarantee unless you yourself
have signed off on it so with
the point which guarantees
become an issue or something
that we can
Used to secure a loan we would
have every individuals and
signed the guarantee they have
to sign that individually.
Happening out come back and say
in my articles are in my minute
that that we're allowing
improving this loan adoption
without him signing up
independently same thing right
nonprofit mean those members of
a board would be.
Required.
I know that he was actually
getting a loan and where the
money was going so are you
gathering that information with
the loan documents to knock
currently we are of requiring
certifications that they have
got those those items have been
given and that they have the
authorization to move forward
So we don't currently collect
all that at the point at which
you have collateral and the.
Guarantees you change the nature
of the commitment and we will
then change the nature of the
documentation.
Some Mrs Russell and and so if
if the president signed a
personal guarantee and you're
not signing the corporate assets
and how are you guarantee and
they borrowed a hundred fifty
are you guaranteeing that in
that in the corporate way and
not in a personal way.
The president we want to provide
a personal guarantee for a
hundred fifty have to be up for
but the corporate entity would
but there's now a few years
implement Ralph you look at
somebody asked that money that
that those guarantees work.
So Mr chairman currently let's
take of an LLC they LLC is is
doesn't have to guarantee it
obviously it's the outlook for
so that guarantee is not
necessary to corporate level but
if the members of the LLC are to
guarantee it because the loans
over seventy five thousand then
we would get guarantees from the
individual owners of the LLC the
members of the LLC but again the
the outlook for is the LLC so we
when they signed that loan we
have the commitment from the LLC
to repay that loan.
Okay.
And then.
how many of the residents again
fifty one percent ownership New
Mexican or employee and an
employee that reside in New
Mexico Representative Mr
chairman that's correct full
time employees.
Although the full time employees
year matching up a W. to their
some process Mr chairman we are
if the exact documentation we
don't have but that's our
anticipation.
Okay and then
What happens if someone walks in
and involves you know fifty
thousand and then comes back and
wants about another fifty and
then comes back and wants to
borrow another fifty all while
they're making their payments
can they can they it involved
that loan or would be a line of
credit.
That Michelin accredit would be
loaned or can you just get one
loan and then.
Mr chairman that's an excellent
question so the existing law is
pretty straight forward you do
qualify for an animatic which is
two times your average adjusted
monthly expense you don't you
can't ask for less you can't ask
for more you'll qualify for
specific amount of the Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three allows for
them to ask for an applicant to
ask for up to three times their
average monthly expense so there
will be flexibility for the
amount they ask for if they ask
for small amount and come back
later and are still able under
that three months calculation to
borrow more then I would
anticipate that be able to
borrow up to that maximum of
three months of average monthly
expenses.
We did not contemplate the line
of credit all of that something
that we should consider and we
have to look to the S. I see the
way the language comes in
money's return to the frontier
immediately are paid to the S. I
see so we have to work through
whether or not they would
believe that we could in a line
of credit.
If they pay down their principal
with the hope of re borrowing if
that triggers an immediate
return of that capital to the S.
I see at we have to look at that
language with yes I see and
understand how they read that
scenario.
That's a good question because I
mean restaurants may need a line
of credit rather than alone and
that they have that revolving
line of credit they open back up
and they're able to order to
their suppliers maybe two grand
ball.
It's just an option where you do
banking and every business is
different and we keep those the
grant I don't know if I really
and I agree with that but I'd
rather than have the money in it
of all the money but
My next question is to Senator
Candelaria at what led to
believe that we need to go back
to the five hundred million
dollars are Representative
Matthews will let us to believe
that we need to go back to the
five hundred million what
numbers that okay you think
we're gonna need five hundred
million by then we proceed from
from where we're at at four
fifty and move forward from
there and say this is the
amount.
Senator because at the end of
the day Mr Chairman really
doesn't matter what number you
pick as the authorization right
this is an appropriation of
severance tax permanent fund so
there's no there's no if there's
no immediate harm more or or
deduction from the permanent I
mean from the investments.
And so you know I I chose the
five hundred million dollar mark
because I think it's important
as policy makers for us not to
backtrack on our commitment to
making these funds available to
the New Mexico economy into
Mexico entrepreneurs and so you
know I thought it appropriate to
keep the authorization level at
the same as I said if if the
market doesn't want this product
well then we won't use it five
hundred million dollars an
authorization Mr Chairman but if
the market does.
The demand for this product
then you know look close at five
hundred so there's not a magic
reason why other than the first
built made a certain commitment
I think it's important that we
as a legislature continue that
commitment I realize that it's
you know it's not really money
out of our pockets until there's
a demand Mr Chairman.
Thank you maybe Representative
Matthews has the Interstate
behind.
so
I want to ask some other
questions in market is are you
guys going to be able to handle
this or we gonna need to give
you some extra money in your
agency to handle this I think
there's another leader bill that
and coming that throws the.
Will you more money to loan out
how are you how you handle it
financially or do we need to
look at your budget stop and
make some adjustments for short
terms hello well I appreciate
that question Senator Mr
chairman so the
the finance authority has
because it was a short term
program we staffed primarily
through Bryanston temporary
staff and by kind of pivoting
some of our existing staff doing
some our full time staff having
them fill in on a part time
basis with the two year horizon
between this and the lead the
bill that's being proposed
through Senate bill five
We anticipate bringing on people
on a full time basis so we'll
take some of those employees
that have been trained and
worked on the program and
incorporate them into the agency
staff you know for a two to
three year process for sure
because it'll take us that long
to really institutionalize it
the good news I think for the
legislature is we're not a
budgeted agency so you would not
it would not be an impact to the
state's operations because in
fact it the finance authority
covers its cost and through a
fees that it earns on the
administration of the program
this statute allows us Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three allows us up
to two percent of the commitment
to be utilized to pay our costs
of administration and that would
be over that basically what
we're assuming is a twelve year
horizon.
And and so what what what two
percent of a hundred thousand
two thousand dollars right.
In summary amortize the loan
over time in the.
Where.
I pretty much at a break even.
Roughly.
So Mr chairman Mr I believe it
would be up to ten million
dollars could be two percent of
the five hundred million dollar
commitment so that's that's the
maximum amount of that set out
in
In this particular legislation
so that's the maximum amount
that we would be able to over
twelve year period be reimbursed
for expended
for purposes of administration.
So Marquita.
What is that enough to cover
your costs.
Mr have a.
Mr Chairman the first bill it
was of one percent of the
balance of the funds so as the
week drew the money down so we
ended up with one percent of
forty million and that did not
cover our costs we have a lot of
start up costs relative to
technology in particular
the end because of in the
stimulus programs particularly
in shorter term programs there's
a higher incidence of fraud so
we are acutely aware of
identifying our clients in
advance in understanding making
certain they are who they say
they are so that we we invested
in technology early on that
money has been well invested we
were able to utilize it for the
other short term grant program
that we operated with the cares
money and so we would be
augmenting some technology here
but we're not creating whole
cloth branding program so you
know significant portion of our
start up costs have been
invested in this and it would be
really operational but you're
given the scope we anticipate
adding a few more tools to our
fraud mitigation technology just
so that we have a belt and
suspenders approach to fraud.
And and then they're going to be
an ongoing program for your are
you also collecting the money
you're doing them regulations
you're gonna are you gonna
process that hopefully there's
not any default I hope so but we
gonna process in the fall what a
good team and and part of the
loan docks are those the fall.
calculated in in are not
calculated but added to the to
the signature line of the note
saying that if you do fall to
you the pale party feeding
collection.
So Mr chairman that is a
standard part of our
documentation
the that the
The initial focus of our
staffing would be on it loan
administration and working with
clients so client outreach sort
of troubleshooting application
issues making certain they know
how to qualifier whether they
qualify so our initial staffing
over the first two years we
anticipate would be more client
outreach than just loan payments
start to come in that staff that
we need from that point forward
will be loaned loan servicing
staff and attorneys for the
reasons that you've noted.
Mr Russell to go back to one
more thing in I just want to
clarify I know that the banks
want four points to originate
alone I guess kind of banker
here today and we're talking
about guns and stuff and so you
know I know that that when you
sent the what when we send these
applications to the to the banks
are that wanted to do and what
did they get paid per
application.
Just the electors application
basically because they weren't
doing anything else other than
collecting intended.
Well Mister chairman they were
collecting more information than
that but it I mean they they
were certainly doing a job that
someone had to do so
But it was
A hundred seventy five dollars I
believe it was less than it was
just under two percent I'd have
to look specifically at we had
so few come through the bank
that I honestly can't remember
that but it was of.
Around two hundred dollars an
application.
Okay I think that kind of wraps
it up for me and I just want to
make sure that that we're
covering your costs and they are
not fully from from the grant
for supplemental are coming in
because something went awry
there how the I want to make
sure you have the staff to do
this to make sure that the
program flows smoothly
I think it's a start we just
have to be cautious in New
Mexico what happened.
I think everybody would help and
if you alone there's an option I
just don't want to price out of
the market.
You know what a local bank
as they actually are the ones
that help small businesses you
go to senator Byrd's banking
your live in that community
they're more likely to help you
handle that and they'll take
your deposits and and you have
to still have relationships
with.
That will take a motion from
committee.
wrap anything up.
I know Mr chairman thank you for
the committee's time I would
move it to pass thank you.
How I can grab a motion for do
passed by Senator Candelaria
second by Senator Rodriguez
At what you call the roll
please.
Yes Senator Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Candelaria yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Hello yes Senator sure.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods no.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
And.
I will be recusing myself from
the vote.
Just to clarify that that you
never know what happened and.
In this too and so I'll be kids.
And on the.
Thank.
Motions passed.
You got to you got account forty
Pat.
Here again.
Can you hear me that.
With needed Senators eight four
two against and one recused.
Thank you Senator Candelaria do
have a due pass.
Committee report out thank you
Senator Rodriguez you're next up
with Senate bill twenty seven
and then.
We're gonna try to keep going so
we don't get behind we
rescheduled the courts and
judiciary so we want to try to
get to that thanks a point that
center thank you Mr chairman
this bill is actually very
simple Billiken MFA committee
bill and it has no fiscal impact
so if you recall we discussed
the possibility of just
reporting it out to the Senate
floor since there's no fiscal
impact on it but at the same
time a good idea just to have
her in case there are any
questions
this is a Committee endorsed the
bill and it's merely allows the
MFA mortgage finance authority
to to
a sponsor and distribute funding
from the housing trust fund for
more rental assistance in
mortgage assistance
weatherization our programs that
are needed now for it allows for
more of a
The distribution now during the
COVID and allows and the the
ability to do Rolf to distribute
some of this money they already
do it but they have some
limitations and now it's going
to be based on need to help out
with this rental assistance the
assistance will go for example
to landlords when a person is
getting addicted and they
haven't paid their rent and and
they they need to remain in
their home of course MFA oil
assist with the criteria then
the station to criteria for
eligibility and to distribute
funds to help landlords and and
that offer mortgage assistance
that I have is the here who's
the director for the mortgage
finance authority with me here
to help answer questions and
Rebecca Velarde both very
competent from the MSA and that
you know we learned one thing
big at least during this
pandemic is that you know the
great needs that exist in New
Mexico we thought would be a
truly as we see more and more
landlords small businesses and
so on struggle and the tenants
also struggle families we
realize how much was exacerbated
by this pandemic we need to do
everything we can to leverage
the the funds that we have so
that's really what it does Mr
chairman if there are any
questions please feel free.
You questions from committee
members Senator Gonzales this
year hand ready.
Mr chairman if it's appropriate
I move forward to pass.
Thank you Senator Gonzales I do
have some other people on the
list.
Senator share your hand popped
up next mentor what thank you Mr
chairman I know in the past we
talked about whether or whether
it's ation I believe it was from
this fund and it was often
somebody going out there and put
plastic on a window.
Is that still the case here are
we talking about something.
A little more permanent like
maybe blown in insulation in the
attic.
Mr chairman and senator thank
you Senator for asking that
question it's for whatever is
needed to whether I for example
even that even blowing
insulation roofing a lot of
people have issues with leaking
roofs and they don't have any
money to even fix the roof for
example and so this is why the
rising whatever is needed from
the housing trust fund which we
already do like I said every
year we have weather is ation
program but this one allows them
to do a based on need and
especially now during the COVID
not only on competition that
need off so this well Mr chair
and senator I appreciate that I
do in you know I voted for these
things in the past I just wish
that we could do something a
little more permanent for people
I know that there's a limited
amount of of of funds available
there always is a limit but
Of just having somebody go out
there and stable plastic on the
outside of a window that's I
don't know what they what that
cost but
all right that's certainly not a
permanent whether it's ation
that's a few months where the
weather is ation and so we got
to keep going back year after
year after year to do the same
thing.
But I also have another question
about the the rental.
and mortgage help here of a I'm
glad that the that it's landlord
it's going to get this to many
landlords that is their business
of the rent houses and when
people are paying will then
they're out of business to they
still owe the mortgage to the
bank.
But is there any anti donation
clause a problem in here in in.
In doing that in it and given
the money to the landlord or to
the mortgage company Mr Chairman
are here thank you very much for
all that right now there would
be an activation card probably
don't bring is the to elaborate
a little bit more to director of
younger thanks to help answer
that question make sure I'm not
missing something here this is
the are you there available.
Yes good afternoon Mister a
chairman senator Sharon thank
you Senator Rodriguez sat like
to back up just a just a little
bit if I may please on the
weather is ation question.
We actually do a very
comprehensive analysis of the
home and what weather is ation
measures are needed so there is
the installation that's blown
and others for nurses that are
also installed many different
activities we average about six
thousand and sixty five hundred
dollars for home on what we
would consider more permanent.
Measures that lasted between
twenty and thirty years and you
end up saving the families
between you know thirty to forty
dollars a month on utilities
with regard to the anti donation
clause the state legislature
passed a back in two thousand
seven time frame I believe the
affordable housing act that
allows for these type of
assistance to be provided
without violating the the anti
donation clause and this would
fit within that so it is says
something that day has been
contemplated when the housing
trust fund was originally
developed so I hope that
addresses your question Senator
share but that definitely open
to be more clear provide
additional information should
that not hit the mark
Mr Chairman and Mr Hernandez
that's perfect thank you very
much.
Thank you share.
Thank you Senator what.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
senator.
How much money.
Are we talking about using here.
Have you got a high and on this.
Mr Chairman sure thank you
senator Wirth thank you for your
question there's no specific
number currently because.
Be approved before applications
come in and so there's no number
of the funding is available
under the housing trust fund but
I'm gonna refer to is the need
to elaborate a little more is he
can you help Senator Woods here
the answer.
Mr chairman if I may and Senator
Woods have definitely D. R. what
we are looking at the quality
rental and housing or mortgage
assistance as mentioned as an
example we're actually looking
with this bill to get more
flexibility to provide funding
across the thirty various
programs that we have all
affordable housing type programs
yeah our guests if you would it
is a difficult one with regard
to how many folks may come in
for assistance and a rental and
mortgage payments as you may be
aware there may remember the
state legislature in November
at the special session approved
fifteen million dollars to come
to to go to DFA which were
awarded to MFA for rental and
mortgage assistance.
We were able to assist close to
thirty four hundred households
with the fifteen million dollars
with both rental and mortgage
assistance so that that helped
many families out we don't know
that they'll be a back or a big
got demand going forward I think
it all depends on when the
economy opens up and folks get
back to being employed in
addition to that there are some
federal monies that are being
made available for rental
assistance so
Don't know that those will meet
all of the need in their very
restrictive in how they're
currently being applied so we
may need to tap into this
housing trust fund to assist
those families are low income
but yet don't qualify for the
federal monies that may be
available so did Doug unable to
give you a definite answer on
these the demand but it does
give us flexibility to use these
monies for affordable housing in
many different activities rental
and mortgage assistance being
one of those.
Thank you for that Sir.
With that answer your question
Senator what.
I've got a couple more.
Mr chairman and senator
Rodriguez.
Is is it open ended the the
rental assistance is a open
ended.
How long can the same person
keep getting the rental
assistance.
Is pretty open ended which
chairman and senator rob Regan's
Mr Chairman in the past it has
been approximately three months
because that is that was all the
funding that was available in
this case we are going to be
working with the MFA to be there
will be doing the eligibility
criteria for under the rules for
this and it all depends again
how far the money goes but it is
a do you have anything else to
add on that.
Mr Chairman representative would
Senator Rodriguez if I may I'm
going to defer to read back up a
lot of they are she is a R. D..
Director of policy and planning
and she can address the program
guidelines and how we could
potentially use this in the
future.
Senator Wirth thank you for the
question on in the past we have
done and currently are doing a
program that has a maximum
amount of three months.
Therefore considered a marking
the tenth there is a new funding
for coming from the federal
level are that would allow for
more efficient but I am not sure
that we would do any more than
three months for the New Mexico
having Trust Fund due to it just
how precious that funding is and
how much is needed throughout
the state that being said the
bill are eight to MFA to
promulgate the rules after the
legislation is passed.
So.
Mr chairman and and Senator
Rodriguez so again we're pretty
open ended of the staff how much
money is in the trust fund right
now.
Can you tell me that.
Mr Chairman thank you senator
Wirth and before I go on let me
just say that the MFA mortgage
finance authority of the queen
like governmental entity or
agency it does not depend on the
state for its survival it
financially or otherwise they
have the room board and the
favored we are the oversight
committee the mortgage finance
Authority oversight committee in
the interim and they they do
very well with the funding that
they get they actually in it's
like a they they just regenerate
regenerate with and return we
get returns with their own as
they invest it so it's not like
it depends on the state to for
them to go on for another year
the funding is available there
but I'm going to refer to
Rebecca for the rest of your
answer declined to elaborate.
Chair senator would NMSA again
go to the state legislature
every year and a half for New
Mexico housing trust funds and
then usually we loaned the funds
are to affordable housing
development currently we do have
a balance of approximately six
million dollars of New Mexico
housing trust fund at MFA
however I think that MFA is
going through around teacher
determine what type of funding
is needed for portable housing
development so that funding may
be the first are pretty shortly
that that quick answer to your
question is that six million
dollars it and our account right
now of New Mexico have.
If I may elaborate a little bit
Mr Chairman representative would
then because the MFA hopefully
we'll get more federal funds and
so on for this purpose and at
least they would have the
ability to distribute the funds
with this bill otherwise they're
very limited they don't have the
the ability with the criteria to
distribute what they get.
And and.
With that Mr chairman and and
Senator Rodriguez.
We're not putting any limits on
this at all.
We're we're just saying that the
we're going to do it as the need
arises.
And we're hoping for more money
than the six million.
For this fund.
We really have no upper limits
whatsoever other than what we
can gather.
However we may need to gather it
is is that kind of the the
scheme of the thing right now
I'm Mr chairman and senator
Rodriguez Senator Wirth we would
be that you can't do you think
that the balance of the fund
because that made me has used to
regenerate and generate more
money return on this I guess
twenty five to one so it's you
know brainer why it's not like
that this offer affordable
housing are the what they're the
MFA needs the authority to be
able to use any funding with in
the I come from the federal
government or I think that we
are more for example to be able
to use that for the purpose that
it was intended and that was for
rent or mortgage or rent or
mortgages that's nearby have
your arms down out yes without
down payment assistance
weatherization activities and
how the programs services.
I have a total cap or amount to
give you we can do that because
every year we have new
applications and we don't know
how much is going to be applied
for and especially during this
pandemic funding all comes with
in on I don't want to say you
know I sponsor legislation every
year during the committee to be
able to get more funding the
generate twenty five two one
four four will help out New
Mexico and it is that we
received some funding from the
state which helps a lot that
we're not putting enough into
the fund sure because of the
return of the higher tier yeah
it should be a priority over all
the lack of affordable housing.
Thank you can.
Mr chairman that's all my
questions thank you very much.
Thank you Senator
and are you operator I'm sorry
and I apologize we have four
people insult supported a bill
and.
Information you want to let them
in real quickly give them one
minute piece or something real
quick since.
Where at chairman members of the
committee on the call with that
we could have even and I am with
the realtors association of New
Mexico.
And I am.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name Steven I am
CEO of the New Mexico
association of realtors and now
we support this this bill I
think expanding anything for
housing we've seen since two
thousand and six there were
roughly about fourteen thousand
housing permits in two thousand
and six and this last year is
about five thousand permits
almost a third of of the.
Housing is being built so
anything and the median price
December was about two hundred
and forty thousand dollars so
anything that can be done to add
to housing we support so we
stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee next is highly NEA
director asset management for
the greater Albuquerque how the
part housing partnership Kelly.
Thank you chairman Senator this
members of the committee again
my name is Kelly CM the director
of asset management with the
greater Albuquerque housing
partnership and we also stand in
strong support of this Bill SB
twenty seven allowing for
greater flexibility in the use
of the housing trust fund
especially in this time of
greater need due to the national
health pandemic it's a
responsible and proactive move
they will assist households that
have been hardest hit by loss of
income under the public health
orders to maintain housing
stability and focus what income
they do have one other
essentials like food and
medicines and utilities
residents across the state are
playing catch up with rents and
every measure that can be
executed to the system is an
investment in the importance of
housing as a human right thank
you.
Chairman and members of the
committee next to a brief celery
communications strategist for
the New Mexico coalition to end
homelessness.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee I'm here to
represent the New Mexico
coalition to end homelessness
who stand in support of Senate
bill twenty seven the statutory
changes will have significant
positive impact on the community
allowing for the flexibility to
respond to the eviction and
homelessness crisis is a win for
everyone the MFA will be able to
distribute these funds to
provide the assistance needed to
landlords and tenants by filling
crucial gaps left by other
rental assistance and addiction
prevention funding streams this
will improve outcomes for the
community housing retention and
keep people in their homes while
supporting landlords and
recouping money that has been
lost due to a household
financial crisis thank you for
your time Mr chair and members
of the committee.
Chairman members of the
committee last we have Rachel
Biggs.
Policy director with the
Albuquerque health care for the
homeless incorporated.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Rachel
Biggs and I represent
Albuquerque health care for the
homeless and we stand in strong
support Senate bill twenty seven
we've seen first hand the
fallout from COVID nineteen and
how it is exacerbated New
Mexico's housing crisis and
there's an urgent need to invest
in affordable housing to address
a real continuing rise in
homelessness the proposed
amendments to the New Mexico
housing trust fund act would
allow and that they use these
essential funds to address the
current housing crisis our state
is an affect as many as forty
two percent of New Mexicans are
now under threat of eviction and
these changes would allow MFA to
direct urgently needed funding
for rental assistance and other
portable housing needs I urge
your support of SB twenty seven
thank you for your time.
But at.
Thank you Mr chairman and and I
think most of my colleagues have
asked the questions I had I did
have one or two of the questions
According to the national
coalition of state housing
agencies in our analysis here
there sixty to eighty thousand
New Mexicans who can't seem to
make their rent payments right
now in our risk for.
You fiction
If we are getting of the twenty
five to one return on the money
we should have that money into
someone else's said.
We at one time we ended up with
over five hundred million
dollars self for what we put
into that so I think that's
that's great.
My question probably is do we
have the infrastructure and Mr
Hernandez you may need to be
able to just answer this we have
that person in the
infrastructure in the policies
in place to handle these
requests a quickly to get the
money out because there's
nothing worse than having
someone who has applied for this
expecting to be rescued if you
will and it take weeks and weeks
and weeks to get the money so I
assumed there some policies and
some structure built into this
could you share that with this
pleasure.
Mr chairman and I Senator Burt
thank you for the question and
that you are correct the NCSA
Care National Council state
housing agencies did a study and
that indicated between sixty and
eighty thousand household may be
in need of rental or mortgage
assistance here in the state.
With regard to the
infrastructure here at MFA we
have as I mentioned a little
earlier we're able to get
fifteen million dollars out the
door in a very short period of
time I can tell you that it was
a a challenge we had to hire
some additional staff on a
temporary basis similar to what
the New Mexico finance authority
did we also have a a and that
helped us process like I
mentioned earlier about thirty
four hundred applications the R.
we also have a CDBG program
community development block
grant program for some funds are
available we've received
probably close to six thousand
applications they're very
similar experience to what that
New Mexico finance authority
experience we had about that at
least a fifty percent fallout
right was folks that did not
qualify weren't able to process
that will provide the
documentation needed on those
under those restrictive programs
I can tell you that under the
housing trust fund and that we
have such a small amount of
funds available our priority
would be to try to assist these
families with need a rental
assistance with the federal
funds that may come about then
in that case we would need to
hire some additional temps or
contract out some of that two
firms that have the capacity to
do that.
We see that data using the
housing trust fund money for
those folks that may not qualify
for the federal funds which are
very restrictive and use the
housing trust fund monies to
fill the gap while still serving
low income families I'm gonna
turn it over to Rebecca real
quick and she's the one that's
been developing these programs
and very attuned with the
capacity that we have in the the
estimated staffing that we need
to be able to assist this many.
Many households should they come
to to us for assistance.
Thank you for your question I
think you'd be covered most of
the point we do have the
infrastructure in place again we
are running a the G. rental
program to the federal funding
for our and we
also repeat Corona virus relief
funds and we were able to
process those quickly in terms
of the amount of New Mexico
often trust fund we have
currently definitely currently
do you have the staff to get
that money out you know if we
get that fifty to eighty
thousand applications that are
the national coalition a state
housing agency that that that
are at risk of addiction you
know we'll probably need to hire
more people that being said I
don't think we anticipate the
demand to be quite that high and
we will definitely work to be at
all possible to make sure that
people are able to get the
rental assistance they need in a
timely manner.
Okay Mister chairman and and
thank you all for that.
Information at just one make
sure to that the unfortunately
there are bad people trying take
care of issues all the time take
advantage of of situations like
this so I just want to hear from
you guys that you're confident
that you can weed out the the
folks who are right.
Maybe trying to work the system
if you will and that the the
money will go in fact to those
who actually need this money to
help them out.
Thank you Mr chairman as senator
Byrd tech I can assure you that
that is our goal is to set the
program parameters to weed those
folks out to and mentioned a
little earlier that over fifty
percent of those that applied
we're we're we're denied for one
reason or another some just did
not qualify in may have been not
trying to take advantage of the
system I'll let Rebecca again
talk about some of the.
Some of the safety net that we
have there too to assure that
that that that does not happen
so Rebecca can you address that
place.
Mr chair senator Byrd again
thank you for your question we
are very aware of the we're very
aware of what we definitely want
to make sure that the right
people get the money to access
the some of the mechanisms that
we put in place is that we have
the are able to apply but we
actually contact every single
landlord from the landlord we
actually ask for a W. nine of
program participation agreements
that also go through what to
confirm the amount that is
outstanding that in you and then
we also asked for the land for
for one of two things the fully
executed leave for their rat
will showing history of rental
payments for that client.
We do have a lot of measures in
place and if we are the anything
that causes us concern we
definitely dig a little deeper
all the landmarks talk to the
economic and if we cannot make
the people the line will be
declined the application that we
definitely have a lot of
mechanisms in place and where
we're pretty confident in our
system right now.
Mr chairman and and and Rebecca
and and is he both thank you for
that information idea you gave
me some comfort to that we are
going to do our very best to get
the money to the people who
actually need it
and that the money is.
Again filter the right way and
justified in its.
It's this version
I would imagine that landlords
are more than happy to help you
out there.
And I hate to be cynical
sometimes but hopefully there's
no landlord to their clients and
coots to try to get some of this
money that would be a difficult
situation to figure out what
I think the intent is good and I
appreciate the answer to my
question thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you ever I want.
Thank you Mr chairman Sen no
other people on the board Mr
chair I move to pass.
Thank you lord I I just have a
few questions and I'll go back
you that motion.
If
I look at last year's bill and
info there's a little bit a
change of one work what what
need was the work preservation
and for.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
let me get back to you here okay
the preservation is a word that
is used because the MFA the more
the housing trust fund from the
through the MFA and from the MFA
it is used basically college to
produce housing and now it also
through this bill it would be
used not only to produce housing
affordable housing by building
and so on but it used to
preserve housing you for example
reservists you fat you
weatherization program or if you
to preserve
homes for people who are renting
it will be evicted and they will
have a home reserves that we
still living so that's the term
that the MFA out has chosen
would cover the it would be like
an umbrella term to cover the
needs that we're talking about
filling.
Senator Rodriguez hello this on
being adding an additional
program this is just a
requirement maybe you know the
answer is that and expand
requirement by the fan
why why did it change it Mr
chairman thank you very much for
the question not we're not
adding any new specific programs
or any requirement by the feds
were merely using the house
clean trust fund that already
exist to remove some of the
limitations through this bill we
would allow more flexibility for
the MFA to be able to assist
with rental mortgage assistance
for example especially now
during this pandemic so nothing
else changes they already do it
they just have been very strict
limitations based this will be
based on need now specifically
for rental assistance for people
not to get evicted.
So maybe Rebecca can you add to
that so when you go to change
the rules.
That animation language is that
correct.
Sure the policy.
Mr chair and thank you for the
question I get the Senator
Rodriguez is correct the
original New Mexico housing
trust fund language would to
produce powerful so build yet in
which we have done well for many
number of years the preservation
language again and to our income
expansion and add the more more
flexibility to how we can use
the funding in terms of the
rules that we have been working
with the and I think legislative
oversight committee and they
have adopted rules and into the
patient if they adopt rules that
the bill does not happen in the
bill died path that doesn't work
right the preservation language
as one of the purposes of the
New Mexico housing trust fund
that it wouldn't necessarily be
a new program it just kind of
add language that had increased
flexibility and more uses for
the funding for.
So Senator and and and Rebecca
in.
Somebody had a home in it was an
older home and this is a
downtown Santa Fe and they
wanted to preserve it.
The home was five hundred
thousand with that house qualify
under preservation fund or.
They have to meet a certain
threshold or value on.
Mr Chairman this would be based
on eligibility criteria in again
on need and low income and so
certain income eligibility
criteria let me refer to is the
Rebecca had to answer that more
specific.
Not just men
Senator a Rodriguez said thank
you that that that is correct to
the in that particular case the
the house and Santa Fe that may
need some rehab if the family
that lives in there is not low
to moderate income they would
not be eligible for for the
assistance however we are
contemplating using this money
for rehab for families that are
maybe elderly and very low
income across the state to that
is a big need so that would be a
preservation activity of
preserving homes for maybe
elderly that want to age in
place versus moving to a to a
nursing home or something like
that is it is that activity that
we're contemplating on making
eligible should this language
passed.
And then it in to me ask one
more question so so what is
moderateincome.
Anybody making over eighty
thousand dollars in the state of
New Mexico pays eighty percent
of the taxes.
so what is moderate income
according to MFA.
Mr I chairman so I have a table
here that has the income limits
across the state they are a kind
of based on the location and
family size so I'll give you a
couple of quick example so for a
family that lives in Albuquerque
with that maybe three in the
family the maximum income that I
would allow him to qualify would
be forty six thousand eight
hundred in Los crucis for a
similar size family that be
thirty eight thousand seven
hundred so the numbers I would
say on average for the media and
is probably a you know the high
cost areas like I Santa Fe and
Los Alamos would have a little
bit higher number in Santa Fe
Santa Fe it's about fifty
thousand dollars so I would say
just south of a fifty thousand
dollars for a low low income
families across the state on
average.
Does that your question.
Yeah that that the married
couple filing jointly correct
that is correct with that and in
that case say they have a child.
That was a family history that's
not my question reading center
signed one of we want to make
your motion I think we're ready
for your motion.
I moved give passes chairman
second Mr chairman.
We have a new path motion
Senator Steinborn effective
from.
Senator Campos.
That we call the roll.
Senator Burt.
yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Diamond just.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn yes.
What.
Yes No.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
And senator Munoz.
I I need to think about.
Okay senators that is I'm nine
yes one no in one of state.
So the motion carries thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee and thanks to my
presenters and helpers thank
you.
Thank you an Indian Rebecca I
want to tell you a story just
because I am a landlord but I
want to tell you a story about a
Navajo lady who was a nurse who
got COVID right.
We probably have paid her rent
impairment for about eight or
nine months.
And and luckily that I have the
opportunity to help them out
and.
On the
he got COVID enters was put in
the R..
And with one Albuquerque.
And her husband came down the
coast.
The hat to people in the
household that couldn't work and
the that.
we're in trouble with the rent
and I have other tenants that
are like this too because we
have a lot of COVID in the
county but at the end of the day
I want you know that your guys
work out that lady and in
aggregate some of the rent
with you guys and help it much
you paid her for her rant.
Your hard work
you help that family overcomes
and situation.
And I think we just right before
the holidays.
We were out actually delivering
Christmas basket Drug.
In in.
I had never really broke down
but when that family came back
into it you know Senator because
you again at the Lincoln MFA
because you help the.
Out and show that you know it's
all about all about greed and
the people NMFA help
I want you to know that there's
a lot of thankful people out
here for what you're doing and
they appreciate it made a
difference in their life in
Mexico as we move forward.
Because I am in that situation
and I'm speaking to a girl
balance on our right.
because we all have to help
people in their.
And so I want you guys to know
what I want to tell your staff
to build that what you're doing
that help people and it makes a
difference in their life even it
was during the holidays which
was the greatest help your
property give I want you guys
and your staff know that if you
need to figure out if we need to
add more money for your aching
feet for staff that will get
that sent maybe let's circle
around the next day or two and
I'll call either you were back
at make sure that that you have
the staff to handle.
Thank you for your presentation
and I appreciate it.
Chairman if I may just stand and
inject a little bit here Senator
Rodriguez here to say that I do
have a bill which we have every
year requesting funding more
funding for the housing trust
fund and the request was twelve
million dollars and again to get
the twenty five to one return
hopefully we can get something
we may not be able to get the
twelve million but in the mouth
is leveraged with a lot of money
so we get a the high returning
hopefully we can put some money
in there for them to continue to
assist in this regard thank you.
Thank you senator Ortiz we're
gonna go right to capital outlay
and.
Miss Martinez and.
Right you want to go ahead and
start off off I think Mickey how
in the with me you are on
credit.
Yes Sir.
I guess.
Mr chairman my on this is Linda.
You're on okay good afternoon
Mister chairman and members of
the committee.
Of for the public the benefit of
the public because I know most
of you legislators know me my
name is Linda Keogh I am
currently a consultant to the
legislative finance committee to
assist Mr Stevie Olson who is
the capital LESC capital outlay
analyst of I'll be assisting him
or have been assisting him with
capital L. issues of in
throughout the session.
Mr Olson and I will be
presenting an overview of the
severance tax bond capacity for
capital expenditures that are
available during the twenty
twenty one session.
Of the highlights of state
agency in higher education
capital outlay requests the
store the current outstanding
capital outlay funds and other
capital issues.
for committee members the
information that will be
presenting today is I believe in
your packets that are titled
attachments eight through is G..
And the public can access the
documents on the LESC website.
Yes for the of twenty two budget
policy in performance analyses
and will be referring to
information in volume three of
the budget documents.
And if Stevie will share the
screen I'll be starting.
With the demonstration of
severance tax bond capacity that
has been determined by LFC.
Of the taxation revenue
department and department of
finance and administration
consensus revenue estimators.
You'll see first on line one is
the total senior severance tax
bond capacity totalling five
hundred and thirty eight point
five million dollars for fiscal
year twenty twenty one.
Then on lines two three and
four.
It lists the percentages that
are deducted from the total for
earmarked funds.
A total of forty eight point
five million dollars for the
water project fund.
Twenty four point two million
dollars for the colonias
infrastructure fund and twenty
four point two million dollars
for the tribal infrastructure
fund.
I'm lines five and six this the
authorized but on this on issued
number of severance tax bonds
those bonds were not ready to
proceed and so they've not been
issued at this time.
Online can.
It is a hundred sixty six
million dollars that
supplemental severance tax bond
money that is earmarked for
public school infrastructure.
Online eleven as members will
recall pursuant to legislation
that was passed in two thousand
sixteen the legislature may
appropriate up to twenty five
million dollars of supplemental
severance tax fund capacity for
instructional materials or
transportation.
I'm gonna pass over lines
through fifteen through thirty
five for of Mr Olson will be
giving you an overview of the
state agency higher education
and other state funding requests
that we received during the
fall.
At the very bottom of the page
Mr Chairman on page on line
thirty nine.
Is the total proposed in the
staff framework totaling two
hundred and twenty three million
dollars.
That total includes nineteen
point five million dollars in
other state funds and three
point five million dollars in
general fund.
Finally on last online forty is
the two hundred and thirty three
point four million dollars that
remains for of policymakers
decisions.
Mr chairman of members of the
committee if there are no
questions relating to the
capacity available for the
twenty one twenty twenty one
session I'll turn the next
presentation over to Mr Olson
he'll give you an overview of
the capital funding request to
date and other capital issues.
Good.
Thank you Mr
I'm going to begin on line
thirteen the uses of the
severance tax bond capacity.
please note that these are just
the highlights the full
framework with all one hundred
and thirty nine projects is
included in attachment State
it's seven pages long it in your
packet on the full framework is
also included in the legislative
finance committee publication
volume three page miss Keyhoe
referred to previously I want to
look across lines.
Fourteen and fifteen the green
columns here are the LFC staff
framework the first call on our
proposed probation out of
severance tax bond capacity the
severance the second column is
other state funds in general
funds the third column is the
total of those two columns then
the fourth column which is
yellow or orange this is what we
know about the executive
recommendation for
so the capital bill and then
finally is the notes column
which will connect a few of
these pro appropriations to
other bills and other
appropriations that are before
you during the session.
Wine sixteen is a roll up of the
judicial projects
these are recommended by the
administrative office of the
courts include magistrate
district courts we also see
presentations from the Supreme
Court and the Bernalillo county
metropolitan court the largest
appropriation is phase one of a
new Santa Fe magistrate court
for more information please see
attachment do which is a
break out of all of those
projects wine seventeen is
the fully funding of the
requests of the aging and long
term service department in the
second column you'll see seven
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars for general fund that's
for regency projects in again
attachment he in your packet
provides a break out of all of
the senior center
appropriations.
wine eighteen it is for the
higher education institution and
special schools LFC staff is
proposing funding thirty five
projects totaling forty seven
point one million dollars across
thirty one higher education
institutions and special school
campuses not higher education
department recommended twenty
nine point seven million dollars
in funding when that the
estimated capacity was
significantly less the LFC
framework provides the same up
were more capital funding for
every school relative to the AGD
recommendation.
Major projects include fire
alarms and roof improvements at
UNM's main campus those total
four point two million dollars
I'm utility tunnel improvements
at New Mexico state university's
main campus that's for three
million dollars and campus wide
energy upgrades at New Mexico
tech which is two point five
million dollars another
appropriation I want to
highlight in in the higher ed is
three million dollars for the
UNM comprehensive cancer center
to replace radiation and
oncology equipment that is being
decommissioned the funding for
the cancer center project is
proposed in tandem with the
twenty two million dollar
cigarette tax financing proposal
through the New Mexico finance
authority the the funding source
was what was used to originally
billed.
The the cancer center in
Albuquerque.
Winds nineteen and twenty are
both appropriations for twelve
million dollars for health life
and safety issues at corrections
and the department of health.
Wine twenty one is ten million
dollars for the local economic
development act to be dispersed
statewide in addition to this
appropriation the LFC
recommendation has seventeen
point five million dollars in
the general appropriations act
which is often called house bill
two.
Line twenty two the.
During the cap of the executive
Syrians three agencies
collectively requested thirteen
point six million dollars to
renovate the pair of building
which is across the street from
the capitol into a field office
for children youth and families
in the early childhood education
and care department this
Appropriation would be a
significant departure from the
capitol building Planning
Commission guidelines so our
framework provides seven million
dollars for the renovation of
the administrative portion of
those offices.
Line twenty three is a
includes five million dollars
for the department of public
safety to complete their crime
lab and an additional two point
three million dollars for
facilities statewide why twenty
four is the General Services
departments
Fund for capital renewal
improvements across the state
owned and operated facilities
that's for six million dollars.
Wine twenty five is the
department of cultural affairs
this is appropriations for four
million dollars in covers life
health and safety infrastructure
improvements across facilities
that they own and operate I do
want to note that there is an
additional five million dollars
in SB seventy which is the
governmental gross receipts tax
diversion from the public
project revolving fund for the
department of cultural affairs
infrastructure funds.
Line twenty six is the a request
made by the early childhood
education and care department
this is for the Albuquerque
early childhood service center
and renovation this four point
seven million dollars completes
that project.
Additionally it moves ECECD out
of leased space in Albuquerque
and move them into state owned
space.
R. Y. twenty seven is two
million dollars for safety
improvements at St cemeteries
and memorials.
Wine twenty eight is to the
Department of infrastructure I'm
sorry of information technology
which is a public safety and
radiate radio communication
systems for ten million dollars
right below that online twenty
nine is the statewide broadband
appropriation for ten million
dollars LFC was also
recommending ten million dollars
in the general appropriations
act please note that in the
executive column you'll see two
hundred million dollars which we
heard from the governor during
her state of the state speech.
On line thirty you'll see the
energy minerals and natural
resource department's request to
remediate the Carlsbad brine
well we have four million
dollars in from S. T. B.
capacity there are five million
additional dollars proposed
three million of those are in
the GA for from general fund and
two million are from the
corrective action fund also in
the general appropriations act
all of these funds are
contingent on a one hundred
percent local match which would
fully fund EMNRD's request.
Line thirty one has the public
Education Department school bus
replacement request these are
all out of other state funds
half will come out of the
Volkswagen mid environmental
mitigation trust and half of
them will come out of the public
school capital outlay funds
right below that is a four
million dollar appropriation to
pre K. classrooms
in infrastructure again this
comes out of the public school
capital outlay funds.
On page online thirty three
you'll see the office of the
state engineers request for the
Indian Water Rights settlement
which is nine million dollars
and below that we have another
request from the office of the
state engineer for dam
rehabilitation for publicly
owned dams at five million
dollars.
Again these are just the
highlights the entire framework
is provided an attachment see if
you want to see the hundred and
thirty nine appropriations and
we of course welcome questions
on that I want to just remind
you miss key already went over
this but here on the battle
bottom lines we have the net
just to be capacity which is
four hundred and thirty three
million the total proposed in
the LFC framework is two hundred
million and that leaves two
hundred and thirty three million
four policy maker decisions I'm
gonna scroll down to attachment
B. which explains much of what
we've said in words so if you
prefer sentences verses the
spreadsheet I totally understand
Miskito covered what's under the
first section I covered what was
under the second section with
the exception of this last line
that I want to make everyone
aware of not included in the
framework the LFC recommendation
includes two hundred and fifty
million dollars in the general
appropriations act for the state
road funds and the local
infrastructure road funds.
And if I scroll down to page two
of attachment B. I just want to
review quickly are unspent
proceeds regarding capital
outlay staff calculated as of
November twenty twenty at one
point four billion dollars in
capital appropriations were
outstanding an additional four
hundred and seven million
remains outstanding in
supplemental severance tax bonds
for public schools and the
general obligation bonds
approved by the electorate in
November and scheduled to be
sold this spring or summer will
add one hundred and ninety eight
point five million dollars to
the unspent balance it's
important for me to know that a
portion of these outstanding
funds are encumbered or even
spent LFC tracks expenditures
once they've been fully
processed by the department of
finance and administration which
is the final step in processing
expenditures.
Putting these outstanding
balances to work we'll create a
return on investment through
improvements in health safety
education and other critical
government services the money's
also stimulus to the
construction industry statewide.
Many of the slow moving projects
are the result of lack of
planning prioritisation
coordination among governments
piecemeal funding projects and
lack of projects to execute
those projects.
Finally I'm Mr chair and
Senators I want to direct you to
the final two bullets at the
direction of leadership we have
included new language in the
introduction of the capital bill
we are calling this the
preamble.
To promote the efficient and
effective use of capital
appropriations general fund
capital projects will be
reverted on last five percent of
the total appropriation is
encumbered by the end of the
fiscal year twenty twenty two I
want to emphasize that this only
affects general fund
appropriations not this the much
larger severance tax bonds
appropriations and it also
provides approximately fourteen
months for these projects to
encumber five percent of the
total appropriation the LFC
recommendation currently
includes three point four six
million dollars in general fund
appropriations in this year's
capital bill the appropriations
include emergency roof repairs
as well as study planning and
design phases staff expects
these general fund
appropriations in the capital
bill to be fully encumbered by
the end of fiscal year twenty to
if not fully expand.
Finally did there's also
additional language that will
affect all appropriations and it
requires all appropriations I'm
sorry requires all fiscal agents
to receive the authorizing state
agencies approval before
entering into a binding third
party contract this addition
supports the model accounting
practices already in place
across state agencies but
provides clarity.
I'm.
Six Mr chair and Senators as I
said attachments C. is the
framework it's seven pages long
attachment do is the judiciary
capital outlay requests broken
out.
The attachment he is the agent
of long term service departments
requested broken out again so
you can see them all.
And then we have a tentative
time line for the capital outlay
bill production which was
provided by the Legislative
Council Service and attachment
G. is a memo provided completed
by the legislative finance
committee staff makayla.
Fisher completed this and on the
last page you'll see the table
which she compiled of existing
broadband funds that are either
incoming or currently available.
Mr chair with that miss Keyhoe
and I stand for questions.
Thank you Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Olson this Keogh
I want to ask.
In reference to the broadband
piece of this is become very
fashionable and they worry under
Gary to be pro broadband now I
want to spend a lot of money on
broadband infrastructure but I
personally have not sat through
a conversation where we've
openly discussed what what is
that capital money actually used
for insofar as the state is not
a direct provider of broadband
services I struggle to really
understand you know when the
governor calls for legislators
to dedicating was half the
capital to broadband you know
it's a little frustrating to the
not in the same sense from the
executive
after that sort of flippant
remark to that direct us on how
that money is actually spent so
from LFC perspective.
When the legislature's talking
about spending money capital
money on broadband what are we
spending the money on I Greg
sent like rubber hits the road
where is this money going to go
Mr Chairman and Mr Olson.
Senator Candelaria let me let me
just interject something in
Stephen in an Adrian from Senate
finance are working on a broad
then.
What out there in and I think we
can shoot chain email because it
is so broad we believe there it
roughly five hundred million to
seven hundred million thing out
there broadband currently
through federal money that I am
I will have two hundred million
and so if we send you a sheet
with all that kind of gathered
up and we're still trying to
figure out what do is plan is
that may help because it's very
confusing I think Stevie have at
the bottom of the list of all
the projects and in work that
and we're probably going to hear
just one meeting of just
broadband and and how we get the
most bang for our Buck with the
federal match in that info sent
a letter you can I want to go to
at that question but will gather
all that information for you but
there is roughly five hundred
million to seven hundred million
that we found sitting everywhere
in the state of New Mexico for
broadband.
So Mr chairman thank you I guess
I guess I just wanted idea of
what we spending this money on
are we buying rights of where we
I mean the I just don't
fundamentally understand why the
state is you know where and what
we're gonna spend this money on
that's never been explained it's
very popular to be pro broadband
but I don't think we've only had
the conversation of what that
money actually gets spent on Mr
Chairman said Mr also just help
me understand broadly speaking.
If we're gonna spend public
money to increase broadband
deployment what is that money
need to be spent on.
Mr chair Senator Candelaria
legislative finance committee
staff has asked very similar
questions about creating the
money will go to what it will go
to why it is go wide as
prioritized in those ways we
have not received a prioritized
list of projects for broadband
and so we're not I I can't
answer your question with
positivity the ten million
dollars that was previously
appropriated to broadband as
part gone to projects in Kochi
Pueblo it's gone to projects in
the southern part of the state
with Jack all and other
infrastructure projects but you
know this is a question we we
want to answer that the do it
strategic plans as not have the
prioritize projects as as I said
we're also concerned about the
implications related to the anti
donation clause and how that
impacts related to either
providing broadband to private
households or the internet
service providers that are look
lane fiber and so these are
these are questions that
we have brought up misty how do
you do you want to add on.
No Mr chairman I did reach out
to the department of finance
administration to ask if there
was a strategic plan in
implementation plan who would
have oversight over the money
and some of the same questions
that senator condylar asked but
that information wasn't
available at this time
we will be working with the
department of finance
administration to come as close
to possible on the capital
outlay funding as possible and
we hope to get these answers of
for you in the full legislature
up before before these issues
actually come before you and
other committees thank you Mr
chairman.
All stop asking about broadband
but I think you get a sense of
where my concern is which is
it's one thing to sign your name
on and want to be politically
popular but it's another thing
to actually know what that
money's going to be spent on and
are we actually spending it in
the right way I mean my concern
Mr Chairman with these billion
dollar proposals for broadband
is you know we technology may
leapfrog the state in the sense
that you have a lot of companies
were now looking at can we just
launched satellites using
commercial airlines and deliver
broadband from out on up week
you know that doesn't require
the the the the the fiber and
the tremendous capital
investment for example so part
of me is concerned we gonna
build up a tremendous
infrastructure and it by the
time we're done technology's
going of leapfrogged us with
much less expensive much less
capital expensive investments so
I appreciate the work of the
committee on that Mr Chairman
regarding the recommendation for
two hundred and fifty million in
the in the LFC rack that's
nonrecurring general fund
correct for roads.
Yes yes Sir.
And and I guess the question is.
Why I mean to have fifty million
is is a significant amount of
money going to roads and I
understand.
You know this legislature
putting money behind roads is
been like you know gospel for
generations but from an economic
stimulus and development
standpoint I mean I I have to be
very Frank I I really don't
think roads is where we get the
biggest economic bang for our
Buck sorry we just don't
how did LESC come up on the two
hundred fifty million dollar
number
and.
To me it just seems like a very
large number that may need to
get moved around a bit.
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria can help with that.
We worked with the department of
transportation on major
infrastructure projects and
heavy maintenance
whether or not they could get
that money out the door quickly
and they do have list of
projects all around the state
with deficient roads that they
can as soon as the money is
available shovel ready and so
from the standpoint of making
major investments to upgrade the
safety of our roads it would
continue to employ large numbers
of contractors and have.
That level of stimulative effect
within the economy so as opposed
to some other projects that may
not be ready to go and and might
set there when you look at the
capital outlay balances.
The same was true for local
governments
don't get an extra forty million
a motor vehicle excise taxes in
addition to the amount that's
and House Bill to and their
that'll put them in about
capacity of what the DOT's as
they can push out in much needed
local roads very quickly over
the next year and a half.
Mr chairman I I guess I
understand you know this is
always a place we want to push
money out and but I just I just
at some point think there's a
declining rate declining rate of
return
you know if we're talking about
things that move the Economic
needle I think we need to
broaden our our thinking from
just roads and I've been a
legislature for eight years it's
very easy just to say but the
money and routes
you know I and I I'm not sure
that's the best policy you know
all I'll say it now for all the
talk of the urban rural divide
in the legislature this is a
prime example of the urban areas
cross subsidizing rural local
responsibilities which is what's
and if this money is coming from
gross from general fund it's
gross receipts money this is
money coming from the urban
centers in Albuquerque Los
crucis and Santa Fe and cross
subsidizing and I think that's
great but I wish we would tone
down the the the top you know
the chatter about how much
there's this animosity between
rural and urban areas as we all
crossed funding each other one
way or another and this is a
prime example of of urban areas
having to cross subsidized to
the tune of a quarter billion
dollars local road initiatives
that should be the
responsibility of local
governments.
last question I have Mr
chairman.
regarding.
Regarding the
The the the the the amount that
we claim is unspent outstanding
capital outlay of one point four
billion.
Do you have Mr chairman if I may
just staff have kind of an aging
report.
On on those numbers because.
You know we.
If something's been sitting
there for a year that's I think
substantively different than
it's been sitting there for
three years five years or more
will be possible we have to go
through it right now but to send
around to the committee if
available sort of that aging
data so we have an idea
where it just where on that time
distribution these projects lie.
Mr chair Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria the short answer is
yes we can provide that for you
the majority of the money is two
thousand nineteen in two
thousand twenty appropriations
but I can get you and the
committee the exact numbers so I
mean I think that means that in
that that to me it's like I get
that you know I get that it's
also like around this time of
year we we like to jump up and
down about how terrible capital
outlay process these are I'm a
firm defender of the of the
member at process I think that
fundamentally empowers all of us
and all of our constituents to
have a say in how this money is
appropriated but again to my
point you know if it's one point
four billion that's been sitting
there for twenty nineteen and
twenty twenty that's also very
different picture to the public
benefit was one point four
billion and it's been sitting
there since two thousand and
eight right so the more detail
and data we have I think is is
is always better thank you Mr
chairman no other questions.
Mr chairman if I may I'd like to
add to that please.
Senator condylar and other
members of I'd like to clarify
that when we say outstanding one
point whatever billion dollars
that's the money that is still
out there it doesn't mean that
some of it is not being spent it
that there is a great deal of
that money that is progressing
unfortunately the legislative
finance committee with the
quarterly reports that we
developed for you all they do
not always can't at this point
give us the amount of money that
is actually encumbered and in
progress I would venture to say
of the two thousand nineteen
money of the general fund which
of course would like to see go
out quicker because those are
monies that could be used I mean
for raising our our of revenue
estimates are set aside monies
in other more important things
but I would venture to say that
there's probably about seventy
million dollars that has not
been encumbered of no grant
agreement signed up but I'm
taking a wild guess at that
based on data that we've
reviewed of the department of
finance and administration has
let us know that with our next
quarterly report they are going
to try to give us the amount
that is actually already under
grant agreement and we're funds
have been encumbered meaning
that they do have a third party
contractual agreement of to get
work done so I just wanted to
clarify the difference between
what we say is outstanding
versus what may not be expended.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Miskito.
Thank you Senator Candelaria
next time I go on a trip from
Deming the Gallup all taking
Cherry the road but once you
leave Albuquerque you're pretty
much in rural New Mexico or year
being down the roads with semis
on I. forty.
Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman
I think it was so Mr Charles
responded to some of the
questions on the.
On the two hundred and fifty
from the road from.
Charles do we have the
information not phone what the
trip report shows for New Mexico
as far as on.
You know what the needs are into
infrastructure for poor road
system.
Which.
Charles lease.
It's Charles are you there I see
an agency is based there but
maybe that there Center involved
maybe stepped down well anyway
of.
Well Mr chairman and members of
the they've done to C. will.
So on the two hundred and fifty
thousand with that cool strictly
to the D. O. T. or do we have
information if you would go to
the six districts.
Miskito did do you want to take
that one Mr Chairman what we
know what we know is that the
money will go straight to the
state road improvement fund.
And we do know that some of the
priorities that are being
developed by the department of
transportation are in
coordination with all six of
highway districts in New.
We don't have it right today but
we could get you the information
and so far what is those major
road the major roads that are
waiting for the money that that
haven't been sufficiently funded
some of the more aid plan and
design in engineering completed
but don't have the money for
construction we can get that
information for you.
Mr chairman of.
Ample of the project that's
ready to go today they've got
seventy five million two hundred
million that are ready to go
today that they don't have
money.
I'm suspend a good example of
that is level how to.
You know they've completed the
bottom of the hill and the top
of the hill in the middle of the
hell where it's really unsafe is
would be a project that they can
start to spring same thing with
a number of large interchanges
and around Albuquerque I forty
projects there's projects down
in southeast New Mexico that
they need additional funding for
the but but they do have that
list we can get you.
Mr chairman of the members so
the only part that I just want
all you know I want to mention
to the member states that all.
It looks like two hundred and
fifty million is a lot of money
when it comes to roll it goes
very fast.
And those serving as chairman of
the transportation committee for
many years and really seeing the
needs and seen the reports and
then the we get the deficiency
reports on bridges on the
interstate and then also just
recording all the way down to
the local level.
Our needs statewide they're
huge.
And you know most of you know
this but you know maybe for new
members so this is one
department that never saw an
increase for like twenty seven
years.
And the it's not a department
that is funded through the
general fund and it's just
recently in the last few years
that there has been no you know
some all of.
Funds that have been placed to
to the Department you nobody you
know using the general fund to
using the service tax the other
part is the on the other
projects that we've had before
you know the state bonded itself
to quite level and that's why we
have such huge payments you know
that we have to pay back you
know that heard the department
because you know all that's our
first obligation is to pay in
our debt services so you know
for the member so you know this
is something that is as far as
infrastructure there's many
needs for infrastructure but
without our highways and without
a interstate without our bridges
being in compliance you know and
it's also a safety part you know
that once we reach a certain
level also it turns into a
liability you know it is in the
you know I myself you know have
tried their some other members
the legislature tried for quite
a few years to do an incentive
through Racine the gas tax and
we have not been successful but
I have a a bill this year again
that would just go back again to
it's not even at the level of
replacing what was so repealed
you know during the Johnson
administration the this is a a
one cent for guests to one for
diesel for the next five years
so just understanding how big
the needy is seeing on that part
you know I think the all members
have to really just of.
Take time and just really read a
lot of these reports that you
can see where we are state thank
you Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you Senator Gonzales
Public.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
not going to of the labor the
point but as we move forward and
Sierra seven springs out of a
very good point over the years
we've seen the growing need if
you will for infrastructure
improvements across the board
and Miss Vigil knows this very
well as we move forward as well
what is the other issue is that
I would like to bring up is the
area of
are down rehabilitation process
throughout New Mexico we have
about two hundred fifty million
dollars worth of improvements on
public facilities public dance
that are needed with a high
level of urgency and many of
those stands so I hope as we go
forward we're not just looking
at the five million dollars to
the LFC at this time but that we
do get into the area of how
we're going to plan also the
rehabilitation ensembles some of
these as well I could go on when
it comes to capital outlay but
the need with all of it is
Center once and this is
indicated let's read the reports
let's move forward and at the
same time insure that we do have
the proper planning because
capital outlay definitely is one
of the our the surgeon issues as
we move forward to stimulate not
only in our development but as
you will continue with the
hiring process for those people
who choose to go in the
construction and provide
materials so Mr chairman members
of the committee and
respectfully that's all I have
at this time thank you.
Thank you senator couples
Senator Steinborn thank you Mr
chairman so when I when you said
outstanding projects I thought
you were complimenting him that
you thought they were really
great projects and now I come to
understand that you need
something totally different so
well I have to consider that
LESC first off thank you for the
good presentation it's really
fascinating when you start
digging into these attachments
and sting.
Seeing where the money spread
around and that's why at why I
asked to be on this committee
because they're all policy
decisions and it's and it's
really a lot of good in a lot of
opportunity to do good around
the state so thank you for the
presentation I I just want to
make one comment on broadband
which is that every day I read
about new satellites being put
in this guy.
by starlink by
Ilan must company really
changing the nature of broadband
situation to be able to provide
broadband to people living in
rural areas all over the world
and so I've asked this question
and I I guess I just put it out
there to the extent that LFC is
kind of looking at technology
and I realize that we don't have
our technology department on the
line here but I just wanna put
it out there that things are
changing technologies changing
in this.
In this particular around and
how does that figure into what
we're looking at doing as far
as.
You know even subscribing to
hate hate the thought of that
but you know rather than paying
millions of dollars for
infrastructure that I presume
will then be used by the private
sector so people at the end of
the day are still going to have
to subscribe.
As.
If it's even it's even an
alternative.
How does
How did how are how do are we
taking advantage of companies
like starlink and looking at
those options as alternatives to
spending.
Money that we may not have to
spend for infrastructure.
So thank you you're welcome
answer that Mr call center but
you don't have to.
Thank you Mr Mr chair senator I
I would just add one small piece
Micaela Fischer who's our
evaluator that authored the
broadband memo she does refer to
some of the concerns that you
have and she says that are
appropriations should be
technology neutral in that it
should be flexible as different
technologies are being developed
and could serve different parts
of the state in different
capacities so LFC is considering
that I don't think we have any
terrific answers for you but
we're we're trying to be aware
and thoughtful of your concern
sure thank you and the
technology is changing by the
day and the opportunities
available to us in the year will
be different than they are now
and so we're we're kind of a.
Solving today's problems
yesterday problem with their
Indian inspiration MRI I just
want to put that out there is
this is an area were being asked
and a lot of money things are
changing fast.
So anyway thank you all very
much appreciate it thank you Mr.
Thank you Sierra or we have
Senator Pat Woods next.
Thank you madam chairman I just
wanted to reiterate what the.
Senator Campos has said the
Santa Cruz dam in particular
could.
Where will be the second worst
disaster in the United States of
that thing breaks it is not if
it breaks wind breaks if we
don't do something about it.
And those people up there can
not.
On that by their shelves.
Capital is always been long term
money and operational money is
is certainly not present value
money.
We have to do something to keep
the projects up and if we just
keep letting.
Your capital your infrastructure
fall down you're never making
any headway and I don't want to
get an argument over urban and
rural divide.
No need in.
I just wonder thank you for your
presentation thank you all and
thank you for helping me the
many times you have helped me.
And don't tell stories about me
they're all board.
Thank you madam chairman.
Thank you very much Senator
Wirth appreciate your comments
okay I I don't see anyone else
on the list here let me just
Raul can make sure I'm not
getting any one okay no I don't
think so do we have anything
else to staff it like the
president or anyone before we
move on to the next item.
It seems like we can move on
thank you very much to the staff
in for the questions asked
involved presenters yeah we're
going to move on now to the next
item on the agenda.
So we've got
the department of cultural
affairs.
Coming up next.
Trying to get the zoom
participant list here
straightened out.
Thank you very much
And we move on to the next item
that we have a.
Cultural affairs here.
If we cut off.
You madam chair are we on the
judiciary.
Well after the capital outlay
money again to show department
of cultural affairs before we
move on to the judiciary so we
still have that item my Jetta
hasn't changed I don't have it
and updated Jan FY gathered was
to have them madam chair members
of the committee and the
legislative finance committee
I'm the department of cultural
affairs might be presenting and
house appropriations and finance
right now I know they were
scheduled in there too so I'm
not sure if that.
That may be why the delay is
happening here okay our IT well
I think what we're gonna do that
then it madam chair and members
of the committee and with by
indicating that they the DPA
away at hounded rescheduled at
earlier today thank you bye
noted that their membership at
our on the call right now I
apologize for that the Senate
standing.
Thank you very much for
indicating that we don't have
any data inject them
Representative was that last so
they're still on here okay thank
you very much for that
information that we're going to
move on to the overview of the
judiciary appropriations L. we
have
Chief Justice Michael V. hill
here and RT Arthur Pepin the
administrative office of the
courts that director are you
here make sure the staff is.
Chairman searching for your
somewhere don't see him yet but
I was born March what.
Your honor.
Yes.
We are in the meeting and we're
gonna do is proceed with a
presentation that will the last
two questions that they are in
thank you are in need yes hello.
I'm sure I'll defer to the chief
another seven trouble with his
audio.
Looking for him here I can hear
him.
Now.
Nate then are the master you
problems with Chief Justice
trying to get in.
On the zone.
At madam chair members of the
committee I don't see him on the
damn I know you with on the
meeting when we at darted back
at you may have got not I can
that be sent him the link would
like.
Okay we do that and and then
just wait a couple of minutes
and see if you can get in and if
not we would just have to
proceed sure we will you but we
sorry chair chief we can see
about we can't hear you maybe
you want to read rearrest.
For some reason I won't on mute.
Can't hear it judge.
Yes this.
Don't know why.
I think I maybe you are muted
now hardly that number if you're
your
it just didn't on mute that's
why I'm suggesting maybe he
once every so often come back on
because it won't on mute.
Yeah yeah I need to
your
item.
And we're.
Talking more with program.
Indication.
Wait a couple of minutes and see
if we can figure that out this
Rep D. Wonda when he'll be
coming back.
Needy.
I think what we'll do here is
that
Is just down.
Proceed let me ask one more time
Nate then that you don't see
anything different right as
we're waiting for the Chief
Justice to be able to weigh in
into them.
At madam chair members of the
committee at the practically
rejoining the meeting right now.
Can you hear me now yes.
Great wonderful.
Yeah we're happy you made it you
were able to get in you so much
you're very welcome glad you
made it all right we have you
Chief Justice and are you can't
how are you are there have been
here they of fees that you can
proceed to make your
presentation thank you madam
chairman good afternoon madam
chairman and members of the
Senate finance committee.
And thank you for the
opportunity to appear you before
you today to give you an
oversight or an overview of the
budget request made by the
judiciary in the unified budget.
These are terrible times but the
judiciary has responded with the
twenty four hours of the
governor's declaration of a
public emergency the Supreme
Court issued its first
administrative order to ensure
that the courts remain open all
keeping them safe I always
public health and safety
protocols from March to August
twenty twenty district
magistrate and metropolitan
courts conducted over two
hundred thirty eight thousand
hearings.
Using technology remote
proceedings and other
efficiencies in the same time
frame the district courts and
magistrates.
Courts conducted over thirteen
thousand trials.
In addition to emerge the courts
emergency response team reviewed
and approved reduced operation
plans for all the courts right
person perceives this included
all thirteen judicial district.
Judicial district courts metro
court eighty one the the civil
court and thirty three probate
courts safety protocols include
procedures to minimize the risk
of X. of exposure to comment
include screening questions and
temperature checks at the door
to every coral courthouse
mandatory mass social distancing
is totally plexiglass were
necessary and disinfecting high
touch services we also provide
all courts with necessary
signer.
And supplies masks and it's
Representative titers ensure
supplies in the first quarter of
the year the juries the
judiciary spent over two and a
half million dollars on COVID
response efforts for mass your
supplies for monitor sanitizers
plexiglas barriers computers
cameras and our Mr cheap steam
spent over sixty nine thousand
person hours.
I am also proud reported that
the judiciary submitted for
reimbursement for costs restored
to the cares Act knowing that
the.
We would go to the general fund
and not to the judiciary as a
result I'm proud to report that
the judiciary cost seventy three
thousand dollars to be
reimbursed to the general fund.
The recent special session
corporate conditioner is fiscal
year.
Twenty twenty one budget by
almost three point seven three
percent and stripped away seven
hundred and thirty six thousand
nine hundred dollars to fund I
statutorily created.
Judgeships we are we are asking
this court to be restored
especially resulting in the flat
budget for all our courts this
will enable the judiciary to
continue streamlining case
processing expanding technology
and making court processes.
Your for the public to access
and to fully open re opened
after the pandemic.
We're very thankful to the
legislative finance committee
for recommending modest
increases for certain district
courts Mr David Abbey
understaffed and I'd like to
give us particular shut out to
Amanda Dick Peddie they
represent the best of
professionalism and their
expertise is beyond question I
thank you for their help and
cooperation are working with the
courts in developing the budgets
that are before you with that
may I please highlight certain
requests that are of particular
importance to the judiciary.
First of all there's the fire
the judgeships this.
You're twenty twenty one the
legislature created and
appropriated recurring funds for
five new judgeships based on the
workload study of the national
center for state courts.
These positions other costs are
not discretionary because they
were created by statute the cost
for funding these judge judicial
positions is one point two three
six one million two hundred
thirty seven thousand nine
hundred dollars.
House bill one of the emergency
sessions.
The recurring funding and made a
one time allocation of five
hundred thousand dollars to the
judiciary for the judgeship.
It's small increases in the
first second third and twelve
districts partially restored
these the current funds and we
ask is our number one priority
that these funds be fully
restored as recurring funds to
each of these districts.
Second I'd like to talk about
pre trial.
Services.
Judges always have the final say
on pre trial release fiscal year
twenty with legislative support
the judiciary initiated pilot
programs in Santa at San Juan
County to use a data driven tool
called the public safety
assessment or PSA to assist
judges and measuring the
likelihood that an individual
and arrested arrested and
charged with a crime what will
one committed to crime.
If we're if released especially
a violent crime and chose the
likelihood that the individual
will appear at future court
hearings.
The judiciary has also
established a centralized
operations center and this is
the first of its kind in the
entire United States it complete
check criminal.
Your background check the state
and FBI databases and performs
an assessment of flight risk in
your criminal activity if
released these results are
available to judges before the
for the.
Make sure that initial
appearance in court to determine
conditions of release thank you
institute for public research we
reviewed six thousand four
hundred cases using the PSA and
Bernalillo county from July of
two thousand seventeen to March
of two thousand nineteen.
Its findings are first more than
four out of five defendants from
Bernalillo county were not
arrested for a crime all up pre
trial release second ninety six
percent were not accused of a
violent crime while release
third eighty three percent.
He had no criminal activity of
any kind or something as simple
as a text message reminder for a
court hearing can reduce failure
to appear rates by twenty five
percent to thirty six percent.
In the pilot programs which the
legislature funded.
One thousand one hundred and
eight cases were open and close
with pre trial release.
Using the PSA.
In Santa Fe County there was Hey
in.
Ninety percent release right it.
And nine percent appearance rate
and that eighty seven percent
public safety right is San Juan
County there was an eighty
three.
Percent release right and eighty
nine appearance right internet
one percent public safety right.
We are now seeking nine hundred
and fifty thousand dollars to
expand this evidence based
pretrial services in requests
you don't go and Luna can.
Counties which on the sixth
judicial district and I don't
Ana County which is the third
judicial district.
Operating these funds.
We will save counties money
enhance public safety and reduce
we arrests just as a small
example aside from what I've
already noted.
It costs an average of a hundred
and eight dollars per day to
detain a person in the
metropolitan detention center
but it costs nine dollars and
forty cents per day which is the
average cost and Bernalillo
county which includes pre trial
staff and drug testing costs but
excludes electronic monitor.
This is an AOC quartz Services
Division request has a budget
increase which which I would not
the LFC did not recommend.
Security for magistrate courts.
Is the third item on our list
recent J. events have once again
demonstrated the need to provide
for the secure.
The of our public buildings and
employees are judges and
employees who work in our
magistrates court houses all
across New Mexico.
Go are particularly vulnerable.
Recent news accounts related
that possible targets were
courthouses and during that time
we took the best precautionary
measures we put.
It has been rightly said that it
is not a matter of if there's
going to be an attack at a
courthouse but when you do the
clear need for security at these
courts has been repeatedly
expressed repeatedly expressed
to the legislature we believe
and hope you will.
Degree at the time to act on
this dire need is now.
LCS made a special request of
eight hundred thousand dollars
to provide you.
Thirty eight magistrates courts
statewide I implore you on
behalf of our judges and court
employees to provide them with
this panel will security base so
much they so much need.
Forth is what we call that the
do not upgrade Vienneau C.
upgrade the N. O. C. as the
secure connection established by
the judiciary between courts and
jails all across New Mexico
which allows judges to conduct
hearings involving arrestees in
custody remotely using video
technology this has been proven
to be essential for our courts
to be able to continue providing
due process to Senator.
Visuals during the pandemic and
it will be a key efficiency and
reopening the court after the
pandemic.
For this purpose AOC six two
hundred thousand two hundred and
seventy thousand dollars for to
upgrade and integration project
continuation this includes
replacing cameras in detention
centers and that the judicial
information division of PLC.
This request is made in multiple
places as a special request and
it.
And in FY twenty two C. two I.
T. special request.
I don't know what that means but
LFC Rivera recommended approval
of this request has a special
request I like to talk about the
data exchange program.
This program originated in two
thousand nineteen when the
legislature wisely directed The
New Mexico's sentencing
commission to create and
maintain a data sharing network
to provide data sharing
information among criminal
justice agencies.
A pilot program was rolled out
in June of twenty twenty which
includes to Mexico where data
from multiple data sets such as
open an active warrants release
orders conditions of release the
mystic violence orders of
protection disposition at
sentencing landlord and tenant
evictions this is a marvelous
program and you.
You can click on it and and show
court here for example quarters
during the pandemic this will
show you how many hearings are
conducted how many hearings are
set per month the number of
years by type.
Number of hearings by day there
is also an active warrants a
street map which we can click on
that warrant street map showing
all the warrants that are are
existing in that area.
This information is cloud based
so there is no impact on the
justice partner database.
Currently the project includes
San Juan County sheriff's
warrants arrests bookings
booking shoots traffic citations
D. W. I. N. traffic citations it
also has Bernalillo county M. D.
C. information to
appropriations.
Just as partners we hope will
eventually include district
attorneys public defenders the
department of public safety more
for submitted ministration
corrections mental health and
probation and supervision the
value of this tool for public
safety is self evident.
All of these up just as
partners.
We hope will eventually be able
to access all of this data
ensuring amongst themselves AOC
originally asked for a fiscal
year special request to support
the project moving forward to
increase the number of both data
sets and number of agencies
other than the others and the
judiciary who will share the
data AOC has now determined that
moving to the next phase is not
five hundred thousand which was
the original request but two
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and this is the amended
amount requested.
LFC recommended an increase of a
hundred thousand dollars for
this program.
And we ask that this be
increased by a hundred fifty
thousand dollars for the total
of two hundred fifty thousand
dollars these are the priorities
of the judiciary Indian that
unified budget this year.
I thank you madam chairman for
the opportunity to present them
to you at the end of the
committee I will now turn our
presentation over already pap
and and we will both be
available for questions at the
end of our presentation.
Thank you very much justice the
hill appreciate your your point
your comments and we're going to
go next article.
Thank you madam chair I think
during the chief justice's
presentation that we can share
my screen with you on the some
of the pre trial information I I
think you have the number of
documents including of the two
page fact sheet about the pre
trial program the chief
justice's talking about of all
the things you talked about the
two things that were recurring
on the judgeships and the pre
trial services.
I'm sure you have before you for
cheese and no you didn't ask to
hear specifically from Amanda
Dick Peddie and Brian Chavis
from a DFA I can you can I don't
want to hear from them shortly
keep going but
I assume you've got different
sheets from that would show you
the differences in their to
recommendations.
Thank you thank you already and
you know one of the problems
looking for part of the
information here and I don't
have part of it part of it I do
what that's one of the problems
with zoom in having to do things
virtually and and not review
have everything but I really
appreciate you showing from
information on the screen
because that brought up some
immediate
information we needed but I
think at this point unless you
have anything else to add I am
going to before I go on for any
questions or anything I'm going
to you go to Amanda and see if
she had anything to prepare our
president.
We had already you have more to
say yes I did briefly what what
the committee to house bill one
seventeen which is the draft
that's over on the house side
that includes the LFC
recommendations when I need to
just talk about the
recommendations from LFC and DFA
you'll see an outline of of what
could be house bill two and
house bill one seventeen and
section four B. are the base
budget recommendations for the
all the courts and section five
of the specials are special
request to which they're cheap
dresses report we also have all
the courts online one of the
documents I hope you have is the
budget book I would I could sure
screen from that but I'll do it
only if you want to but you can
see.
On if you have the budget but
pay structures objections to
what you need to assist required
expert team that pre trial
request information in addition
better screen I shared with you
when you look on
page for the members of the
Supreme Court you'll notice that
we have an error because this
was this was made before this
happened but I January twenty
fifth a justice really Vargas
who plays Justice.
October so you see a picture
Justice knock Americans when we
did the budget for she was on
the court but now we have not
just very Vargas I just review
that we're also maybe I will try
to share this with.
For those members who are a
hundred percent more with the
With the courts that singular do
that yeah
We're made up of the thirteen
districts that you just talked
about and those districts kind
of overlap with your elective
districts but not completely
because where County based on
your crossed many counties of
course I heard Center compass
about those bands are so the
covers so these are the district
so when the Chief Justice talks
about the third district where
we would take the trial services
and six district you see it's
also this border with those
counts but these are counties
that make up the different
districts each district has a
chief judge and each of those
courts I believe estimated your
document about their specific
court request
and what's not in house bill one
seventeen or the recommendations
from LFC which were voted to be
adopted by House Appropriations
last week so anyway this is
where we are and there's a
little on the bottom of that
page which is page seventeen of
the budget book I I hope you
have this image as what those
red stars and blue things are
but those of the counties and
those were all of our courts are
located.
With that madam chair all stop I
I I I believe we should come
over to the Senate side with at
least the framework that's in
house bill one seventy because
that's what it House
Appropriations voted to adopt
last week and there are some
gaps in the chief mention those
in the primary one from my
perspective is pre trial
services funding I'd love to
talk about as much as anybody
wants to ask questions and I
will do that but I will not do
that right now I'll see if you
have questions about that or or
anything else that is in there
with that I'll turn it back over
you madam chair and we'll be
happy to answer questions after
Amanda and Brian finish their
part.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and yes and I'm gonna go to
Amanda because I do have a
question about the treatment the
pretrial on initiative and also
about the jet ship but before we
get our there are other members
insurers who have questioned
dollars can go first but for now
the man that she may not answer
the question your statement
without let's go for it all
right.
Your.
Madam chair members of the
committee Amanda Dick Peddie
with the legislative finance
committee I just like to thank
the Chief Justice and already
they've been a pleasure to work
with I'm already really covered
everything I really just wanted
to alert members say HSC did it
drive the LFC recommendation
last week on the LFC
recommendation provided for
small increases for all the
District Court while the
executive recommendation packed
everyone flat on we do have the
executive analyst Brian Chavis
years of use of a level for
questions I also just wanted to
point out something that wasn't
mentioned in the LFC also
recommends eighty two percent
increase in pay for judges on
top of the one point five
percent increase for all state
employees that something else
that the LFC recommends
the map they already mentioned
is also in your volume three
document on page forty eight
that is a really helpful tool in
sorting out which district is
where as far as the judge should
go I will mention the LFC
recommendation
by all the judges and those are
five digits created in the first
judicial district which is Santa
Fe.
In Rio Rio
to judgeships in the second
judicial district which is
brilliant county and one in the
third which is Los crucis and
one of the twelve the LFC
recommends full funding for all
those judgeships mostly general
fund there is about a hundred
forty thousand recommended it
Fund Allen's is for those
statutes but most of that is
covered in the LFC rack and
again just like are you
mentioned we will do individual
presentations from all the
courts because that could take a
very long time but everyone is
here and available for questions
if you have.
Specific concerns about it
district.
Thank you thank you I'm and I'm
happy to hear that the LFC is
recommending the five judgeships
I know that the courts have been
cut pretty drastically and in
fact you know we were very
concerned especially the first
additional district with cat
also so we want to make sure it
was restored and and all of the
five judges my goodness they
needed throughout the state so
I'm very happy to hear that and
then also about the the small
increases better than being
recommended I wanted to mention
something before I go on for any
questions agency before I forget
here about the their increases
that are being recommended for
all state employees including
those that are that are working
everywhere that the courts for
example
But also there's other
legislation in the works right
now that is hopefully the
pandemic relief package that may
be providing some further
assistance for what we call the
financial workers and other
people who are making less than
fifty dollars an hour and a
fifty requests I should say and
so we may be able to come up
with additional assistance to
that pandemic released L. in
addition to the the increase
that we're looking at so anyway
I'm not going to go too much
into that because I have other
questions at the end when other
members ask but I'm going to
just defer to members of the
committee for any questions and
let me see if I have anyone here
no goodness let's see this them
if I can scroll through
I don't see any hand are we
serious all there Senator share
okay let me see make sure I get
my list correct here and
scrolling through and I don't
see any other states so far so
Senator share can we let's go to
you and that and then we'll keep
watching for other.
Of the thank you madam chair.
Chief Justice I I'm not sure
that these particular questions
are for the chief justice but
but well here we go.
So on.
On the charts in the volume
three would start with this one
so.
Of.
We talk about consumer this is
really Attorney General stuff
though but
so there settlement from Equifax
Johnson Johnson Volkswagen
Monsanto.
Do all of those Madam say
somewhere in the court system or
I thought they went to the
general fund somewhere but
they're listed on heroes like
income.
Madam chair.
That.
And Amanda the Senator retreat
Services staffing type failed to
mention earlier the gentleman or
a lady Chavis the governor said
that the executive side right so
we've got you and the analysts
and executive so we will have
whenever the other person is
ready thank you proceed.
Okay.
Chair chair so that is an
attorney general question I'm
also the analyst for the
Attorney General so I can
address that for you the
consumer settlement fund there
are settlements from.
Revenue from a variety of
different settlements and
generally speaking that stays in
the consumer settlement fund at
the Attorney General that some
of those settlements are
restricted so for example a
settlement from opioid
medications might have
restrictions on it can only be
used for public health reasons
so it does all stay at the
Attorney General Fund but the
legislature has the appropriate
power to appropriate for
whatever purpose.
Okay all right thank you
So we also have yes I'm looking
at sources.
budget summary
talk about general fund
transfers some of them talk
about federal reserve some of
the talk about other reasons of
federal revenues and other
revenues I'm pretty sure I get
what the general fund revenue is
but.
Why do some have federal
revenues some some of the
District Court.
And some don't what what is that
federal road revenue for.
Share your already might
actually be a better place for
this but generally speaking some
courts receive federal grants
while others don't so those
requests can be rigorous
programs but are you probably
has a better idea of what
programs consist of.
Yes madam chair Senators chair
and Amanda federal money comes
through AOC we do I don't know
how many requests we have it's
manage and they get administered
by the fiscal services division
at AOC but the money goes out to
the court so you might see a
line in the courts budget for
federal it's federal grant money
that flows through AOC so for
example hearing officers for
child support enforcement money
comes to the child support
enforcement division gets
distributed through and see to
the courts to pay for hearing
officer to expedite the hearings
on child support enforcement
cases so they'll have to that
the budget that money in their
budget and that's a long way
around and getting federal money
into it a District Court just
got a full or part time hearing
officer to hear those cases so
we have examples of that that's
where federal money goes into
the.
That's how I federal money
really gets into the course we
don't have
Some kind of revenue federal
revenue.
Well thank you Mr but I I I can
see that some of these courts
have it and some don't
I noticed that the the first two
additional district.
Doesn't.
The second does and if you go
through there the the the third
does but the fourth doesn't why
don't why isn't everybody of
applying for grant.
Madam chair and senator share I
don't know what page looking on
a vine three but that it depends
on the activities that correct
the two that that's parts
of all you want to yes what page
or pages on pages sixteen and
seventeen for first and second
and then eighteen ninety four
sure so
it depends on the programs that
the different courts run for
example the second district in
Bernalillo county and the
thirteenth district in Sandoval
county run about Santa Valencia
and Cibola counties run
foreclosure programs and we
originally had federal
settlement money coming through
the Attorney General to those
programs so they would have
federal money in there the first
district doesn't right now have
a foreclosure program funded in
that way so it just depends on
if they have a program and if we
can get our hands on some
federal money to fund a
particular kind of program and
other other courts may have a
program this general fund to to
it just depends on
the history with the court you
know how how that works we
should get a lot of funding
federal funding for drug courts
less less so now but you would
have seen that in some courts.
Okay well I guess the.
The question is.
Where the point is if there's if
there's federal money out there
then maybe we ought to be
applying for those requests all
of it in all of the judicial
district but then there's
another line that everybody has
and that is other revenues what
what are other revenues will
have rental property or some
other doing.
The madam chair and Senator no
we don't have that
other revenues could be any kind
of a mix of things there are
statutory fees that we collect
we're required to collect there
are you know of difficulties are
you see a lot of more other
revenue well it.
It it's just revenue that comes
comes in from
the programs are required
generally do charge fees so you
might have a mediation program
that might be partially funded
by a few that people pay and you
would see revenue from that kind
of thing so in the second
particularly I know we have
chief judge would occur on the
line he could probably address
there are two and a half million
other revenues
that's going to fund programs
they get money from well gosh
they're drug court is actually
funded by an executive agency
that only court that gets money
for that so I don't know if you
know if you want to particularly
know about the second which has
a large up well the the budget
they have a two and a half
million dollar other revenue he
could talk about where that
comes from you'll see a lot
lower in the first for example
where it's only two hundred
fifteen thousand because they
have left smaller programs and
generate less revenue and that
kind of thing.
So now let me go to where the
the uses are of it so the the
big one is contractual services
we contracting with.
Madam chair Representative madam
chair
Senator shares so in the volume
two documents the numbers for
the uses are going to be a
little bit funky said the courts
actually get line item
appropriation authority that
means that everything goes into
one line item called
appropriations this did not
translate well when we did
volume two and fortunately I
didn't catch it so you'll see
some courts have everything in
contracts have their entire
appropriation in person that's
just a typo your different sheet
if you have that look like this
you can see but that has the
correct operation category
that's how it's written and
hospitals.
Okay all right
So then in not in the volume
three on page fifty five and I
don't know if this is you or not
either there's overview of seem
civil legal services funding I'm
assuming this is an other
and I don't know how many there
are two four six eight ten
twelve twelve things in their
Catholic charities to New Mexico
Center for long poverty and a
bunch of stuff in the middle.
Are those things that we're
paying for is that what that
says.
Madam chair and senator sure yes
but not us.
That's a different that's a
different entity that's funding
the civil legal services you you
appropriate almost five million
dollars in through a process
they run they
Anyway they provide the
different programs but we don't
do that that's not a court run
program okay all right then
I'll.
Right madam chair all quick to
quit harassing this cap and then
thank you.
Thank you senator Sharon thank
you.
All right before we go on for
any more questions what but the
analyst DFA analyst have
anything to say Chavis are you
here would you have anything to
say and if not we will open it
up for other questions are to
the committee and I don't see
any other hand tossed.
Where did she branch of us
earlier but I don't see him
right madam chair our areas and
members the committee thank you
for having me on branch out of
this Alice for DFA nothing that
at this time.
appreciate your work all right I
don't see any other hand wait
we're master knows of anyone
else with wages the and I don't
see them times you know staff we
dismiss people sell okay going
to a no I don't.
To Senator Candelaria waiting to
stand I'm sorry okay right now
are you are you there in
conceding that war I don't
handle thank you I've I've read
through this of missions as I I
like to read through things that
are presented to this committee
in depth and I I'm I'm at a loss
to try to understand and and
sort of reconcile for myself you
know from the courts.
I'm gonna I'm gonna echo for the
committee
the need for us to to really get
behind the courts budget
recommendation but I really want
to understand from the executive
and legislative analysts
especially from the executive
why was a flat budget
recommended you know I think
when we talk about the judiciary
we need to remember this is an
independent and co equal branch
of government.
and so I think our obligations
years appropriators are a little
different if not a little
enhanced to ensure that this the
branch of government has the
resources it needs to function
so I was a little troubled by
the flat budget recommendation
from the executive I want to
understand more about what but
tresses that and then if the
LESC can walk me through their
rationale as well madam chair
thank you thank you on the line
your Brian would you yeah.
Are you available to answer.
Yes yes madam chair and and
Senator Candelaria so when we
don't when we do these budget
recommendations within all
what are revenue was was really
gonna look like so
Originally we asked of agencies
to come in at a five percent
decrease
So it was a five percent for
percent increase from the four
percent cut.
So we brought it back to flat.
And we still don't know if about
the judgeship so we took the
president's from earlier before
on the appropriation to AOC for
five hundred thousand dollars
for the judgeship so we kept him
flat what we recommended the
special that AOC asked the one
point two million to fund the
judgeships and and the other
districts.
but.
It was done with the projector
Avenue back in.
September.
Thank you madam chair Mister
Chavis and if I could ask the
same from the LFC analysts.
Of course.
Madam chair Senator Candelaria
so
in the same vein these were
formulated in September when
revenue is still very uncertain
we LFC we had many conversations
with director it happened and
with the Chief Justice so you'll
notice the LFC recommendation
does provide increases to all
the courts those are offset by a
prepaid General Fund reduction
AOC the so really over all the
executive LFC recommendations
for and see if the statewide
courts in the district reports
are pretty similar but the LFC
recommendation try to you know
it's not what you're saying that
this is a co equal branch of
government through providing
increases to courts for direct
services the LFC recommendation
also look for creative ways to
find things so you'll notice in
the second judicial District
Court the more closure
settlement program is funded
with I'm ballots from R. LD you
know we really try to focus on
what was important for the
courts and provide that with the
revenues that we thought we had
available in September.
Thank you Mr chairman I know
that we're going to receive a.
Updated revenue projection at
some point if it hasn't already
come out but
you know I think if course want
to be prudent but again I.
I really think this is one of
the budgets we need to we need
to make sure that we we don't
just take of care solvency
approach
you know this is like I said.
Democracy only works if there is
that well functioning court
system kind of fundamental to
what we do so I look forward to
seeing what movie there can be
an to all the judges into our
Chief Justice thank you all for
being here today Mr captain
thank you as well for your
presentation thank you all very
much thank you Senator in the
last year I don't see any other
and you're gonna yeah I can see
your hands Senator Candelaria
earlier and I wanna make sure I
don't miss ninety one we have
Senator Pat Woods there you go I
saw him go Senator do you have a
question.
Senator Wirth yeah I'm I do
madam chair I the question I
have I know that.
Comment here and we had a lot
less stuff happening in the
courts.
And.
I'm assuming a lot less money
was spent because there were
less court.
Meetings going on and I was just
wondering if we did this money
revert does it stay in your
funds.
how does that work.
Madam chair.
Thank you RT can you answer that
sure sure we don't have reverses
one expecting largely in
specials one time funding
programs that were on going in
fiscal year twenty but
everything had a stop come March
we actually in the courts in
those spending more money due to
the COVID adjustments we kept
the courts open.
Right through they never closed
and we've done a jury trials in
two different sections a five
month period and then again
starting this month and to do
jury trials we had to do a lot
of things to change point people
sixty part all that kind of
stuff so yes we did revert money
in specials about six hundred
thousand dollars which is a lot
of money for us but we just try
trying to add new comment for
our last quarter of the year
really took us off being able to
do the special of those other
one time of funding spending if
the court didn't spend its
general fund appropriation
that's in section four it would
revert and you'll see some if
you look on the reverse is page
after get where that is I think
it's a vine three but anyway
you'll see a few larger ones
mostly they're pretty small
because.
What's budgets that not the AOC
but the courts budgets are
eighty five to ninety five
percent person just depends and
our personal care working we've
been open now we got a working
all over the place and doing
everything by zoom and remotely
on their computers at home so
each one of these gestures of
the drive there would you about
what they're doing with the
people that they're paying and
the business of the courts are
continuing to go I could share
screen if you want to but it
would show you that we're up to
about eighty five percent over
the ten months of COVID about
eighty five percent of the case
or we would have expected over
those ten months in new case
filings occurred and it keeps
going up every month and pretty
soon we'll be back to a full
load and we also expect revenue
increased low because you may be
aware that a number of case
types have been state or paused
so we're expecting a significant
increase when those pauses stop
in landlord tenant cases
foreclosure cases which is why
the program in the second for
example so important and that
consumer debt cases so
we'll probably have more than a
hundred percent of what we had
before COVID so we did revert to
money those are generally one
time funds and specials of the
recurring appropriation to based
budgets as they spend everything
and we spent the two hundred
thousand we received in the
special session for COVID relief
and we got another two hundred
thousand that was an **** one
just session and we're going to
spend that because of the COVID
is is expensive.
Okay thank you very much thank
you madam chair thank you
senator Wirth okay I don't see
any other hands here so if his
new master sees any or has any
other names please let me know
all right I do have just a
couple of questions because I
know we have to move on we've
got a long agenda here and it's
late but Amanda may be permitted
even RT whoever can answer this
on the the funds for the pre
trial justice initiative that
we're talking about tell me
again on that course the LFC on
that Amanda.
I don't have the booklet with
me.
Madam chair that the LFC
recommendation doesn't include
those pre trial service funds
there is an increase in the
eleventh judicial District Court
and some of that is intended for
the pre trial services programs
but for the more wide reaching
programs that are you talking
about that currently not
included in the LFC
recommendation are you can see
more actively.
What about the executive
recommendation.
Nothing recommended on that one
either that's correct madam
chair and that is a recurring
funding that would be an
expansion of the budget I think
support to catch the point that
Amanda was making which is when
these budgets were considered
we've submitted them this is
September first and through the
fall you're looking at a billion
dollar shortfall and I've got
two hundred and fifty million or
so of new money and we submitted
an increase a budget increase of
about four percent which
basically would get the courts
to the money appropriated last
year in the regular session
right we had about a four
percent increase and that's
about six and a half million
dollars we ended up in the
recommendations from LESC with a
zero point two percent increase
of two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars that's because
of this attractions in the era
State General that got re
distributed to the point but we
knew that if we need a four
percent we need money and this
is a big jump from for the A. R.
C. but it's not and we spent
that out in the courts
to do something really valuable
and I I I would love I share
screen to talk about that but I
don't think I think all the time
but pre trial is so important to
return so much value for the
money you invest if you
appropriate nine hundred fifty
thousand dollars for pre trial
it has to comes over without
that money in the Senate to put
it in I guarantee you you'll get
more than your money's worth in
increased public safety and
decrease cost in your detention
centers and I know that not all
of you have a detention center
in your district but then if you
do you'll save that money in
addition to make in the public
sector so
that's where we're at on the on
the pre trial services madam
chair unless I'm gonna pay why
it's a good investment but many
of you know already and I I talk
too much about it I suppose.
Thank you know thank you I
believe what you're saying used
to be a very good program so
thank you for explaining that
and also the security systems
you know and for many years now
I have heard about the need for
security systems statewide
written by the court and leisure
thousand dollar request for that
and and I'm just wondering you
realize it's requested made back
then that makes ever however I
do not think the change we're
getting in New forecast for the
budget so we'll see what that
says by is that anywhere are you
to questions that anywhere in
the budget for the security
systems and capital outlay for
example that we may be able
hello this is doctor higher like
security people and that would
be appropriate right that's what
it is madam chair you the
legislature appropriated money
to allow us we're almost done to
put a lot of security
infrastructure in our courts
particularly match records where
we haven't had individual person
for security so we got magnetic
locks and we've got cameras that
you know security cameras and
things like that this eight
hundred thousand dollars which
he did appropriate for one time
for fiscal year twenty one is to
hire people to provide security
in the master courts most of
these courts are out there in
the rural communities all by
themselves and their their
security is
call nine one one you may have
no security so you appropriated
eight hundred thousand dollars
so we can do that we are
spending that money now on
people if we don't have those in
again will run out of money and
those people go away most of our
contracts some of them we hired
but we won't be able to keep
them because we will run out of
of funding so the DFA
recommendation included eight
hundred thousand dollars in a
special appropriation to give us
another year of that
appropriation for the security
personnel in the match reports
LFC did not they did recommend
language in house bill one
seventeen to extend the money we
have.
Now in the fiscal year twenty
two which is good because with
COVID and everything we got a
little pick up in our ability to
hire those people but they're
out there now we're paying them
we care of some of that money
into twenty two well we're gonna
run out long before fiscal year
twenty two ends and just to get
an appropriation for at least a
special and then we'll probably
come back and try to submitted
as recurring money thereafter so
that we can have actual human
beings provided security in the
last records like they do in.
Most district courts although
not all but anyway it that's
what it's for Madam it's Madam
it's not you've given us
infrastructure money and that's
great but this is for actual
people and we we had a security
study done of all the courts we
got a grant we had a study done.
They told us that you really
need to get people in here if
you want to it's going to happen
you're gonna have a bad incident
that you can reduce or avoid
with security personnel yeah
thank you already and I know
from experience and having
listened to this every year that
there are a lot of point he
didn't even have a lot of there
are few anyway that didn't have
it on a list I think one point
and this is like really not
acceptable truly need to do
something about this and then
I'm glad to hear that that you
will be getting something in
capital outlay I hope I'm
looking at the cameras for
example detention centers and
things like that those can all
come from severance tax funding
helpfully so anyway I'm gonna
move on because we've got such a
long agent that that I don't see
any other hands here and I want
to thank you and thanks Amanda
and Brian and Justice the of the
hill and everyone who present
today for all your work and we
certainly appreciate your
presentation thank you very much
thank you madam chair thank you
through the committee then we'll
we'll be talking to you again
when we get hospital to come
over to the Senate I'm sure yeah
thank you very much thank thank
you madam chair and if I may
make an observation when I first
logged on at one o'clock I was
so happy to see how well you all
over get along with each other
and visiting with each other and
as coming from the Supreme Court
in the court of appeals which
works together we Julia was very
very hard for me to see that so
and thank you for your time
thank you just the notes are you
have a little trouble getting
into the beginning but we heard
your presentation well you
finally were able to log you
good to see you thank you for
your presentation all right
we're gonna move on now to be at
District Court and Amanda and
Brian.
Those I think that based off the
district courts unless any
members had specific questions
for the court
if you wanted to one day
district attorney's I can set
that up for you.
Thank I'm and we're having a
little trouble here with the
with the microphone can you say
that again you said the district
courts unless we have any
questions right for the year yes
all the chief judges or their
designees are available for
specific questions for specific
District Court but that was all
covered in the unified budget so
I can set you up for the
district attorney's or we can
see if there are more questions
for the courts I feel thank you
very much I have reviewed quite
a bit of that information I
can't say all of it because
there's so much but I have
reviews you know quite a bit of
it let me just say that I am
very pleased that it has been
recommended to give the court
the judges a two percent
increase additionally we are
actually one of the lowest here
in the yeah in the nation and so
I'm happy to to see that but
anyway I don't have any
questions for the courts does
anyone else I'm gonna look here
for any names or any hands up
and if you don't we'll move on
to the district attorney's.
Okay I don't have any questions
let me just ask before I move on
at Brian Chavis if you want to
say anything and if not we'll
move on.
The DFA madam chair no come.
Thank you Ryan okay then thank
you very much and we will move
on to the what we have them
Bernalillo county metro fort
separately on the agenda so I
will address it the same way
Amanda.
Is that what you what you had in
mind in presenting this for the
courts of course madam chair
members so with that metric
court it's also part of the
unified budget it also had a
small increase in the LFC
recommendations so it's really
the same thing that was part of
the unified budget process I
believe I see Rachel monarch and
property apartment record if
anyone has any specific
questions permit for court.
Okay thank you very much and I
don't have any particularly
because they were part of the
unified budget any other any
questions many other members of
the committee or anyone else I
don't see any hands so thank you
very much and we will move on
now to the district attorney.
Thank thanks Amanda okay madam
chair I'll go ahead and give
members and information about
the district attorneys
so for the FY twenty two budget
the district attorney
successfully agreed on a unified
priorities approach like the
courts all district attorney
offices requested the
restoration of the four percent
hi maybe in the first twenty
twenty special legislative
session again the executive
recommendation part district
attorney agencies lacked with
the FY twenty one operate
adjusted operating budget.
C. recommendation eight small
decreases to almost every
district attorney agency based
on funded vacancy rates
availability of fund balances
and reduce HSD caseloads.
Last week eighty exceeded adopt
the LFC recommendation.
Again just like the courts we
will do individual budgets for
the district attorney's we do
have
each judicial district attorney
available for questions but for
an overview and to outline the
priorities I can go ahead and
turn it over to hi guys director
of the administrative office of
the district attorney and
judicial district attorney and
president of the association of
district attorneys that
analysts.
Thank you very much here we go
all right Henry and Diane are
you there I don't see with blank
here.
Share I'm we are both here I so
eight a good afternoon to the
members of the committee I would
you like to hear from I'm Mr
Valdez regarding I'd
administrative offices in the
district attorney first or that
the district attorney's overall
presentation first why don't we
do turns over office and patient
person next to us resolved that.
On Jennifer thank you Graham.
Thank you I'm.
Madam chair members of the
committee we did submit a
handout that I hope that you all
received which was a letter I'm
that we I had submitted in the
fall that we revise state with
all of the new and district
attorneys we have are currently
seven new a district attorneys I
as part of our fourteen elected
district attorneys I'm I'll talk
a little bit about how the
priorities as I'm I miss petty
pointed out I and I want to say
thank you to her thank you Brian
Chavis I'm they they work very
closely with us they were very
hard on our budgets I'm we asked
for our return back to our our
budget funding level and the
reason we did that is because
our budgets arm for the most
part the majority as person.
And when.
You look at vacancies that a
particular district attorney
agency may have often times that
vacancy is there because we've
had to use a part of that
funding to pay another employee
more in order to either hire
them or keep them from leaving
or you had to use funds I in a
different category we've
submitted a bar and done that.
So that we pay for other
expenses such as expert witness
fees which I think most of the
district attorney's I would tell
you that those have increased
and those are usually unexpected
and certainly not something we
can plan for in advance for in
needing an nexus for on a case
or countering defense expert on
a particular case.
We all encountered additional
unexpected expenses just as
other branches of the criminal
justice system the courts and
the public defenders are to be
able to continue to work during
the COVID nineteen.
All of the district attorney's
offices continue to work they
worked in a different manner
some had their staff in the
office every day continually
throughout COVID nineteen and
they never tell worked some had
their staff all at home
teleworking throughout the
process some districts did a
hybrid where the employees some
telework summer in person.
Hello working then we had to
increase bandwidth then we had
to purchase laptops some offices
purchase scanners and printers
these for costs that were not in
our budget we weren't
anticipating and we had to use
that funding to do that.
If you have the district
attorneys offices still have
what is federal grant money from
the past it's not current not
funded currently it's money was
left over called southwest
border funds.
The district attorney's offices
that have those funds you will
see in the LFC recommendation
that they are including those
left over southwest border
federal grant funds I in place
of it general fund money.
The problem becomes that some
district attorneys offices had
planned to use so since
September when these projections
for done for other expenses.
I and or they use some for these
expert witness fees that are
unexpected otherwise to be
coming asking for supplemental
emergency one so it is
concerning for the district
attorneys to see the use of
southwest border federal grant
funds in place of general fund
money.
I'm we would also I note that.
The district attorney's offices
in varying amounts regarded
funds
of last fiscal year as we were
asked to do to the uncertainty
of New Mexicos economy I under
the COVID nineteen restrictions
some may have regarded a small
amount of two thousand dollars
in some more perverted a
substantial amount I'm import
I'm due to the request of the
amount we were asked to revert
and due to the inability to have
bars and proved to be able to
move the money to use it for
other categories in our projects
we appreciate all that I'm this
committee has done for us in the
past and funding us I'm we know
that your job is difficult we
know that every agency comes
before you asking for more money
and the district attorney's I'm
for the most part I in the
request are we're basically
asking for what we had in the
past so that we wouldn't
encourage that.
We recognize that there is a
recommendation are and the LESC
for a small cut her district
attorney's office and that that
was approved by the house
finance committee last week that
lower amount.
I'm.
I would be glad to share of the
handout if the committee needs
it on my screen if not I will
not I and it I know it's been a
really long day I would be glad
to answer any questions we have
the district attorneys are
logged on they would be glad to
answer any questions and
certainly as well Mr Valdez
would do is presentation for
AODA but he also I'm would be
able to assist with answering
questions as well about the
individual district attorney's
budgets I if them committee
members have questioned so thank
you for your time and I will and
stand for questions thank you
very much thank you I think what
we're gonna do now is breaking
to go on to generate all that
then that that we we can ask
questions all at once and so I'm
sure we have that yeah right
come up please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I first want to add that also.
With respect to the the budget
submission process additionally
with regards to the district
attorney's you have seven new
district attorneys that took
office on January first so you
said you you sensually of seven.
People who are for lack of a.
freeze kind of stuck with the
budget that was submitted by the
previous DA.
They might not have the same
priorities are they might have
different ideas of how the
resources that they have should
be spent on and so I do know
that there was that.
in terms of the budget
initiatives that that this
committee always deals with
every four years
But with the idea that there's
generally you know some way some
Senate amendment processes that
may go on that can address some
of the dust concerns are
particularly those newly elected
dust and and I would ask that if
the if there is any type of
process like that that goes on
of that difference be really
given to the district attorney's
are particularly the the newer
district attorney's all that
would like to reassess the
properties of those offices
having said that I will tell you
that the COVID year has been a
very challenging year not just
you know you heard from Chief
Justice Michael V. hill who will
grow very proudly stated that
and and I agree that he should
be proud that the court's never
closed.
Well the courts never did close
which meant the DA's offices
could never closed
also we never stop doing
business with criminals crime
continued.
During the COVID era and so
basis work coming in courts
Wirth you know I won't what
point did show shut down jury
trials did.
Because jury trials are shut
down it is often times difficult
to get cases resolved without
the hammer of well if you don't
agree that we're going to go to
trial when they know there's not
or not nicknamed trial coming
down the pike and so there is a
tremendous amount of cases that
have piled up that are going to
be needed to dealt with at some
point there's some cases that
were
waited in the you know in the
district attorney's office
waiting to be indicted so that
these cases four charge so these
cases can move on but here at A.
O. DA we were faced with
you know some really challenging
circumstances one while and this
court is well aware I mean this
court this committee is well
aware of the centralized case
management system and you heard
the Chief Justice talk about
data sharing and the mandated
data sharing and everything else
so much of that data comes from
the district attorney's
statewide centralized case
management system that is
maintained by the administrative
office of the courts I need a
couple things to remember is one
that is the in house it was
developed in house at the
administrative office of
district attorney so there are
no Outlander's license fees
attached to it it is we made it
we own it but we have to upkeep
it and so it needs attention
just like anything else all
sometimes.
It it it it reacts in the matter
do that is it the best because
we don't have the resources to
really address and an updated
the way it should be I think it
really is a time for infusion of
capital into the case management
system we have to developers
they're working on a lot of
those issues well but some of
those other things
could be addressed through
increased capital one of the
things that the projects that
we're looking at is trying to
get all the districts on to
Microsoft three six five which
would my great the district
attorneys from a server based
environment to a cloud based
environment and I know this
committee is heard you know you
just heard the big capital
outlay
of discussion and I was very
interested in the brought back
discussion in terms of what that
means and what it could mean for
the the various district
attorney's office up but.
If we're able to do that it
would free up some of our
physical servers that we have to
be able work with the the CMS
projects make it faster make it
more responsive.
and.
One comment
on any given day.
The administrative office of
disparities would maybe have
thirty remote users throughout
the state.
Well that one up averaging over
three hundred remote users on
any given day sometimes a size
six hundred remote users putting
a tremendous strain on our
resources we're definitely not
everything stopped during COVID
the the attorneys and the
investigators still had to
maintain their their mandatory
legal education credits AODA
still had to put on the the
necessary trainings for the
attorneys to be able to maintain
their licenses and so I'm proud
to report that the
administrative office of
districts did indeed find to to
seminars the spring seminar in
the fall seminar they were all
virtual
and every eighty eight in the
state of New Mexico was able to
complete all their mandatory
continuing legal education
credits
if they attended either one of
those two courses and so I know
it's late I know it's been a
long day and so I too will stand
for questions thank you Henry
thank you for your presentation
and and I agree M. if things
didn't stop when when one thing.
Was hit with COVID one agency or
department it has a ripple
effect on many others many times
we just don't think about thank
you for reminding us of all that
okay do we have any questions
from committee members before I
go on an indictable see a hand
but Amanda did you or Brian have
anything else anything to add
right now before I move on to
just one or two quick questions.
Madam chair members of the
committee nothing significant to
add I will just note that though
agency data docks the LFC
recommendation they did also ask
for a closer examination of some
of the vacancy rates in district
attorney offices so we should
have more information about some
of that also just a note over
all the executive and the LESC
recommendations for all district
attorney agencies are only two
hundred and seventy thousand
part so you can see small
decreases in the LFC
recommendation by it ranges from
like five thousand dollars to
about sixty thousand dollars so
overall it's a huge difference
and unless Mr Thomas is anything
to add internet accuracy of.
Thank you Ryan you have to do
that madam chair nothing that.
K. thank you very much I just
have a quick question on the a
centralized case management
system I know that I had spoken
to Henry about this baby two
years ago or something like that
we were talking about the
communication needs throughout
the state and can can you tell
me you know Amanda can you wait
a little bit on that and and see
where it is on the priority list
it was even discussed this is so
crucial because it's not only
for the communication and the
transfer of data but it's to
keep the updated information on
cases up to date for the court
and so tell me a little bit
about that in the discussions if
anything to placed on.
Madam chair chair so.
Ation date date decrease A. O.
T. a slightly and use of money
balances from the southwest
border prosecution it initiative
thank you looses referring to
just the plants that general
fund reduction
again at the time that these
recommendations were formulated
we didn't have a clear idea of
what that revenues would be so
the requested increase for this
year and I just was not the top
priority the top priority was
person trying to make sure no
one was for lotus in the agency
I do now and I've spoken to you
Mr Valdez about this what many
dust teleworking CMS has had a
huge influx of activity so we
have noted that but the top
priority was person.
Okay so I'm very happy with the
once we see the new forecast may
may be able to see what funding
for something like this would be
B. R. find it your severance tax
money at that actual or is it
just all programs.
Madam chair members of the
committee as far as I know there
was not a capital outlay a
request for the CMS system nor
was there a special
appropriation request the
request that Henry was referring
to was in the operating budget
so unless that changes that's
where that money would show up.
In case they would be very much
general fund that would be used
for okay thank you and then one
last question per day you
mentioned the southwest out
grant Fund and that was used
instead of general fund.
So I guess the question would be
working and she looks like it
may be for you no way in a
little bit on that then that
wants or you.
Sure sure so
This might actually know more
about this D. was definitely
knows more about this but some
of these balances so each each
district attorney office they
has received this grant funding
some of them have remaining
balances from it and some of
those balances have been around
for you know I six years not
being spent and so the idea was
it general fund revenue
reductions were necessary these
funds that have been sitting
around could supplant those
revenues D. Lewis did mention
that sounded dust had plans to
expand those revenues LFC was
not aware of those plans at the
time that the recommendation was
for.
Thank you very much it would be
a good idea to review these
again the weather discussed at
the time for the new plans were
made we don't want that right
now the intent of the
legislature never have a program
we already on the way and if
there are plans that are working
in the we just end up cutting
the funds and your staff the pip
company also but anyway
especially general on their own
but anyhow thank you very much
or I don't have any other
questions looking at the list
you're missing and what was the
only after Nate and help if you
see any have they're not showing
up here now.
And it's not.
I don't hear anything else any
questions from committee members
one more time before I move on.
Thank you thank you very much I
don't see any from anyone and I
think we are done for today I
wanted to announce I just was
notified that to more exit Gen
that that we have the department
of public safety but apparently
that's going to be reschedule
and so it just it now if you for
you know whoever may be
interested
and the rest is still intact so
thank you Henry for your
presentation and Diana we heard
you loud and clear and your
concerns thank you into our
staff and all legislators
everyone here today on the
public been a long day you're
right but you know.
That tomorrow is a new day so
thank you very much have a great
evening and I don't see anything
else on the agenda.
Thank you thank you Senators
thank you thank you.
Are you there.
Got them yes and as.
Right down there
Information camera.
You all right.
