Okay forty seven so yesterday in
very early
didn't call vote on the Senate
bill one forty seven the tax
changes.
I guess Senator Rodriguez co.
The one more person for have a
quorum.
So we can vote this out.
Senator I guess we'll just start
hearing the subsidy changes in
comments.
In addition to enter sure
Senator the the tax.
Bill Senate bill one forty seven
I think did we have a due pass
motion yesterday if not let's
just make that again we didn't
have Mr chairman we didn't have
a due pass most motion because
that was at the very end so I'm
gonna move a do pass with it has
to be amended it didn't with yes
is amended Mr chairman the need
to pass motion with the
committee as amended.
As for the service yes as
amended thank you.
A motion by Senator Padilla.
And by Senator Campos.
we please call.
Campos once you pass motion for
the tax bill yesterday and.
Senator Burt.
Is
Campos.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales is it.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator shares excuse Senator
Steinborn excused Senator Woods
yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz.
That's a seven two zero seven
zero sort of that Senator we're
back on your bill with the new
subs Revenue substitute yes Mr
chair members of the committee
you're looking at point four
there was some spelling changes
and I will explain the other
changes the bill only focuses on
new or expanded health care
services it does not focus on
continuing hospitals with their
losses existing losses so it's
new or expanding services and on
page three the department which
is the Human Services Department
shall consider the health needs
of the state and the locality in
the long term sustainability of
the new or expanded services so
the department will in fact
analyze whether of the
Service requested reimbursement
for would be sustainable and
viable for that community.
And with me today I have missed
you the Blasi who is the health
policy adviser for the governor
to my right into my far right is
the acting secretary of Human
Services agency Kerry are me
hope and will stand for
questions or support.
Thank.
We already went to the audience
yesterday so we don't need to do
that again.
And so.
Committee members on the point
four version of the substitute.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and thank you senator
for bringing this for action of
course that this nice lady and
debt Kerry to let me just
quickly I didn't hear and
perhaps I was at one of that
that did you tell us how much
the department's going to have
the flexibility to determine you
know which areas are sustainable
and thank you wonderful bill by
the way but let me just this
past how do you determine how
much is it sustainable.
For these rural communities
based on the needs but do you
how do you measure the needs
thank you Mr chair Senator for
that question I'm going to
deflect that to my experts.
thank you for the question Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez and the
answers to that question is
actually around the operating
losses and so the bill actually
is related to projected
operating losses so that would
be the amount that is considered
for the grant awards and then
there's a back and Rick
reconciliation process that
would be utilized to make sure
that those operating losses were
impacted heard providing the new
or expanded service so that's
really how we would do it and we
would also check to make sure
you know that Medicaid services
specifically are being provided
I see okay thank you very well
thought out appreciate that
that's all I have Mister
chairman.
Thank you any other questions.
Senator Padilla thank you Mr
chairman and so just a real
quick Senator so much for for
doing this and and and and
shepherding this for so many
years and making sure that this
happened the component related
to the start up costs
how will that.
I I'm is it going to be a for a
certain amount as a percentage
of one of these facilities or is
this you know you need eighty
percent to get yours going then
we know that that's where real
need is they'll get eighty
percent or is it going to be
eight percent to do we have any
of that defined already or is
that gonna be something that'll
come together in rules are out
of how will that work so Mister
chair and senator thank you for
the question and the all the
cost the law will costs are in
section C. starting on page
three through five the start up
costs is number eleven and I'm
gonna turn to my experts for
answering that thank you.
Mr chair Senator Padilla it's
really it allows up to the full
amount of the projected
operating losses so again those
are going to be projected and
then we're going to do that back
and reconciliation to make sure
that we didn't over pay for
those operating losses but the
point is really to cover those
costs during those first five
years of experience up to five
years during that expansion well
that providers really trying to
get to the sustainability
aspect.
I appreciate that I just think
this is going to be incredibly
valuable to to some of these
committees with this work say
inability County for the for the
facility that they're attempting
to bring online there.
So Mister chairman Senator wants
that facility is actually built
an established and once they
start some services it would be
considered by the Human Services
department for its viability and
sustainability thank you I I
know that community has really
thank you thank you.
Questions.
Thank you chair I I just want to
clarify even with the changes
this this helps with operating
losses for new an expansion but
it still doesn't addressed
existing services with existing
providers correct Mr chair
Senator that is correct that is
not the intent of the executive
okay thank you.
Thank you Senator Cappelletti Mr
chairman I just like to go to
make a motion for a new house
and Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy thank you Mr chairman
yeah motion by Senator Campos
second by Senator Rodriguez
we've called
any objection to the.
And once going twice.
You're no better call the roll
we make sure track practice.
I'm gonna go to hell Senator
Campos this health.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
The.
Okay.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator what's.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator my nose yes.
Yeah carries eight to one.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you senator noting that.
Tension.
Very.
Everyone.
This.
This is a.
He's coming.
This is changes to PED.
Alexis Peter and.
Yes yes yes and I heard.
Okay.
Okay we're gonna go off we're on
their senator Neville.
Senator Padilla we were next on
this but will to a great okay
got it thank you for just a.
Okay thank you Mr all right
thank you all right to yes
Senate we have a committee
substitute for Senate joint
resolution one is amended
statewide education and it's
senator Neville your it.
Thank you Mr.
it's a.
This is a joint resolution
called for constitutional
amendment to restore the state
school board similar to what we
had to twenty years ago in two
thousand and three there's a
special election held on
September the twenty third we're
time wasn't an election year
nothing the state passed a
constitutional amendment to set
up the current system we have
now we have the secretary of
education and the.
We set up also set up the
Education Committee are
commissioner commission of
education but this bill's been
through a number of revamps and
rewards to come up with a system
that everybody thought would
work we tried converting the
current age commission over to
the school board we thought
about having all appointed by
the governor there were various
reasons why we felt that those
are the way to do it so this
bill her this joint resolution
sets of the school board
essentially converting the
existing commission over to
state school board members are
elected in that could be twenty
six is that right two thousand
twenty six.
If this passes the next election
and then the governor gets to a
point a number of people to the
board it's a large and that's
one of the big concerns we had
on the other hand it to allows
for a great deal of stability if
we're going to have an education
system that functions we've got
to have stability there's been
something like eight or ten
secretaries of education since
the current.
Situation was put together
twenty years ago.
And it hasn't worked used to be
a big joke around here thank god
for Mississippi who hadn't heard
that one would guess where
Mississippi is there about
twenty fifth in the nation and
their performance numbers and
the reason why they're there is
because we set up a system that
is stable they've had the same
guy running the show for ten
years or something like that and
that's what we need to get back
to this to have some kind of a
program where the education.
Authorities the people who run
education can have time to it's
not going to happen overnight
just appointing a new state
superintendent isn't on the
server curit but it will allow
us to put together a program
tried out for didn't work try
something else tried out
something else eventually over a
fifth period of time if we have
a stable.
Board of education and a stable
so state superintendent we
should be able to start to see
some results in improving
education the current system
does not work whether money is
better not I can't tell until we
try but it's got to be better
because we would have the same
superintendent in place
hopefully for some period of
time and San Juan County we've
had very successful local
governments and one of the
reasons Senator sure will I
think of us for that as we keep
the same superintendent of
schools for a long period of
time to use it to the retire the
county managers usually in the
state county government for a
long period of time until he
retires city is Farmington same
county manager for a long period
of time I'm a big advocate for
having stability in our
governmental.
Administrators managers and
that's what I hope to achieve
with this the to the stars
fiscal impact there is none of
this would not be voted on for
eighteen months when the next
general election comes on if it
passes then it would take two
more years before the intellect
state board of education and
then they would start and at
that point in time we have
testament neighboring
legislation a long way but at
that point in time then there
could be fiscal impact but as
far as passage of this bill
there's no cost to speak up
thank you thank you senator for
that for all that work you've
done on this I have to listen to
it in committee in other
committees and in ready to talk
about it a little bit just for
clarification anyone on the
committee Senator Diamond
Senator Padilla Senator
developed so we create the
commission I'm assuming which I
think is a great idea the
commission then would hire the
director of education.
P. secretary granted it would be
those the state school board and
then I would have a state school
board will be established and
then it would be they would hire
state superintendent the
superintendent would propose
concepts and ideas and state
school board within approval and
the developed help develop the
with the programs need to be I'm
not an educator so I don't know
what those need to be but that's
what we need to do is have
something that is stable and in
place and not at the whims of
politics that's unfortunately
under the in under governor
Martinez we have problems of
their secretary of the
Democratic Party did not like
her we've got problems with
education and it's not the fault
of the governor these people
have lives they have their put
in a political environment and I
don't blame the governor one I
think that's just the nature of
this of the of the beast when
you're in a political
environment this would minimize
it and do it obviously but it
would minimize the political
environment allow state
superintendent in this state
school with school
PED's on state public education
department to then start to
function and develop.
Programs that would should start
to work as far as I know it's
supported by the superintendents
and that the the educators and
so forth they've all testified
and the changes in scheduling
and got any of here not.
I I like that I think it shields
them from political influence a
little bit isolates and and
allows them to just focus on the
job at hand sort of politics one
example you can see it shows but
its successes are secretary of
that is not directly appointed
by the governor this but instead
by the MSU board of regents and
so under different executives we
see more consistency within that
industry so it's a great idea
for this one of the components
is This Is removal for cause
because a governor's upset and
the future this by the way this
does not affect current governor
the current governor
disappointed next appointees on
the school board association she
would be involved all the way up
to the end of our term so it
does not affect the current
governor it wouldn't it the next
governor whoever that happens to
be and the the they would be.
It would minimize and reduce the
political influence of the
governor and if they have to
they can only be removed for
selected people can't removed
the two appointed folks on this
board could only be removed for
costs just like the border
regents at the university we
don't have university presidents
changing every two years they
stick around for the most part
we had a couple bad eggs every
now and then but by larger star
University president state and
they stay there long production
and that's what I want to
achieve with the school for the
track thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you Senator
Diamond Senator Padilla.
Chair and I you may know I I
don't know if you know the such
attempted this twice myself and
two different sessions a big fan
of trying to get done I
completely see the longevity I
completely agree with you there
persons doing a great job
they're going to be in that role
for twenty five years and
they're not they're gone
tomorrow it's unfortunate so I
just think that we need some
some real help there is a good
point out prior to the change in
two thousand and three for forty
five years I only had three
state superintendents over a
forty five year period we had
three state superintendent sits
with a very similar structure is
so I will let you know some of
the ran into that that slow down
when I was working on at the
time was can you just talk a
little bit more about the
structure of the board I think
is does it move to fifteen
members are disposed to fifteen
ten elected I appointed by the
governor they're staggered six
year terms all of them were
staggered that we would use the
current Education Commission
districts that were set up when
we did redistricting couple
years ago the design of the I
the additional I can you walk us
through kind of what those are
so there's six six year terms
appointed in staggered a
staggered basis so we have to
point they're least that's where
we need some some good
distillation they would be
appointed on a two year
difference so we have those I
would be appointed one or two of
them would be a two year term
one of two of the four year term
and another one or two would be
a six year that have to be
established political party
affiliation can you talk no more
than
three from the same party
ability does that work with the
six you're set up I just wanna
make it would depend on how the
governor chooses to make those
appointments once those
positions are established
governor could say the.
The the whatever her opposing
party is gets the short ones I I
don't know how that works so
that's right so madam chair and
and senator governor might have
to appoint a Republican if
they're Democrats versus so want
to make everyone aware that and
then the other issue that I I
did run into was sort of the the
budget for the department and
what sort of energy will they
have being not directly in the
governor's cabinet and the have
to show up right like just about
any other agency that's not in a
governor's cabinet can you talk
a little bit about that that was
a big challenge that I ran into
that would be very similar to
what the PRC has to do now
they're not directly under the
governor they have to go and beg
for money just like to but it
doesn't seem to be I mean
education is always going to get
a lot of attention and and I
don't think the funding that
will be a big concern of the
committee wants to make
education successful I'm not
really concerned about the
funding is but if we have it
that's always an issue with oil
and gas economy.
That would be I think everybody
would try to make sure the state
education is funded.
And madam chair and senator Lee
would they be on the you may
have said this I apologize if
you did will they be on the two
year election cycle
Or they won't have a special
election for the state school
elected school board members
will some of them would be there
be staff or so some of the on
the two years
and some would be on the
governor cycle but their six
year term so that's going to
automate I just met at they'll
be in the full blown election so
that you have a lot more people
participating in having a voice
in you're gonna have to get out
there and run a campaign to get
yourself elected to this report
the tenants that are across the
current.
PC district which for the
previous quarter members of the
board districts are they
partisan or nonpartisan fair
participants.
That was one of the reasons we
have estimated nonpartisan but
we list left parks have that's
about the only little mounts of
thing I'd rather than be
nonpartisan and the other I
could point to that way but
appreciate you working on this
and I want to I'm very
supportive of what to Senator
certains
I don't know if you ever signed
on Senator of
chairman of the education that
they both said they would co
sponsor Senator Stewart is a co
sponsor and the I think we might
have a house I can't remember
now.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
Thank you madam chair.
So I I agree you know the
definition of insanity and so
we've been insane for twenty
years but I was here when we did
it before and all the arguments
that we need stability this more
this elected boards not stable
they change their mind the okay
so we need stability almost
every word that came out of his
mouth came out of us somebody
else's mouth twenty years ago
only opposite.
We need to
the person appointed by the
governor so they would stay
around.
But it really is can we get
somebody to stay around.
How you get them to stay around
is always been the question I
know that in New Mexico.
The school districts that are in
the top ten.
in academic achievement almost
always have superintendents that
have been there for a long time.
Those that are in the bottom ten
have superintendents that they
flow through daily.
No there's there's I I see some
of these with the school boards
are so involved in the day to
day operation that they fired
the superintendent with the
superintendent just loses their
mind and leaves.
So.
That's still potential problem
here if you have a you you now
have a statewide school board.
The drive superintendent out all
the time.
I don't think there's any good
way to stop that but.
But what we have to enrollment
certainly isn't working but I do
want to caution at all of the
things that we that we're said
twenty years ago work to set
today but just for the opposite
reasons.
So madam chair and senator did
we have a problem with a
nonpartisan school board I mean
is it was at a sticking point
anywhere in here not necessarily
I'm Madam chair Senator
We were.
Working on lots of versions of
this bill and originally I had a
nonpartisan ten member.
Take the current people are in
the commission make them the
school board
Make you make that a nonpartisan
school board in the process of
negotiating so forth it got back
the other way and that's that's
not a good answer but that's
what happened.
Because I agree with Senator
Padilla it would be better.
If it wasn't.
Overly political.
Yes for two thirty.
Even the other third is you know
you got a point he some of these
and some are so it reduces the
political this of it.
What what I finally one of the
big arguments that came up was
it.
you and I both Republicans even
Democrats like to have a good
education in hundreds of the
facetious but that's right the
reality is party does party
doesn't have anything to do with
wanting to have your kids
education educated so we felt
that that really wasn't after we
get there and so we can make a
nonpartisan well.
Doesn't matter and I think
that's was the final decision.
What would be my only concern
but I do agree we got to figure
out how to keep somebody here
long enough to to implement
their ideas I would reemphasize
the forty five years prior to
the change we had three
superintendents.
So that's pretty long time
right thank you madam chair
thank thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
question one you had mentioned a
six year term yes is that I see
four year term in the bill just
give you Original Bill and that
I don't know that have the
sober.
The search section.
Thank you very much so I have to
say off the bat I'm not a fan of
six year terms just because.
Just because they end up
carrying over into a new
governor and and then especially
you have a provision here that
they can only remove for costs.
That and so you know I health I
think we all do it's funny
depending upon which side of the
aisle wrong we all have PCS the.
What we might consider that
appointments from the previous
governor.
Who a new governor David could
not.
Could not get rid of us that's
the problem of the six year term
in my opinion is that it carries
over into a new administration.
And the people may want changed
on including on education policy
I.
So that's that's a real problem
for me
Secondly.
One thing that I thought was
kind of good at least in theory
about moving to the secretary of
education model was that we had
a figure head you know we had a
person who was in charge
grant agreement appointed by
governor.
And in this case what you have
is you have a person that's
responsive to the statewide
board.
I mean that's press number one
right as opposed to a governor
in part Senator it's great.
Okay I guess the benefit of that
is that you have a broader based
group of people hoping to set an
agenda and not just necessarily
a governor which could be good
or bad the bad thing I think
when we make this change was a
feeling that things are just
kind of out there you know and
by putting a person that was
accountable under governor that
was accountable you have more
accountability so.
I've been around long as you
that's for sure but I remember
when we left this model and.
So I I don't I don't know I need
to think about that part of it.
so it will just continue to
think about it I don't know that
I'm really comfortable with the
idea.
Right now but
Okay thinking about missing the
debate might save the full
intent is to get it of separated
from the governor that is the
intent of this because the
politics of governors including
my last governor Martinez and
the politics these folks are put
under a microscope and they are.
Inundated constantly and the the
with the governor's wanting this
in the whatever and that's part
of the issue part of this other
issues health and whatever thing
you can't do anything about that
that.
Fifteen years.
Ten years for the last three
superintendents prior to the
change we have not ever had a
secretary of education anywhere
near that I think five or six
years the longest one that
served.
That yep I understand what
you're saying at the same time
though.
I think governors I mean even
though I really disagreed with
the last governor I mean she had
her agenda and her philosophy
about schools and I mean I
totally disagree with that that
is really not helpful but.
She got implement an agenda so
anyway I appreciate it I
appreciate the value what you
just said knowledge is continue
to kind of think about thank you
thanks thank you senator anyone
else on the committee all right
I do have just a couple of
questions for clarification
Senator
how does this
correlate or work with or does
it with the Education
Commission.
charter schools and charter
schools are public eliminating
those duties would come under
this board.
Right and what are those
The the terms when are the the
terms over for these how would
it affect the Education
Commission if this passes which
would be the next election
eighteen months from now about
and then the next election after
that which would be two years
after that there would be an
election for staggered terms
some of these positions would be
two four and six for six year
terms and we have to drop draw
lots or something like that
would have to do enabling lizard
provided would stagger those
terms they would be elected at
the election which phone three
half years now or something like
that they would then take
office in January one of twenty
seven so we're that's when the
new governor the next to
governor comes in as well so
again it doesn't affect this
governor she just run education
if she's got a really good
secretary of education the time
that person could be higher but
this the school board I don't
whatever happens happens but
they would of it's going to be a
long time and passing are
getting all this in place it
takes awhile to do that.
Thank you and remind me I was
here thank you were when this
was there before Senator share
mentioned but I can't remember
how many members do we have
Senator back then the same with
the same thing okay I see and I
think the last you can really
calmed secretaries right you
would column directors or should
bring tendons thank you okay
wasn't ever on a coke human what
was the delay wasn't over Annika
Garcia Dr no okay initiatives I
don't remember yeah okay
somebody was a delay David
Williams the name comes to.
Yes okay that maybe that was the
case thank you thank you Mr
thank thank you Sir Senator and
thank you Senate bill for that
all right well
You know I yeah I just to put it
out for the committee and see
what you all think and we have a
motion K. there's a motion
there's a motion from Senator
Padilla second to Senator share
on favor signify by saying aye.
Anyone opposed to okay there's
one opposed that Senator
Steinborn so you can put that on
there thank you very much thank
you appreciate it.
Do we have I'm sorry you know
what it's too late now but we we
did not get public comment and
can you I I would like to go
back a little bit because I
think the we need to know anyway
it still has to go to the floor
so we didn't hear you make it
official having voted with the
majority I move that we
reconsider thank you thank you
very much for the that's
Republican thank you the motion
the second to reconsider and we
can hear public comment wasn't
verdant yes situation here so
thank you all right anyone for
the bill here there we go can
you come up and say a few words.
You don't have to worry general
manager there there we go can
you hear me now.
Don't have.
Madam chair members the
committee Stan rounds I
represent these superintendent
of schools in New Mexico as well
as something called the
coalition of educational leaders
Senator that's every
administrator who administers
public schools in New Mexico for
instructional revive this bill I
was one of the folks madam chair
that supported the change in the
constitution to the current
structure okay and I'll tell you
that based on my experience with
twenty seven years as a
superintendent was my fiftieth
year in education unfortunately
it hasn't played out like we
thought it would.
The the membership of the the
return to the past has
opportunity for us to rewind
that again and we believe change
the turnover rates at the
leadership level in the state.
It's really hard to make change
in education in New Mexico with
that consistent time and effort
and and fish and that's what
we've been lacking with hope for
different madam chair that's not
how it's played out.
Mr chair of the last three state
superintendents were Leonard Leo
Alan Morgan and Michael Davis
just to to give you those names
in order has a as a completed
because I worked in fact serve
for Alan Morgan is the public
school finance chief and madam
chair I could just and also one
of the questions was about how
does that work with budget.
So this is a constitutional
office.
It was treated like a qualify
state agency we appear before
the legislative finance
committee provided our budgetary
recommendations what was
different was there rather than
having an executive an L. E. S.
C. and and LFC recommendation
for public school budgeting we
added a fourth player from that
constitutional office which was
the job I got to do is public
school finance chief for four
years to present to this
committee as an example what are
recommendations were for funding
of public schools including the
programmatic side that is
married with that in the public
education department was called
the state department of
education the time I'm sure
yours is committed to consider
this change we thank you for a
good hearing we believe this is
the right way to go and we thank
you for listening thank you very
much for those comments anyone
else in support of this joint
resolution anyone opposed.
Do we have anyone on seeing
to have somebody a post office.
Came as Terry call yes please if
we can put our economy that
would be great.
Can we hear that there's no
there's no visual there's
there's over there.
Members of this all I see okay
all right so the end can we hear
their audio to.
Okay Terry are you there are.
Good morning Morning madam chair
members of the committee we
respectfully oppose SJR one and
we do sell with a great deal of
respect for senator Neville who
we've worked with successfully
on many issues over the years we
believe that putting a partially
or fully selected group of
people in charge of our state's
education system will result in
greater politics not greater
progress and all of us can agree
more politics is the last thing
we need to the patient it's not
a perfect comparison but let's
not forget that we put elected
body in charge of utility
regulation and ended up with the
daily cocktail of dysfunction
and poor decision making every
retreated from that model in
addition lawmakers are
considering bills this session
that deals with the history
report governments of school
boards all across the state we
are concerned the same thing
would happen with the state
level school board finally the
number of adult decision makers
in our public education system
is not driving our students
unacceptably low character
academic performance we get to
have more deck chairs or
rearrange them the ship still
going to sing unless we become
more student centered and
relentlessly focused on growing
high performing public schools
of all types replicating
innovations and practices that
were requiring every child to
read by the third grade and
requiring the highest level of
training and development of
school leaders and teachers
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for allowing
me to share our common.
Thank you Terry anyone else on
this and before we move on.
Thank you very much all right
can we have a motion again from
it's it's Senator Padilla had
made a motion prior to is yes
this year thank you Senator
thank you so we have a second
center share again and anyone
opposed.
Past I like no without yes
Senator Steinborn was opposed
earlier thank you again now
thank you.
Thank you senator okay.
Thanks for that there for
reconsidering.
You okay now we're gonna go on
to Senator Padilla.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two.
I see can we have that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and you do have a
substitute
Two two five six two oh that
two.
Senator I'll move.
Do not pass the Senate rules
committee substitute for Senate
bill two eighty and a do pass
for discussion purposes Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty second.
Thank you mentioned you Senator
so with me Russia some Bunton
who is acting in the role of six
so we're chief information
security officer at the moment
and I I he's going to be my
expert witness today madam chair
and we have several others in
the audience will probably chime
in at different times I also
have Andrew Sherman who we all
met yesterday is my shadow and
he's going to maybe take some of
the prison the hard part do the
hard parts today all the the
easy part but madam chair
sensually you do know that I've
been kind of Cherry the what
happened during the science
technology telecommunications
Committee for approximately
eleven years now or vice chair
every other years we do it with
back and forth with the house
and in that in that time we've
come forward with the officer
broadband access and expansion
you know brought some
efficiencies there we're seeing
some great results there.
We now need to go down the road
cybersecurity in in exactly
what's been you know ailing us
for quite some time every level
of government in New Mexico has
been
the victim and survivor in a lot
of cases of cyber attacks from
across the world with this
legislation seeks to do is help
in a unified standard
streamlined fashion of
cybersecurity or cyber risks and
it helps us to implement a
cyber security office the
creates and documents and
develops and deploys and
implements minimum standards
that various government agencies
need to are here to apply to if
they want to have transactions
with state government and what I
mean by that is if you're in a
secular Association out there if
you're a city or county or state
university the state association
of some kind another agency all
you really need to do with what
we're designing here is meet the
minimum standards in order to
properly gonna have the
transaction with the state we
have hundreds of thousands of
transactions that occur on a
daily basis if one tiny little
window is not secure let's the
the bad actors into our system
and you see things like what
happened with our of the late
last year you see things that
happen with the Rio Rancho
public schools Albuquerque
public schools City of
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
you know the individual school
districts like locks Los crucis
as well
this fragmented model is
creating inefficiencies and it's
not allowing us to utilize
standard cybersecurity practices
it's also ailing us in terms of
throughput and efficiency with
the dollars with which we invest
in cyber security the fragmented
model increases vulnerabilities
and the ladies
recovery through the
implementation patchwork in
divergent solutions so if you're
on a totally separate non
minimum standard model then
there's additional work that has
to go in to help you recover
whenever you have these issues
the.
Fragmented model is also
increasing the cost and burden
of cyber security awareness to
our various departments also
want to let you know and I'm I'm
I'm going to wrap up here just a
minute madam chair but in the
FIR which I thought was very
good there was on page to a
normally don't like FIR is I
think the use of the most
important your bill sometimes
but I thought they did a
terrific job of analyzing and
outlining exactly what on page
two what the office will do and
everybody here can reach all
justify part I. points but
essentially it adopts and
implements rules that create
that minimum standard it
develops
those minimum cybersecurity
controls to help spot things
before they actually become an
issue it helps to monitor agency
I. T. networks it'll help to
reasonably and a re as
reasonably necessary obtain
agency systems event logs at
cetera so that we can use those
to model where threats might be
coming from in the future it
serves potentially as a
resources with this office will
do
the collaborates with agencies
and developing their standards
or takes a look at as an example
in the rules committee we
elected to take out agencies
like this these the secretary of
state's office and others that
already have to adhere to
federal standards that would be
much higher than ours and so we
we took care of all that in the
rules committee establishes
again anymore data
classification policies and
standards it develops an issue
cybersecurity awareness policies
and training it serves as a
resource all those community all
those other political
subdivisions and establishes a
centralized server security data
breach reporting process in
addition all that we do create
the actual office of
cybersecurity we created the
role of chief information
security officer and then we
also equipped back office and
that six oh chief information
security officer with an
advisory board of professionals
in cybersecurity cybersecurity
industry to advise them on the
work that they're doing so those
are the high points of what the
legislation does someone ask our
our current chief information
security officer rostrum to say
a few words and then we'll.
We're going to go with the flow.
Thank you Ross good morning
Peter and that thank you members
of the committee it is a hundred
to be here to introduce this
bill along with the senator.
So this bill gives yeah level of
standardization that we have
currently lacking
I'll give you a quick example
and
Let's say.
If I incident happened just a
more security incident happen
and if we need to respond right
now we have seventy five
executive branch agency
occurrences ascension portal I
am very positive each one of
them has its own incident
responsible.
So we can minimize that effort
by having a standardized set of
incident response.
Because these are process these
these are not technologies these
are prophecies and we can gain
efficiency we can be quick to
react to.
And as the senator pointed out
that another valuable is that
having a security operation
center that does monitoring this
is think of this is a more I
guess security center madam they
you know feeds from maintenance
different cameras is being
monitored for any potential
activities things of that nature
this is standard best practice
that exist across the board.
But be here in the state of New
Mexico we have lacked such an
effort so who's trying to get
break into Department of Health
are who was trying to break into
PED I was trying to break into a
TD we do not know the inside
because we lack visibility into
that.
The state has done a better job
competitively speaking because
the state's staff Senate very
common I recall the network if
you are connected to the network
then I get to see all what type
of traffic from which country
it's coming in which can play is
going to things of that nature.
Not all agencies provide that
information but we have done a
family good job of finalising
what those abilities are and
giving a heads up I am happy and
produce indicate here that in
many cases lately I in the last
I have three four months since
we start up a sock for the state
executive branch
yet having at least a seven day
head start saying Hey there's
something it is the evolving
into a packed and let's focus in
here and boom.
Ten days later.
critical infrastructure agency
says hello the at that is a
vulnerability well be identified
that much earlier and but most
of that so thank you thank you
Russia and so madam chair the
last thing I'll wrap up with is
that we do have a small
appropriation in the bill and I
I know that we're dealing with
those in certain ways three
hundred thousand dollars section
seven on page ten essentially
all of the staff of furniture
equipment etcetera it will we
transfer that over officially to
the to the new office of
cybersecurity the three hundred
thousand dollars to fill a gap
on positions of.
The but those staffing positions
will go as well I do have I
don't know that this is reached
the this committee yet but the
truth money availability for or
dollars or funding available for
this office is actually already
in the HFC HB to the came over
at fifteen million five hundred
thousand it's spread across four
agencies first is ten million
dollars through to the actual
office of cyber security and
then P. AGD and actually are all
the make up the difference of
the other five or so five point
five million so this gets the
office off the ground and and
moves in the right direction and
the come back later like we did
with the office of broadband
access expansion my creative
that when we did the early
education department they'll
come back with revised budgeting
down the road once they're
established okay thank you thank
you senator anyone from the
committee here that has any
questions are going to go on to
to public comment too but I
think Senator share wanted to
has a question okay yes I would
thank you but I didn't know if
your question was immediate
thank you do we have anyone
supporting this bill thank you
all right if you can come up and
make it is possible as time
passes and we have to go on to
the floor soon thank you you
can.
Thank you for coming in and
doing this and just takes our
sometimes waiting thank you
madam chair my name is Peter
then toss on the secretary
designate for the department of
information technology in the
state of New Mexico also chair
the cybersecurity planning
committees that has activities
going on to engage agencies and
organizations outside of state
government this is a whole of
state approach that the office
of cybersecurity would address
not just the federal government
is giving away very little money
but they're very interested in
securing the state not just the
executive branch of state
government and that's what this
office will do the acting C. so
has shown great success in
recent months
one hundred percent of the
executive agencies if they're
not in our vulnerability
management program they are
providing data to it so that we
now have a single pane of glass
that can state what the
cyber security posture is of the
State government of they've also
achieve success with what's
called multi factor
authentication that's where you
get the call back saying is that
really you we get your username
and password is it really you
this.
But technique.
Will stop ninety nine point nine
percent of all ransomware
attacks and I'm happy to report
that
Raza's
team of cyber security experts
has been able to implement that
one hundred percent across state
government thank you very much
thank you I am in support of
this bill thank you thank you
thank you members of sorry about
that next person you're next
down here okay and then.
Then stand back there thank you
thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Roy
Soto I am a former cabinet
secretary for two and a former
chief information officer I'm
supporting this bill because
I've had the experience of
living through a major hack the
one that went to a major
department because we are
networked at the time with
several other departments we
didn't have the staff we didn't
have the resources and we had
thousands of individuals and
throughout the state whose
personal information was at risk
we were able to call in the FBI
to help us I had we had the
resources I think we've been
doing a better job now you know
this is not going to go away of
these over the last few years
these attackers have become
sophisticated organizations.
Of forget the hope the Chinese
balloon you know they've got
more information on Americans
right now that any other country
that's why there is a national
association of state chief
information officers was this
year maybe cybersecurity at the
risk management of that the
issue their top priority it's
the number one issue I support
this bill I support the
appropriation that was tacked
onto it because these cyber
gangs are smart they're moving
ahead I was reading this week
they've got a new a tax system
this actually of a what acting
like the sheep that comes into
the system undetected and we've
got to be prepared we have to be
prepared I support this bill the
hope you do too thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you ladies are I stand
your next thank you.
Madam chairman again stand
rounds the superintendents and
the coalition education leaders
we stand in full support of this
cyberattacks turned away today
we have a district he just in
the last six days had a
substantial impact there were
dealing through that this is our
third wave of attacks in the
schools over the last two years
that are substantial we believe
this collaboration coordination
for this office is going to help
us do a better job of
coordinating our efforts it
isn't the only answer but it's
one of the important answers
madam chair thank you we support
the bill thank you Stan all
right anyone else in the
audience supporting this bill.
Can anyone opposed.
Thank you enough about soon do
we have anyone.
For yes okay thank you know one
on Sam okay committee member
center share your first.
Thank you madam chair.
So I know.
I asked this question I could
believe we don't have a security
But I saw in the university for
various so why aren't we working
together all because western is
so much more special than New
Mexico state which is more so
much more special than eastern
and so we can't use the same
system.
Under this plan I know it won't
be the same system but can you
secure them all so madam chair
center outstanding question and
I and I try to say this every
time I present this material.
They can do with the the H.
other agencies can do whatever
they want to you know but if
they want to have transactions
with state government which a
western but absolutely have to
have that from a financial
standpoint.
the registar office whatever
maybe they will have to meet a
minimum set of standards of this
office will be the gatekeeper if
you will of those minimum
standards otherwise you're not
getting in your transaction in
state government.
So madam chair some just some of
the things that we do so we do
our campaign.
Of finance reporting from this
right here.
So.
How would how would you secure
this so madam chair and senator
the individual interaction on a
standalone machine like what you
have in front of you is one
thing but the moment you try to
commit that information to the
database of the secretary of
state's office they have to meet
federal homeland security
requirements and minimum
standards which are actually
higher than what we're more than
likely to implement here across
the state so I hope as I said
that right Roger and so as a
result whatever you may be doing
on your machine is is totally
separate until you actually try
to commit the information to the
database you won't be able to do
that unless the standards are
put in place and unless the
secretary of state as me what
the secretary of state's office
the group were the other ones we
had a couple of is that we.
Yeah I couldn't remember all of
not but that are out they claim
They are elected
the functions and they have some
like to do that.
Requirements but as the Senator
looted out chair and members of
the committee is we are defining
a framework that all these
people can be in a position to
contribute and not be part of
that alignment we will be
following understand that I just
want to know will I be able to
use my my computer to send stuff
chair Senator Mike Wilder is a
weakness because it doesn't have
all the same secure you will and
as a as a matter of fact the
secretary of state's office as
an example and it was the Land
Office was the actually the
other one they already have
requirements that they have to
adhere to from the federal
homeland security standpoint so
they're not going to receive
receive your data unless their
offices unless it's coming from
a source that is secure they
will let you know that in very
short order because you won't be
able to present your your
ProConnect your information to
the database I feel confident
that they are in great shape
already because they've
implemented those standards that
are federal home it's pretty
standards several years ago.
So madam chair.
We've accepted recently that
means that.
That's right I can still get in
matter what this that's correct
yes okay
there's also of.
In MLS
used to be national mortgage
note something else licensing
system but a lot of.
People are using that to get
licensed in various states of
money is useful so I can be
licensed and I don't know forty
of the fifty states to NML.
So I'm assuming they have the
same thing because that's
another outside window me
completely outside government
but that information has to come
into government somehow that is
a madam chair so that's an
excellent example of what we
were just saying so they that
organization because it's across
forty states they're hearing to
federal homeland security
standards
the if any portion of that
transaction having to deal with
the state of New Mexico we'll
have to meet the minimum
standards that are set by this
office essential.
And then finally madam chair of
my concern I I love this sport
but my concern is that the
national actors that are out
there have farm more recent
resources and for the more
interest in breaking in then we
have been protecting ourselves
can we defend ourselves.
In reality from the national
actors are trying to break in
madam chair center I want to say
yes but I I would say yes to
ninety nine point nine nine nine
eight percent of the time once
the standards are in place
The other the fragmented
approach we have today is what
truly causes the problem and so
I said to the folks to do this
work in state so why don't we
put this all together.
So that's the good news the bad
news is when they make it in
they're gonna make it all the
way and so but with this much
energy attention inertia and a
focused effort it's going to be
incredibly hard for them to do
that.
And so I just want to read the
headline here of US Marshall
service suffers major security
breach that compromised the
sensitive information it was the
US marshal.
It was hacked if you can pack
the US marshal would probably
hacked stated to Mexico to so
I'm just a little worried not
again I'm not opposing this
because it's way better than
what we have but how do we keep
up with with them thank you
madam chair the good news
services were gonna be a highly
less likely but you're right.
R. as their style thank you
madam chair Senator so I like
the concept I have a major
concern though with one part of
the bill I just want to bounce
off you which is that if you
will look at page six come with
up to two.
Thirteen K. five fifty two.
the advisory committee act fund
for Tate on page six line I that
we actually have and what the
advisory committee make the
hiring decision.
Of the security officer of the
main person.
And then we allow the security
officer to a point almost fifty
percent of the advisory
committee.
it to me number one.
I would think you would want to
do it secretary to hired a
security officer number two I
don't think a real concerns that
you have the person basically
being able to point the people
to get a stand in judgment of
the performance making slightly
less than fifty percent of that
group it might be a pointing
their bodies to that thing who
kind of have their back rather
than just people who.
Who are just looking out like a
shark Commission irrespective
whether they get along all the
time so I I think that's a real
concern my Senator I I would
almost feel much better if it
was appointed by the secretary
of do it.
and I'm curious why you set up.
Yes thank you madam chair we
actually had it that way when we
first draft of the bill the
first couple of iterations
we do want the the cyst so chief
information security officer to
have some level of independence
from the secretary the head of
the department information
technology because they.
That we also wanted there to but
Haiti's word collusion make
inclusion there either that's
why we thought that the this is
advisory board and we did not
give full authority to the by
advisory board for for the
hiring because of just I guess
you said less than half of the
of the advisory board has the
authority to hire fire and
discipline this for.
Thank you.
Madam chair you know at the same
time though.
You know you have to have a can
appreciate your coming from but
you have to have some.
Line of authority there if for
getting it done I thought that
was the benefit of the new
offices you've created and you
created a new you're proposing
in the office of Mary's up with
that I think when we segregated
a way we're we're also losing
our economy of scale we're
losing that working relationship
and further we're kind of.
Insulating this this person on a
in a way there.
Kind of shielding themselves
with their own political
apparatus by having almost fifty
percent of the appointees so.
Again I I I I hear you I I
think.
I think I feel better.
Thank you be stronger at if you
do it hired this person and I
wouldn't have a problem with the
security person recommending.
People that they knew and
trusted but not having them
responsibility be like an
executive director of a
nonprofit choosing their own
board which then they do
recruited board members I can
work with I guess that's pretty
common but.
Anyway it's it's well it's less
than half it's it's actually
really three of how many
thirteen.
So it's three of thirteen that
have so that's that line in
there that are appointed by the
system.
Actually six Senator.
Three members appointed by the
security officer where the other
three.
Rep Adam six on page seven.
This item number five and six
looking at the version two dot
to about a quarter of.
If you look on the bottom of
page six phone number five zero
three members appointed by the
security office and then online
I on page seven of three members
appointed by the security
officer so that six.
See you end up with six.
thirteen you yes of thirteen
from a disciplinary standpoint
because I think it's fourteen
because the security officer
also sits on the chairs that as
a non voting member for so for
disciplinary situations six
seven thirteen so I would think
that would correct creating
incentive for that person to
say.
Who can I guess it's going to
have my best.
Not.
Who can I get even though we may
disagree about another person's
gonna bring value.
So for the terms with which
these individuals are in there
advisory capacity our advisory
committee capacity there's a
strong likelihood that some of
those six words appointed by but
they're still in the middle of
their term.
Since it that they're a point
that they're not appointed by
the current chief information
security officer but I hear it
yeah and I just you were back
and forth on that one but a can
imagine madam chair you know
having created a division one
time it within a department
we're going back and forth I
want to the governor actually
appointed division director and
I I.
Anyway there was hoping about
government organization act
people report to New Delhi so in
this case you have an office
within a bigger office and I
don't know to me I would just
think it be stronger if if they
were appointed by the do it
secretary more accountability
and then.
And not have that advisory
committee to the to the hiring
so I mean there's other people
on there as well like.
You know like Legislative
Council gets to pick someone and
just some kind of it spreads it
out.
That advisory committee more may
not be the best apparatus to
make that decision and they may
do a perfectly fine job so would
you consider making that change
Senator at the moment I'd like
to leave the bill the way it is
when we went back and forth in a
couple of iterations I feel
comfortable that we've we've got
something here that starts well
I'm more than happy if we if
this season its way to the
governor's desk gets a signature
to work with you in a future
here to if you don't feel that
it's working appropriate.
Well.
Appreciate that and madam chair
center hopefully you'll just
since the bill is actually just
getting started you'll be open
to hearing others feedback if
this because it continues come a
theme that maybe we make this
change you know and I will say
that we've been through the
rules committee already and we
are now here with our Canadian
we're move you one third of the
way through Manchester United
along so no disrespect to the
great rules committee all right
so you're just getting started I
appreciate it and that's my
feedback at this juncture the
committee thank you.
Or in Senator Woods and then
Senator Diamond do you have your
hand up Senator okay thank you
Mr.
I'm missing the point you madam
chair in center somewhere of
lost.
We have a Office of do it.
And at this point in time right
now the second.
Who does this job.
What's gonna by the individual
sitting to my right without.
Respectfully a lot of teeth
staffing and and ability to get
the job we have very little
the fragmented approach which is
where a lot of the entry into
the system occurs and this is
going to tie it all together and
provided with the appropriate
staffing and guidance and
authority to essentially carry
that stick that make sure that
you're not gonna be able to do
transactions with state
government until you hear the
minimum standards.
So what I'm getting at madam
chair and.
Why does do it evidently agrees
that this is a very critical
issue a very important issue.
So why don't they say we're
going to set up a position and
do it to do exactly this.
And make it a priority if it if
it's that ported important to
deal.
And we had to do it.
I guess I don't understand the
scope of the job do it is I
guess is what I'm missing madam
chair.
it is that it that is not under
there's and scope of interest to
do this madam chair and senator
so do it does a whole lot of
other things that have
cybersecurity related necessary
that's one thing I can it's it's
an incredibly wrinkled shirt
that we're trying to iron out
here
we're we're going down this road
also because of the fragmented I
commence a little out of the
fragmented approach that we have
today this brings everything
into alignment and a minimum and
someone that owns the sleeves
and drinks a minimum set of
standards if you want to do
transactions the state
government rise as a common
goals on chairman members of the
committee a right now the
department of information
technologies and compat known as
do it is very specifically
focused one to provide services
to the executive.
This will open the door to find
work with the school district
and Paul it's political
subdivisions and we also have
the acting secretary of do it
it's just a few words also one
coming up this.
Thank you madam chair Senators
up there were two big issues
first of all my two biggest
priorities are
broadband getting broadband out
to the people and cybersecurity.
Acting governor and I disagreed
on the priority between those
two cybersecurity is hugely
important and we've been taking
a lot of work to it
six months ago we had two people
in our office working
cybersecurity
the certainly not enough to you
get a standardized approach to
it.
Another issue is as Roger had
mentioned the school and that is
my authority is only to the
state agencies and as you've
heard some of the state agencies
resisted that and it's difficult
to to get them together and I
can't say anything to the
schools I can't say anything to
the courts about.
Here's the minimum you must have
before you interact with us so
those are the two reasons and
the.
Models that we've used with
broadband having it's own office
administratively attached the
director and I work very closely
together on a daily basis all is
the same sort of model that we
would have with cyber security I
think it's good model I think
it'll work well thank you
Senators thank you madam chair
thank you thank you for that
madam chair before you go Sir I
stand for questions.
Madam chair and so why wouldn't
we just right statute to broaden
your office.
To do these things instead of
creating another office.
Madam chair Senators thank you
that would be one approach but
that is one of the problems that
we're trying to solve is that
the executive branch of state
government and the department of
I. T. why definition by statute
their scope is limited to the
executive branch of state
government but I believe you
could okay thank you madam if
yes thank you senator all right
we've got the time is going by
so we're going to move Senator
Diamond your next do we have
anyone else to madam chair and
and Senator I I really might my
questions and my thoughts were
going those of of my colleagues
before it seems unnecessary to
create another office to do
something instead of just
enabling do it properly funding
you I believe that these the
cyber security attacks are real
threats are real and that we
need to properly fund and
protect our government but this
seems like an unnecessary
expansion and then and then as I
continued reading it gets pretty
swampy and here what we're
appointing board members you
know the officers going to point
their own bosses it just seems
like we should come together as
a legislator and properly fund
and and find do it with the
ability to to do their job to do
it.
Really so I guess I'm not
understanding the need for an
entirely new office instead of
just letting do it.
Senator excellent points and
thank you for the comments
essentially that's what you're
what's being proposed or what's
being said by Google our
colleagues are that's really
what we're doing here simply
formalizing a functional office
on the subject we're not
actually at the moment not even
adding any staffing or anything
like that we're create and then
and then that gives this agenda
at this office the ability to
come forth an agenda to the
legislature every year whenever
changes are needed so it's not
that we're not actually creating
a whole new apparatus or
anything like that the only new
thing that we are City sensually
creating is the
linkage so that we don't have
the fragmented approach the
advisory board so that there is
help to the system over the
chief every scripture and
guidance in terms of what's
going on out of state government
and outside of state government
so have that information and
then with regard to to to the
you know appointing
their own boss or whatever the
not everybody on that advisory
board has the ability to hire
and fire this individual to less
than half of them have the
ability to do that
so that's that's why this is
being great so that we have the
more directed focus on
cybersecurity rather than the
fragmented approach that we have
today.
We're not adding any additional
staff for at the moment I'm sure
that this office will come later
in stable for really need is you
know these three people in this
area who knows I don't know
what's going on outside the
cybersecurity attack out there
in the center this is what I'm
trying to help with.
Not madam chairman and I guess I
just I still don't see the need
of why do we even need the
advisory board why don't we fund
positions within do it why don't
we give them the necessary you
know if if there's necessary
statutes to allow them to just
expand and operate under the
system we have now.
Well a lot of what's in the bill
actually is what you're
describing and there will be
more later that will come
forward as a result of a
directed focus on this topic.
Madam chairman I think I would I
would feel more comfortable just
properly funding them clearly
they're not giving them the
resources and and potential
legislation legislation if
needed for them to us to to
address cybersecurity but I just
don't see the need for this mass
expansion of an office but but I
I appreciate your time thank
you.
Thank you senator all right do
we have anyone else here with
the any questions or comments
and if not what is the pleasure
of being free to pass on Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate rules committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty.
There is a motion for the past
there's a maintenance
requirements but there is a
motion and a second at the end
anyone opposed to this bill okay
Sonya you can mark this and with
gas into the woods and Senator
Diamond and all right you've
gotta do pass Mr.
Medic you very much all right
thank you very much it seems
like we have a finish this
morning's agenda this afternoon
we have two full committee
hearings Public Education
