Thursday, February 20th,
Committee for Senate Finance,
and we will start off with early
childhood education and care
department and Kelly, do you
want to start us?
Good morning, Senator. Good
morning to everybody on the
committee. I'm Kelly Klund with
the Legislative Finance
Committee.
We're on agency code 611, the
early childhood education and
care department with me today is
Secretary Gerginsky and my
counterpart from DFA Mary Beth
Dinsmore.
So I'm just gonna start by
reminding us about our
conversation we had last week or
a week and a half ago, whatever
day that was.
Um, regarding early childhood,
and some of the key things we
talked about were the continued
growth we've seen over the last
few years, particularly targeted
at programs when you want to get
an an outcome for a certain
population that you need to
invest in the early childhood
services that achieves that
outcome cause they all don't
achieve the same outcome
necessarily while together, they
do have complementary factors,
things like early education, we
tend to get more outcomes from
pre-K, uh,
Workforce stability and
participation, childcare
assistance does, um, outcomes
for when it comes to um family
support and early intervention,
the family infant toddler
program and also when you have
prenatal to up to 3 years old,
the home visiting program helps
with family support issues early
screening, possibly reductions
in child maltreatment, depending
on the model. So I just want to
remind everybody where we were
at in that conversation as we
start today.
For your notes, if you want to
relook at some of the LFC
documents in your volumes, the
child well-being section in
volume one starts on page 23.
The Volume 2 starts on page 251
and I'm just
calling this out if you want to
write them down.
Volume 2 starts on page 251.
And that the volume 2 is the LFC
recommendation, which
We're kind of pass a little bit,
but there is some good um policy
discussions in there.
And then volume 3, the Spiral
bound notebook that has a bunch
of the data so that you can see
where we're at on spending and
enrollment across these programs
that begins on page 83. There's
a lot of really helpful charts
in volume 3.
Now for the rest of this
presentation, I'm gonna be
working off of the documents in
front of you that has color
coding, it's got yellow and
orange. It's a two pager and
it's got separate tables on it.
This, uh
This documentation shows you
what the House Appropriation
Finance Committee is going to
adopt for the early childhood
education and care department,
so it has um.
For 4 columns now. It's got the
executive recommendation.
The LFC recommendation and the
House Appropriation and Finance
Committee recommendation and
then the difference that final
column on the right is the
difference between the LFC and
the AFC appropriations.
And if you look at that middle
table, it's gonna be at the
bottom of page one. There's some
orange on that.
And those are highlighting the
differences because the main
changes from HAFC to LFC was
increased use of the early
education and care Trust Fund we
call it.
And so the main differences were
in that table and you can see
the orange is the additional
money from the trust fund on top
of LFC. So that was the big
changes from HAFC, so we'll go
through that.
Um, it begins online 38 and that
table ends on line 66. So you
can see there, the largest
changes were on line 42. HAFC
increased childcare assistance
to $67.3 million on top of the
current operating budget.
For an additional 56.1 million
over LFC.
They increased IT for the
department by 1.5 million.
And they increase, they put an
increase for the family infant
toddler program for state
matching funds of $5 million.
They increased home visiting,
$10 million.
An increase for childcare foods,
um, and nutrition by a million
dollars?
Early educator incentives by 2.5
million.
And pre-K expansion by 25
million. Now remember that those
are the increases on top of the
LFC.
I will note that there are other
increases for pre-kindergarten
and home visiting and childcare
systems that were already in the
LFC recommendation, which is
what it's accepted by House
Appropriation Finance Committee.
I will note that there is a
couple language uh important
pieces that the HAFC adopted. So
all of those increased revenues
that are in orange are all
contingent on an a bill that
would increase the distribution
of the uh trust fund.
To right now, the bill increases
it to 500 million. This
recommendation increases it to
400 million, so there's a
difference there.
There's also language in.
Do, do you have a number on
that?
Uh house Bill 71.
Uh
Sorry, what was it? Oh, yes, the
language. The other language
that was included is that the
increase for childcare
assistance is to be targeted
towards increasing infant and
toddler care in the state, and
if you remember, we had
discussions that we have pretty
broad coverage of childcare for
4 year olds and 3-year-olds and
school age kids because of the
auxiliary programs that serve
them like free kindergarten,
after school care, summer
programs in schools, but we have
very
served infant and toddler slots
in the state. So the intent of
HAFC was to increase that
revenue to target that to infant
and toddler care for families
around the state.
And with that, I will turn it
over to my counterpart Mary Beth
for her to add any additional
comment.
Thank you, Kelly. Uh, good
morning, Chair, committee
members. Um, I just wanted to
take a second, go over a few of
these still remaining
differences between the
recommendations.
Um, that are, uh, still pretty
important for the agency, um, so
a couple of these, just so you
know, it's not all in the base.
There's a couple of
non-recurring. So one of them is
uh the agency has a supplemental
request this year for about $7.5
million. And this is due to, uh,
it's in the family infant
toddler program, which is an
entitlement program to help, uh,
screen kids for developmental
disabilities, um, ages 0 to 3,
and they are projecting uh
an uptick in, uh, eligible, uh.
Little ones
For this program, um, I believe
they're seeing about a 5%
increase over what is currently
in the 25 budget. So for that,
they're asking for 7.5 million
to to try to address this, make
sure all the kids that are
eligible actually served, um,
and one thing I just want to
throw out here, I'm sure you're
all aware of the trust fund and,
you know, how much is in there
and things that can be used for.
I also, I just wanted to point
out we, the trust fund can't be
used for this supplemental. This
would have to be some other
funding source.
Um, because the trust fund
distributions are done per year,
and there's no more budget, uh,
according to the uh legislation,
um, and the statutory, uh,
guidelines for how much the
agency receives every year.
They're at that limit. So,
there's no more trust fund in FY
25 to use. We'd have to, uh,
that bill, House Bill 71,
starts, uh, for FY 26.
Hopefully that makes sense, um,
but basically they, they can't
use Trust Fund for it, so it
would have to be some other
funding source, but it's a
pretty critical need. Wanna make
sure you're all aware that so
they are serving everybody.
Um, I'd also like to, we haven't
talked about this too much. This
is a C2 request, but it, it's
the other really, really
important thing for the agency
is, and I'll, I'll let the
secretary can speak more about
this cause
I'm not super familiar with the
project, but it is a uh an IT
project to, I believe, help
modernize and streamline uh the
data from the kids that are in
the system. Please correct me if
I'm wrong. Um, that is critical.
They have a million.
Um, in trust fund currently from
HAFC, they are asking for 3
more.
Um
The 3rd thing I'll just want to
bring your attention again, Kel
Kelly touched on childcare.
So HAFC raised childcare
tremendously, got much closer to
the executive, um, which I think
the agency is very grateful for.
There is still a gap of 29.2
million between the executive
recommendation and that what was
adopted.
Um, in HAFC.
And
This additional funding would
take
Um
Sorry, would allow for an
additional about 5,100-ish.
Uh, kids to be served, and these
are mostly focused on infants
and toddlers. So like Kelly
said, LFC and HAFC really
focused on ensuring that that's
what the agency was going to
focus on. There's language for
it, um, my understanding is that
was what the agency was planning
on focusing on anyway, was this
great need for infants and
toddlers. So this additional
29.2 million would get them to
where they're trying to be, to
have enough capacity to serve
more infants and toddlers
throughout the state.
Um, and very quickly I'll just
end with um
Uh, pay for, uh, early childhood
educators, um, and childcare,
uh.
Childcare workers
So there's two places I believe
that would be sufficient to
address this. So in the base,
there is uh $10 million for wage
and career lattice that was
requested, that was recommended
by the executive, but not by the
LFC, but that would help, uh,
them get going, um, even more on
helping raise the salaries of
these people that I'm sure we
all know are not very highly
paid and um really do need
support to get to a living wage,
um.
That's one way to address it.
The other one is in section 5,
there is a large special
recommendation from the
executive for 104.6 million.
Currently about 69 million of
this would be used, uh, or would
be addressed by the trust fund
with the balance in general
fund. That's the other place
where um the agency is really
trying to address this, uh, wage
floor issue. And so of that
104.6, about 74 million is
what's needed to bring everybody
from 15 to $18 an hour.
So it's two different
approaches. One is obviously
much more than the other one,
you know, you're talking 74
versus 10 base versus
non-recurring, etc. um, but I
just wanted to put that out
there for you, that, you know, I
think those are some of the more
Still outstanding means that the
agency is trying to, trying to
secure. So, uh, with that,
I will stop talking, turn it
over to the secretary. um, thank
you all.
Good morning. Good morning, good
morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the Senate Finance Committee.
It's wonderful to be here with
you this morning. Uh, do I have
my slides up?
Um
OK. Um, well, um, I, I really
appreciate being here and wanna
thank Kelly and Mary Beth for
all their great work and support
in helping the agency, um, put
together, um, you know, to put
together a budget that I think
reflects the values of our
state, uh, and in your folders
you'll see a copy of the
PowerPoint, a one page fact
sheet about House Bill 71 that
Kelly referenced, and I don't
know if we also have the
governor's summit in there. I
don't know. We have a, a, a
summary of a wonderful summit
that we had in July.
at Bishop's Lodge, um, to really
culminate the incredible work
that this legislative body, uh,
the governor, so many advocates,
early childhood providers all
across the state, a deep
partnership that we've had, uh,
to work collectively towards our
shared goal of improving the
lives of babies, toddlers,
preschoolers and their families,
and most importantly to the
people who care for and educate
them every day.
So our request definitely builds
on this great partnership that's
happened over the past 5 years.
This is my 6th budget, um,
presenting to the legislature
and could not be more proud of
the work and working under
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
and her vision and um two
incredible people sitting here
on the panel who uh were the
authors of the bill that, uh,
that created the sponsors of the
bill that created the early
childhood education and care
department, uh, so it's really,
it's just incredible and that
the next
kind of says why I believe the
legislature came together and
aligned on creating the
department and then creating the
trust fund and then taking to
the voters the question about uh
the land grant permanent fund,
but when we think that this
committee in particular, you
think about investment and
finance and what's my return and
what are all these funds we have
and we know that the early
childhood trust fund is
performing as expected, but
better than we expected moving
quickly, that's returning.
It's, it's bringing in about
6.7% on the corpus each year.
Those investments are in turn
going into your communities,
your neighborhoods, rural and
urban areas and making a 13%, 7
to 13% return for our state, uh,
because of these investments
that the trust fund has had,
general fund and all the other
funds. I was down in Las Cruces
recently with about 50 early
childhood professionals from
schools and community and home
visiting and they are just
overwhelmed with how and
grateful, and I bring it back to
you because without your
support, this would not have
been possible, but they talked
about a deep and intentional
investments that are
transforming their communities
and the lives of families, so we
are just again I I wanna echo
their gratitude to you and wish
you could be there with me and
um it's it's everywhere I go.
People are saying thank you and
not only here in New Mexico, but
the country is definitely
watching. This is an area where
New Mexico is leading the nation
in showing how, as Kelly said,
when you bring all these
programs and service.
s together in community with a
family centered focus, community
driven, we really do get the
outcomes, um, that we're all
looking for.
So our budget priorities really
focus on 3 key things is first,
we have to build capacity. I'm
sure you hear this when you're
out talking to your members and
people, constituents in your
community that they're doing
well, but they want, they need
access to more support to either
build their back office or to
build some brick and mortar or
to hire staff, so we, this
budget really does focus on that
workforce. Without the
workforce, we can't serve more
children, and we want a
workforce that is well
compensated and
credentialed. Our second
priority is around the quality
of these services that return on
investment comes when children
and families have access to
quality programs, um, again, the
workforce is that source of
quality. If they are safe and
secure and have enough resources
to care for their own family,
they're able to come to programs
and deliver for other.
Family's children, uh, we saw
this when we during the relief
money we gave $3 an hour,
um.
Raises to people in childcare
and the testimonials were things
like I, I can quit my second
job, I can buy that medication
for my parent. I can come to
work more ready and focused on
the children in my classroom. So
that is a huge part of our
improving quality and then
accountability. These are big
dollars. This budget is almost a
billion dollars that we're
requesting and sorry about that
and uh we know that with that
comes a high level of
accountability, and we welcome
that. We want to see that we're
using a
assessments in our classrooms
we're redesigning our quality
rating and improvement system so
that you as legislators and us
as executives have a far better
idea of how well our programs
are performing and how we can
better support them to perform
at a higher level of quality.
These investments we know, um,
some of the things that we've
seen is um 72% of parents
receiving childcare assistance
in New Mexico report greater job
stability, allowing them to
pursue career opportunities,
achieve financial stability and
support their household. We have
a very high maternal labor force
participation rate, 10% higher
than the national rate. We think
it's a lot because of the
investments that you all have
made in families in allowing
them to go to work, go to
school, and then also take care
of their, take care of.
children.
The next slide, oh, we're
already on, thank you.
Um, so this shows you the trust
fund increase and how it aligns
with the executive budget
request.
Um, I will go to detail because
you can probably read it, but
the good thing to see there on
the chart is we're taking the
500, just a few years earlier
than it would already produce to
the department. The reason we're
doing it is because the momentum
is here, the communities are
ready, we have local early
childhood coalitions all over
the state, working together,
working with the state, working
in um with data to see what do
they need to do for children and
families in their community. So
you'll see there the corpus does
not.
get impacted um as the, as the
distribution does increase, and
we're really hopeful to have um
your support. It'll come once it
crosses over, uh, and we're
excited to see the kind of
things. The other thing that is
very important to us that the
HAFC did not, and I hope you all
can help us is the Dolly
Parton's Imagination Library.
This is a pride and joy of this
state. We want to be a full
Dolly Parton imagination
library, and we need that
5004048. Thank you. We have it
memorized $548,000 to add to the
660,000 the department already
has. We are in every county and
we wanna make sure that every
baby born in New Mexico knows
about Dolly Parton imagination
library. There's local input,
there's local funding, so we're
hopeful to see that also, uh,
and come across, um.
the House Bill 2 comes across.
Special appropriation.
Um
The next slide. This one, this
is the one that Mary Beth talked
extensively about and we're
really grateful to get the
professional development special
for our family infant toddler
professionals. They're uh using
family guided routines based
interventions when they go in
and work with a family whose
child has been identified with a
developmental delay or a
disability, and they really
build the capacity of the
caregivers, whether it's the
childcare, whether it's the
family, the grandparents,
whoever's with that child, uh,
and this.
family guided routines-based
intervention is a best practice
and so that $2 million will help
with that as well as coaching
for those professionals. Um, the
other, um, is our supplemental
that um Mary Beth talked about
and we we are very hopeful. The
family infant toddler program,
we are number one in the nation
for finding and identifying
children 0 to 2. So this is
really a a a a crown jewel of
our state and we wanna show that
by really supporting this um
program that
is also heavily funded by
Medicaid. So 71% of the children
in the FIT program are on
Medicaid. The team here, um,
does a good job working with um
the healthcare authority to make
sure that we are getting all
those revenues, but again, post
COVID, I think we're seeing a
huge increases. We're gonna be
reaching over 17,000 children in
the state through the FI
program. And so these dollars
are very much needed and hopeful
to have that support.
This just gives you a sense of
our workforce. So we have 4 core
programs. We're talking about
growing that workforce by almost
2000, not quite 2000, but um.
1500 thank you. uh, but you can
see, uh, you know, childcare is
obviously our largest workforce,
and we know that we cannot um
get the kind of outcomes that we
want for children without a
workforce that is well
supported. So we have, uh,
thanks to the parody program for
pre-K for Head Start and infant
toddler educators, I think on
the next slide, do we show that
they um this is the kind of
increases they're receiving
because they have credentials,
they have degrees, they've been
working in the field.
a long time, and it's helped
stabilize our pre-K system by
having the teachers in
community-based settings able to
make what their counterparts in
school-based settings make
because of the investments, and
this has come from the trust
fund and the infant toddler pay
parity has come through the
Ground, uh, and we have a
partnership right now we're
finalizing a contract to make
sure we're evaluating the impact
of that infant toddler pay
parody.
Um, we, we know that ensuring
fair compensation is key to
attracting the workforce and
that the results that we're
gonna see with children when
people are paid and reflect the
value of their work, we're going
to see increased outcomes as
well.
But the wage scale and career
lattice is work that, uh,
Senator Padilla and um.
Uh, Senator Trujillo at the time
put into our enabling statute
that we needed to make sure that
we were developing a wage scale
for the entire system and so,
um, the work that the team, the
ECECD team right now is leading
with home visitors, child care,
pre-K, and early intervention
professionals is to look at what
are those roles that these
different people play and what
should they be paid and so that
$10 million that we're asking
for in our base will help make
sure that we can realize uh this
work.
Building on the good work you've
already invested in with pre-K
parody and infant toddler
parody, but to make sure the
whole system, um, that we're
raising the whole, the whole
level of the early childhood
professional and having them see
each other as part of a whole
system, really building a
universal high quality
comprehensive prenatal to 5
system.
So the reason that we need the
trust fund, we feel like it's
important now, as you can see,
there are many children and
families that are eligible for
services right now, but they
can't have, they don't have
access to them because of the
funding. So with this budget in
child care for infants and
toddlers will be at almost 46%
if we fully fund the executive
request for childcare.
We know that the results of that
more families are at work,
they're more productive when
those settings are high quality.
The research from the US Chamber
of Commerce. This is a big issue
for them, is making sure that
businesses and um have access
communities, businesses locate
to communities where they know
they'll have access to childcare
to make sure their workforce is
ready, um, and prepared.
Both now and in the future.
Um, home visiting, this is, um,
been a really we are leaders in
this in the country and we have
a very robust comprehensive home
visiting system with many
different models and uh this
again shows us getting closer to
that full saturation that Kelly
often talks about so that we
then see the outcomes reduce
child abuse and neglect,
improved parenting
relationships, um, all the
things children's education has
improved health outcomes are
improved. Postpartum care,
prenatal care, all the things
that.
Our home visiting programs do
across the state. We are in
every county now, that was just
as of this year, thanks to the
increased funding we've received
from the legislature.
Finally, um, I think this is
finally, yes, our pre-K, um, 3s
and 4s. This is exciting. New
Mexico is universal for 4 year
olds, and with this budget ask
um if uh we get there, we'll be
at Universal for 3 year olds.
This is an incredible program
you heard Kelly a few weeks ago
talk about the $6 return to
every $1 invested. We have a
very diverse mixed delivery
system made up of
community-based providers,
tribal, um, programs, Head Start
programs.
school-based programs and the
department really takes
seriously the role of making
sure that families do have
choice within their community if
there's an opportunity. We do
family childcare, so it's a very
robust mixed delivery system,
um, something that I hope you
all are proud of and, and hear
good things about when you're
home in your communities.
That is our amazing executive
team live in person and on the
screen, um, but I would like to
recognize Assistant Secretary
Cotillion Snetti is our uh
assistant secretary for Native
American Early Education and
Care, um, in your appendix, you
will see a wonderful slide about
all the good work she has led
with our tribal tribes, nations
and pueblos, the types of
intergovernmental agreements we
have across the state, um, also,
um, we have Shelly Strong, our
general counsel.
Leila Wendell, um, our director
of policy research and quality.
She's leading all the wage scale
work, Ali Hedrick from our
family support early
intervention, uh, with our early
intervention and home visiting,
uh, team right here, Sandy
Trujillo, uh, who leads our
pre-K childcare and food
program, and many more. Our
budget director Valerie Garcia.
Mark Dominguez sitting back
there, our ASD director, uh, you
really, um, I hope you can feel
proud, there's others here and
not to be mentioned or CFO or
but um uh we built a really
great team and we've done it
because we've had the support of
all of you. We've had the
support of the community.
And um, we just, we know that
there's more we can do, more
transparency, more
accountability. That's what we
pride ourselves on. You'll also
see in your appendix a clear biP
code, um, what Kelly presented
on, uh, exact, um, LFC HAFC and
the difference between the HAFC
rec and the executive, you can
get a sense of the kind of work
that happens within our um.
Within our um different pe
codes. And you'll also see a
list of the local early
childhood coalitions that we
have across the state, you'll
see many of your communities are
represented and we hope to have
those every county in the state
supported by a local early
childhood system building
coalition because we can't build
a system that works for all
families, sitting here in Santa
Fe, we need to be out there. Um,
actually, today, the assistant
secretary is convening our, um,
early childhood tribal advisory
coalition, so we have
ative s the governors and the
presidents appoint people to
that advisory council.
We have a statewide advisory
council. So just so you know,
there's a lot of input coming
into the department and these
decisions are being made
collectively with the community,
with the advice of um
legislature with working with um
the executive, of course, across
the children's cabinet.
Um, so with that, I will, um,
I'm not going through all the
appendix, but we wanted you to
have that detail and stand for
any questions you may have for
me.
About the work of the
department.
It's
The
Thank you very much, Chairman.
Thank you Secretary and Mr.
Dinsmore and um Kelly, you know,
just on top of everything all
the time. Thank you. Um, I am,
uh, wanted to go first because
I, uh, Mr. Chairman, just, uh,
Wow
It's so beautiful to see
something that you sponsored and
built and tried to be a big part
of and help happen and I just
want to say to the staff that's
here from early education, uh,
thank you so much. You guys are
doing a phenomenal job. It is
amazing everywhere I turn,
everyone I talk to, everyone
just has so many wonderful
things to say about all of you.
So thank you so much for
everything you're doing. And if
you don't hear that enough, I
know you hear it from, from your
leader here, your, the cabinet
secretary, but I want you to
hear it from me as well. This is
something that I ran, uh,
originally, I ran for the
legislature.
for this very purpose, 13 years
ago got here and, and I had no
idea it was going to flourish
into this wonderful and my
amazing co-sponsor just we
happened to be back together
again. Look at us, they even see
us together. We have a couple of
other big things we're going to
do too, Mr. Chairman, as you
know, so, um, and, and I would
just take a point of personal
privilege, Mr. Chairman, and
tell you that um um my someone
who I love more than air is
actually in the room right now
and um he and his brother both
were able to participate in
early education programs.
We well, long time ago before
any of this was ever in my mind,
but we knew it was really
important that they have that
early start in life and uh he is
a clinical manager for Serenity
Mesa here in New Mexico. He got
all of his education on the East
Coast, and then came back to New
Mexico with the dream and he's
achieving it, and um I just
could not be more proud of this
young man. His name is Zachary
Padilla, stand up, Zach.
This is my son, everybody.
And he is uh he is probably, I,
I would say that he's a
wonderful human being all in his
own right, but he had that early
education early on, and I think
that's what led him and his
brother to the work that they're
doing, so thank you, son, for
being here today. And he also,
David Burke, who is his boss in
the uh uh one of the founders of
Serenity Mass here as well. Can
we give him a hand as well.
Thank you, David, if you want to
stand.
And they provide a very valuable
service to all, all New
Mexicans, so I'm just so proud
of the work that they're doing
over there, but I have some
specific questions, OK, and I'll
be real quick, Mr. Chairman, but
if we look at the um information
that um we reviewed here in
this, in this document.
Toward the bottom there.
Line 401 early childhood
coalitions. What are those? I, I
don't think I've heard that term
before.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Padilla, thank you for those
kind words and um thank you for
all your leadership on early
childhood. Uh, they are uh there
many states have them, but it is
a way so that at um we started
them under some of the federal
relief money because for years
the family development program
at UNM had been working with
local communities, Paso El Paso
up in Taos and um others down in
um uh uh Lincoln County and in
um Lee County, uh, and.
They come together to coordinate
childcare, pre-K, early
intervention, home visiting and
to really build a local system,
ideally, they're getting more
buy-in from their county leaders
from behavioral health so that.
And then we meet with them
regularly under Lea's, uh, team,
uh, Colleen Lambert brings them
together. We have a family and
community engagement team and we
work closely with the UNM Family
Development Program.
And they
They have a strategic plan.
Uh, they did a needs assessment
and they use the needs
assessment to build a strategic
plan and then they identify what
they're working on. We provide
technical assistance and
support, and they have a like a
at least a 3-45%, if not a
full-time paid coordinator. They
do family events, it's a big um
important part of their grant
with us is to a contract
actually, is to have family
leadership.
So they're uh families in their
community and in their coalition
are getting trained by
Partnership for Community Action
on a curriculum called Opening
doors up.
Puerto Puerto,
OK, you see my Spanish is weak,
um, but, uh, they, so they get
trained on like how to, how to
advocate, how to advocate for
their children, how to be more
involved in building the early
childhood system. So we're doing
it together. It's like a state
local collaboration and
coordination so that at it when
we're here at the state level,
we're building a system that's
flexible enough to address the
unique needs of communities all
over the state. Well thank you,
uh Mr. Chair and
uh and secretary. I just uh now
I know what they are, the word
cola, I just didn't know what
that was. I, I'm familiar with a
couple of the ones that you
mentioned. Well, there's no
money there anymore, so we need
to get that repaired. So thank
you for highlighting and and and
making that, you know, for us. I
also on line 60 on that same
page, wage and career ladder,
$10 million.
Ah, you know, we've, we've got
to make sure that that gets back
in, in, into wherever we need to
put that, that, uh, being flat
lined and zeroed out is just
completely unacceptable. We're
going to have to get that
repaired. So thank you for
pointing that out. And then on
the pre-K expansion is the, is
the expansion, uh, well, the
33.2 mil that you asked for and
then HAFC agreed with, with 25
of it. Is there, I mean, there
is that variance of $8 million
Kelly.
Mr. Chair members Committee,
actually, if you turn to the 2nd
page and there's an additional
$10 million on online 67, so
it's actually 35 million, which
is above.
OK, let's not do anything with
that one then.
I will note that the um also on
you were bringing up the waging
career lattice that's not at
zero, that's in the growth fund
and it's in it's, uh, first year
pilot right now.
But what, what is the amount in
the gro it's 5.
5 million for 3 years and the
reason it's on the
recommendation is because we're
barely in the pilot and we don't
have any data on if it's
affecting turnover or stability
yet. OK.
Well, thank you very much for
for pointing those items out. I
appreciate that. And then if we
can go to the secretary's uh
deck and to page um.
I don't know what page that is.
It's the one that has early
childhood workforce growth,
this, this slide here.
So of the 18,000 in FY 25 and
then up to 20.1 in FY 26 this is
this inclusive of all the
private providers. They're all
in there, OK. So if you look at
home visiting, are those, what
is, do you do, do you actually
do home visiting or are you only
using vendors that do this or
who does, who, who does that
service delivery?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
such a great question. Uh, so
it's a combination, um, we have
most of our home visiting is
done by, um, a private
nonprofits or for-profit
organizations, we are again in
every county. I think there's
36, 36 um different unique
providers, but we also are
building out the universal touch
model, which is called Family
Connects, where we want every
baby born in New Mexico, every
family to have at least one, if
not 2 or 3 visits, and
that will be actually
administered, um, right now, DOH
and ECECD partner on it, um, but
ECECD will be um actually doing
those visits with our families
first program so that it's a
part of our department that is,
uh, staffed with nurses, and so
you have to have nurses do these
visits and so it's a
combination, but the majority of
the funding for home visiting is
going out to a private nonprofit
or for-profit businesses.
OK. Well, that's great to hear.
I'm glad that that's a
continuing on. We know how
important that is. And then I
know, uh, maybe there's others
that have questions. I just have
one last thing. um, so Madam
Secretary, who, who on the team
is sort of responsible for like
developing like what's being
taught to the kid, the the
actual what is actually being
taught.
Who is that on the team?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
it, it depends which program and
when you're talking about pre-K.
Well, let me just throw
something out. I try, you have
so much on your plate that you
don't need something else from a
You know, a state senator here,
OK, but I'm gonna throw one more
thing on your shoulders. Um, so,
so when I have an opportunity to
talk to kids, uh, elementary,
you know, this and that all the
way up to high school and stuff.
One of the things I talked about
it almost always is, is 50% of
life is showing up.
You know, you gotta show up on
time and be the hardest working
person in the room, uh, but, but
show up because if you don't,
it's not just a James Brown
song. If you, if you don't show
up, you get absolutely nothing,
OK? Cause you weren't there. So
I just, you know, dawned on me
the other day I thought I wanted
to mention this to you and your
team, but we just make some sort
of a campaign of something like
just drill it into these kiddos'
heads that attendance is so
important and critical.
I mean, we have a chronic
absenteeism problem.
You know, came through.
12.
And uh in my annual survey, I
asked the question, you know,
should parents and guardians be
penalized?
Uh, for their K through 8 child
that's, you know, has 10% higher
absenteeism on a monthly basis.
And then I asked it again for
grades 9 through 12.
harder with the older kids, but
you should be responsible for
little Joey, maybe bigger Joey,
I don't know, but the littler
Joey, um.
Would you be willing to take
that on as a little bit of a
challenge just to start making
just weaving it in every single
bit of every single thing that
you guys do, talking about how
important attendance is.
Whoever does that.
OK
Mr. Chair, said everybody, I
think we are 100% in agreement
with you that we know how
important it is and it is
something potentially that
through our even home visiting,
you know, starting very early
like that, that notion of
showing up and you know, you've
seen some of the evaluations
coming out of LFC about home
visiting where, you know,
staying with the program,
staying with it long enough. I
think we, we really have that
opportunity. I know in pre-K, it
is something that we talk about.
We need to do a better job
tracking attendance in the early
years because we know that that
is something that I think LFC.
is, is wanted us to do and we
want to do it too, to be able to
see that, are we seeing trends
and patterns, but I think the
team is, is on board to make
sure that we're talking about
why it's important to show up
because you don't get the
benefits if you're not there. If
you're not even there, you get
nothing. You have no opportunity
to succeed or not succeed or
whatever and so I'll conclude my
remarks, chairman, with um I do
and I'm not because he's here
today, but I, I think I
attribute a lot of my son's
successes, both of them, because
they knew to show up and they
knew to show up hope he was, I
hope he was on time today.
I hope his boss will tell me
he's on time today, but,
but, but, but they knew to show
up on time and they need to work
really, really hard, you know,
and all that, but you gotta be
there and, and what a great
Like mechanism that we have now
that we have built this robust
early childhood education, you
know, let's capitalize on that
and talk about attendance. All
right, thank you, Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Sherwood, and
Good morning again.
To all of you, you know, a big
hand for.
A great job that's happening in
our state, you know, so I just
have a couple of things that are
just probably more in
anticipation and.
And on this one maybe Kelly.
You might refresh my memory, so.
As the trust fund grows.
Does the distribution.
also grew.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee right now, current
statute says that there's two
options for the distribution.
It's either 250 million or an
average of the 3 year corpus.
Yes, and so that, that's able
that smooths out the
distribution. We have last year
recommended a a quickening of
that because the trust fund is
growing so much, um, and now the
HAFC recommendation, um,
includes that, um, position as
well, but not at the level.
Requested by the agency, yes,
so. So, so what are we?
Now, at the
The 3 year average or the Mr.
Chairman, if in FY 26, we did
not change the statute. The
trust fund on that average would
put out 289.9 million.
Which was the LFC
recommendation.
Um, the HAFC recommendation is
to increase that distribution to
a total of 400 million.
They added 101.1 million. OK.
Thank you for that. Uh, the next
question is um.
Just with what we're hearing
from a.
You know, and Washington and the
funding and also with um.
Uh, aiming at education.
So,
Would we have any kind of a
safeguard or anything if the
reduction happens to come for a
head start.
It's true. I mean, we're all
following what's going on with
the feds.
Pretty specifically, I will say
that a lot of the Head Start
programs have intermingled their
funds. Now they receive
pre-kindergarten, some of them
received home visiting, so
that's something we would have
to take as we move forward. Um,
I haven't heard anything on the
Fed on targeting Head Start
specifically yet I think are
bigger risk is on Medicaid.
OK.
Mr. and I, I'll just add, um.
Mr. Chair, and we definitely are
monitoring as well and and
concerned and I do think, um, it
started is such a vital program
in our state and over $90
million comes into the state
federal to local, for Head
Start, so, um, it is good, you
know, to know that we have the
inter the integration of Head
Start with our other system, but
something to keep our eye on and
um our Head Start collab
director uh is Casey Lafferty
and she stays in close contact
with the New Mexico Head Start
Association, so we can.
Also also keep you briefed.
Yeah
Oh, very well, thank you. The
last one that I have.
Mr. Chairman is um.
If you looked at the, at the
whole picture.
Or state, the number of eligible
to all the programs that are
under this program.
The number of students stayed
wide. The number of children,
students.
Stayed win
Uh, what percentage would you
say that we have?
Reached
Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez
sets, um, such a great question,
the, the slides that I showed
broke it down by childcare and
the childcare is only looking at
infants and toddlers, so those 6
weeks um through 3, and if you
look at that right now, we're
reaching about 29% of them with
state funding, with supporting
the, the cost of their childcare
or ask would, um, get us closer
to 46%, which would be wonderful
for pre-K were at Universal for
4 year olds. Give me a second.
OK. 29 and 46. Yeah, they're on,
um, I think slides 9, 10 and 11.
Mhm.
And then for pre-K for 4 year
olds were at Universal.
At 84% and um.
About 53% for 3 year olds.
With the budget ask, we hope to
be closer to 70.
33.
Yes, so good, thank you.
help
At larger and then for home
visiting, we're looking only at
that like first year of like
Medicaid eligible families uh in
that year and that where we
could be at 84%, especially
because the HAFC recommendation
is in full alignment with the
executive. So I think we're
gonna do really well, um, in
reaching more families,
especially through that family
connects that universal touch,
uh, home visiting model.
I hope that answers your
question, but there are many
children still in childcare and
in our early pre-K.
Um, in home visiting that could
benefit um.
That's why we want the increased
distribution, um.
To help make them, you know, to
get them services now rather
than waiting.
Ah, Mister Chairman.
Uh, I, I, I really do feel also
the the hard work that has gone
into.
The many champions that have
been there too.
To make this happen.
But uh we are a model for the
country. We just can just make
it even a lot more, but.
A little bit to um.
But uh
Senator Padilla brought about
attendance.
And what a perfect time to get
that behavior.
Of how important it is.
You know, so as they continue,
you know that.
You know, it's, it's expected.
You know, part of just the
process, you know, going through
school.
But thank you to all of you for
your work.
Thank you, Senator uh Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you secretary, and it's
good to see you. I will say, um,
I'm just appreciative that
Senator Padilla let me ride
along on that journey. Um, it
was a, it was a hard fought
journey and um.
I am so excited to see the work
that we've done and that you've
accomplished here. I'd almost
like to figure out how we can um
make your position, uh exempt to
the legislature so we can keep
you for another 8 years, um, at
the end of this administration,
um, but so a couple of things,
um, uh, Senator Gonzalez already
addressed my, uh, questions
about the home visiting budget,
so thank you for those questions
and answers. I
um, am going to drop.
My last bill this morning and it
is a CYFD bill that has been
endorsed um by this committee.
Back in December, and one of the
things that it does is
officially move Kara over to the
um healthcare authority, which
has already happened apparently,
I understand, um, but I, I just
want to point out that um the
rules that the healthcare
authority are going to be
required to adopt.
Um, include identification of
appropriate agencies to be
included as support services in
the plan of safe care.
And that has two categories,
Category A is shall include not
may include, shall include home
visitation programs.
And then you go down to the main
clude and it's, you know, public
health agencies, maternal, but
shall include home health care
or the, the home visitation
programs at the top.
Are you going to have the
resources to make that a
reality.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
thank you, um, thank you too for
your support and um amazing
leadership in early childhood.
Um, I will want to look at that,
um, I believe I, when I think
about the light touch, the
family connects model, I mean,
every baby born in New Mexico
and daily is gonna have that
visit, uh, and that that's.
2 to 3 year trajectory that's
not tomorrow, um,
everybody come
but also with the this resources
and we have, we do have now 5
evidence-based models, you know,
approved through Medicaid, so
that, that helps us.
With the expansion because it's
expensive and so we do wanna
have that and we also have, of
course, firstborn, which has
been expanding many of our
current home visiting programs
are moving towards first born, I
think 10 of them have adopted
that. So, um, more to come, um,
and I think, um, DOH is
obviously a key partner in um in
the car work. We do have a car
navigator, um, in our agency
thanks to the legislature's
investment, uh, that position is
still under recruitment, but um,
you know, we, we believe that.
I mean, home visiting, all our
programs are voluntary, so the
show part is, you know, a
little, um, yeah, we, we want,
we want parents to want to have
these services and maybe Kelly
wants to say something about
resources.
Mr. Chairman, members committee,
thank you. Yeah, that was a
recommendation also coming out
of LFC that it be targeted,
particularly for car families as
we know those are high risk, um,
and I do think it is a good
point that
Medicaid probably would pay for
a chunk of those children as
long as they enrolled in the
appropriate model and so it
wouldn't be as strenuous to
state revenues as
Other models would be if we were
to target those families with
those particular expenses.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman. So
what about the personnel though?
I think that's what I'm more
concerned about is the actual,
you know, boots on the ground,
people that can uh carry that
through.
Yes, um, I miss, uh, Mr. Chair,
um, Senator Trujillo, so we'll,
we'll most likely get a fiscal
impact report, um, request on
that and so I think there would
be, um, I, I forget how many is
it.
1500 a year that are.
I identified as Cara.
So it probably within the
expansion that we're getting
through home visiting and with
the Medicaid models. I mean, it
is always a concern. That's why
I think the the wage scale and
the, the compensation piece to
make sure that we can attract
and retain.
High quality, um, home visiting
staff, um, is always a concern
and, you know, family connects
and our nurse family partnership
are both models that require
nurses, so, um, and those are
good models, but safe care is
another one that LFC advocated
for and is, is now in our
waiver, which can be added to
another model, uh, and then
have, have that reimbursement
help support, so we have a lot
of building to do still and um.
But I feel like the
Christie, uh Romero here is our
bureau chief for um Family
foundations, we call it, and
that's where home visiting and
um and family connects lives,
and then John is our home
visiting supervisor back there,
John Auna, so they're listening
to you and they'll be helping us
think about what that impact
could be. Great. Thank you. And
Mr. Chairman, can you explain um
on page 3, you have under
enhanced outcomes, the classroom
assessment scoring system. I
just wanna kind of
Just, just briefly. I, I know
when people hear assessments,
they think of SAT, you know, I
mean, our kids do bubble filling
and I'm sure that's not what
that means. If you could just
briefly explain for the for us
and for the audience, um, what
that looks like. Yes, Mr. Chair,
Senator Trujillo, the, um, uh,
the classroom assessment scoring
system is actually an op.
A tool that a trained um
observer goes into a classroom
and spends anywhere between 3 to
4 hours, watching the class,
watching the teacher's
interactions and so they're
looking at classroom
organization.
Emotional support and
instructional support, and then
they get a score, there's 10
dimensions under those three
domains, um, and then the
coaches that we have in the
field, I use that data to work
with the educator in the
classroom with the pre-K
administrators with the, the
centered, well, right now we're
doing it only in pre-K, but we'd
like to roll this into our
childcare as well to be able to
see.
That, that, uh, in those
interactions and how they're
supporting children's learning
as well as their emotional,
social and emotional
development. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So, um, we heard, uh,
I think you were here, uh, a
week or so ago again time begins
to get blurry middle way of the
session, um, and we saw the
graph where uh there's long term
benefit past 3rd grade or pre-K
services, but maybe only short
term benefits.
for childcare. Is this a tool
that would help um improve those
outcomes potentially.
Yes, Mr. Chair, um, Senator
Trujillo, the, I think that when
that study was done on childcare
in New Mexico, you know, the
wages of childcare workers were
very low, um, our ratios are
high, there's, there's I've been
a lot of work focused on in in
the process that we're
redesigning our quality
improvement and rating system
right now and doing that with,
with the community, but, uh,
you're exactly right that, that
will give us a better view in we
don't right now, we don't right
now.
Oh
I know this is something LFC has
also asked of us is to get in
there more and understand the
quality so that we can again
provide the professional
development, the technical
assistance to raise the level of
quality in those classrooms by
supporting the educator,
supporting the director, the
instructional leaders in the, in
the building, but I do think
having better wages and tying
the to the level of um
credentials is, is so critical
to getting better outcomes in
childcare as well as in.
UK.
Um, and then on page 8, Mr.
Chairman, uh, secretary, you
have a bilingual incentive, um,
payment, and I'm wondering, does
that include native languages?
Does it include, I'm assuming
Spanish.
Um, what are all do, can you
tell me, um, do, do you know the
different languages that are,
are being shared with our, our
children in early ed. I have a,
I have a friend that lives in um
uh Germany, and he grew up in
Taos, um, uh, comes and visits
us every year, his children, um,
a mother and lima speak 5
languages, and it's because he's
a language he he teach teaches
language, everything from
Spanish to German.
to,
you know, uh, their mom speaks,
um, she's from, um,
uh uh not Lithuanian, not, I
keep wanting to say Prague, um,
I'll I'll think about it anyway,
they speak 5 languages and
they're brilliant kids, and we
know from research that
bilingual children actually are
better problem solvers, so.
I just wanted to give you a
little time to find that
information.
Yes, um, so in 23 there, um, Mr.
Chair, Senator Trujillo, there
were 7 languages that were, you
know, that were awarded and then
there were 4 and 24 for some
reason, but yes, we definitely
recognize, uh, if it's tribally
certified, then they're they're
eligible for the bilingual
incentive and it was it
Czechoslovakia that you were
trying to think of?
No, it's right up at the top
inoslavia yeah, I'll figure it
out, um, anyway, I will just
close, Mr. Chairman, with that,
you know, we had a.
Presentation a couple of days
ago, talking about quality of
life in regards to economic
development. This is quality of
life services, and I'm hoping
that as we become more known
throughout the country, not just
by the experts and by the people
who understand what early
childhood means and how to
evaluate it and what a great
program we have here, but I'm
hoping that this actually draws
people into our communities to
be a part of our
community to expand businesses.
I just think it's really one of
those key things. So thank you
for the work that you're doing.
Thank you Senator Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
fighting a little something. I'm
not a chain smoker. Um, Senator
Churillo, I just want to thank
you for supporting um this
program because it's absolutely
amazing and essential in our
state.
I'm a little confused and maybe
I missed something in my
sneezing and walking out of the
room, um, so is Kara under DOH
or AHCA.
I'm
Not clear on that, Mr. Chair,
um, Senator Tobiasson, great
question. Um, right now we're,
um, DOH in the statute and in
the rules DOH um provides a lead
role with CYFD as a as a key
partner and then, um, ECECD came
in late, we're not mentioned in
the rule, but we've, we've been
working with them over the last
few years, so, um, that is how.
And without flipping through my
papers, Mr. Chair, was, was
there a recommendation from LFC
to move it.
From where it currently is.
And why?
Uh, Mr. Chair's committee, um,
so sexually, uh, Kira falls
under CYFD and HCA. HCA has come
under a memorandum of
understanding, we think we
haven't received it yet.
To transfer some of those
responsibilities to the
Department of Health. Currently,
the LFC recommendation for um
some CYFD and Kara is to keep it
under the healthcare authority
and not move it to uh DOH.
And um
That that bill is being
sponsored and moving through.
I'm, I'm not the CYD or care
expert, but I do know the bare
minimum.
OK, fair enough. Thank you very
much. Oh wait, I do have one
more question, Mr. Chair, and I
don't know if it was asked what
exactly is the Dolly Parton
library. I, I mean, I know she's
big on reading, but I didn't
know that there were libraries
outside of maybe her.
The Park. I don't know. I don't
know anything about it, so tell
me, what is that?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, such a great
question. So Dolly Parton's
Imagination Library, I forget
when she started it, but um, if
a baby born in New Mexico, um,
it can sign up and they get a
book every single month until
they turn 5.
So they build these robust home
libraries and uh Leila Wendell
and her team, um, handle it, and
we work closely, but there's a
local buy in and so it's through
um.
Through the local, you wanna.
They
Southwest Council of
Governments. They kind of lead
the work, um, representative uh
Brown has been a huge champion
and really hoping to get Dolly
here this summer, um, so, but we
really want to have, we want to
be a full state, so some states,
you know, they're very strict.
Dollywood Foundation to say, you
know, you can't say you're a
Dolly Parton imagination library
unless you the reach that you
have is truly statewide and the
children um wherever they are, I
mean, I'd love to see us be able
to it by.
records at birth, you know,
everyone.
Would you like to sign up for
Dolly Parton's and then cause we
know that many children's homes
they lack books and so this is
fantastic, our former, uh,
director of communications
daughter thought that Dolly, you
know, knew her personally cause
it comes addressed to them, to
the child's name and every month
they get a new book in Spanish
and English and.
Uh, so
That's what Dolly Parton's
imagination library is. That's
amazing. Thank you for
explaining that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator, uh
Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome,
ladies.
Was it cold enough out there for
you?
I just, I'm having a hard time.
My question is, private
childcare and the programs
you're gonna be starting. How,
how are those going to
interlock?
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, uh,
when, um,
So, most childcare is delivered
in um.
Private uh businesses either for
profit or nonprofit.
Uh, and so that's been the way
it is in most parts of the
country we do fund um some in
schools, but it's very limited
in terms of that. I'm not sure
it's some of them also do home
visiting, um, but maybe I.
So Mr. Chair, so what I'm really
getting at is, are, are we gonna
saturate?
So where we're driving out those
small businesses, I mean, that,
that's kind of my fear is we're
throwing a ton of money at you
and you're gonna do a great job
with it. I'm not saying that at
all, but
What are we doing?
You know, like my small
communities.
We have childcare.
You know, private childcare in
those, my grandson goes to one.
And I'm just, I'm, I wanna make
sure that we're not just pushing
them out.
How are, how are you guys, I
feel like you're gonna saturate
it with all of your programs
that they're gonna get kind of
pushed out.
So Mr. Chairman's Committee, um,
this isn't it, it's a concern
that we've been thinking about
for many years now, so most
childcare providers are the
private and I wanna to say pre-K
is delivered by both childcare
providers and by public schools.
And where this comes into
particular um importance is how
we distribute that
pre-kindergarten money childcare
systems most is just it's
private business for the most
part. There might be a few
school districts that have small
portions of that.
But
Um, strategically, when we're
thinking about childcare
assistance providers, they make
their business makes sense
financially on children that are
older than infant and toddlers.
And so if we move too much money
to and don't balance it right
with the school systems, you
risk making childcare's.
Assistance providers, less
financially feasible. So we have
to be very careful on who we
award pre-K kindergarten
contracts too, which is I
believe the point that you are
getting to, um, I will say, um.
We do have to make sure that
also in saturation we found
several years ago that certain
communities were oversaturated
and certain were under saturated
because when we're thinking
about pre-K awards in
particular, we have to consider
the childcare assistance center
that's being delivered there.
The pre-K that's already there,
the Head Start that's in the
community and make the awards
based on the totality of care
options, not just what
pre-kindergarten options are
available, so that is a delicate
balance that the agency has to
and
Hopefully will
Be particularly focused on.
Thank you, Kelly, and uh Mr.
Chair and uh Senator Lanier, I
think the other great thing
that's happening we've we've
received private sector funding
and we have underway a
comprehensive childcare supply
and demand study that should be
completed here, I think by May
or June, it'll have maps of the
state and we'll really, we'll be
able to understand where our
licensed providers are and where
we have what we call childcare
deserts where there's.
More than 3 children, um, for
every available slot of
childcare, and so then the
department will be able to be
even more strategic with the
legislature and the
appropriations of where do we
need to help shore up and the
team, Sandy Trujillo and her
team look very closely at the
pre-K applications, make sure
that if there's a childcare
center here that's already
providing it and an elementary
school says they want to open a
pre-K classroom.
But we already have enough
children being served in that
area. We're not gonna, we're not
gonna be awarding that. And so
part of it is we inherited two
different pre-K systems when you
created the department. One was
being administered by PED one by
CYFD. And so now that we have a
clear-eyed view of where all the
slots are and where the
providers, that really is a huge
part of our responsibility and
job, um, as the lead agency for
this prenatal to 5 system. So I
appreciate the question. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I think, I think
that
is exactly what I'm talking
about and that, that's the fear,
so I, I can tell you understand
exactly where I'm coming from
because um
You know, in our rural areas.
It, it
Those are
There's a lot of employees
involved, so it's, it's kind of
like a ripple effect in a lake.
You know, we have our childcare
there, but there's a lot of
ripple that that comes off of
that, not only the employees in
the childcare.
But then
The single mothers, the dads, I
mean, it, it's a trickle effect,
and so I just wanna make sure
that
That we're not creating an
unfair.
Playing field.
So to speak, um, I always come
back to the coaching things, you
know.
But um,
And the only, uh, one last
question. I know you'd like to
do that to me.
So how have you
So if paid family leave.
comes true.
Have you figured that that cost
to you?
Oh sorry, yes, uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator Lanier, um, you know,
uh, secretary Nayer, I really
takes that lead in the cabinet,
um, you know, we, we do our
fiscal impact, we're monitoring,
but um.
So
Is it scary?
I think we're just monitoring,
you know, what, there's
different versions, different
things, and and we.
on um Secretary Nair and um her
leadership to, you know, and of
course, with the impact, but I
know there's a lot of things
moving and so we're just keeping
monitoring it.
Mr. Chair, so does it make you
nervous?
um,
me personally, I have no
children.
Um, no, um, it doesn't make me
nervous, no, it doesn't make me
nervous.
And Mr. Chair, you, you had
talked about salaries.
Well, in wages.
Your FTE. So,
If, if we pass the
Minimum wage because I think, I
think you what you said was
between 15 and 18 is what, what
you had mentioned. So if we go
to a 17, what, what effect is
that gonna have?
On filling those other
positions.
Right? But what's it going to
do?
To your pre-existing FTEs.
Right. Oh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Lanier, so the, um, I in our
childcare cost model, what we
want to do is bring the entry
level positions in childcare, so
not teachers and directors entry
level from what we put in our
cost model, basing it on a $15
to an 18, um, for people working
in childcare. So to your point,
um, the bill that's moving
through the legislature around
moving the whole state minimum
wage to $17. I know our staff
completed, we completed a
physical impact report on that.
And it would most, I mean,
again, a lot of the salaries and
fit in home visiting are already
above that, but in childcare,
um, that could that could have
an impact, but.
So, Mr. Chair, if, if it, let's
say it goes to 17.
You're gonna have to raise
everybody you have.
Right, or not everybody but the
ones that are below, you're
gonna have to raise them up.
And then
You're gonna try, you're still
have all of those vacancies
you're trying to fill.
Right.
But that's gonna be huge cost to
you.
But
Do you see it as
The state's telling me what to
pay them, so I only have to pay
him $17.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
now no
inside ECECD makes less than $17
an hour, so.
So it won't affect you at all.
Not the agency. No.
Right
Thank you, thank you, ladies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary 2nd time today can't
be a bad thing, can it?
Um
With the department spending on
childcare exploding due the
dedicated funding source.
Because of the governor's
executive order expanding to
400% of the.
Poverty level.
So
How do we justify that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, um,
thank you for that question. Um,
she did not do it through
executive order. We did it
through our authority under um
the childcare and Development
Block grant as the lead agency
for childcare, um, but we did do
it because the costs of
childcare is so expensive for
most families and providers
providers were charging families
what they could afford to pay,
which was not enough for them to
meet a good bottom line. And so
it was a market failure across
the board. And so we wanted
to both increase, use a cost
model to set their rates and
make sure that more families had
access to um to be able to pay
for childcare, and so it was a
way to stabilize the childcare
industry and grow it at the same
time.
I've read that research finds no
significant improvement in
education outcome for children
in universal pre-K programs. Do
you find that same research or?
Mr. Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
um, here in our own state, the
legislative finance Committee
evaluators found that it had
significant, um, outcomes of
both all the way through high
school.
And it returned about $6 for
every $1 invested, especially
for children, low income
children and children with
special needs.
Mr. Chair, I, I want to quote
one of these studies, and you
can recruit it, refute it.
refruited. How's that?
Yeah
You,
you.
This one Long Bay, uh, long term
study was found the negative
effects on social and emotional
well-being of center-based
childcare. It was Baker and
others in the 2019 American
Economic Journal.
And I quote from that journal,
Mr. Chair, I'm sorry that, you
know, you don't like me to read
and uh as uh when I get through
with this, everybody in the room
will know why, because I'm
Poor reader.
We find that the negative
effects on noncongenitive
outcome persists to school age
and also that cohorts.
With increased childcare access
had worse health.
Lower life satisfaction.
And high crime rates later in
life.
Our results reinforced previous
evidence.
Of the central role.
Of early childhood environment
for long run success.
I'm sure that you have a study
to recruit that refute that.
Sorry about that.
Having troubles this morning.
But these are some of the
things, you know, the people out
in the general public.
You know,
Access to information as well.
Right now.
If you want to prove one side.
There's plenty of studies to
prove one site. If you want to
prove the other side, there's
plenty of studies to prove the
other side.
I know that legislative finance
committee has done some studies.
And we have to figure this deal
out somewhere. I know that our
hope is to get more people
working in the state and also
all of the uh
Programs, the benefit programs
of the state and the federal
programs because we it sounds it
may have some drastic cuts and
all kinds of programs.
So
You know, today I need for you
to reinforce me.
In in my thoughts to to show
that these are critical
programs.
Who
For all pis.
This helps more people get out
of the house and go to work.
Because they have a safe place
to put their kids.
But also hope that we don't put
all the private people out when
you first or maybe when you, but
when this program was first
presented to me.
It was that we was going to have
a high quality of education
given to those kids, they
weren't just gonna be put in a
place, uh, for storage.
There's going to actually be
educated.
They was going to be trained
teachers to do this work. There
was gonna be
You know, the people we needed.
To do that.
And
How close are we getting to that
point in time.
This chair
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, thank
you for that and I'm, I know my
team took down what that what
that study was, and I think it
points to the fact that when I
came here.
Child, people working in
childcare were the lowest paid
people in our state.
That is not the case today. We
have more work to do, but when
you are not paying people well,
and the quality is not there.
We're gonna not see outcomes.
The other thing that we follow.
The science and we followed the
neuroscience, the developmental
science, and also the economic
science, and they've all aligned
and said this period of human
life.
is the best time to make those
investments. You're setting,
that's their executive function,
their health, their development,
their education.
But wherever a child is, they're
learning their brains are going
a billion neural connections a
second. So if they're in a
setting where the provider isn't
paid well, doesn't have
credentials, doesn't know that
that relationship they're having
is building that baby's brain.
And they're not gonna, we have
come so far in the last 5 years.
We're gonna be 5 in July 1 and
there is such maturation that's
happened, but we have to have
these investments in the
workforce because they're the
ones who are helping that family
understand, serve and return
when your baby coos, you, your
response to them is key, uh,
because that's what's building
their their language, their
their.
They're human
Future outcomes, um, and so I
think those studies that done in
19, we know as a country we have
not invested in childcare.
This is the most
Underpaid workforce in the
country doing the most vital
work for our future, and so I
think that's why.
The generals and the police and
the DAs have all said early
childhood is our best
investment, the US Chamber of
Commerce, um, all these
organizations Council for Strong
America say this is what we have
to do to address public safety,
behavioral health, all the
challenges we see. And so I
think if that we follow the
neuroscience, the developmental
science, and the economics, we
know that what New Mexico's
doing is and is going to
continue to change the
trajectory for whole populations
of families.
The, the only comment back on
that is that it's so critical to
have a high quality of staff.
And again, the pipeline, Mr.
Chair.
Again, the dens of those
schools.
Again,
The people to go to those
schools to get those degrees.
And again,
population of 2.1 million.
That in a declining population
of kids every year.
We have to think that a lot of
things here, but
You know, I encourage you to
Seek out those high quality
people.
Because if it's from out of
state, it's from out of state.
We've got to get
We to achieve the goals you just
set forward.
We've got to have high quality
people.
Um
My daughter
Red
While she was pregnant, out
loud.
Out loud with you.
You know, I'm, I'm a
grandparent, my kids, my
grandkids are, you know.
How can I say that anything
against anything they do, right?
Uh,
you know, the smartest, the
best, you know, everything that
that's grandpa's role, yeah,
Grandpa's rule, you know.
But uh what people can do at
home to help their kids.
It's huge.
And yeah, at night, she would
actually read books to those
kids.
While they were still.
In
And, you know,
And uh
How, how do you ever major
whether that worked or not? I
don't know.
But those kids are accelers, you
know.
So I have to believe that that
did have to help some.
But I'm, I'm, I'm just bragging
on my grandkids. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
You and I can sit here and brag
on about our grandkids all day
long.
Thank you, uh
Senator Trull 2nd time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
just letting me redeem my
memory. My friend grew up in
Latvia, which is, was under the
former Soviet Union just south
of um Estonia.
That's all. OK, all right, thank
you. Um.
Couple of quick questions, uh,
on this.
Again, on, on the uh.
Bill HB was it 71 or 7, OK, if,
if that does go and the
increased distributions do
happen and so forth, so with
that care, the care of what
You know,
I think, can you explain a
little bit about what the gap
is. I don't have all this stuff
in here.
And then what that will cover
and if there's still an
additional need beyond that or
not.
Any one of you Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, so
House Bill 71 increases the
distribution to $500 million.
Currently, the, uh, HAFC
recommendation is at $400
million. So if that bill were
not to pass.
Then everything you see in
orange on that chart has
contingency language saying that
bill has to pass for those
things to be funded, if that
bill does not pass, then it just
goes back to the LFC
recommendation. OK. All right.
Go ahead, go ahead, make a
comment, yeah. Thanks, thanks,
Mr. Chair, um, I, I just wanted
to add, uh, just on top of that,
that the executive
recommendation, um, the total
amount of trust fund needed in
the base is about 430 million.
So in the base right now,
they're short about 30 million
um of uh trust fund dollars.
All right, appreciate it. Thank
you.
And then, um
The early childhood coalitions.
I know you have uh
tribes, are they part of that or
is it separate or how, how does
that work with the coalitions
and all the other folks that are
not part of the coalition but
are still actively involved. How
does that work?
Mr. Chair, um, such a great
question. So we do, um, the
tribal advisory coalition, um,
is separate, but, um, oftentimes
and an assistant secretaries
here, uh, she works closely with
Colleen and Leland, the team on
the local early childhood
coalitions, so for instance,
recently we went with the Al
Pueblo Council of Governors and
Hickory and Mescalera and the
Navajo Nation to talk about some
data that we want the local
early childhood coalitions to
use to improve conditions in
communities. Um, and so there
is.
some overlap, um, with, um, that
with the work, but they are
separate. I mean, the, the
ability of the tribal leaders to
come together, um, from across
um all the tribes nations and
pueblos has been incredibly
beneficial to both the assistant
secretary and the department as
a whole in terms of language
revitalization and um uh some of
the culture and the parenting
aspects, uh, so.
Uh
I can get back to you more on
where there's overlap like up in
Taos, I mean, Taos has a very
strong coalition, but they also
have a strong, uh, tribal
coalition, and that's, I don't
know if you wanna add anything,
assistant secretary.
adding to your funding
mechanism.
That's included in our tribal
ask, the tribal um advisory
coalition is supported through
the tribal Investment strategy
funding.
And we did ask for $3 million
increase, that's included in
that.
Does that answer your question?
Yeah, I appreciate that. I just
want to see and make sure how
the overlap or coordination
because you have, you know, I'm
looking at the areas and the
names of the organization that
you have tribes within them as
well, so I just want to make
sure that there's coordination
among in between uh the entities
and so forth, there absolutely
is and, and some of it we do
through our statewide early
childhood advisory council, and
we have, um, the, um, tribal
advisory coalition come and they
come and um we do sharing across
the two.
But always room for improvement,
so we'd love to get your
thoughts on that too. I
appreciate that and then also on
page 22 where you have the
tribal investments, so you have
capacity building and so for
most of the entities listed are
tribes that you have a shoreline
consulting and NABPI growing in
beauty are these, who are these
and what do they do?
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, uh,
Shoreline Consulting was uh Sha
Sha Shain Garcia, who helped
facilitate um a lot of the
travel advisory, the Native
American budget and Policy
Institute at UNM, uh, they
provide a lot of back, um,
support to the assistant
secretary with coordinating the
tribal advisory coalition
meetings, helping us with data.
We have a policy analyst, um,
who supports us, Mark Hume,
who's been with us for about 3.5
years. And then, um, the other
one you referenced was.
beauty is an early intervention,
uh, they provide early
intervention services in the
Navajo Nation.
Appreciate it. Thank you. um.
I don't believe I have anybody
else on the questions. So thank
you for your presentation,
Secretary
make some notes Helen Quintana,
um, she's retiring in April and
she's been with us for 21 years.
That's what I told him,
but, um, I just pass a bill, you
know, from retire when I came
and helped me get paper clips
and pens and everything and that
has helped me ever since, so,
um, just wanted to recognize her
and our incredible
communications director Sonia
Martinez.
If you see the early show, you
get our information, uh, these,
uh, she's the woman, the brains
behind, um, our communication
strategy. So, um, thank you for
letting me just recognize those
two important people, um, who
helped build this department in
a very positive way. thank you.
You know, extended gratitude to
all of you, man. I think, uh, I
think, you know, the discussion
here, you know, the children,
you know, from birth to, you
know.
Uh, 7 to 8, you know, if we can
get them, I mean the scientist
proven, you know, and then I
think, you know.
I think my, my, my mom, you
know, a school teacher, and, and
I think read to all of our kids
and we were still, you know, uh.
Just like your, your daughter
did in in all these, you know,
whether it's song, whether it's
music, and, and that's what we
believe in our traditional ways
too, you know, when mothers are
pregnant, you know.
I just do the things and, you
know, through osmosis or
whatever that is, you know,
things happen and uh sometimes
it's hard to explain, but I
think if the, if the children
grow up in good environments
with the support and
encouragement in in positive
ways, you know, they grew up to
be, you know, good people. So
thank you all for your support
and I want to thank Senator
Padilla and all the work that
he's done as well as uh Senator
Trujillo and uh and continue to
support and invest in our
children. So thank you. Thank
you.
Jo
See you this afternoon.
Carmel.
Oh, sorry.
