We're going to review the LFC
statewide capital outlay
framework, but also before you
on the spreadsheets and the back
of your packet, you have the
executive framework for
statewide capital outlay.
Um, I want to start out by
giving kudos and thanking DFA
and the governor's office for
providing this framework so
early and releasing it. This is
a huge help and
Figuring out um and getting us
on the way to a consensus
framework more quickly, and we
really appreciate them doing
that and being here to discuss
their recommendations with you,
So I'm going to present and
then, um Wesley will also be
available for questions if you
have any on executive requests
or recommendations.
Um, Mr Chair, So I'm gonna go
through some of the bullets that
are the top sheet you have.
And then would you also like me
to do what we've done in the
past have going through the
spreadsheets and just
highlighting some items, or do
you want to just do the bullets?
No, I think we'll just go
through and highlight them
because we've got plenty of
time. This is the earliest we've
ever got The exact capital.
So I mean, it will be really
helpful. I mean, you did a side
by side comparison over a
million. Correct. No, this is
everything okay?
Um okay. So starting on your key
hearing issues brief.
So I wanted to start out by just
giving you some sort of
background on the basics of
framework development.
Um, the capital Outlay
framework is developed and kind
of parallel but similar way to
House Bill two.
Um, we received requests from
higher education institutions
and state agencies in the summer
and fall go through a formal
hearing process and then LFC
staff conducts analysis on those
requests. Draft recommendations.
Um, and those go through the lfc
in the fall. Um, the LFC
framework was voted on by the
committee in December and forms
the foundation for the
introduced version.
Of the Capitol Outlay Bill.
Um, so the LFC framework
proposes a statewide capital
outlay package totaling $934.5
million That includes $409.5
million in General fund for
statewide projects, so those are
projects for state agencies, the
judiciary and some general fund
for certain higher education
projects as well.
The eggs and also, um, quickly
point out that the LFC framework
includes no use of severance tax
bonding capacity for 2024. Aside
from the earmarks on senior
capacity, which would continue
as they did last year.
The executive capital Framework
proposes a statewide capital
outlay package totaling $1.2
billion, including $499.6
million in General Fund for
state agency, judiciary and
higher education projects. Um,
and they're also proposing $350
million in severance tax bonds
for two projects which will
highlight what those are in a
minute.
This is an even numbered years,
so we will also have a general
obligation bond package and bill
for higher education libraries
and senior centers. The LFC
framework proposes a statewide
GOP GOP package totaling $268.8
Million, including 219.4 million
for higher education. 30.4
million for senior center
projects.
And 19 million for libraries,
Executive Framework proposes a
GOP package totaling 287.9
Million, including 238.4 million
for higher education projects,
which is the main source of
It really is. The source of
difference between our overall
numbers for G O B.
Um, as I mentioned, Lfc is
proposing no use of severance
tax bond capacity this year, um,
due to the large amounts of
General fund you all have
available.
Um and if no long term severance
tax bonds are issued in 2020,
for this would generate an
estimated $80 million in annual
savings over the next 10 years.
Um, this number is still in flux
a little bit because capacity
will not be finalized until
Monday of next week.
Turn out to page two.
Of the brief
Um, I'm gonna start by
highlighting are major
differences and starting out
with, um, projects that are
proposed in the executive
framework, but not the LFC
framework. And then I'll do the
same for the LFC framework.
So the biggest of those is $2
million in severance text bonds
to the Department of Finance and
Administration for Advanced
Market commitments for treated
brackish and produced water. Um,
we have asked the executive for
some additional detail on this
proposal, and I believe that
will be forthcoming so we can
provide more information when we
get that.
Ah, The executive is also
proposing $100 million in
severance tax bonds to the
General Services Department for
construction of the Executive
Office Building in Santa Fe.
Ah $30 million authorized from
the Public School Capital Outlay
Fund for distribution to school
districts for school security.
$10 million in general funds,
The Children, Youth and Families
Department.
Ah for a facility for short and
long term stays for foster
youth.
$10 million in general funds for
renovations to and restoration
of the Bataan Memorial Building
in Santa Fe. Um and
I also just want to note for you
that I am going to run through
these pretty quickly at high
level, but there is some
additional detail in your brief
on sort of the source of some of
these differences. Uh, and lfc
analysis on some of these
projects.
Um, they're proposing $4 million
in General Fund for a new fire
Training academy and firefighter
Memorial in Santa Fe.
$30 million in general fund to
New Mexico State University for
construction of the
reforestation Center. Uh, 5
million in General Fund for
state match for the Clean Water
State Revolving fund and $11
million in general obligation
bonds to central New Mexico Co.
Community College for a trade
facility in Rio Rancho. Um, and
this is essentially one of the
major differences in the GOP
package.
Where the LFC fans a different
project for C N M, uh than the
executive framework does in the
next set of bullets you can see
projects proposed in the LFC
framework, but not the executive
framework. Uh, these include, um
on authorization from the State
Road fund for $50 million for
wildlife corridors.
And $10 million in general
obligation bonds to C N. M for
construction of a facility for
the fuse maker Space on C. N. M
s main campus. Um, which was the
institutions top priority. Okay.
Um so I just want to point out
that you also have two sheets
that are high level summaries.
By agency and higher education
institution for um, the general
funds, um slash STB bill and for
the general obligation Bond
Bill, um, the the high level for
higher education institutions
also includes a column for
General fund for those
institutions sense. The higher
ed money is kind of split
between
The two bills so that you can
see sort of totals by
institution. If you're
interested in that.
So, um, Now I'm gonna go to
attachments. See? Which is the
first, um, spreadsheet that you
have.
And this is the detail.
For the main capital bill or the
General Fund bill for 2024. So I
am just going to go page by page
and just highlight 1 to 2 items
on each page. Um, Mr Chair. Do
you want me to go through the
whole thing before we stop for
questions or you want to stop
along the way? Let's go through
the whole thing, okay?
All right, um, so starting on
page one lines, 19 and 20. You
can say to requests from the
Children's youth and Families
Department. Um, the first one on
19 Online. 19 is for general
improvement statewide. Um, and
the second one is for the
facility I mentioned for short
and long term stays for
Youth and foster care. Um and
you can see
And the first set of columns and
then the second set that we have
differences with the executive
and both of those projects.
Y'all? Uh, sorry. I also want to
mention that, um
Our analyst for C Y F D. Rachel
Mercer. Garcia is here and she
can sort of answer some
additional questions about Lfc s
substantive concerns about the
Girls Reintegration Center
project, And I believe some
folks from CI FDR also here and
can do the same about that
project if you'd like. So if
they're in the room, let's just
stop and ask those questions
right now. Right That way we can
move, okay?
Kind of quickly. You want to
move up to the
Share.
Anybody. I guess we'll start
with C Y F D since she jumped up
first. That's right. Don't
matter.
You have any questions on the
reintegration center and see
what if I D for the 20 million?
I do.
Is this already a building that
exist or you're purchasing a new
building, Or is it because it
says to plan design and
construct?
Um, Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Good morning.
Um yes, The girls Reintegration
center is a building that
currently exists. Um, we are
looking to, um
Do you renovations to the
facility? The building itself is
owned by C y f D. But the
property under the building was
in last legislative session
given to the city of
Albuquerque, Um, in a trade for
other property, and so the
building would need to be moved.
Um, And so there's a cost in
moving that building. We are
also looking and working with
GSD on options of just maybe
outright purchasing or
constructing a new building. Um,
if it is too costly to move the
building and Vineland to
purchase so the hope for the
girls Reintegration center is
to, um, set out set up a
facility to help us with office
days.
Um, for youth in the Albuquerque
area.
Um, how do you How big is the
building?
Mr Chairman. I don't know how
you move the building.
I've been told Bryer that the
building could be. It's a
modular building and could be
moved.
I don't know how bad the square
footage of this It's a large
building.
And Andy. Uh, you know what it
is, I guess. 1000 Square feet.
Oh, and they're modular. Okay,
so we just need to place a piece
of land really? To move it and
not 20,000,002.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. The $10 million is
just a portion of that would be
used for this facility.
Additional money is being looked
at for other buildings or other
locations across the state to be
able to have more of a group
home environment for
individuals. Um
That record is kind of a step
down facility from our TCS that
still needs some sort of acute
care and some sort of services,
and we're looking to build those
in areas across the state. Um,
we have a shortage of our TCS
and oftentimes they don't
necessarily take kids from C Y F
D and we don't have a step down
facility.
Those facilities once we can get
them set up and running and
getting a vendor in to do them,
um, would be available for
Medicaid reimbursement as we
move forward with treatment for
individuals. Could you bring us
a breakdown of like, Where are
they going to be farming
tonight?
As stock Gallup Las Cruces so we
can see a breakdown of the 20
million. So we know it wasn't
just 20 Million for one set of
modules recommend attempt, but
the total was Tony.
Mr Chairman. Thank you. We will
get that to you.
Any other questions.
Senator. Everybody's got their
hand up now, Uh, Senator Stein,
born first and then Senator
Woods. Thank you, Mr Chair. Good
morning. Quick question. Um
Galavan.
Bill here. Where is it going to
start?
What were on Capitol right now
Statewide capital.
Okay, we're going through,
probably ahead of myself looking
at the jail in San Richie.
Underwoods. Why haven't you
you've got
I understand. We're talking
about 19 on this list.
Number 19 Let me put my glasses
number 20.
Number 20.
So we've got $10 million there
$20 million
And you're talking about
Plan design and construct.
So
Maybe I'm um, misinterpreting
this.
But you should have a pretty
good idea of what it's gonna
cost to move that.
Or what is going to cost to
construct that?
Because
Haven't you got a plan in place?
Or is this literally
Give him 20 million in our
planet.
Um, Mr Chairman, Senator Woods?
No, we did base that figure off
of the dollar amount per square
footage that was provided us to
gsd. Um, and it allows us to
plan design and construct two
facilities statewide, um, of
about 5000 Square feet, maybe a
little bit larger and
Albuquerque area.
If possible. Um, so that was
based off of the square footage
that they gave us. The
additional money was detailed
for existing facilities to
upgrade those facilities. Um,
and then there was additional
money in there for the John Paul
Taylor facility in Las Cruces.
Um, for a parking structure and
solar that would be used as
A backup generator for that
facility in the event that they
have a power outage and Mr Chair
You have this conversation.
Mr Chair.
When you talk about GSD giving
you
These estimates cost
How long ago was that?
Um, Mr Chairman, Senator Woods.
Those costs were given to us. I
would say it was in August.
Timeframe in preparation for us
to submit this request, um for
capital Ali.
Okay?
I'm very concerned because the
escalation that's going on in
construction right now and I was
I'm worried you're not gonna
have enough money to complete
What you're doing, but I guess
multiple projects.
Complete the one that you get
to, so I guess.
Mr Chairman, senator words That
is correct. We would prioritize
those based on the amount of
funding we received.
And the availability of what's
the cost is at the time that
we're working on that project.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair. Let me tell me your
name again.
Chairman. I'm Rachel Mercer
Garcia and I'm the LFC analyst
for C Y F D Do Cultural Affairs.
Cultural failures. Media request
for John Paul Taylor to I do
not, but I can take questions
back to the analyst today.
Pretty sure in the lfc hearing
and maybe Kelly in your sheets
that there was a request from
The cultural apartment for John
Paul Taylor the exact same
thing.
Mr Chair. We didn't receive a
capital request specific to John
Paul Taylor, um, from cultural
affairs. I don't believe there
was
There was a staffing request. I
believe.
Oh, that's correct related to
related to the house. The house?
Yeah. Um, What is John Paul
Taylor have to do a C Y F. D.
I just don't know the area so
maybe, um
Mr Chairman, member of the
committees, the John Paul Taylor
house that was given to cultural
affairs to be utilized in the
southern part of the state as a
museum is different from the
John Paul Taylor Youth facility.
Okay, all right now I
understand, right? Yeah.
Okay. I just want to see a
further breakdown. See exactly
what you guys are doing. 20
million. So, Mr Chairman, member
of the committees, we have that
and I'm happy to get that over
to you, Senator Bert? Uh, Mr
Chairman all past my question
was on another topic. Thank you.
Senator Bradley, I. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Um not only does it
seem a little abrupt for the
spending and kind of this this
movement of facilities, but I
guess my question is more
centered around the intent of
the facilities. And maybe this
would be a question for lfc
analysts.
But how do we reconcile this
with terms of the Kevin s
lawsuit that are already saying
that were mismanaging, really?
The long and short term care
there? We have a lawsuit saying
you're not managing that
correctly. And yet we're gonna
make this huge investment to
continue to do it when we're
already in violation.
Of the of the term if I
understand correctly, Mr Chair
Secretary.
I thought she was sorry.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator. And my
apologies, Mr Chairman, Senator
at the time of the request. We
also didn't have very much
information about the types of
programming and services. That
would be, um, delivered in that
facility. Um
When Calley mentioned kind of
the substantive questions for
us, that was a core question,
because the terms of the Kevin s
settlement directed the state
not to use congregant care
unless it was medically
necessary. That was a concern
for us. The other question that
we have is that while Medicaid
will reimburse for accredited
residential treatment, it will
not reimburse any longer and the
feds have moved away from
treatment, foster care
reimbursement and so that
Was also a question, not really
knowing this specific types of
services to be delivered in that
facility. Those were the
substantive questions that
Callie Um Mr Chairman, Senator
Bradley.
Um, we've been working with H S
D on a sub acute facility for a
bit of time now. Right now we
have many individuals who enter
a facility as an acute stay,
which is 5 to 7 days. Um, and
then, after their seven day
stay, there is not necessarily a
location in New Mexico, where
they can go and oftentimes we
end up with those individuals
having to be transported out of
state, Which is something that
in the Kevin s litigation.
Um
Is found upon us sending them
out of state. So with the one
facility that we're looking at
more as a group home, it would
be a step down from the acute
level, but not as restrictive as
an R T. C. So the hope in that
facility is that we would be
able to house those individuals
who don't need the acute care
but are not yet ready to go out
just into
Um, regular foster home or as
many of you know a lot of those
individuals when we don't have
placement for them end up as
office days. Those are some of
the individuals that we are
looking to make sure that we
have facilities that can to
maintain that. And so they're
not acute. Their sub, acute. Um
H S D has written a letter of
direction to the CEOs to create
building availability for stub
acute residential Children. It's
not a residential treatment.
But sub acute group homes, which
is what we're looking at, doing
to be able to meet the needs of
those individuals. There would
be, um
Um, services provided there
there would be behavioral health
services there for them. We
would tap into our educational
services that we provide
currently at both John Paul and,
um um why, Dvc? We have
individuals that provide
education, so that would be part
of what we're looking to do
there, but just to be able to
create something that would not
require us to send some of our
individuals out of state for
treatment.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
secretary When you're kind of
gathering the details of like,
really, the financial asked
Could you also be very specific
and provide us that in writing
what services are asking what
what would be provided here? And
I say that because we have a
Many of our failures within C I
f d. The answer is we'll just
follow the settlement. Just
follow it. What follow the terms
of the agreement. And so it
seems initially like we're
making a huge investment to
continue to violate those terms.
If you could outline exactly
what services are providing for
that, and how we reconcile that
that we're meeting the Kevin s
lawsuit agreement, I would I
would appreciate that. Mr
Chairman, Senator Bradley.
absolute. Thank you, Rachel. We
asked
Mr Chairman, Um, because I am
not a lawyer. I don't think that
I can directly answer that
question. But, um, the Kevin s
settlement does prevent the
state from placing youth in
congregate care unless it is
medically necessary. And so I
think it is a critical question
to ask before moving forward.
Yes.
Um
In the in reference to the
building.
So how old is the building?
Mr Chairman, Senator, Are we
talking about the girls
Reintegration Center? Yes. Um, I
don't know exactly when that
building was purchased.
So two years ago, we were, how
old is the question?
Mr. Mr Chair. Um, the age of the
building. They have to get back
to you, but it's roughly about
20 years old. We just completed
the lease, uh, two years ago,
and it was transferred to the
state and at that time it was a
bill to suit for the states.
It's roughly about 20 years old.
Oh, Mr Chairman. That's what
Yeah, that's what I would
suggest this so
If it's that old, you might just
consider going with with a new
one.
So, Mr Chairman, Senator
Gonzalez in the plan that we put
forward it was to construct a
new building at about
approximately 7000 square feet.
Um, at the rate of I believe it
was $270 per square foot. Um and
I'm told by Ms Silva that that
is taken into consideration, Um,
current rates.
Well, um, thank you. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Just something to
consider.
Thank you.
I think that's it. We just We
need a lot more detail. Okay.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Since we have an early childhood
secretary, any questions for
her?
Don't see any red Mr Chair,
turning to page two of your
spreadsheet.
Um, starting online 45. You can
see requests and proposed
appropriations to the Department
of Finance and administration.
Um, online 45. There is an
approach proposed appropriation
to the New Mexico Finance
Authority that would flow
through the D F a for cost
overruns for existing water
trust board projects.
Um, we're both proposing funding
for that at different levels.
Um, online 46. You can see a new
request from D F A, um, for part
of funding for emergency capital
projects statewide. Um, we are
the same on our proposed funding
for that, but I'm just
highlighting that in case any of
you are interested in hearing a
little bit more from Wesley on.
Oh, sorry. Uh,
Senator Rodrigues. Um I'm on
page two of the
Attachment C, which is the
framework for state agencies and
higher Ed.
Okay?
Um, so I just wanted to
highlight that in case any of
you are interested in hearing
more from D F a on their plans
for that funding, And then
before I stop, I'm gonna turn to
additional Did Fay, which flows
onto the next She Page three.
Online 49. You can see the
request and proposed funding
from the executive for the baton
Building. Um, I would note that,
uh well, this is not in the lfc
framework. I think you know, we
agree that there are some
immediate repairs that are
needed to baton. Um, and a
longer term plan for renovation
and restoration to Baton.
Um, the reason that we're not
proposing funding for it now,
um, is because we think this
project should should sort of go
hand and glove with the
Executive office building
project before we do major
renovations to baton. We need
sort of a long term plan for
what that building is going to
be in the future. Um, and there
are some other sources of money
we believe are available.
Um for immediate, more critical
repairs that can't wait for
that. And then online 50. You
can see the executives proposal
for us STB funding for this
strategic water supply and I
will pause again.
Senator share
So thank you, Mr Chair. So two
things first on the emergency
statewide capital.
$10 million.
Yeah.
But
Just because of inflation. I
think we we can spend $10
million before we walk out of
this room just
Just trying to fix things that
are already in the system.
Do we have any
We have a good number on on what
that is. Or is this 10 million
just to guess or the 20 million
before that?
Mr Chairman, Senator, Sheriff.
We don't because this is based
off of requests that we get from
local entities throughout the
year. We do receive quite a few
of them right now. We actually
tracked them. We actually have
them fill out a form if they're
requesting emergency funds, and
right now we have about eight of
them that are on the form that
we just don't have enough
funding to give them their
projects.
So we don't really have an
actual total amount. But you're
right. $10 million might not get
us very far. So we might have to
pick and choose. I guess if you
want to say that way, which ones
are more urgent than others
whenever they do come in
throughout the course of the
year. Um, we're hoping this $10
million could get us at least
through one year, although I
believe you know more funding
would be would be helpful to
kind of make sure that we have
that funding available for
All entities that request
funding some entities might have
other means of fixing the
issues, maybe in the the bigger
the higher populated cities. And
whereas the smaller rural areas
don't have the funds to be able
to fix water systems and things
of that nature, So, um, I agree
with you that I think we we
could use more funding in this
regard.
Sure, but this is for
emergencies. Right? Wesley for
emergencies Only there.
Gallop Hospital almost shut down
and we needed money to make
payroll so you would apply to DF
Asian. How much can we get
right? And so it's only for
emergencies. Pipeline breaks in
Farmington in the city doesn't
have the actual cash on hand.
To do that. Maybe not farmers,
but maybe grants and they need
emergency money will have to pay
it back, right? Is there Is
there recourse with this or no?
There isn't on this funding. I
think there is another bill out
there. That is more of a loan
type funding. Um, another we're
putting together which is going
to $100 million with that one.
We we we would have
There's two There's two pieces
to it. One is. If they do
receive FEMA funds, then they
could pay it back with FEMA
funds. It's similar to the
Senate Bill six and then the
other piece of that is if they
don't qualify for FEMA funds,
then they would work with, um,
with the FAA to kind of
structure alone repayment on
that at no interest. So, Mr
Chair, so this is so it, says
Emergency capital.
So in my mind that was to make
up the shortfalls that we know
are happening now, but this is
completely different irrigation
ditch breaks and we can't figure
out whether it belongs to the
state or not correct. This one's
not really for for cost
overruns, right, So then online,
50 the strategic water supply.
Um wow. $250 Million. Why do we
want to buy acquire? I'm sorry.
Acquire rata, right?
Um, that's a
That seems
That's worse than buying land,
Mr Chair.
Um, we argued about buying land.
Mr Chairman, Senator Sherrod.
That's a good question, And I
don't know if I have anyone from
environment here to answer that.
I
I don't really have that answer.
I can get it for you. I can get
you more details into what we're
doing with this 250 million. It
was part of the governor's
initiative. Um, where she wanted
to have $500 million for this,
but it's really 250 over the
course of two years, the 1st 250
coming from seven stocks bonds
this year and then to 50 next
year, But I can definitely get
you some more information on
that. So, Mr Chair.
What do we have a guest on on?
How many acres feet of water
$250 million. Sure he doesn't
have any details. I know. Sure.
So that's good.
Underwood's
Mr Chairman, I've got a question
on on 50 also, and it's on the
language.
It seems as though
We're going to say
Well, one question I've got
If
Official all be this won't be
presented as an individual bill.
Well, this is the only thing I
will ever be show up.
As to
This going into law. That's what
we see right here.
Is that right? Mr Chair?
Are you talking about that the
bonding for the water? Yeah, I'm
talking about on Rodriguez has
my glasses away
here. We were sharing. Uh,
they're so dirty. I can't really
see anything. This this this
very small and But here's what
As I read it, it says.
Everyone's that may be a good
point for the exact that they'll
need to introduce a bill to
define what
What the 250 is going for and
how it's going.
I'm sorry that that it is so
small that I can't even ask a
question about large copies for
her. Seems like we're going to
bypass.
A law here. This is specifically
saying we're going to bypass the
law here in this language.
And I'd be happy for some
attorney to explain to me.
That clause, and it says
something about
Shall not be subject to any
requirements.
For incurring substantial
binding obligations.
To third parties.
Or spending bonds or no
proceedings within a specific
time period, such as those
specified in section one of this
act, Sara Woods. We're not gonna
get that answer. I know we're
not going to get that answer,
but I'd like to bring that up
Because if this is the only
place this is gonna show up
And any document.
Actually, it's gonna be easily
overlooked by the
The general legislature.
So I wanted to bring that out.
And I'd like for that to an
explanation of that.
To come. Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods. Um
The questions regarding that
language were among the
questions we sent.
Um, the executive asking for
additional detail? Um and so
they they have said they're
working on getting those answers
to us, so we will provide them
to you when we get them.
Thank you.
Thank you. Teacher DF a kill you
want to continue?
Okay. Um, the final project. I
want to highlight. Um, on Page
three is online 61. This is a
request for additional funding
for the forensic unit at the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute.
Um which, as we've discussed
before we intended to fully fund
at this same level of the
request last year. Um, and you
can see that. Currently the
executive and lfc are in the
same place on proposed funding
for this project.
I'm going to go on to Page four.
No, no. Let let her let her
Get about three or four
agencies. Okay, so I'm just
gonna go on to page four and
just highlight a couple more
things, and then I'll stop.
Um, on page four. Lions 69. You
can see a request for funding
for planning and design for a
regional fire training academy
and firefighter Memorial. Um, I
just want to note that while LFC
did not include funding for this
in the capital framework, there
is a special appropriation.
Um for a feasibility, study and
cost benefit analysis, um, for
pursuing this project and
creating a second fire Trade
Fire training Academy in Santa
Fe, In addition to the one in
Socorro,
Um and then online 74. You can
see the request for the P 25
public safety radio
communication system. Um, where
we're both proposing
significant significant funding
but at different levels and I
will pause again.
Senator Stein board.
Um couple of things. I would
also like information on the
water, the water fund because
I've heard various proposals out
there from purchasing produced
water, which
Definitely a little skeptical.
now and two other ideas. So, um,
I even though we could we
skipped over it. The wild the
line 55.
I would like more information on
that because it says we're using
money from the Habitat
Management fund.
For improvements at facilities.
The first part of it. Talks
about habitat improvements.
Second part is we're using
habitat funds for buildings.
That to me, I would like some
clarification on um Mr Chair,
Senator Stein Warren, um, that
isn't properties owned by the
State Game Commission. But I
don't believe it's for
buildings.
Okay?
So if we could, if I could get
an answer if you can help me get
an answer. So it says
improvements at properties so we
don't really know what it means.
Yes, I will clarify that
landscaping, but
Uh, but it's also habitat funds.
So are we using it to landscape
facilities? I mean, what are we
doing there? All right.
And then, um
The line on the firefighter
facility and then memorial. I'm
curious how much of that
appropriation is for the
memorial, part of it.
Mr. Chair Senator Stein born
That's still to be determined.
the total cost of this facility
we have estimated about the $40
million range, so there's $4
million is really just for
planning design. Um, I think
we're going to implement the
memorial piece of it into the
planning and design. Um, so
we'll have more information
after we after we conduct the
planets.
Alright, Go ahead, Kelly.
Okay, Mr Chair, turning to Page
five.
And I am sorry. Yours are so
small. I didn't intend for them
to be printed larger video as
well. Um, line 94. You can see a
request for electric vehicle
infrastructure. Um, this is to
cover the infrastructure funding
gap so infrastructure in places
that the federal funds don't
cover.
Um and you can just see
differences and proposed funding
levels there.
I also wanted to highlight
online 99 request from the
Department of Veterans Services
for the Veterans Resource
Center. Um, the executive in LSC
are quite close on this, and the
reason I wanted to highlight it
is just that it's sort of an
example of an approach that
we're taking an appropriation
recommendations. Um
For major and new projects that
agencies are requesting that
have not been planted designed
and that is to provide funding
to support planning and design
before we recommend major
construction dollars, so that
you all have much more
information about what those
projects actually entail. Um,
both from the building side and
programmatic sides.
Um and more realistic cost
estimates before we look at
higher funding levels.
Senator ship
So, Mr Chair on online 90 for
the electric vehicle
infrastructure.
There's a couple of things here.
I'm not sure that
$30 million or $55 million.
Whatever is
What we know is that the
manufacturers are saying we're
not building them anymore. We
don't want to sell the CVS
because we can't
And there's not enough
infrastructure anywhere to
charge these things anyway. But
I know one of the things that we
talked about or that we were
instructed to do by the feds, I
think was have a E V charging
station every 50 miles along our
industry interstates.
So with this $30 million be too
by, uh, diesel powered
generators to put behind each
one of these e V charging
stations so that we can actually
charge the TVs without running.
Billions and billions of dollars
worth of power lines out there.
I don't think you can answer
that, Kelly.
Keep going, Kelly, Mr. Chair
onto Page six. I'll highlight
two things on this page.
On, um, line 119. Some
differences in proposed
appropriations for state parks,
restoration and infrastructure
improvements.
And on line 134 the request for
additional funding for
construction of the executive
office building. Um, I do want
to note that the state's hearing
before the city's historic
review board was supposed to
happen last night and was
postponed again. Um, I think
indefinitely and Msilva can
probably
Speak to, uh, where we go from
here and what a new timeline
might be if you would
Like to hear that and you want
to
Um, thank you, Kelly, Mr. Chair.
So the we were, um the hearing
was postponed. We look to be on
the next agenda, which is in
February. The reason it was
postponed. Um, was a
collaborative effort between the
state and the city in order for
us to give FMD and opportunity
to speak with us via the
Um, Office of the Santa Fe
Association. So we have a
meeting scheduled for the 18th,
which is next week just to give
the community an opportunity to
discuss any issues or concerns
that they might have. Once we
have that meeting, there will be
back on the agenda in February.
Well, just quit filling potholes
in Santa Fe and see if they want
a new building.
Okay?
Any questions on the executive
building
center, Woods
I wonder what your office number
is going to be.
What on the executive office
building? We've got 100 million.
How much planning has already
been done on that?
Um, Mr Chair, Senator Woods, So
we are not in design. Um right
now, we are just at the phase of
US site planning, which includes
demolition of the concert, TCP,
no building and the Casitas. So
we have not started design. As
of Yeah.
That we're sending a sad
$100 million. Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods so part of the Capitol
building planning commissions
tasked to the facilities
Management division was to look
at amassing size of a facility
and look at the size of a
facility that would we could
potentially put on site.
Um, when we did that, we looked
at a parking structure. Um, that
would, uh, accommodate 700
parking spaces as well as a
building that would accommodate
700 employees. So
I'm sorry. Go ahead, but I'm
not. I'm not.
I'm asking.
Yeah, Yeah, we're we're looking
at this stuff.
But do we need $100 Million to
look at it right now? Mr Chair,
Senator Woods, so that estimate
was given to us by Dec Repaired
17 E So we're confident in the
numbers and then we're looking
at about $1000, a square foot.
But we're still talking about Mr
Chair. We're still talking about
building the building. And it
sounds like we're could be
several years away from building
that building. So what I'm
asking for
Why are we asking for 100
million today?
When it may be several years
before we spend it.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator Woods. So,
according to the timeline, um
once we are able to demo the
facilities once we get approval
from the city to demo the
facilities, then we can start
looking at, um we'll do the demo
and the design in parallel. So
if we're successful in getting
an approval from the city, um
within the next few months on
demolition
Then we can design so we would
look at construction starting
next year.
Uh, possibly if we get approval
from the city within the next
few months, so we've already Mr
Chair. We've already got an
article or collect architecture.
Company that is designed the
building.
Mr Chair Senator was we do have
an architectural firm on
contract, but we have not
started design. As of yet. We
won't be able to start design
until we get approval from the
city for the demolition of the
Casitas and the country. TCP, no
building. Go ahead to circle
here. I apologize. Mr Chair
Senator was so, um, I can tell
you that we can start the site
work.
Uh, we can start the, um, the
parking structure and we can
start the shell of the building
with the money that we have
currently
Um, the design of the building.
We won't be able to complete
that until we know who's going
to actually go in the facility.
And what once we get the
remainder of the money.
Okay, Um
I'm not getting anywhere, mr
Chair, so I'll quit asking.
Thank you.
Okay. Um, Mr. Chair, um,
starting online 138. This is the
detail on the higher education
projects that are proposed for
General fund. Um, it's primarily
supplemental funding for
existing projects. Demolition.
Um, and in one case, planning
and design for a major, um,
project
Um, if you'll turn to page
seven, all highlight a couple
items in the higher Ed General
fund.
Category.
Online 152 on page 7 $15 million
in supplemental funding for the
U. N. M Cancer Center, supported
by both Lfc and the executive.
Um our understanding is that
this funding would complete the
cancer center once and for all.
So this should be the last
request. We'll be seeing at
least for awhile for this
building.
Um and on line 153. You can see
proposed funding for the
reforestation center. Um, I just
want to kind of note why This is
not included in the LFC Capital
framework. Um, First of all, it
was a special request. Um,
though we also did not recommend
it there. And the reason is that
There is a $10 million special
appropriation for the
reforestation center from last
year that was for site
acquisition, planning and
design. Um, the results of the
site selection process was the
selection of Maura, which is
already owned by MSU. So we
don't need money to acquire a
site now. Um so we believed that
$10 million was sufficient to
cover design. Um which I
understand they're getting going
on now.
Uh um and probably some initial
phase construction as well. Um,
and then the Legislature could
consider additional funding for
construction next year when it's
likely to be more ready for
that.
All right, Uh,
KJ.
Uh, line 167. You can see their
request for the governor's
Initiative for Literacy
Institute, and that is that is
kind of wraps up what I was
going to highlight in the
statewide general fund.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you on the next line. Actually,
won 68 the electric bus charging
stations.
Um
Does anybody know anything about
that one? What? Where will those
be? And
We have a plan. Is there a
network being put together on
the electric bus charging
Mr Chairman, Senator Padilla.
Um, this is a request made by
Public Education Department
every year. I think they
probably do have some more of
that information that I can get
for you. I don't have it in
front of me. Um, I think that
you know $1.5 million doesn't go
a long way. I think it's only
going to be a couple of sites,
but I can I can get with them
and see if I can get a list of
potential sites for you.
Appreciate that, Mr Chair and
just, you know, if there's a
like a schedule of where they
are now and what they're trying
to do, and, you know, is there a
community I know, Las Cruces has
purchased a couple of electric
Busses that they're piloting or
whatever, but just curious where
these are going to be placed.
Thank you.
Kill? Yeah, sure. Yep.
Okay, so all right. So this is
Attachment D. It's the
spreadsheet that should be
behind the other one.
Um So here you will have the LFC
framework and an executive
framework for general obligation
bonds side by side. Um, I do
want to say you know, in
general, I think we're not too
far off in the GOP package, so I
will highlight a few things and
try to move quickly on page one
lines, 14 and 15. You could see
the differences and projects
that were
Um, recommended for funding for
Cmm between LFC and the
executive. Um, Mr Honey is here
if you would like any more
details on that.
Uh, um, on Page two.
Um, line 50.
This is for the second phase of
Kelly Hall replacement at New
Mexico Tech. Um I just kind of
want to note that, um
There is also a supplemental
request for this project for
Phase one, so this is kind of
the ongoing major construction
at New Mexico Tech that we are
funding in two different ways
proposed this year.
Um online, 54, New Mexico Junior
College. There is a difference
in the recommended funding here.
Um And I just wanted to note
that the LFC is recommendation
is, um, based on the high
unrestricted fund balances that
the college has right now.
Okay, Page three.
Um, lines 63 and 67. There are
pre school projects proposed in
Albuquerque by both the school
for the blind and visually
impaired and the school for the
deaf and these funds are
actually require statutorily
required as a match for public
school Capital Outlay fund
funding, So these projects are
going through the public school
Capital Outlay Council as well.
Uh um.
You can see the recommendations
for New Mexico State Online's 71
through 75, and I just want to
note that there is also, uh,
funding included for MSU's
Creative Media Institute project
as a special appropriation and
House bill two.
So that's why you're not seeing
that here.
Um
Keep going.
Yep. Okay. Ah, the last page
On Page four.
Ah, line 95. You can see you and
M s major request for the 2024 G
O B cycle to replace their
humanities and social sciences
buildings.
Um, we are in truth, uh, on this
At
So our numbers are actually
matching overall for this
project. The differences there
is that the LFC has recommended
$2 million to support planning
and design for this project from
General fund so that they can
get started on it right away.
The expectation with that
appropriation is that the
institution would contribute to
planning and design as well.
That's the humanities building
that
Nobody even knows anything
about. It's like a napkin dream.
Um, Mr Chair? Um, I wouldn't say
we don't know anything about it,
but they have not started the
design process. So this is an
example of you know of a very
large project a very large
funding request. Um, where we
would like to, you know, See
these projects get started
sooner, um, to make the money
move faster for job projects as
well as kind of get it further
along before you provide all the
dollars.
Okay?
Right. That's what I was going
to highlight. So we will stand
for questions on that. If you
have them any questions on the
higher Ed.
I read
Okay?
Senator Gonzalez.
My men will go back just a
little bit just for a couple of
real quick questions.
On the one in the
Line 167. This is on the
executive governors.
On that.
Literacy building.
Where would that be?
Mr Chairman, Senator Gonzalez.
Um, I did ask that's someone
from ThinkPad Come here and and
explain that project. I'm not
sure if they are here.
Gonzalez. My understanding is in
inside house built to there's
another request for the
literacy, and now they want to
build a building. But it is a
summer reading program, which
should make schools available.
Uh, where that literacy program.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator. Um, we
have not yet had those details,
either. So, um, that's the
reasoning behind the LFC is
current recommendation, which
would be to support planning and
design for the facility rather
than the full request for
construction. Okay, Thank you.
The other question And I can't
find it now is so
The one on the fire training.
Now, Um, earlier this summer, we
were proposed with, um, the two
Type of, you know, hotshot crews
that are going to be built one,
He said. No.
That's Vegas, and one isn't so
coral.
So is there any coordination
with that, or those are two
separate things.
Um, Mr Chair, Senator Gonzalez.
Um, there are two separate
things on Page six line 117. You
can see the request for the
hotshot facilities. Um, what
number was that again? So line
117 on Page six.
And then this other one is on,
uh
I remember 68.
One that has
Fire training academy.
Yes. So the, um so my
understanding, you know, the
fire training academy would be a
new regional training academy in
Santa Fe for firefighters, the
hotshot facilities are to
accommodate the state based
hotshot crews. Mr Chairman, I
understand that, But you know,
I'm just saying
On the overall. Is there any
coordination with you know that
could be some parts of Mr
Chairman, Senator Gonzalez. I
know that there was some
coordination. I'm not sure the
hotshot crews but I know with
the fire, um the fire folks and
the governor's office. There
were some coordination on to
where to where to locate that
facility. And so that's where
Santa Fe was selected. So I know
there was coordination there.
I'm not too sure if the hotshot
crews were involved in that
coordination or not.
Right. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator Gonzalez. Just
real quick on your literacy
center question. The plan is to
have that in Albuquerque and
burn Leo County.
That's fine.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Kelly.
Thank you for the update.
Question. What? When? Where is
this bill originating previous
question? Uh, Mr Chair, Senator
Stein more. And so the GOP bill
will originate in the House and
the General Fund Capital bill
will originate in the Senate
with Senator Rodriguez as
sponsor.
Yeah, I know. You mentioned the
supplemental for CM I that was
in MSU's top party projects, so
it's good to see it kind of
moving, and we just need to
figure out how to complete it.
So I'm wondering if this is
still
They're still capacity in here
for part of that project.
Come on.
Um, Senator, you, Mr Chair.
Senator. Are you asking about
additional funding for the
project? Because what was funded
in the supplemental was just a
third of the cost of the
project.
Um, I don't have an answer for
you yet, but we can look at
that. Okay, Cool. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you all.
Thank you Just
don't want to stand up. Um, Just
curious. Um, line 95 on you and
M.
The humanities and social
science complex is that multiple
buildings
And what? We're going to
buildings. I mean, if you don't
have the information, that's
fine. But I'm just I'm Mr Chair,
Senator Bert. I believe it's
going to be a single building.
that's replacing two buildings.
Gerald's
Is that right? Yes.
Um So currently there's
Humanities and Ortega Hall,
which the institution plans to
demo and then sort of build a
single replacement facility.
Okay. And then how many square
feet are are they gonna? Is it
gonna be about the same size? Or
is it an increase or Mr Chair?
Senator, I believe the current
plan is for it to be around
100,000 Square feet, And I'm not
entirely sure how that compares
to the existing size, Gerald, do
you know
But we can get back to you on
that.
That's fine. I'm just kinda
curious. Um
It looks like a pretty large
expansion is the only thing I'm
kind of curious about, and, uh
But I guess the hall you were
talking about has to be
demolished. It's and
Very old, very bad shape. I
would assume that
Um, Mr Chair, Senator. Yes, The
buildings are in bad shape, and
they do have to be demolished.
Um, I will say that, you know,
we've had questions about the
overall cost of the replacement
project as well. It is quite
high and you know, that's one of
the reasons that we would like
the, um, designed to be further
along before full funding is
provided for this project. So
you have more information about
exactly what you're buying and
Sort of the cost estimates are
more specific and closer to the
time of construction.
So, Mr Chair. Just this is yet
another example. It looks like
Almost the cart before the horse
We're designing buildings and we
don't know totally. What's going
to go in? There were, um,
looking at certain square
footage. We don't know we can
feel of that capacity. Um
And it just seemed like
To me, and I appreciate the fact
that they're requesting 110.
We're only looking at about half
that. But again, we're gonna put
in half that money and again. We
don't know exactly what the
needs are within for the use of
this building is just
Seems to me like
Boy. We're here We are. We've
got tons of money. Let's just
figure out a way to to spend it
in some cases.
And the other thing that I guess
bothers me is that
We've talked about for years and
meetings in this committee and
other committees that
The nature of education, Second
secondary education. Higher
education is changing.
And they're not using classrooms
as much as they used to. And you
know, we're looking downsizing.
And yet she was, like all the
universities come to us with
more brick and mortar projects.
And I'm not saying they're not.
Neither they're necessary.
But we're ready to spend 55 $57
million on the building that
We don't even know
Exactly what's gonna go in there
and how it's going all fit
together and
And we don't have a full plan
for this so no, even not even a
design.
I just cautioned the committee
and
And in this group to look at
Being cautious about how we
commence a lot. This is 55 to
$57 million. Could that be used
a little bit better until we get
a design and and will it matter
if we roll it from this year to
next year? Well, we may not have
the money next year. That's why
we're trying to do it this year.
I
Anyway, Mr Chairman, I'm just
throwing up the flag caution
again. I'm just very concerned
about
Got to spend the money from got
it. Thank you.
Just real quickly. I know we're
about to beat this horse to
death.
That on your attachment C
And number 46 it, says Emergency
capital statewide.
How would that be handed out?
How would you? How would you
determine who got that?
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods. It
would most likely come in on a
first come first served basis as
the emergencies come up, and
they submit a most likely a form
of request online through a
form. We will then look at that
request and and basically see
the need of it kind of go
through their budgets of these
local entities is here. They
have the competitive capacity to
kind of pay for some of this
themselves, And if it's
determined that they don't then
we could find that project
that's that's how we envision
it.
And D F A would
Would
Make that determination. Mr
Chairman, Senator Woods? Yes.
So we're not gonna appropriate
particular project we're gonna
appropriate to the agency to
distribute the money.
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods.
That's correct, because we don't
know what the emergencies are.
So, um, as they come in, that's
the only that's the only way
that we see that we can do that,
Um
You know, obviously the the
other. The alternative is to
fund these projects before they
get to emergencies. And maybe
that's that's an option as well.
But I'm just going to use this
one. As a as an example. I know
Senator Diamond Brantley. She
had some water issues and T or C
and if we had a big pot of money
to be able to help with that we
could have helped resolve some
of those issues. And so this is
kind of where we're where we're
coming out with. This kind of
funding is once those those
issues arise. We can try to
determine how we can fund them.
Without having to wait until the
next session.
But But I guess my concern is of
all the thoughts of money that
you handle.
Many of them are loans. I know
and most local governments don't
want alone. They want free
money.
But I guess what concerns me? It
doesn't even say.
You know water, it is, says
Damn near anything here.
And so any emergency it could
get pretty
Political on how that's given
out Mr Chairman, Senator Woods.
It was left broad on purpose
because I think if we just do it
just for water. Um there's other
needs that come up throughout
the year. Um, purchasing
ambulances. Um, having some, you
know, medical equipment, there
was some for another entity.
There's different. There's
different types of projects that
come up throughout the year
where emergency funding are
needed, so we didn't want to
restrict it with just water
projects.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Oh, Mr Chair. That's all we have
for you. I if I could say just
Oh, that's on Friday.
Um, Mr Chair. I'm sorry. I don't
have that for you. I thought we
were doing that on Friday. I
apologize.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Allowed. I'm sorry, or legacy
funds are they allowed to fight?
Are they sick is allowed to
apply for legacy funds.
Um, we could find that out. Mr.
Chair. I
I don't think so. But I will.
Um, we can confirm that for you.
I generally I don't think
there's an application process
for the legacy funds it's
distributing to certain
programs. Yeah, And so I mean,
we have 20 million for a sake is
there at easier accessible
through the legacy funds.
And through the capital.
It might be a better way to do
it.
Especially with the issues of
audits and all that.
Um Mr Chair will follow up on
that. And while you're checking
that check on the legacy fund
that
If if they are appropriate money
to their audits have to be
current or not current on the
Legacy fund.
And that will answer that
question for me.
Because if we're putting 20
million innocent kids, and they
go to the Legacy fund
For sake is and they don't have
to meet the auditor helpless in
those small districts.
We didn't get the capital, the
exact capital till
Almost the day we were doing it
and it was late because we're
trying to draft the bill. So
this is the earliest I think
we've ever gotten the exact
capital.
Just like
Swamp of government how slowly
we moved our local school and
water district of charges that
Money was available that never
done
Watch.
I will make sure that Wayne
gives you raised Wesley. Well
deserved raised. Yeah. Let me
tell you that.
And your name comes up a lot and
how you're performing, and it's
always in the good
So that that that's really helps
us quite a bit, and so
You have a reputation trying to
constrain things and
And working with people to get
things done.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Senator. You know, I
couldn't do it without my team
as well. So I just want to make
sure everyone knows that it's
you know, having a good L G d
team behind me and Capital
outlay team helps, you know, get
everything done. So appreciate
it. Thank you to Cambodia.
Thanks, chair. I'll just be
really, really brief. Also
outstanding work. I mean, every
time I call this this team and
this gentleman
I'm sure he's Oh, my God. What's
he calling about now? But you
always jump on it, and it's just
really, really very thick. We're
very thankful. Thank you so
much. Thanks.
Okay?
Yep. 130
So we're gonna have that Friday
and Kelly, right?
Could you do me a favor and let
me ask the members? Do you want
big sheets Because everybody in
