Senator Campos excused.
Senator Diamond excused Senator
Gonzales yes.
Those votes yes Senator Hemphill
used Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla both yes Senator
share yes Senator share votes
yes Senator Steinborn Senator
Steinborn votes yes Senator
Woods yes Senator Woods votes
yes Senator Rodriguez yes
Senator Rodriguez both yes
senator Munoz yes Senator
million yes votes yes seven two
zero December.
Thank you very Senator Burt two
zero eight two zero sorry thank
you.
Representative Gregory up.
Good afternoon everyone thank
you for hearing
Four five for those of you who
don't know me and representative
Cynthia Borrego this is
Representative Terrel Lujan co
sponsor thank you Mr chair the
health labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill three
forty I also heard by
probation and finances proposes
it to create a firefighter
recruitment fund.
Find recruitment disbursements
to firefighters started
employment with the county or
municipal fire departments
provided that they state three
years.
Anybody in the audience and
support.
One missile in the last one of
the session.
But he doesn't want tough.
Of.
Thank you Mr chairman within the
general kids with the New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO
within in strong support of the
semester and thank the sponsors
for bringing it up.
any questions from committee
members.
That.
One question real quick good
question that you okay us
so it says will get a five
thousand dollar bonus will that
come from the city or the
county.
Mr chair we are looking at the
fire fighter fund right now but
the those rules will still be
promulgated.
Thank.
The question that you're talking
about the state firefighters
from this is going to come from
does this include all volunteer
fire department Senator Mr chair
just Senator Woods it does not
this is Mr chair well wouldn't
Mr chair Senator the purpose of
this is really to have parity
with with the police to right
now they have a special fund for
recruitment and this is to
encourage our volunteer
firefighters to sign up to
become career firefighters.
Many of these volunteer are
career firefighters.
Thanks man Mr chair Senator the
fire fire
That is already set up that is
the.
Excuse me is already using some
of the funds from the grant Fund
that portion of it to use for
the recruitment and education
for our with our rural and
volunteer firefighters.
I agree that that's already
happening this is just would be
for the for our career
firefighters so that sets up a a
fund for them when the sign sign
on I will agree to do this with
the with the sign on our paid
for our federal why would you do
this for volunteer firefighters
saying it's the same they risk
your life just like anybody else
and you're trying to get them to
come on what we need to find Mr
chair I'm sorry not going to you
man man and Mr Mr chair of
center we are committed to work
with the five Marshall on that
because this is already
happening through this grant
Fund we want to make sure that
we have the parity place but the
functionality right now in this
bill as it stands is just for
the for the those career
firefighters but it's not that
it's not already have not
happening but we want to work
the fire marshal to make sure
that we are addressing the the
initial need and then making
sure the right corporate in all
okay Mr chairman and
Representative do you know where
the phone comes from.
Mr chair and representative and
senators we will be coming back
next year to work on that with
in the meantime we'll be working
on our rules the purpose of this
fund is to recruit firefighters
because in Albuquerque for
example we are short
firefighters by about sixty
firefighters right now and so
the whole purpose of this fund
is to recruit firefighters to be
career firefighters in addition
to that Mr chair and and
Senators the peril is
is a completely different thing
for volunteer and career
firefighters so those are some
of the reasons that we're right
now we're starting with our
are career firefighters and it
may be expanded as time goes on.
You don't understand where this
fund come from.
You understand how this is
funded.
Do you understand how this fund
is funded Mr chair
representative yes Sir you
should explain to me where the
money comes into this fund.
Mr chair and Senator right have
this we this is just setting up
the fund it doesn't have the
appropriation in SB two if
that's what you're asking.
Mr chair Senator.
So you want to fund this General
Fund sisters Mr chair
If that's where we we find that
we need to do that and that's
will look that right now because
of the other funds that we
already have in place from this
year's funding we we we can look
to find that funding in the next
year to come in working with the
fire the fire marshal as well
and we also have an expert
witness online captain mark
Martin sos or if we need to go
to him to respond Mr chair.
Point that Senator Woods has a
for the day this.
You're telling me that there's
not a fund to take this out of
but you want a five thousand
dollar recruitment bonus so how
are you going to fund this fund
if there's not a fund set up
already Ford is is fun come out
of the equipment fund of the
firefighters that comes off of
property tax of of of the
insurance surcharge that's where
that money come from right Mr
chair Senator Woods we are going
to be coming back next year with
that information asking for the
appropriation and we're going to
be looking at every Avenue
possible to fund this
this fund Mr chair Senator we
know that even without the
appropriation it's it's worth
creating the fund for future
appropriation for the.
So that we can look at the
junior funded other state or
federal funds that can be put
into this fund as it would be
created Mr chair Senator.
We get this straight Mr chair
and representative austere.
That's who has you're telling
me.
But you won't.
According to my.
Information.
The this sets up.
What is this legislation
accomplice Mr chair fives five
thousand dollar recruitment
bonus for new firefighters is
that what this does Mr chair and
representative.
Mr chair and senator what this
does is it sets up a mechanism
for the fund to be created and
that is really all that it does
right at this point.
And then again why wouldn't you
set this up for volunteer
fireman you said all we've got
to have because we don't have
them here we don't have in the
rural areas to the.
Under so why are you.
No I think that that.
Mr chair.
No further questions.
Question.
Thank you representative for
bringing this bill at I think
this is Andrew may be over
complicating it as I read this.
Mr chair colleagues
Representative this is exactly
what we just did with the with
law enforcement.
We just gave a hundred million
dollars for sign on bonuses
recruitment hates for law
enforcement volunteers
respectfully the person to be
able to require so this is just
exactly the same thing for
firefighters is that not
Mr chair Senators Steinborn
exactly trying to set parity for
the firefighters as with for all
public safety officials that are
career
employees.
Thank you and and and Mr chair
representative you could say in
a way that fund is an inducement
it's a way to have a little
leverage and to encourage
someone to have someone seventy
with the department which is a
good thing because we talk a lot
about turnover and just going
from one jurisdiction another
and so by having that
requirement in there of someone
Javadi that kind of a thing that
and I use it Mr chair and
Senator Steinborn if this if the
firefighter signs on and then
leaves within the years then
they are required to pay back
that amount so it really is a
tool.
Thank you for that answer I
think it's really important Mr
chair so that this is just.
The state you could save parity
does not even parity because we
gave a hundred million dollars
to other first responders and so
this is a way to kind of put us
on a path with with the for
firefighters to so I think it's
great bill thank you for
bringing it forward thank you
Mr.
Thank you senator good afternoon
representatives and staff here
just a quick question I think
one of the confusion parts as
they seem to be an actually
initially when I first thought I
just had that look question to
is where the funding for you
intend the funding for this fund
to come from that during because
the way it reads I think created
a little bit of confusion where
it says that you would disburse
five thousand dollars to
firefighters into this
recruitment fund but it didn't
say from where it merely said
that it has potential to to get
it from the fire fire right
firefighter retention fund for
the general fund so maybe you
can just explain to clarify some
of the thank you thank you for
that question Mr chairman and
senator Rodriguez
we are going to both be looking
at every possible source of
funding we may be coming back
next year for some alternative
funding I mean not alternative
but some funding from the
general fund to fund this but we
were going to be looking I'm
working with the state fire
marshal to identify all of those
we had some rules in the
original go and they were they
asked that we take them out so
that's why it's coming to you is
a little bit more of a skeleton
at this point in time and we did
take those out so you can see
those you didn't have the
benefit of seeing those but we
will be coming back again thank
you for that explanation and it
seems like a great idea from
what I can see I think just the
the fact that it seems to be
together it creates a fund and
it does versus five thousand and
so it's not really that way from
what I hear from you and I'm so
that I want to put words in your
mouth but tell me if I'm correct
what I hear from you is that
yours that was to the fund
period that's it and so we
missed it it's very I'm sorry
it's a mechanism to chase
creating the fund yes.
Thank you but in the but in the
future you intend it's a fund is
created you intend to have five
thousand dollar disbursements
made out in whatever form of
funding you can get into this
fund that's really what it is
correct yes okay then there's
then I think that makes a
difference in at least to to me
so Mister chairman had for the
questions I think it's a good
idea let me ask one question I
can not find that firefighters
retention Fund.
Can't find that in when
securities
anywhere fire protection fund
fire protection grant Fund.
Mr chairman I tried protection
fund yeah it would be under the
jurisdiction of homeland
security with the state fire
marshal and under that fund yeah
and.
I can't find where that funding
this their fire protection grant
Fund that's under that as well
no this is the fire from from
the firefighter retention Fund
but there's no firefighter
retention Fund listed under
homeland security fire
protection fund fire protection
grant Fund.
For the protection fund from the
protection fund they receive
that insurance premiums the
funds in the this past year they
got a hundred and ten million
dollars and from that hundred
ten million dollars I think
they've then they take a formula
and and take percentage out of
that to fund these other
projects that Center we're just
talking about needs
I think I spent over thirty
million dollars there and part
of that one of the allocations
there was to go to and why is
created is to go to our
volunteer firefighters Mr chair
Senator Woods.
the that's good because of I I
looked it up in the bill that
fires different so the fire
protection fund has thirty three
million in there but I kind of
like the same thing Senator
Woods.
Why don't we help in the rural.
Firefighters.
Mr Mr chair I think what we see
what we've got by with what the
request is in those it was.
with captain Martin so those and
all the and our firefighters as
it is to go to the career I part
is right now we're seeing that's
where the deficit isn't even
here in Santa Fe County we are
looking at a fifteen percent
deficit with our recruitment but
in Albuquerque it's a bigger
disparity but again of this is
something that we need to bring
back to reconsider we're we're
happy to work towards that if
that is something that we need
to do right now we were asked to
just focus on the career
firefighters.
Mr Lott Albuquerque and Santa Fe
no rural New Mexico can have a
motion Mr.
A motion for two passed by
Senator be a second by Senator
I'm what we call the roll.
Senator Burt.
Senator Byrd votes no Senator
Google yes Senator Campos votes
yes Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales boats yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator have the votes yes
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes yes
Senator share.
Senator share votes nose Senator
Steinborn Senator Steinborn
votes yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes no Senator
Rodriguez yes Sen Rodriguez both
yes senator Munoz yes Sir my
nose both yes seven to three to
pass thank you so much.
