We're gonna go ahead and get
started
Senator Hickey the longer you
talked the more we draft
amendments especially centers
here.
Senator has a very quick can of
riding the amendments.
We get started Center take you
through it very good thank you
Mr chairman and and senators
the average is there speaking
with the senator and this is
just a little tiny bit Senator
shares of all time but he said
so what you gonna do song and
dance wise and I said he said
staying alignment I said exactly
this is about staying alive it's
about keeping people from
succumbing to the addictions
that starts with vaping nicotine
etcetera and essentially in a
nutshell what it does is it
removes.
Funds from general reserves the
to the tobacco settlement
permanent from and the reason we
want to do that is that it will
hurt in in the general fund
reserves you have to be very
conservative in your investment
but in the tobacco fund we can
be much more liberal and earn
significantly more money and
then we can get to a point where
once the funds that are burned
to surpass the settlements that
are coming in we will be able to
take that money and spend it on
the prevention and with thirty
four percent of our high school
students now vaping fentanyl
going in through that tool that
they've they've with it's it's
getting to a crisis that we've
really got to address with more
funding going in the future and
again vaping tobacco is the
gateway to a potentially a life
of addiction and and oral pain
and for everyone around so I
would move but but I'm here to
do is to ask that we make the
movement of those funds and I
have to witnesses.
Is the movie and who can go into
detail for anyone who likes
thank you Sir thank you we're
gonna go to the audience first.
Engine.
We're gonna go in the audience
anybody of four again Senate
bill one seventy eight.
Mr.
Chair members need to come to
the Mike state name and.
Otherwise people on the World
Wide Web don't know your.
This.
Yeah Mr chair members of the
committee my seat of the
American heart association I
think we strongly support this
legislation and and the sponsor
I think we all know it can of
the tobacco settlement funds
supposed to be meant to be used
for prevention and education and
you know it's it's time that we
put the money back and use that
money for.
Senator estately thirty four
percent of our high school kids
are we paying forty percent of
the middle school kids are
waiting and you know the numbers
are not going down steadily
going up and you know our
revenue in terms of spending
money on prevention and
education has gone down
significantly from several years
from almost ten million dollars
to five point four million
dollars now so we're not raising
taxes not spending on prevention
education this is a place to go
till and we we urge you to
support this bill thank thank
you.
Center this is an LFC rec bill
is correct that is correct
senator.
to questions from committee
members.
So what welcome back sorry and
be gone for half.
Welcome back.
We missed.
Did.
This is the number of the most
of thank you very much
Senator Hickey and Mr chairman
of.
The tobacco settlement fund was
a fund that was.
Is our state share.
Of a settlement
that was done.
We understand it through the
courts I don't remember what
court but.
Course of regional.
Reason our what was their
original purpose of this fund
what was what was it originally
quote set up to do make sure
Senator.
Yes originally it was set up in
as it was determined by the
court Senator Woods to help
decrease smoking
in the population and as is been
used around the United States
it's been really quite
successful in decreasing the
rates of smoking.
but and it it was smoking and is
the main issue courses is
nicotine but nicotine now is
coming in so many other forms
and those the utilization of
nicotine in this other forms is
going up substantially as in
vaping and so these funds would
be used for that as well so with
that Mr chairman and senator
I don't see.
In my.
And I'm not reading the bill so
I'm gonna I'm apologize to you.
For not reading the bill ahead
of time your of the bill
proposes this money to be
directed where.
It this money a substantial
portion of the settlement money
that comes in and we're now and
year two thousand and three in
terms of litigation with the
tobacco companies of how much
money should be brought in and
the idea is that ultimately at
some point there's going to be
so little smoking
that they're
because of the success of this
and there would be less and less
money but this fund originally
through the courts it goes on in
perpetuity until we've
essentially a cheap
no smoking and or use of
nicotine.
So this so but during the
process of this fund in some
later years money was taken from
the fund and put into general
fund to have potential resources
to deal with a number of issues
I should also note that the the
as this is still there is money
there being generated this money
is coming in through the
litigation again we're still
finishing up two thousand three
it goes into treating the impact
of nicotine in terms of cancers
it goes to U. N. M. for a number
of departments which basically
related to smoking in one format
or another as well as going to
the Department of Health and
some money going to CMS.
So from what I understood Mr
chair Senator you're not
objecting to spending money on
those.
Those things.
You're objecting spending the
money on.
Something else.
I'm I'm really not objecting to
anything Senator what's Mr
chairman what I'm doing is
acting on behalf of the LFC who
made the observation that
This money is always tight and
and in a number of reasons we
will have more money to be able
to spend on cessation prevention
and treatment by transferring
these funds where they are now
tobacco phones residing in the
General Fund in moving back over
to the tobacco fund which has
less stringent investment
policies associated with it so
so the the.
Back to fund.
Would be.
Maybe you.
Mr chair of.
We understand a permanent fund
it can be.
Statutorily.
But we also have
constitutionally.
From the funds but what what
we're trying to do here Mr chair
and senator.
I got a question up yet trying
to figure out.
Why this is already there is
what I'm trying to figure out
how I'm going to refer to my
experts Senator Woods Mr chair
to answer that question Mister
chairman Senator Woods yes I
think I think I understand your
question well so we in the
master settlement agreement
related to the tobacco
litigation was established we
created the you all created the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund in statute only in the idea
was just like other severance
tax permanent funds we would get
these monies one time and
eventually we stop receiving
that money and this will
continue to generate interest
for the general fund for
treatment of other purposes at a
certain point
the reserves had reached solo
there was a there was a worry
that they could even go negative
and so it was at that time that
the legislature decided to take
this tobacco settlement
permanent fund included in the
reserves the general fund
reserves to help our bottom line
that's both our bond ratings in
just in case we needed to to get
into it and in fact the
legislature has done that
already before so what this bill
is doing is saying that that our
current reserve number is
inflated maybe artificially by
this three hundred million
dollar fund which may not belong
in reserves and needs to be
taken out again so that it can
be invested more aggressively
and again it's distributions for
treatment.
Senator so.
Back to the withdrawal part of
it if we put this back into a
more of a permanent funded not
use it as a reserve we can still
withdrawal the.
Interest off of that fund is
where we're going to fund these
programs that we're talking
about we're not going to dip
into the corpus of the the fund
which we are now doing.
Which we have before yes Mr
thank you very trying to head
Mister chairman Senator Woods it
takes non reoccurring money and
we've been using it from
reoccurring issues and takes
that money makes it nonrecurring
and holds it is nonrecurring in
the last.
All automatic.
Any other questions from
committee members seem and can
have a motion helps understand
where.
Right right three.
The motion by Senator one second
by Senator the.
Any objection to the do passed
motion.
I see none.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator thank you John.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee Senate
bill two forty two
is the bill that was brought to
me by the
department of health which still
operates the medical cannabis
program and the bill is very
simple it it makes an
improvement in the way the the
timing of registering for the
purpose of registering for the
program and getting a medical
certificate in order to re
register is handled and by by
making the change that we're
proposing here is that we put
both the the re registration and
the medical certification on a
two year every two years
basically and and and aligning
them that way it actually will
save a great deal of money for
the patients in the medical
cannabis program who currently
have to be you have to get an
annual medical recertification
and and that can be very
expensive and for people who are
living on the edge it becomes a
of a barrier to their
participating in this program so
I would like to have my expert
witness Dr Dominick Cirillo from
the department of health and he
has another expert witness to so
we have to experiences so I'll
I'll turn it over to them Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and senator Ortiz
you can now thank you for this
opportunity present this bill
and to speak on it this is
really something that will be
very beneficial for the patients
in the program as a senator
mentioned the current process
for patients to enroll in the
program is they obtain a three
year chart but still have to go
and obtain and medical
certification every year over
the last several years we've
streamlined the process so that
is essentially the same process
however because of the confusion
of the way the statute has ended
up being interpreted providers
and patients often are wondering
do I need to go and see my
medical providers do we need to
get a renewal on the car and so
many of the phone calls and the
increase that we received our
about exactly this confusion
what we're asking is an attempt
to try to reduce that confusion
while also saving patients a
fair bit of money many patients
when they go to see their
medical provider if they're
providers of federal provider
those federal providers such as
at the veterans administration
and Indian health services are
not able to certify patients
because of the federal status of
cannabis and so what ends up
happening is they have to go see
another providers to spend
additional money and these quite
often are the individuals who
can least afford to spend
additional money so by moving to
a two year parts with the
certain medical certification
matching that two years this
will save patients over eleven
million dollars a year
collectively and this is a huge
amount for the patients we know
thirty percent of our patients
through the various surveys
we've done actually fall in the
low income range and so this
would be of great benefit to
them in addition this will help
us to be able to continue to
streamline our operational part
of the program to be able to
focus more and more on research
and education about cannabis.
For the patients the medical
providers and community at
large.
Thank you.
We're gonna go to June first.
the audience next anybody in
support.
Anybody in opposition questions
from committee members.
Senator Diamond then their long
lost friend.
Thank you Mr chairman this may
seem like a basic question
Senator Christine seeking out
well what relevance does this
medical marijuana have now that
we've legalized it
recreationally.
The question is Mr chairman of
Senator Diamond I'm gonna let
doctors low answer that because
it's it's it's a crucial
question.
I thank you Mr chair Senator
Diamond thank you very much for
asking that question this is one
that we talk about all the time
part of the reason why medical
cannabis is so important is
because we want to ensure that
patients who are using cannabis
are having that relationship and
talking with their medical
providers about their cannabis
use to ensure that it remains
beneficial for them especially
when it comes down to their
conditions we know that cannabis
itself has been very beneficial
for many of our patients and
that it has been something that
they've been using for a long
time to suddenly stop that or to
do something like stop the
medical cannabis program and
start instituting just under the
commercial use or recreational
use would potentially suddenly
impose upon the medical patients
the additional twenty percent
tax and as I mentioned once
again the medical cannabis
patients thirty percent of them
fall into the low income status
so this is something that would
be an additional burden for
those medical patients and
that's something that we really
want to ensure that the medical
patients are able to obtain and
that they have access to in
addition by doing this and
having the medical program we're
able to more easily conduct and
help to conduct for other
entities the research that's
needed to find out exactly what
about medical cannabis is
helpful beneficial so that we
can actually help to advance
medical science in this area.
Thank you Mr chairman so so it's
at a discount really I'm trying
to also understand the fiscal
impacts of this bill obviously
there are some few before Senate
finance on hearing your talking
points you're fired here it says
that
patients would have a savings of
more than eleven million dollars
walk me through that again that
money would have otherwise been
spent how on the taxes Mr
chairman and and Senator Diamond
oh goodness doctors really rent
to the game.
Mr chair Senator time and what
that money would be spent on is
as the medical patients have to
go into payment medical
certification because they have
to pay for that aspect of it
well the medical cannabis
program itself is free of charge
to patients that are enrolling
they still have to pay for those
medical expenses with the
providers and so that eleven
million in savings the costs
that those patients actually end
up paying out when they're going
through the medical providers
simply to get the signature and
this is especially damaging for
those individuals who are not
able to get the signature from
their regular medical provider
such as those who receive
services at the veterans
administration or Indian health
services so Mr chairman and
senator I'm effectively it cuts
their medical expense in half
instead of having to do it every
year the only get to do it every
two years okay so if I
understand Mr Chairman said
there is a.
Savings are reduction to
providers aren't getting.
What they would want to phone
now and then and then I didn't
even realize we're not even
taxing medical use cannabis and
so there would be a roughly
around twenty percent
additionally if you're buying it
proficiently.
Okay thank you Mr chair.
Bear with.
This real quick.
We want to change this Mr chair
and senator we want to change
this from a.
Three year.
Licensed to a two year license.
And with that the only go to the
medical practitioner one time.
My question is why don't we
leave it at a three year and
just go to a medical
practitioner one time.
Chair.
Mr chair and senator what's
that's a great question as we
have actually spoken with the
medical providers and the
medical provider community we
have been talking with them
about what would be most
appropriate as far as being able
to see those patients from a
medical standpoint the medical
certification standpoint for
medical cannabis and we actually
have several letters that we
include in the packet from you
for medical providers and they
feel that the two year would
still be appropriate for these
medical patients without
impacting their medical care and
so it's sending it to the full
three years we're concerned that
there might be some impact on
the medical care and what we try
to do is encourage and ensure
that the patients and the
medical providers have a good
patient provider relationship
and so this helps to continue
that.
So the question that would lead
me to.
Would be Mr chair and.
Come would be.
As.
Cannabis.
Cured any of the diseases.
That you would then remove
appreciate from medical
cannabis.
Or do they want to see them ever
two years.
To to use to measure their
health.
But.
Do when you first said.
Make the subscription to carp.
Is it required to go to the
doctor in so many days to make
sure that that use is doing what
it's supposed to be doing.
my getting to four to eight and
let us forget all of it.
Mr chair Senator Woods first of
all thank you for the fund since
we're talking about medical
cannabis and for mentioning
about getting into the weeds
really.
And what I would like to say is
well actually what I would like
to do is introduce our medical
director for the medical
cannabis program answer that and
so this is doctor Kerry French
and.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Wirth from
what I understand from your
question you're wondering is
there a requirement for a
patient to go back and see the
medical provider at a certain
time frame after they receive
the medical cannabis card.
And that would be a
determination made between the
patient and the provider so
again what they want to do is
always and gender that
relationships to the provider
the patient I do have follow up
in to check in with each other
and to make sure that the
patients are benefiting from the
medical campus and discussing
adverse reactions if they are
benefiting as well and so again
the two year the card would
compromise
and it I just think of all the
research is coming out.
And in two years we're gonna
know a lot more about medical
cannabis its budget and
therefore I think that that
would be an opportune time for
the legislative to see the
patient again.
Okay thank you very much.
The first time more thank you Mr
chairman and senator and welcome
first of all thank you for what
you do I know that medical
cannabis helps a lot of people I
mean from all different kinds of
backgrounds from.
you know cancer patients to to
veterans and you know all all
points in between and.
I think the medical community
still has quite a bit to learn
about pain management and for
people undergoing chronic life
threatening conditions and it's
just unbelievable but.
I have a question Mr chairman
and gentleman Dr how long what
if you look at other states and
their medical
alright that they give people
what's what's the longest
duration of time you're seeing
out there in the country.
We do have some parts that are
longer than two three years that
are for five years.
Where is that with that what do
you say.
Mr chair and Senator Steinborn
thank you I'd have to go back to
look to see what areas have the
longest but there are other
states that it's actually just
on the doctor's recommendation
for example and so there's not
necessarily a time limit and so
again this is really about
trying to do a compromise to
ensure that there is that
patient provider relationship
which we encourage by the way
outside of this process as well
that they should be having
visits more often regardless but
we don't want to add to the
administrative burden for the
medical providers and so that's
where we see this especially in
rural and frontier areas where
we have such a shortage of
medical providers we see this
helping on that and so we're
really looking and focusing on
that aspect of it and then the
other side of it is really just
the financial side that patients
experience from it.
Right thank you Mr I I know will
we'll keep looking at this and
certainly if we need to look at
giving doctors more flexibility
but anyway if this seems
reasonable to accept thank you
thank you Mr.
Thank you any other questions
from committee members seem none
can have a motion.
I have a motion for do passed by
Senator Rodriguez second but
mmhm.
Would you offer to pass.
Second by Senator Padilla.
I can't.
Must be a medical.
Any objection to the best
motion.
So Senator Diamond voting no.
Senator share you deep in
thought or.
coolmath.
The maybe that is the gummies.
Thank you senator thank you very
much Mr chairman and members of
the committee thank you.
That we can entertain you today
Senator Rodriguez you want to do
your bill that.
The cannabis with me and.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I do have an
amendment before we go on.
You may have when you're moving
in then for discussion.
Have a problem with the public.
We're organized discussion
purposes.
Thank you second that motion
thank you Mr chairman I Marquita
Russel here with me from the
she's the director CEO of the
New Mexico finance authority and
the amendment just briefly I
will state that it's a common
amendment that we do every year
to this particular bill this is
the annual bill of the public
project revolving fund that we
have and the reason for the
amendment coming in usually at
this time is because when the
bill is completed and endorsed
by the committee this to
committee endorsed bills it has
only so many entities that are
eligible to apply it doesn't
guarantee him to acquire any
only to get along but it but
they're eligible but between now
and between then and now there's
other entities that have shown
interest and so that's all we're
doing is adding so that we can
make the list complete that's
the amendment Mr chairman and
If we can have a motion for
depends on the amendment and I
can proceed with the bill.
In the past on the amendment in
the motion for do passed by
Senator Diamond second by
Senator Padilla any objection to
the.
Senator have an amended bill go
back from the thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee has amended the bill
merely authorizes forty eight
now with the eleven added public
entities to apply to the public
project revolving fund for low
cost financing it doesn't mean
as I said earlier that they're
automatically going to qualify
or we're going to apply these
are eligible entities that have
shown interest but we require
them to come before the
legislature in a list like this
for the legislature's viewing an
approval and so that's really
what it's about
the authorization we give them
to applies good for three years
and
but that's the that's about it
to the bill really wrestling
thing that no Mr chairman thank
you have a hundred forty two
people on zoom right.
Would anybody it's four against
this bill questions from
committee.
A motion for us we have Senator
Padilla second by Senator share
any objection from the past
motion.
Hello thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you working.
Senator we're gonna swap spots.
Sure what are we doing.
Good afternoon madam chair.
In committee Senate bill one
ninety two is the junior bill.
so I think everybody in the room
is familiar with it they're all
scrambling to look through it
make sure it's correct the only
amendment that was done in in
the Senate rules was adding the
language on who is tied to which
project that won't come after
till sixty days after the
session sixty days after the
session that it'll be published
with your name and where you're
probate the money and that was
only minerals.
He's got.
Will stand for questions one
nine two.
Fire.
Chair Mister chair is there
anything that was submitted Mr
chair they did not for whatever
reason get put into this last.
Where is this one hundred
percent.
The list of what was submitted
by members.
Madam chair and senator whish
scrubbed and scrubbed and
scrubbed.
We know we sent this list to DFA
to make sure that they scrubbed
it too if there was any issues
with it there was some members
that had to come back and change
some stuff we believe that was
all handled this is the previous
version a junior I think we've
ever seen.
The committee zero three showing
to the audience resume yes thank
you very much thank you yes
anyone in favor of the bill.
The audience any one of the bill
in the audience and anyone on
zoom do we have anyone for or
against Thompson.
For all four against thank you
and thank you we have Senator
Padilla next.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chair I just wanted to echo the
chairs comments it's it's seems
very clean very well organized
and I think it's it's really a
lot of Adrian and and others
work that really made that
possible they did an awful lot
of work getting us organized in
your picture direction Mr
chairman to sit down and go
through the points for they were
submitted because if we did hand
on that part why would have been
a nightmare for them so I just
want to thank them and thank the
rest of the staff to help on
this.
Thank you all right any other
questions or comments not may we
have.
The doing it this way there's a
motion for the passage of a
second.
There's a motion preservative
second by Senator Diamond on
favor signify by saying aye.
Post path thank you senator the
one thing Adrian in this.
Working from home today in
yesterday in Phelps state
telling me and I I went in Donna
Dennis back here some I think
and some in some state till like
midnight or one in the morning
trying to make sure that
everything was correct and
everything was right so should
thank them for their hard work
thank you Mr make sure.
Thank you for we now have lots
of faith in a room interment
maybe.
Okay.
That was quick to mention
content okay.
This.
Continue this good afternoon.
Let me get the.
Get myself in order here.
That aging and long term
Services Department Agency six
twenty four good afternoon
cabinet secretary and staff.
Our staff and your staff.
All right.
Let's proceed
thank you madam chair I'm
telling legislative finance
committee for HSD code six
twenty for the aging long term
services department also with me
today is Secretary Katrina
wholesome Lopez my counterpart
Laurice Siaka.
Right okay.
And Valory their HSD director
I'll note that on page two of
your presentation is a high
level rack up of both the
executive recommendation the LFC
recommendation and the HSC a
substitute for House Bill to
coming for the department so you
can see in that the third
column.
What the HFC recommendation is
I'm not going to go over the
differences between the two rex
since we're kind of past that
point but I will get mixed
comments on what the agency did.
So the has appropriation of
finance committee substitute for
House Bill to include an
additional million dollars to
increase the aging network of of
the LFC recommendations for a
total of five point five million
HFC recommendation also included
three hundred thousand dollars
for tribal an aging networks in
total HSC recommendation
increase the general fund
revenues for the department
thirteen percent additionally
agency recommended nonrecurring
revenues including six hundred
thousand dollars for emergency
funding disaster preparedness
planning an eight million
dollars for the kisa major
dignity funds and with that I
will turn it over to my DFA
County Board for any additional
comments.
Thank you thank you for C. Madam
chair Senators I would like to
point out a couple executive
initiatives that were not
recommended in the LFC
recommendation.
C. those initiatives include ten
million for New Mexico air which
was split five million recurring
five million and non recurring
to support.
Families care givers trying to
support their family members so
that they could age at home and
then two million dollars for our
senior transportation with that
I will turn it over to secretary
heard from Lopez for additional
comments thank you Secretary
thank you madam chair members of
the committee again my name is
Katrina hope from Lopez in the
cabinet secretary for aging and
long term services we were so
excited to come in looking
forward to our budget since we
were going to get according to
the LFC recommendation forty
million dollars and a key piece
of a dress Trust Fund had we
have passed a bill I'm not sure
what happened between that time
and you know what we're hit the
floor but then we got a whopping
eight million dollars one time
non recurring fund so I could
fix I guess trying to programs
that I could take people off of
it I didn't get funding for the
next year or you know and we
don't have a fund for the future
so I really appreciate this body
and this committee you guys have
always been really good to us
and I really appreciate and
whatever else you can do to put
this back into our budget would
be extremely helpful at this
point in time not having anymore
the key piece of data funding
means that we can't to do that
the creative fundamental things
to get things up and going for
our seniors and adults with
disabilities because we serve
that population to and also like
to remind and think this body
for your support over the years
for adult protective services
and much you now that we are
being considered right now as a
best practice nationally for the
that new model that we put in
which is a prevention and harm
reduction component meaning that
we're trying to limit the
numbers of individuals going in
and out of our system because we
haven't stabilize them with food
housing
and other services that they
need and I guess that the third
point is that I hear often that
our agency has had a thirteen
percent and.
These and although that is true
I think it's really important
for this body to understand
where we go with this the
majority of the increase
increases that it happened for a
couple of years is actually flow
through dollars that go to our
work area agency on aging and
then down to the senior centers
so people can be fat and so ask
we're working through this and
I'm asking for money yes it is
true we got an increase but we
also have an aging population
and by twenty thirty we will
have the fourth highest aging
population in this the in the
country per capita we are an
aging state and so I don't I I
feel like preparing for that now
infusing that the services
getting services started up and
moving see what works see what
doesn't work is really our time
to do that now it is really not
a time to limit funding because
it represented to increase that
individuals think maybe enough
or too much because I'm not sure
speeding seniors are
transporting them to their
medical appointment counts is
too much and we definitely have
more individuals that we have to
take off of a waiting list
expression in rural remote to
New Mexico where they're hardly
any services these are where our
seniors are living these are the
ones who need the most help so
with the budget that we that we
have proposed and that we really
wanted it it's important to
understand that there is that
flows three dollars which is the
majority of the percentage of
our increase this agency has
received a four percent increase
over the the amount of couple
years because we we needed to
increase our pay to adult
protective services we only had
one person in our office of
Indian elder affairs and we
needed to beef that up it did
nineteen pueblos and tribes not
one person can can handle that
and you know this year we're
just.
King for a chest a little bit of
infrastructure for our staff so
we can continue the flow through
dollars continue to provide
oversight to to our senior
centers into our trip away and
also be able to do so do more
with Alzheimer's and dementia we
have an excellent plan that is
come out and we have over forty
two thousand individuals who
have memory care issues today
and it's not just them it's
those family members that that
are calling us those family
members that are home with us
now have to make a decision of
where they're going to go into
work or they're going to care
for their loved one and so at
this point since we have pretty
much almost wiped out the care
giving industry because of COVID
having extreme sort of creative
thinking of New Mexico here and
in fusing people so that the
infusing dollars so that people
can stay home in their home
choice or in their community of
choice is something that needs
to be priority for New Mexico
and it definitely is a priority
for my department as well as my
administration I really
appreciate you know thank you
lord thank you to my staff
thanks LESC but I really
appreciative of this body and
how you know you always have
been been good at trying to fix
our short of budget so with that
will stand for questions thank
you very much Secretary all
right did you want to say
anything come descent no all
right thank you very much do we
have any questions from the
committee.
Senator share.
Sure I know yesterday we talked
about the queues Vader Fund.
And there was a reason for the
forty million to eight million
but I slept last night and it
fell out of my head.
Is the better way than don't
sleep anymore I just need to not
lay down came out my here hello
but but is there anybody that
can explicate I just I don't
remember why we did that I don't
know if.
If somebody if David could
explain it or if we can.
Madam chair okay yes you can
explain thank you just a so
chairman small on the floor of
the house floor made some
testimony as house bill two is
going through that the key piece
of major fund would have been an
endowment funds and that would
have kicked off the five year
average of I think a million
maybe a little bit over million.
Instead of doing an endowment
funds they put the eight million
dollars that the agency could
bring in the eight million
dollars in FY twenty four to
spend the full eight I believe
that the fund currently right
now has about six million I'm
sorry the secretary seems to
disagree I do madam chair we
tied up all that money because
when we first received the Kiki
Sabetta Fund we didn't get the
authority hi the LFC to drop
down on that money so we're a
little behind.
So the they made the decision to
make eight million dollars
available to them in FY twenty
four.
So madam chair was the is the
planner was the plan to to have
I know it's it's not recurring
at the moment the with the plan
to make that eight million a
recurring.
that's something that the
legislature would take up next
year miss madam chair.
I'm still missing something
because it was a lot longer
conversation yesterday.
Mr chairman you've heard me many
times when up to the committee
in general you don't want to use
nonrecurring money to start up.
So you know there's a lot of
support for these programs and
HFC this is probably an area
kind of like opportunity
scholarship where you were using
a lot of nonrecurring to advance
that program because it's hard
to grow.
It's hard to find enough for
current money to address the
demand so discusses with
sectarian and it's my view that
this is very likely an area that
when you come to the FY twenty
five budget will be a lot of
interest in making this eight
million special appropriation as
much as possible record even
though generally you don't.
Recommended you generally don't
like it this is like this is a
guideline and not a car rule
this probably falls in that
category Mr chairman.
So madam chair.
Faith.
I do I I have faith in the
Senate thank you.
Thank you all right Senator you
finish your question or do you
have more thank you very much or
anyone else on the committee
have any questions or comments
okay anyone on zoom.
For against there's no way thank
you the of the I'm sorry
Division HSD that's true hi yeah
we don't have any public comment
on this on this one here sorry
about that okay well that's fine
then I do have just a comment
before I go on the state thank
you for all your work and I know
it's that it's tough to get back
specially for all the challenges
you have with the pandemic but
let me ask this did you say did
I understand correctly that the
eight million dollars is part of
what you needed to provide
support to the elderly at home
the providers to allow the
elderly to be able to stay at
home is that what this is madam
chair I think when I came to be
before this body before I think
I talked about New Mexico here
New Mexico would be a new
program because we have so many
family members trying to make
the decision about whether they
can care for their loved ones at
home or go back to work we are
depleted I mean we're still
we're struggling as almost every
industry is for care giving so
unique idea that would be to
give them a stipend it specially
if they're just above that
Medicaid amount which all but
eighteen percent of our
population is up above that that
that Medicaid amount that they
would be able to have a stipend
to either stay at home pay for
adult day care which Medicaid
does not pay for and we only
have eighteen percent of our
population are seniors as a
whole not within our programs
that would even qualify for
Medicaid and so in I don't think
yours are expensive and so
having this option to where
families can work you know have
adult day or work and have a
different option to take care of
their loved one seems like a no
brainer expression the since we
are working as fast as we can to
build at the service so we were
hoping not only for the forty
million but then a pile.
It what I actually think was
five million recurring to start
New Mexico here but we certainly
could have taken additional
dollars out of the key piece of
it Fund in order to increase
that were to continue to do that
but with eight million I can't
I've got a I've got to try to
make the ageing Network whole
I've got to make sure that the
services that are currently
being provided are provided and
we continue to have more seniors
needing meals meeting home
delivered meals needing light
help housekeeper Services
needing a case management
services we haven't been able to
hire because our wages have been
too slow so once we on board
some of those things is the
eight million will be gone and
then I am left coming back here
either it won the irresponsible
that I put people on services to
take people up services or I
come back back for money but
maybe there's no money and then
one and so for me this is the
least palatable option that
we're in right now there are
thank you for that response yes
question does Medicare pay for
any of this at all I know you
said Medicaid doesn't for adult
day care but that madam chair
Medicare does not pay for long
term in home services they'll do
it for a short stint for you
know if you get out of surgery
or if you need that right out of
the hospital but they don't do
it long to the long term adult
day they don't pay for long term
that they don't they don't pay
for it typically at all and so
we you know we we have to be in
a position where we're
stimulating the economy by
allowing people to go back into
work building out adult daycare
so we've got an option for our
seniors to live with dignity
expression we in rural and
remote New Mexico where there's
not a lot of services and we've
had to start building them from
the ground up so
Katrina secretary let me ask
this so if if.
A person if Medicaid doesn't
pay.
Who pays for for these elderly
people to remain home and and be
able to stay home instead of
going to a nursing home it is
that is that the issue here
where we would be that's the
main issue yeah it is it is a
huge issue a lot of them now are
starting to go through adult
protective services because
they're at home alone or
families don't know what to do
and so we had to take on the
cost adult day in many cases and
we're still doing those sorts of
things we also take on the cost
of a lot of in home services
worth our adult protective
services clients the interesting
thing that people may not
realize that were or totally
comprehend when we're with adult
protective services that's
eighteen and older and so you
know I'm dealing with a big
population that doesn't have a
lot of reimbursement and we're
paying for this and I'd rather
set up systems and then try to
convince Medicaid or another pot
of dollars in order to grow this
of people services living in the
community it's still cheaper
service and being in long term
care madam chair yes just just
for clarification the committee
there is a pilot for adult
daycare to be matched with
Medicaid dollars madam chair
I've also got to say though that
we have Medicaid providers in
adults day setting they bill
that already it's only in our
rural communities that we don't
but we're working on that if we
think that we're gonna have a
huge revenue or return on our
investment in that we are not.
Okay all right thank you for
that I think for the sake of
time I'm not going to continue
but there are other questions so
Senator Diamond thank you madam
chair just have a quick follow
up on a question that you asked
mentioned that Medicaid doesn't
pay for daycare are there any of
these expenses that that
otherwise the keys you Senator
fund would pay for that maybe
Medicaid or Medicare would pay
for you mentioned meals case
management transportation madam
chair in in Senator Diamond
thank you for that question
because you know I'd like to say
no and yes and and but it in
reality if you qualify for
Medicaid you know but then you
qualify for a loan it cost or a
free meal and you qualify for
transportation to medical
appointments right you don't get
transportation to the pharmacy
or the grocery stores that's
what senior center still in
addition to that the ones that
are receiving services are the
ones that are outside of the
metropolitan area and so yeah I
mean and Russell you're getting
a service in Santa Fe in
Albuquerque and in Los crucis
you maybe but what about
Alamogordo and those who have to
come into specialty appointments
to Los crucis there's not really
a comprehensive transportation
system that does that and
specialty appointments are are
really hard to schedule around
in our seniors complain quite a
bit that the that they they call
in the call and the call even on
when they qualify for Medicaid
to get those transportation
right that still hit and miss
and so we got to do better by
this population and I'm not
saying that we replace and
supplement I say that we expand
on the veterans program and
transportation services that are
happening so that we can start
the real commute to what seniors
need case management Medicaid
pays for Medicare is going to
pay for a short limited time of
that and that's usually case
management to transition
somebody from hospital to home.
But after that that's not
happening and a lot of our
seniors in it don't have family
members sitting right next to
them that help them fill out the
paperwork or do this for them we
a lot of times do that through
the aging network let me ask you
madam chair you're you're
mentioning a list of services of
which if we don't funded this
kicking submitter Fund but we
just don't fund do is that
anywhere I mean can you tell us
what you spent last year and all
of those services where would we
find that information so you
would demonstrate the shortfall
madam chair we can we can give
you and Senator Diamond we can
we can get the the actual break
out of what we've done but I
think it's also important to
note that that is what the and
what I'm talking about here's
what the senior centers are in
charge of aging is also in
charge of additional services
through protective services
through the ombudsman program
we've been charged to to carry
out New Mexico here and things
that stabilize our senior
population we're adults with
disabilities and without that
fund we can't pave a road to do
anything better with so I can
maybe maintain.
But I can't take it eight
million dollars spend it and
hope that I get it the next year
I mean that's not it's not fair
to seniors understaffed thank
you thank you madam sorry I've
heard I've heard good things
about our senior citizens the
work you've done in your sight
so thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you and I do
have Senators time but before we
do David Abbey had a comment you
want to make this last issue if
you make Senator thank you David
respond please just want to make
the point how important is to
link this program with the
Medicaid program you know you
know we have eighty million
dollars both the executive and
the LFC recommendations
moralists to boost Medicaid
rates and that is a key part of
helping this program if we're
concerned about transportation
services that is a key element
of the Medicaid rate increases
so if they have probable for
this thank you.
Thank you thank you David
Senator Steinborn thank you
madam chair and and madam
secretary good afternoon and I I
also heard from the secretary
though to say that some of your
services aren't Medicaid
reimbursable.
Miss madam chair Senator
Steinborn most of them aren't
also the market so I think.
madam chair this is one of those
in my opinion one of those.
Crucial areas that we ought to
get a huddle together with the
LFC with your department with
members who really care about
this and see if we cannot make
sure that we're moving the ball
forward I know you're trying
your hardest but we need more
resources and look what the
house is done and I will you
know express will ignorance
because I don't know I did the
house manager secretary give you
an increase today.
Madam chair and members the
committee yes the increase of
the LFC budget and put a million
dollars on top of the LFC budget
for aging network rate
increases.
And so madam chair I guess what
I'm hearing is there is a need
for some other funds to be able
to do some other stuff the on
that.
And so at any rate I just is
such a priority we all talk
about and Senator Campos was
here he'd be talking about it
and
I think we do have an aging
population and and the seniors
that are living isolated
particularly in rural areas are
particularly vulnerable there
lonely they.
They just have more needs I
think New Mexico has morning
it's increasing needs in this
area so they ran I'm sure LFC do
great work in this area in the
house and maybe there's
something we need to add to that
so.
I won't tear madam chair to
whoever else wants to handle
with folks to work to look at
this issue so thank you thank
you senator.
Let me just and everyone else so
Senator Woods sorry Senator you
can proceed to quick question
yes.
And this may be what we're
talking about madam chair and
and it went to sleep
New Mexico care.
Is that what we're talking about
here on on using this.
but fun this K. K. a bedroom
Fund.
Madam chair Senator Woods we
actually asked for a five
million dollar appropriation to
start that but I could start
that we keep you so bitter
dollars I just down only have
eight million of that so we're
not talking about New Mexico
care in this previous discussion
Madam chair Senator Woods we are
but it's a service that could be
included but since we don't have
the dollars it's a new program
that we have been trying to
launch in order to keep family
members caring for their loved
ones so that I'm not out and
trying to look for another care
giver so that they family member
can go back to work and there
are people who just are above
that Medicaid line who don't
qualify for Medicaid services
and those who you know have have
other resources and other means
there's a gap there and we need
to provide services to that
population and be creative as
possible and part of that is new
and New Mexico here solution
which would give a stipend to
family members to either stay
home and care for them or find
adult allow them to use that
money for adult day services
mental health services and those
sorts of things it's a new and
sort of initiated that we had
asked five million for program.
From what I understand what you
just got to say it it is for a
group that is above Medicaid.
Yes thank you madam chair.
I thank you Senator all right
Senator Padilla and they're
going to go back to Senator
Steinborn for thank you madam
chair and madam secretary in
teen thank you very much for
presentations only question I
have is just with the shortfalls
are did you did you do you feel
like you had all this worked out
with the through the LESC
process in the interim when you
showed up HSC of what we told
I'm just curious because this
isn't the first conversation
we're having on you know HSD
being this concerned about what
they had already worked on for a
year or more.
I'm madam chair Senator Padilla
thank you for that question we
sat down and met with the LFC in
October and at that point they
were supporting the forty
million recommendation for the
Kiki fund we can get everything
we wanted but that was a really
critical important piece at that
time that they were looking at
New Mexico here so we came out
feeling really good and thinking
that we were going to do have
forty million at least in the
case of a trust fund to do
things from that point to a very
so we had worked this out we had
actually had several several
meetings eat including with our
our seniors we did a lot of
virtual meetings we did this
also with legislators and so we
thought we were all on the same
page with the direction that we
were going.
So both thank you for giving us
that kind of background of but I
think we all knew that this is
where the thing was going so I'm
I'm very concerned then the
other kind of full stop question
I have is just in general are
there funds related just to your
feet into or or just related to
the work of your agency that
you're aware of that are sitting
there with monies that are being
used in just cases we're told
that there might be five hundred
or more funds out there that
just have a million here seventy
million there seven million
there four hundred thousand
there I mean are there any are
there any of those that you're
that you're aware of
Madam chair Senator Padilla I'm
not my budget is you can so I
wish that would make things a
little easier so I'm not sure
exactly what else is out there
but I'm I'm here in the state
The to.
Madam chairman and madam
secretary of no I wasn't being
flip in on on your budget I'm
just saying is there are there
funds that you don't normally
have heard of your access to or
whatever but you know they're
they're in because there's so
many of them are out there that
you know okay Madam chair
Senator Padilla nothing so I
know this is going to be a
process I know that you're
really wants to help the the
chairman yes really wants to
help get all of these things
that some of these things that
we've all agreed to as a
legislature we simply need to
reconfigure things until they're
set up properly so thank you for
the energy with which you're
driving this thank you thank you
senator Senator Steinborn thank
you Mr secretary there's just
one other question I want to ask
for got the
if you have a quality control
mechanism in place for for part
time caregivers.
To make sure yeah I heard from
our store somewhere where
somebody was taking the money
and I don't remember you know
where I heard it might of in C.
span two in the morning but
anyway could.
Because of that madam chair
Senator Steinborn yes we do but
what we typically do so we have
a training program that we can
we can find that typically we
send them to an agency for
training and then they're on
their payroll and we pay that
agency for the output of that
and then we are the we we have
it whatever care giving program
typically live in adult
protective services in which
they do follow up not only calls
but actual visits to make sure
that the client is cared for
okay so madam chair madam
secretary so if we were to fund
this hypothetically The New
Mexico kind of a program there
would be a quality control coach
built in where they would be
checking on these clients.
Madam chair Senator Steinborn
yes right thank you Mr.
Senator I just a final point
here and then I'm gonna we're
gonna move on PED because we've
got other agencies but secretary
you mentioned something about
the increased cases in al timers
and the dementia and I did read
about that it was actually
pretty alarming to see how many
new cases we have and what the
projection is in just a few
years
it's like really scary and so
what are you doing about that
tell me you mentioned something
earlier but it was fast madam
chair we have developed a state
plan and I can get two copies of
the State plant plant but we're
really excited about it because
it also calls for partners in in
in rural areas at the state to
have clinics to have navigators
that will navigate you through
your memory clinic and then
services subsequent to that or
what you would qualify for in
addition to that I I have a
feeling that New Mexico here is
going to go to a largely to this
population because those family
members their seniors as well
typically they are dying at the
same time or sometimes earlier
than the senior and they need
respite and relief and this is
real help for them this is not
just a you know a class that
tells you how to manage staff
stress this is really an option
for them to have a real relief
okay thank you for your working
for your these are proactive in
that I don't have any other
questions or no other comments
so I want to thank you for your
presentation we will take your
requests and your your concerns
into consideration as we
continue thank you for
expressing that need all right
all right we're gonna move on to
commissioner of public lands
where is the commissioner of
public lands their kids.
Okay.
Thank you Kelly also for you.
Thanks to.
Increase agency five three nine.
Can proceed.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee on
process on the executive
analysts today have stors
online.
Land Office and director David
Abbey
to be easy.
Both of recommendations of
supported agencies request
both analyst came to consensus
on performance measures and
targets.
Would you like to add anything.
maybe just a couple things I'm
first of all representing ginger
Anderson who's busy doing the
five dollars to one more agency
today this is an important
agency with no general fund.
However the produce tremendous
amounts of real eventually come
to the general fund
there royalties of course go to
the permanent fund there a bonus
payments go to the land
maintenance fund and then
reserve revert to the COVID
schools fund which we call part
of the general fund so I
although again it's not a
general fund agency directly and
there is a difference in the
rectus just a I'm pretty sure
you thought to schedule this
agency for hearing just because
of its importance in generating
revenues primarily from the oil
and gas industry for the general
fund you know they probably they
get money amounts of revenue
from grazing wind farms but
that's probably a couple percent
or less of the total so the
revenues of sort as oil
production has soared.
And finally I'll just mention
natural gas prices of continuing
to go down and you want to keep
an eye on them and we have with
us deputy commissioner Sonali
Stewart who is here
Representative commission thank
you madam chair thank you and
let me before we go on I'm
always mispronouncing your name
did you say Sunday sun ten madam
chair members of the committee
and some delays to earn lesson
like headed for much anything of
the sort so okay thank you
that's great you can proceed
madam chairman try to exercise a
trait that I don't normally do
which is probably not going to
be long winded you have a
presentation from the
commissioner that is mostly just
for reference as has been
mentioned were funded through
the revenue that we generate we
made two point four billion last
year record after record after
record that we're really proud
of in terms of all the the hard
working employees that we have
more competition a lot both to
DFA or the executive the LFC and
H. B. two are all fully in
alignment so we don't have any
request today in terms of the
modification in that regard we
are not asking for any specials
we're not asking for any capital
outlay our request in our mind
is pretty pretty modest at about
one point six million in terms
of an increase overall when
you're looking at that you know
two point four billion we look
brought in last year it's not a
lot of money in that context
Last thing I would just
highlight is the increase is
tied to it essentially two areas
one is we're trying to bring a
special into our budget for a.
Tool called planet labs it's
essentially a satellite program
that allows us to better manage
about thirteen million acres
that we have and also a request
for a two FTEs one is in the oil
and gas and minerals division to
help work on units and comments
which is about eighty percent of
our revenue you know the more
money we make that represents
more workload and so we really
need to to help out there in the
other area is an additional
economic development
representative in our commercial
division and that's an area
where we're trying to focus on
the big projects the ones that
bring in money at Netflix you
know brought partnerships with
communities across the state
they're more time consuming but
they do eventually bring in more
money than some of our other I
kind of more run of the mill
business leasing
I think I'll leave it at that
but it I want to leave time for
any questions that the committee
may have thank you very much
anything else before gone to any
questions or comments from the
committee.
Senator share.
With COVID here because I'm
seeing this LFC executive HDFC
also at the same number.
Okay thank you.
The usual we're not used to
saying that the store was so
shocked here but thank you thank
you very much and anyone else
Senator Woods and senator.
You know there's been a of a
real stir of echoes but the
governor's talk about a thirty
by thirty and I know this has
nothing to do with the budget or
anything else but it could have
implications if you decide to
take all of the activities of
the state let.
So is there a particular policy
the state land has as to
activities that go along with
the thirty thirty you should do
madam chairman Senator thank you
for the question I think is a
really important area we've
engaged as part of the thirty by
thirty task force that the
governor.
Has it kicked off and what we've
made very clear and has been
reflected in the working
document that they're going off
of his that has it pertains to
state trust land we view
conservation in the context of
working lands that means how can
we work with our existing
agricultural community how can
we work with the mandate that we
have which is to generate
revenue so the the commissioner
is absolutely not supportive nor
we inclined to try to you know
take
That community off the land or
anything of that sort we're
looking for partners that we can
then advance conservation
efforts sometimes when I bring
this up madam chair sometimes it
is thought that this effort is
simply
What would you say open lands of
Eight of non use of scenic lands
of set the land aside in and let
nature take care of the.
But it's kind of tough when you
have been fixtures is trying to
make a income off of it so I
want to bring that up is because
and then this is none of your
doing but it's a public
statement that I need to make
that it's the same case on
privately owned land madam chair
that income has to be made off
of it in order to pay the land
taxes and pay the state taxes
that's in there too.
It and I know this is just
simply something that's out of
your will house but I just
wanted to make that statement
that all your budget this was
this particular plan
Preservation type budget that
you have here to clean up
different parts of your your
land your State Land of that was
set up a few years ago under
commissioner of re done that
thank and he lobbied hard to get
that set aside so that they
could bring some this land back
into a natural state that's that
you know was
views for.
Community dumps and and and
different things like that in
and so I applaud your efforts on
on bring that back to useful
land.
that's that's a good thing.
And so I I I certainly don't
have a problem with your with
your budget special group
because you generate your old.
You know what when here the cash
register.
You can do a lot of that.
So thank you madam chair thank
you senator all right if you had
a common point very briefly.
Senator Woods chair if you think
about the wind project going
from Duran towards corona well
that's thousand megawatts
Senator two hundred fifty or so
towers they want the company
wants to quadruple that to go to
four thousand megawatts and I
mentioned that it's it's mainly
to the north like red hill
coming down to eighty five in
that area its way
disproportionately on state
lands they're going to be the
beneficiary of many many of
those towers thank you for the.
Senator all right anyone else
Senator Burt you had your hand
raised up and you know all right
well I don't have any questions
or comments thank you for your
great work good request in good
job thank you so much all right
we're gonna go on to the next
agents it was for twenty
regulation licensing department.
There we go.
Superintendent Trujillo good to
see you.
And our former representative.
Thank you
all right.
All right good afternoon.
So good to see you.
Thank you for serving and thank
you Kevin Weston because cabinet
secretaries superintendent for
just doing this so long through
COVID in the cannabis
regulations and so much was
given to you we just appreciate
you so much thank you and that
you can print yes and of course
let's get started so let's
introduce yourself so we know I
have it here but.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is done every veteran the
executive analyst for regulation
licensing I refer DFA and with
this representing ginger
Anderson is you know Mr David
Abbey this is a good teacher
David.
Thank you for serving to.
Okay receive your intended
Trujillo and play Bailey who
works he's a deputy
superintendent and quick summary
the house appropriations and
finance committee chose the
executive recommendation of and.
As you can see it's a slight
increase over FY twenty three I
believe the increases a total of
a I'm sorry I wasn't prepared I
didn't see with the the guys
gonna have to present but the
overall increases about a three
point eight percent in general
fund
from the FY twenty three amount
and it's basically the exact the
agency requests level and the
other thing that I would like to
point out is
one of the things that the
executive as well as the agency
needs and requests is a special
I'm sorry supplemental Rick
appropriation of four hundred
thousand four in general fund
for the substitute care Advisory
Council for FY twenty three that
particular Commission is not
funded by revenue self
generating fees it actually
supported by general fund and it
was not included in the FY
twenty three budget and that's
there are six permanent
positions that need to be paid
for supported with general.
But other than that I'd like to
go ahead and see if a director
Abbey thank you.
Madam chair I I'd like to make a
couple comments the LFC
recommendation was higher mainly
in construction industry and
construction industry is a very
important division for the state
because they are the the arm
that keeps projects moving
quickly and LFC recommended more
funding they made a significant
increase using vacancy savings
and pay for inspectors this year
and that's a good thing there
the LFC thought there was more
work to be done and had a higher
amount for the purpose
I don't have all the facts on
the substitute Care budgetary
council my understanding that
there is money in the budget for
the current fiscal year and next
fiscal year even in the
executive director and if there
is is that agent that activities
going to another agency so as
the bill moves forward for the
Senate you want to get to the
bottom of that we'd be happy to
work with the department and
make sure it's not being double
fund which I have a slight
concern that it may be the way
the bill came over but we can
work with the department get on
the same page on that that's all
I have except for one less thing
and I Mr Bailey it serves of the
public school couple of the
council with me and he's been
outstanding member of the
council his construction
expertise is really an asset for
that group and and to me as a
member so we want to call them
out for his good work both the
construction industry and on the
council thank you madam chair
thank you very much and and
thank you for mentioning that
about Mr Bailey would you like
to say something and.
Appreciate your work and I just
appreciate the fact gives time
to come before you.
Yeah.
Thanks for your service.
Yes superintendent we're waiting
for you thank you very very much
and members of the committee it
really is a pleasure to be here
today it's not very often that
I've come before either the LFC
the house appropriations the
Senate finance and said we've
got just about everything that
we need but that's where we're
at today and so I want to talk a
little bit about what those
needs are going to go for before
I do that so madam chair members
the committee I would like to
say thank you to Donna for the
work that she's done to support
us and I'm really excited that
we actually have the honor of
having David Abbey here with us
he has been an incredible
support for us throughout this
last year he's come to our
agency a couple of times to see
the work that we do and to
really get an idea as to how we
moved forward with cannabis how
we're moving forward with
construction industry and the
other divisions and so I just M.
for incredibly grateful for that
and the attention that's been
paid to us I'm also incredibly
excited that clay Bailey was
appointed as R. W. he is an
invaluable resource to our
department if you want someone
to get something done clay is
the one who gets it done and so
I'm grateful to have him here
today we have a couple you know
we've got a strategic plan that
we have put a lot of effort into
so that we can pinpoint the work
that we're going to do to try to
improve the HSD my goal is to
improve the agency so that it's
better when I leave than it was
when I got here that's my name
that's my main issue to work on
we've been the devoting
resources towards the
recruitment and retention of
employees because of the money
that was provided to us for this
fiscal year we were able to get
as much as seventy seven in the
of our employees fifteen percent
raise that was significant and
as a result of that and will
will all lead director W. Bailey
to.
Talk about this we have been
able to not only recruit
inspectors for construction
industry but we've been able to
retain the staff that we do have
that was an important aspect and
that was something that this
committee asked for results this
last year and we have in fact
provided those results we also
have asked for special funding
to complete the boards and
commissions online renewal and
application process I'm happy to
say that last year at this time
we went live with six boards and
commissions psychology social
work counselling realistic
Commission accountancy and
barbers and cosmetology that is
the a game changer for those
people who are looking to renew
their license online and looking
to apply for a new license maybe
their initial license online we
are in the process of going live
with six more boards and
commissions PI and physical
therapy went live last weekend
there was a huge and heavy lift
these don't have just one
application they have multiple
applications the P. I. board had
seven unique application types
that we had to create an app
online application for it
basically went live without any
hiccups.
That's a big change from last
year when we had multiple
hiccups trying to get C.
I do live in manufactured
housing so we're we're we're
doing better we know where the
problems can be and we're
rolling those out we've gone
live with pharmacy this last
weekend for their renewals and
our anticipation is that by
March fifth we'll be going live
with pharmacy for initial
applications pharmacy is one of
our more complicated boards and
commissions there are thirty
three.
Thirty three different license
types and so we had our
developers who had a program in
thirty three different
applications that is again
that's a game changer for those
folks who are looking to apply
and have had to fight to get.
Philadelphia printed out fill it
out militants Anderson Jack they
are now going to be able to go
on.
Around March fifth when this
goes live and they'll be able to
do that at anytime of the day.
Into the weekend and they'll be
able to do that process at their
convenience we also we're going
to go live with occupational
therapy dental and the Saudis
those are going to be live
believe we argue with the
developers today we're pretty
confident that they're going to
be able to roll it out for us by
the end of March thank you.
However.
We still have sixteen more
boards that we need to go live
with that's about seventy two
different applications.
We did a little bit different
than maybe some we took the
hardest one.
Now we're down to the he's here
the less complicated ones
there's about seventy two
different applications type that
have to be delivered we believe
that with the money that we've
asked we can potentially roll
those out.
Before the end of two.
Before the end of June I feel
pretty confident that we can do
that I do want to point out that
this last year FY twenty two
we reverted to the general fund
thirty five million four hundred
forty seven thousand in fee
reversion that's money that we
reverted to the general fund we
reverted no I'm sorry few
reversion that was to the
general fund we also though only
reverted I say only because last
year when I came here it was a
significantly higher number we
only reverted about half a
million little over half a
million of the money that you
gave us that money wasn't enough
pot it was in the different
divisions and so it becomes
harder for us to spend it down
to the penny when you've got a
smaller amount and wanted to use
it for another division can't
combine it to make a position of
the non reverting revenue we had
a little over ten million that's
predominately boards and
commissions boards and
commissions are all enterprise
funds the money that they bring
in for fees goes back into their
it does not revert to the
general fund so the majority of
that ten million dollars was
boards and commissions revenue
that was brought in.
let me talk just to briefly
about the supplementals and
specials that we've asked for
the best for seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars to complete the
licensing online licensing for
cannabis we did the bulk of it
before we went live but we still
need to have online licensing
for servers for cannabis
consumption areas cannabis
testing laboratories which the
probably only be a few of those
and then cannabis research
laboratories which will just be
a handful also we've asked for
seven hundred fifty thousand
that is been granted in house
bill two hundred come out of
their referring fund but we will
be able to bring in the money in
the fiscal year as we bring it
in for fees so we feel that
we're okay on that we did ask
for three point five million for
an incident response and
recovery the budget has given
ten million to do it for that
purpose and has dedicated three
million to RLD reimburse us for
the expenses that we've already
had to occur I'm sure we'll have
to be able to we're trying to
keep very close track of that
money it's things like having
cybersecurity experts come in
and help us build back our
system cybersecurity experts to
figure out how to keep our
system safe we did of of credit
recovery Services monitoring
services not recovery sorry
credit monitoring services for
almost three hundred thousand
individuals in order to go back
who is providing that service
for us and we can have up to
twelve months of credit
monitoring we did just for the
four hundred thousand I do
believe that it is in the budget
I think I found it on page
twenty eight but not quite sure
about that will double check on
that before I put money my life
on that we also asked for five
million dollars is that we've
asked for a high dollar amount
it's not the quote that we've
been given but we've asked for
a.
Hi dollar because you never know
what could happen between now
and then that will get us
through and that will help me
amend the contract of the
developers integrators can get
those last online
applications for renewals with
us for seven hundred eighty five
thousand dollars to replace the
ID vehicles you may recall we
asked her about that same amount
last year we're trying to get
our sales to a three year cycle
and so this is the this is the
the last time I believe that
we're gonna ask for a huge chunk
after that we should be able to
cycle vehicles up we're talking
about replacing vehicles that
have anywhere from two hundred
to two hundred and fifty
thousand miles on it they go in
very difficult terrain and their
they're active all year long so
this is a very important thing
and that is also in the house
bill two we ask for a hundred
thousand dollars for security
personnel because the.
Still did an analysis of
security personnel certified law
enforcement that affects our
staff and so we have to give we
we have to give them a raise the
last thing we asked for was a
boards and commissions far
thirty of ten percent so that in
this is addition to the five
million there's about fifteen
million sitting in the reserve
fund and it I think there's
about thirty million sitting
there right now but we I think
we spend about fifteen million
of that between now and the.
Anyway
those are the priorities that
we've asked for of the the last
thing I want to mention is that
part of the budget requires us
to spend send two point five
million.
That
madam chair we stand for
questions thank you thank you Mr
chairman of course came to
questions real quick.
thank you madam chair and so we
have nine different of we did
sense that process this year and
we took all of our boards before
the the LFC and out of those
and I didn't bring the list of
it Davis I'm sorry two are
scheduled to sunset the LFC is
recommendation was to not extend
the sunset which means that they
will automatically since that
those two are athletic
commission which is operated in
the red for the last four years
they were operating in the red
prior to comment so it was not
COVID that move them to the red.
We don't have the same kinds of
excitement about boxing and we
don't have cable pay for you
that's where the money was
coming in in years past we also
are they also have recommended
that the interior design board.
Since that let me tell you
what's happening with that hello
the interior designers there's
fifty seven of them bless their
hearts they came to me and they
said look this is why it's
important that we get licensed
and I said okay I get it in
order for you to be able to bid
for the contract to do interior
design for things like Hilton
like the hospital on these big
projects they do have to be
licensed and they proved it to
me on the website we did some we
I asked him to show me they
showed me.
The cost of a board to do a
licensing.
We cannot do that with fifty
seven licensees and so what I've
negotiated with them is that it
would be just administrative
process there is a bill I don't
think it'll come to this
committee but it might come to
other committees that you're on
we're the department with out
aboard we just set the rules we
license them there be on a four
year cycle we're not asking to
increase the fees it's a very
simple process you meet the
requirements to get a license
out for four years and then you
do the same thing four years
later so that was the that was a
I feel like that was a realistic
solution for that profession and
then the other ones are all be
either extended or they're
building up there since it is
being removed the ones that the
census being removed for the
health care so the dental board
we all know that dental is going
to stay around it's not going to
sense that we're not gonna let
it go away and so we are the LFC
agreed that it is in our best
interests is a state and not
have to keep doing this year
after year that that they just
need to have a sense that
removed and so that was removed
and it is the idea in New David
can correct me but the idea for
a sense that was that we should
probably look to see if we
should still be licensing that
profession and we should take
the opportunity to update the
statutes.
It's really hard when you've got
twelve boards that are that are
sensitive to have any kind of
call.
There statute and the scope of
practices and those statutes are
updated on a regular basis you
see those bills come before your
committees all the time and so
it's not that you're waiting for
us and Senate in order for that
to review the last thing in
connection to the the sunset and
there's a substitute bill that
will be introduced tomorrow yes
we're looking to move the
podiatry board which only has a
hundred and forty seven
licensees over to the medical
board and I've got agreement at
least.
At least.
Not what everybody agrees that
would they become an advisory
board over the Medical Board
they have three appointees and
and they'll be able to for
a school teacher so you.
That's correct but madam chairs
that bill is HFC will have a
hearing hopefully soon it will
come to this committee.
Thank you for that clarification
all right superintendent or you
madam chair we are supposed
thank you very much for more
information in my goodness gives
us a picture has small picture
of all that you do and how much
you have this is huge I never
have been tiered to your office
I need to go live these
countries the yes thank you any
comments Senator Burton and
Senator Diamond
questions okay go ahead thank
you senator Byrd thank you madam
chair and and the secretary just
want to say thank you I'm really
have a question did a lot of
work my earlier years here on
military spousal license
transfer and.
From day one you at the door
thanks change.
For the good for the better and
so I want to thank you for that
and that has been a game changer
for the military coming here.
people who used to stay in other
states or even the the the
couple would split up one was
stay there with the kids and and
the the military personnel will
come here and work to two years
and and and this is a huge game
changer and I just want to thank
you for that and I think you
found out now that if you know
for military spouses and
dependents you know for
everybody so so license transfer
has picked up dramatically
that's good for the state to and
and Mr bill I'm I'm certainly
glad you're on board because
I've had one complaint and
probably three Snyder how long
you've been on board but I even
had one complaint about for
years about C. the construction
industry and and that used to be
as almost as much as military
problems
we don't have those funds
anymore and and I really applaud
you for getting inspectors back
out to the field in a timely
fashion where the construction
industry can can really uses
folks working with the fireman's
folks over here with the fire
inspectors now being able to go
out into the field and so the
construction industry in the
state doesn't have a lot of the
roadblocks that we used to have
and not just for the independent
the local residential builder or
something like that but me for
large commercial guys are coming
into the state to build a bigger
projects I I just want to say
thank you for you handling
things the way that you handle
and madam secretary for
this.
Is the thing that makes New
Mexico a lot more business
friendly.
And if we can do that and we get
more business here so thank you
again for your efforts and your
work that you do thank you
members should very much thank
you madam chair.
On yes you may think you so
much.
The application I wish I could
show it to you like if we had an
overhead I'd pull up my computer
and show you how these
applications happen the first
question after the.
The first question is are you.
If they say yes the next
question.
And we have the definitions of
what that means whether it's
retired whether it's a veteran
whether it's a spouse or whether
it's a child dependent or an
active or inactive member that's
the next thing that they do they
do if they click that it
remains.
Thank you for that okay we've
got Senator Diamond thank you
madam chair thank thank you you
do great work and I know that
you have to Kerry cover such a
diverse areas of interest and so
that's interesting you did
mention briefly you were talking
about specifically interior
design and sometimes I wonder my
concern is we over regulate so
much an over reach so much and
so although Hilton and maybe
these national groups may
require some sort of licensing
what if you just wanted my
double wide redone I mean what
why do we require that and you
know we stayed in New Mexicans
from Shatta carpet in many one.
Here's a
really good question and I
should have clarified that in
the beginning the interior
design is a title only and what
that means is that for you to
call yourself a licensed
interior designer you have to be
licensed you do not have to be
licensed to do interior design
but to call yourself a licensed
interior designer absolutely
have to be and so that's what
the Hiltons and are are looking
like but you're right if we want
a car but we should be able to
have it if we want to.
They can design but don't call
yourself even by access.
On a serious note when it comes
to regulations and licensing
less is more you know that's I
think if you went through there
and I'm sure you have a list of
regulations if we could cut half
of them I'm sure we all be
better off thank you for your
good work thank you senator
thank you very much for your
responses again do we have any
welcome the committee okay
anyone else I'll turn to my
left.
Okay thank you
I'm just happy with what you're
doing and appreciative and I'm
more than pleased to see that
something we've been struggling
with so much specially since the
pandemic is the recruitment and
retention of employees and
someone and you've excelled so
much on that thank you so much
amongst many other things you've
just really change things and we
appreciate you thank you very
much we're going to move on to
the next department and thank
you Donna and David and clay for
your work right now we're we
have
HSD her department number four
one nine economic development
let's see there we go this is
our last department today and.
Our.
Thank you.
Okay this is the is the
department knows so much.
Thank you are.
So let's move on it's for
fifteen let's see how quick we
can get through this and we'll
get on with our evening so there
we go Amanda thank you for being
with us for me to say hi to John
to used to work with us a long
time ago and we still do but I
mean more closer and this
gentleman here tell me what your
name.
Madam chair my name is Simon
Miller Simon DFA yeah I should
know Simon already but I still
forget his main point okay I
forgive you thank you thank you
for that okay so Simon every
document that you're next thank
you madam chair members of the
committee again my name is
Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst with LFC we've met Simon
we also are joined by the
secretary of the economic
development department Alicia
keys as well as her team all I
heard introduce them later I
know that we are pressed for
time so I will try and it go
pretty quickly through this I
will know for committee members
that in your volume three which
I don't even know if you have in
front of you but is this spiral
bound one that you have a couple
charts on economic development
that you might be interested in
including a leader projects
approved last year and need to
projects cost per job things
like that so as we go through
some of the issues regarding
this department that might be a
good place for you to look at
that starts on page twenty one
of your volume three as you all
know what the house passed house
bill two so I will not go into
detail on the difference between
the LFC and Executive
recommendations and instead I
will just go ahead and give you
some detail on what the house
passed so of the major
differences in the executive an
LFC recommendations were about
three areas and those were in
recurring funding for G. tip
recurring funding to manage the
film academy and recurring
funding for marketing no both
recommendations had up
appropriated money in different
ways so both appropriations had
one time money as well as
recurring funding but what came
out of HFC was a sort of
compromise so you do have a high
level on page two of your packet
that looks like this this is
before.
HFC house bill two got over to
you so I'll just kind of go
ahead over that three lines that
changed so line seven for the
LFC recommendation it you have
two hundred and eighty nine
thousand HFC added and an
additional four hundred and
eleven thousand so that new
number would be seven hundred
thousand and that is for
recurring gtech so we increased
there to get a little closer to
the executive your next line the
change would be line twenty that
was again for contract
management of the film academy
that when up from five hundred
thousand to seven hundred
thousand so an additional two
hundred thousand there's also a
nonrecurring funding in the bill
for that as well for the first
year and your last wind that
changed is going to be line
thirty which says business
incubator grants
HFC included two hundred
thousand dollars and recurring
funding in that line item and
that was to us to support some
of the legislation going through
the house right now to expand
the economic development
department so that funding would
be used for entrepreneurship as
well as business incubators I
know we're pressed for time
there's a lot going on in
special appropriations so I
won't go through all of them I
will note of the LFC
recommendation and now HFC house
bill two included ten million
dollars for trails
infrastructure grants to to
that's part of the outdoor
recreation part program there as
well as one million dollars for
outdoor equity grants and that
was above the eight the
executive recommendation.
So with that I will let Simon
make any additional comments and
we can turn it over to the
secretary thank you Amanda
thanks Amanda madam chair
members of the committee I just
wanted to talk about the
agency's performance a little
bit
if they had an outstanding year
in fiscal year twenty twenty two
in between leader and J. to the
Department created about fifty
two hundred jobs with an average
wage of sixty one thousand I
believe
and then turning to the budget
side of things Amanda covered
most of the differences it I
just wanted to point your
attention to two of the biggest
differences on the nonrecurring
side and one of them is Lida the
executive recommendation was a
thirty five million dollars for
Lita and the house adopted
fifteen million so at twenty
twenty million dollar difference
there for that nonrecurring
appropriation
than the other non recurring
appropriation
where there was a significant
difference was for business
incubators the house included a
two point two million dollars
special appropriation and the
executive recommendation had a
little more than double that it
was five million
so just just wanted to bring a
few of those items to your
attention as you consider the
the budget in the the weeks to
come so with that I will pass it
over to the cabinet secretary
keys thank you hi thank you very
much thank you madam chair
members of the committee I just
wanted to also introduce that we
have John Clark here are W. and
mark Roper our director of
economic development and we can
go very quickly as Simon said
we've had our best year yet in
fact it's our second year in a
row with that we were able to
create over five thousand new
jobs for New Mexico
we can go through these slides
madam chair are I can talk about
the disk.
Season we can keep it short what
would you prefer why don't we go
ahead and talk about the
discrepancies and just keep it
short because we do have them
here and we we we have to look
at everything again anyway thank
okay wonderful so as Simon
alluded to lead up the executive
was thirty five million HEFCE we
received fifteen million so let
me talk to you a little bit
about where we are right now we
have roughly eighty million
dollars worth of projects in the
pipeline when you look at the
amounts that we have in the fund
it looks pretty high thirty
million of that is already
committed to companies we also
have thirty million in which we
feel like the deals are going to
happen and then as I said before
we have eighty million in the
pipeline so there is some
discrepancy there there's always
some discrepancy as to when we
announce when we commit when the
money starts rolling and one of
the things that we did very
early on in this administration
is make sure that we're not the
situation where we have to claw
back money so these companies do
not get money until they have
actually hired people and those
jobs are created on this second
discrepancy is the business
incubators and I'm gonna steal
this from John because he read
it but in an article that said
that businesses are four times
more likely to succeed if they
go through a business incubator
it's something that we have not
done a fantastic job of doing
and helping in New Mexico for
the past few years we have is it
six and curators right now are
seven six thank you banners that
are officially in New Mexico and
they really help businesses do
everything from copying to legal
work to helping you page to
understanding what you need to
get together in order to help
your business so we'd really
like to put some time and energy
and effort and funding towards
these incubators and those are
really the big discrepancies
that we have this year with.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary keys
Committee John did you want to
say that chair members of the
committee thank you very much
the only other thing I'd like to
note is that there are a number
of bills making their way
through committees on both the
house and Senate side that would
set up new divisions or offices
there's one that would bring the
rate Grande trail Commission
over to EDD other two different
bills that would create office
of entrepreneurship they're
built to create a creative
industry division and economic
transition division and expand
our offices science and
technology to include advanced
energy all these require
recurring funding FTE as house
bill two comes over to you from
the from the house it currently
has no additional FTE for any of
those bills the only recurring
funding related to any of that
is the two hundred thousand
dollars that Amanda mentioned is
currently set aside for business
incubators that could also be
used for entrepreneurship there
is currently no recurring
funding no FTE for anything else
we would obviously need
recurring funding enough need to
be able to set up new divisions
so just want to highlight that
for you that's something that
we've been talking to the bill
Sanchez about but also want to
make sure the committee is well
aware of.
Okay thank you for bringing that
to us John would take a serious
look at that
okay mark I didn't even
recognize you earlier thank you
for all your work with economic
development I'm gonna ask you to
say some did you want to say
some before we go on.
You're always so quiet there you
the dude behind so please tell
us.
you can I guess yeah there we
go.
I just I just so John's real
quick.
The.
Madam chairman members of the
committee mark Roper Division
director of economic development
there's one other point that I
wanted to highlight that Simon
kind of covered we were all
green except for one minor thing
on our report card the New
Mexico partnership didn't meet
their job creation called that
was the only thing on our report
card this year from LFC DFA that
was not right for the part we
had an excellent year not only
on the job creation side but
also on the budget side we also
had the lowest reversion ever in
the department five thousand
dollars.
you heard me correctly five
thousand dollars in in
reversions for the entire for
the entire department.
And then also on the on the J.
two front.
There is a discrepancy and what
were your question and what does
come across AGFC but we are we
are experiencing some greater
reversions than we historically
we have injected we understand
the fact that the there probably
isn't a need for a larger amount
of J. tip this year as we had
requested and were fined which
with the HFC recommendation
thank you for your time thank
you for bringing that up did you
want to say something else
before we before I go on.
Secretary secretary of you seem
to be no okay you madam chair
thank you all right Senator Burt
in
Your next and is there anyone
else any questions or comments
senator Byrd senator Wirth
Senator Diamond Senator
Steinborn okay we do have a few
thank you madam chair and thank
you all for the report
just a couple of things
incubator offices where are
those located another someone
around the state but getting are
they located within communities
are have have set up so madam
chair and senator Byrd as soon
they can be set up in various
ways they can they can be for
profit nonprofit they can be
part of universities typically
what we see is nonprofit
universities in particular so
for example we have head down in
a nice you we have the business
incubator of it and Farmington
and San Juan college but we also
have west which is a nonprofit
not associated with the
university but they're they're
located around the state one of
the things that we really want
to do with this funding is part
from the incubator in Farmington
in the computer Clovis they're
all in the Rio Grande core door
and we really want to be able to
push the services out to the
rest of the state both to help
build facilities as well as take
our current incubators and help
them push their services
remotely to other communities in
the state so that's what we're
hoping to do with the five
million dollars to request okay
and I appreciate that you know
it looks like it's been very
successful program to this point
and I think the more that you
have in the further you reach
the more success is I think that
you're going to have so I
encourage you to continue down
that path I'm big fan J. tip and
and later I've seen their actual
application in my district and
they work very very well
but I assume the last two years
COVID has really put a kind of a
cramping and extending some of
those dollars in my writer my
wrong in that madam chair
members of the committee Senator
Burt there has been some
slowdown recently and I'm not
sure if it's because of COVID
because I really do think New
Mexico benefited a little bit
from COVID in the sense that
people wanted to get out of the
big cities.
but I think there is a fear of a
recession coming and so we are
seeing a little bit of a slow
down in addition to a lot of the
on shoring and reshoring from
Asia has been slow down a bit
only because of the geopolitical
situation with Russia and China
and so we're really taking a
wait and see approach to that
and we did have to put a major
deal on hold because of that.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate that because
of I I just know that.
Again the programs work and and
and it's interesting to slow
down comment was the first thing
came to mind that the the
economic situation across the
United States and really around
the world right now is not
always that positive quite
frankly so that's good you know
on a little bit of analysis
tells me that about one third of
the levy jobs promised have not
materialized I know you said you
had a big project that's on hold
now could you address some that
wind we've we've we've because I
know you guys are pretty
sticklers about when it comes to
supporting an industry coming
into the state that you just
mandate that X. amount of jobs
and and they got it materialize
within a fair amount of time so
could you address that for me a
little bit that's a great
question madam chair members of
the committee senator Byrd I'll
actually bring mark Roper out
because he is our deal
specialist.
Our care it.
Madam chair members the
committee senator Byrd
what what we are saying across
the board and that kind of
addressed earlier when I
mentioned about need to is
there's there's there's just
been a harder time in finding
people to to get to the jobs so
it's not so much of a lack of
desire on the company's part to
hire those positions it's more
of an issue of finding the
people to fill those positions
so in those cases we're are in
contact with the company we work
with the company we either
extend leader agreements in
order to give them more time to
to get there or there are
instances when we have had to do
reversions and or call backs
depending on where we were on
that but there's it's really
just the example of what's
happening across the country
across the board just harder to
fill positions right now
regardless of where you are the
it's not just in New Mexico I
know it's happening across the
country.
And and and I appreciate the
answer that I think you're
correct I mean
even down to to local
restaurants restaurants we still
have three or four them and and
my hometown that they're only
open five days we suppose seven
days we because they just cannot
higher can I be able to work
means water boils down to the
lobby working let job
opportunities and they're paying
a much better than average or
minimum wage and they just can't
fill positions I'm sure that is
expedited as you move up to into
more of our it trained positions
if you will so what but I
apologize for for the work
you're doing and and hello
you've worked through
some pretty difficult years
quite frankly and yet you had a
water record here you said this
last year so kudos to you guys
keep up the good work
and if there's something that we
can do we're always open to that
so thank you madam chair thank
you senator Senator what and
madam chair with.
Thank you all right the
government saying Hey look at it
diamond and then we have Senator
Steinborn.
The quickly.
At work John market the
secretary you guys are all doing
good work this question may
actually be a little bit more
for mentors Simon that the
documents that we have in front
of us are still just comparing
LFC rex with executive rex we
don't have on this agency what
came over from the house so if I
can ask you get recurring
multimedia J. tip what did the
house and over.
No you.
Madam chair Senator Diamond for
the reoccurring multimedia G.
tap the house did not your mark
any recurring multi media need
to bump it the HSD substitute
for House Bill to did add an
additional about four hundred
and eleven thousand dollars for
traditional J. tip recurring but
they did not your marketing
multi media need to okay zero
for that and then I think
I think I'll just just several
cuts on business incubator with
a little bit lower than they
requested.
And then film academy they they
wanted one point five it came
over seven hundred so what I
heard you say Madam chair
Senator Diamond that's crank you
and then madam chair what about
the film division budget I know
that the LFC recommendation was
zero did that did it JFC
recommend any funding in that
line.
Madam chair Senator Diamond so
the the contract management for
the film academy is in the film
division that was the only area
that the department well that
was the only major area the
department requested funding in
the executive had about one
point five million as I said I
LFC had about seven hundred
million and then there's also
additional nonrecurring funding
in House Bill to for that
purpose five hundred thousand
additional so the same line item
as as their documents okay I was
confusing the two
okay I think that we have a
little bit of work to do to to
help you guys out but thank you
I think that clarifies
everything when when you have
the HSC numbers in line would
you run that test as well Madam
chair Senator Diamond I have
that ready I can send it to you
this was just before right right
I understand completely thank
you madam chair thank you
senator thank you Amanda and
everyone for responding Senator
dime I'm Senator Steinborn now
we're not thinking and to madam
secretary good afternoon and
welcome to full team thank you
all for your good work at my
kudos to it I just have a few
questions number one thank you
for calling John made a really
important point which is there
kind of bursting at the seams
from what I'm hearing you say
for your administrative support
of all of these different
divisions and we the
legislature is on the precipice
of us more of you in things that
we all recognize are good the
Rio Grande trail some other
potential divisions although
probably.
Many of what you said may not
make it across the finish line
but some might and and I think
the last thing we want is to
create a disincentive for us to
embrace expansiveness us to
create new job creation
opportunities really exciting
for the state so I think one
thing we need to you madam chair
is is look at those FTEs that
you need to just expand your
infrastructure to be able to do
more and that's really important
Mr telling us and I think we can
do that
I want to just ask also about
the need to is that line item
also from the F. cap that's
appropriate management training
program that's J. tip for the
film industry is that where that
line item shall not.
Madam chair of the members of
the committee Senator Steinborn
yes F. cap is run under the need
to
Fund so yes the right now the
statute reads that there's a two
to up to two million dollars on
an annual basis dedicated to of
cap within the film builders
that hopefully gets across the
board increasing that to four
million on annual basis but it
does come out of the the the and
at the need to fund sure so so
madam chairman secretary so I
mean it also is funded in the
budget and so what I'm hearing
you say is that in house bill
two week they only increase the
two million by four hundred
thousand.
So what I'm hearing you say that
madam chair members the
committee Senator Steinborn it
in the in the recurring portion
of our budget yes that is
correct they did add an
additional two point six million
in the special appropriation to
bring the total up to nine nine
million total to the need to
fund this fiscal year so it'll
be six point four in recovery
and and two point six and non
recurring revenues special one
tied appropriation for this year
so it'll be a total of nine
million into the budget and as I
mentioned we have had some
reversions we do have a pretty
substantial carryover coming
right so madam chair madam
secretary you feel good on the
on the J. yes slash of cap
budget where it stands now
between those items.
Madam chair members of the
committee I.
To speak for the secretary but
looking at are carry overs I I
type that will get us to the
fiscal year and get checked.
Okay thank you and so that's
good to hear and then another
question the economic New Mexico
partnership.
Is that then the spare
Department.
So if you madam chair members of
the committee Senator Steinborn
it is
it received an appropriation
from you all it is not managed
fire departments that they have
their own director who manages
that we have communication with
them we collaborate with them
they are fantastic when we are
doing big proposals on helping
us put those together there has
been some real issues for many
years on them hitting their
numbers and I asked the
president to Melinda Allen
whether or not she had a
response for that if we were
asked during this committee and
she said that.
The partnership tends to receive
a lot of cold calls and
conference calls so people who
are walking up learning about
New Mexico site selectors who
are not only going out to New
Mexico but going out wide what
we tend to do is we also take
those calls but we pull on a lot
of our relationships in order to
call people and say we think
you're a great candidate to move
to New Mexico do you want to
have this conversation so with
the partnership their numbers
have been so low according to
Melinda because we really don't
have any infrastructure ready
sites in New Mexico and we have
lost out on a lot of very big
deals because Georgia Michigan
they are ready they have these
infrastructure ready sites they
have a horizontal infrastructure
there the company just needs to
move in so it's a conversation
that mark and John and I are
already having in maybe even
with the State Land Office or
GST how can we create these
opportunities for infrastructure
ready sites in the future madam
chair secretary I know that we
just last session funded with
fifty or seventy five million or
something to a new NMFA spec
building kind of thing so you
know I don't I assume that's
kind of going to be without was
for but Madam chair Senator
Steinborn yes I think we can
also do more yeah but I
understand that Sir really
important have specs space
available and stuff well and I
brought up the partnership not
because some anyone keep me up
before the committee that I know
in talking to our economic
developers down south they
mention the partnership is just
Hey it's important we they've
they think that we should
increase the funding to it I
don't know what that looks like
I just thought I'd ask about it.
And but do you feel like not
withstanding the assets they
have that it's a valuable
valuable partnership just in
terms of capacity in helping you
to yield madam chair Senator
Steinborn we do Malinda Allen is
incredible she has like I said
she's incredible it really
putting these big deals together
she's very detail oriented I
think we need to figure out the
marketing component and what
those marketing dollars are
going towards because I'm not
sure we need to do marketing in
New Mexico as much as we need to
do marketing nationally and
internationally right now and
that's why in our budget we did
ask for those marketing dollars
we recently up we had a meeting
with a company called wistron
which is on the other side of
the border and and they said to
us that not many people know New
Mexico in Taiwan and they
recommended that we invite film
crews news crews from Taiwan on
over to the spaceport when we
have the space cut challenge and
they said that kind of of that
kind of marketing will go a long
way especially in Asia and so
those marketing dollars are are
what we're asking for is to do a
little bit of international
marquee nothing that's really
expensive but there's a lot of
good recommendations from some
of the Asian companies that are
already here so I I do think we
need to look further up up.
About our FOR further far
further away from our borders in
terms of collaboration yes I got
to I'm here in the thank you
madam secretary thank you thank
you senator thank you Secretary
and your staff I don't have
anyone else on my list I would
just say thank you once again I
am truly amazed I never cease to
be amazed how much you do truly
I don't know how you sleep you
are hard working competent thank
you for this your service my
goodness eight you really are
amazing and your staff John.
Mark everyone gosh thank you I
appreciate and what we do with
that Amanda and Simon.
I'm telling you we've got great
staff thank you so thank you
madam means a lot thank you
thank you everyone thank you.
