What we would do without you.
Thank you.
Yes, And we are going to go
straight to the point because
we're falling behind here. So
the state fiscal recovery funds
is the first item on the agenda,
and its agency hearing for
agencies requiring follow up, so
I'm going to have the handouts
here and you will direct us to
see which handout you want us to
look at. There's three of them.
Thank you, Adrian, you can
proceed.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Adrian Avila. I am the
chief, Uh, Chief of Staff for
Senate finance.
Um, what we're gonna go over
today are three different
sheets, So I'm going to direct
you first to this one. Okay? All
the 15 items that were
identified by LFC as having
provided limited detail, So
these are state recovery funds
formerly known as Arpaio, Right?
Um, when we asked for
information, they just didn't
provide enough detail. So this
is the follow up And these are
the 15 that we did follow up on
If you look on the blue sheet,
the blue sheet basically
provides a breakdown of all the
numbers and the actual amounts
expended.
Um, how much has been encumbered
How much has been obligated and
the various vendors that have
received
Ah, um either a contract or have
been encumbered with those
vendors. So you have a full
breakdown the way you can read
these sheets so you can
coordinate between all three in
your first column. You have
numbers one through 15 on this
sheet, right? So item one is the
FAA that will coordinate with
item one on the blue sheet.
And then if you want a full
breakdown of the details that
they actually submitted that is
in this packet, and that is
their actual submission. Work
for word that you have in front
of you. So in the top corner,
the top left corner, you will
have the number that corresponds
accordingly. So instead of going
through all of these, uh I
recommend you take a second to
look through them. And if you
have any specific questions we
have agency representatives from
all of these agencies present
either in the audience or on
zoom.
So they will answer any specific
questions. You have, um in terms
of deliverables for this
hearing, we just need direction
as to next steps of how you
would like to supersede.
Ah, in terms of addressing
issues related to these
appropriations.
Members take a few minutes to
look at these. Even with a few
minutes, it's hard to to really
take a good glance. But we're
doing what we can
It's a lot of information that
needs to be done so
Anyone have any questions so
far, and if not, we'll take more
time. Senator Gonzalez just have
to sign a document.
And then Mr Chair. I would like
to just point out in terms of
the Economic Development
Department. They are the ones
who provided a substantial
amount of information and the
reason it's broken up into, for
example, for a four B four C is
because they had multiple
iterations of open, um,
applications for the funding, so
that's kind of the breakdown.
And as you can see, they've
awarded many many different
vendors, and you can
specifically see where which
grants they used for that
purpose.
If any member is ready with any
questions, you know, just let me
know.
Senator share, So Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Almost all of this is economic
development.
Is that true? They're the ones
who Mr Chair, Senator share
economic development was the one
that actually provided the most
detailed and it's because they
had multiple vendors for each
grant awards cycle compared to,
um the funding that was sent to
everybody else.
Okay, So, Mr Chair I know a few
days ago. I don't remember
exactly.
Uh, when, but I think it was lfc
presentation about RP funds not
being spent, and and why, and,
of course, chair chair. Munoz
was
Getting ready to lose his mind
over sending money back to the
feds.
Um, is there anything that we
can do truly do right now to
show that those funds are
already encumbered in one of the
things that we talked about was
salaries, and I don't remember
who it was Iowa in Idaho.
Somebody with an I I believe
That's what they did. With all
their R RP funds, they send a
note back to the feds saying,
Look, we paid all the salaries.
Or whatever it was and done with
no sending money back.
Is there anything that we can
do?
Given what we already have on
paper.
Can we just shred the paper and
send the flood? The feds notes
and we spent it all on salaries
or anything else for that
matter. Mr. Chair Center share
There are limitations because
any federal money always has,
You know, some strings attached
to them, and I actually like to
defer to the legal counsel over
at DFA to provide some some
insight as to what it can and
can't be used to provide you
that information, okay?
Good morning and give us your
name for the record. Yes. Good
morning, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is
Patrick Schaefer. I'm the
general counsel for the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
I would say. First of all that
the state is not in any imminent
danger of returning substantial
amounts of money to the federal
government under the state
Fiscal Recovery Fund award. The
purpose of this exercise, in
fact, is to ascertain and make
sure that all monies that were
appropriated from the state
fiscal recovery fund to the
appropriated and entities.
Will be spent in time.
The detail that Mr Avila
provided, uh demonstrates that
most of this money is either
been already expended or is
currently encumbered or
currently under obligation. I
will say that a risk does
remain with the reversion dates
that were attached to these
appropriations in the special
session of December, 21.
The regular session of 22 and
the regular session of 23. So
that really from a legal
perspective is the only risk the
other question that the senator
asked. Senator share Asked about
the ability to expand these
funds, as Mr Avila also
referred.
Or mentioned there are allowable
expenditure categories with this
federal ward as there are with
all federal awards.
Using money for salaries has
been a part of the expenditures
for the state Fiscal recovery
Fund award, as have other
multiple types of expenditures
and encumbrances that are
currently in fact, in effect.
So, Mr Chair if I understand
what was
What we were doing last week.
We're spending money. Now we're
spending General fund money
every day for something.
So anything any of that general
fund money
That we can say.
Was our money.
Then that money is off no longer
at risk.
And I don't see why.
We can't make that adjustment
today that that's an accounting
adjustment that certainly we can
do on on our computer. But if
not, we have pencils. We can fix
that.
So
We have pencils. We can fix
that.
So
Um So from that perspective, it
bothers me, uh, that that we
have things that are at risk,
and so I just want to look at
line three.
Uh, on on the big one. So it
says, completion date 6 30 2025
Reversion date 6 30 2025.
So a single
Day delay in anything.
And we lose $6.5 million
A single day for any reason at
all a power outage in Santa Fe
and we lose $6.5 million
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee senator share I'm not
quite sure that, um a delay of
one day would sacrifice the
entirety of the encumbrance or
the obligation. I will say,
though, that again to remind the
members of the committee that
the federal reversion deadline
is December 31st 2026.
So the State award has the state
of New Mexico and the current
awardees of this money they
appropriated entities have until
December 31st of 2026 to expand
this money. That is to say that
no money would be at risk if
it's obligated or encumbered and
expended by that time.
And then, Mr Mr Share Center
share. Um, That's one of the
reasons, for example, that some
of these appropriations have
different reversion dates that
are mandated by the state and
not the feds. So that specific
line line three
Is one of those appropriations
where the state is saying in
previous general appropriation
X. They have to spend it by
June 30th 2025, even though the
federal deadline is later.
And one thing I'd like to know
in your little packets on Page
three. You can actually see so
for for context. This is in
regards to Lida with the
Economic Development Department.
And on their submission. They
actually highlight multiple
projects that could be used to
pay for that once those projects
are potentially finalized, so
those federal funds could be
used for multiple projects that
are highlighted by the agency.
Well, Mr Chair. I do believe
that.
Without
Without any illegal or immoral
accounting.
We can account for this money
today.
All of it.
And then it's all not at risk.
But economic development still
has $6.5 million to do leader
stuff.
That's $6.5 million. We just now
called General Fund instead of
Harper Fund because we changed
that with
With
With funds that lead of funds
have already spent.
But if it must be spent
San Juan County is ready to take
$6.5 million. We could probably
do that this week, but those
that's that's the big concern,
and I
I don't know. Do I appreciate
Economic development for
providing all of this and
therefore embarrassing everybody
else that didn't
Or
Is it frustrating that economic
development didn't spend all
this money and other people did.
I don't know what it is, but But
still I do think we can We can
remove all of the risk.
Of our money.
This afternoon if we chose to
And still have all this money.
We just turn it into. We turned
this money into General fund
money and the General fund money
that we had into our pin money.
And done so.
That's what I would recommend. I
don't know how to do that. I
don't know if we cut DFAS budget
until they fix it or somebody
else I don't know.
Maybe maybe not pay Adrienne
this week, So Yeah.
Double Adrian salary so that he
can fix it this week. I don't I
don't know what the answer is mr
Chair, but I know that we do not
have to have this risk.
So thank you.
Senator.
Yeah. Thank you. Chair and thank
you, Adrian. Um, So do we have
any visibility to, um, Because I
do. See, you know, vendors here
and I see specific amounts.
Safer item number two is an
example for the film office. Um,
there's there seems to be a lot
of detail there. Do we have any?
Uh, you know,
Knowledge on like where things
are. I mean, there are some of
these about to just be dropped.
I mean, do we know any of that?
Do you have any visibility to
any of that?
Mr Chair Center, But yeah,
that's one of the reasons why we
have the Cabinet secretaries
here so we could ask them
directly. Okay, So if it's right
with you, Mr Chairman, Mr.
Roper, Secretary. I'm sorry,
Acting Secretary Roper.
You care to comment on my
question?
Mr Chair Senator, but members of
the committee as you start with
your name for our audience.
Sure, Mark Roper. I am the
acting secretary for the
Economic Development Department.
Thank you.
The detail on the monies that
have already been encumbered and
spent is in front of you.
The rest of it is is really
straightforward. There is $15
million.
Uh, intergovernmental agreement.
That is, um
Momentarily going to be signed.
Between the state of New Mexico
Economic Development Department
and the Mexico State University
Arrowhead Center for the Media
Academy on the campus of New
Mexico State University.
That $15 million will be
encumbered and out the door.
Um, by the end of this fiscal
year without without a doubt,
Uh, there will be an additional
$3 million of that that will be
part of an intergovernmental
agreement.
That will be executed with C. N.
M.
Central New Mexico, Um
College, and that will be part
of the media academy at the
railroad yards and Albuquerque
and that will account for the 18
million.
Um, that is currently unspent
out of that fun. Appreciate
that, Mr Chairman and thank you,
acting Secretary. So to Senator
Sheriff, you know, point Um, if
you already have
Of this ready to rock and roll.
Um
What do we need to send to the
feds so that we don't have to
worry about these?
And put this and start working
on the real business of the
session. Mr. Chair, Senator,
please. Members of the
committee. Excellent. Excellent
question. Um and as legal
counsel can tell you, the
federal government has not only
strings attached on what you can
spend, but they also have very
specific language and the
contractual documents that you
can use
Um so we can't just
We can't just take a traditional
intergovernmental agreement.
That I sign for the state of New
Mexico that's legally sufficient
for state of New Mexico to move
money from economic development
to C N M or whoever we have to
include the language within that
intergovernmental agreement as
per the federal guidelines so we
can't go back and say, Oh, that
money we spent over here was our
money because we don't have the
correct contractual agreement in
place.
Uh, we can do it to future
funds.
But but I think I know
accounting wise, it would be
easy, but I think contractually,
it would be difficult because we
probably don't have the correct
contractual language and place.
And in order to legally move
those federal monies without an
audit, finding or something of
that nature.
And Mr Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, to add to your,
um uh, contribution, the
secretary's contribution. The
money is safe. The state fiscal
recovery fund monies are safe as
long as they are encumbered,
expanded or obligated by
December 31st of this year.
They are safe. They will not get
reverted. They will only get
reverted if the state reversion
deadlines remain in effect,
because if money is still being
spent on a housing project or on
with economic development in
2025 early 2026, that money will
go back to the state treasury.
But that date is after the
federal obligation deadline.
Which means at that point, it
will go straight back to the U.
S treasury. I will also just
mentioned that this reversion
date implicates the Capital
Projects fund as well. That was
subject to appropriation in
December 31st of 2021 so just to
emphasize secretary acting
Secretary Roper's point here is
that as long as the appropriated
entity has that money expended,
obligated or encumbered by
December 31st of this year,
there is no risk. So senator
shares question is is quite
helpful in this sense.
That it helps us understand
where the goalposts are and what
we need to have encumbered and
expanded by what date so that
none of the money goes back to
the federal government.
Well, thank you chair and
appreciate all the comments. I'm
glad the real example with you
know, with the economic
development and you may have
said this, Adrian, I apologize.
I was doing 19 things up here
and you know, trying to get my
grow money to you, by the way,
So it's all done when when you
want it, Uh, almost the
documents. So So, what of the
document here? Do we still need
to encumber expand or whatever
it is? It summarized here
somewhere.
Mr Chair, sir. But the so the
The money that
Realistically, the committee
should have some level of
concerned on is the fourth to
last column on this flu sheet.
That is money that is, um,
planned by the agency but is not
obligated.
Right. So, um, obligated is the
Legal term that the federal
government requires in order for
the money to be safe.
Ah, um encumbered is the state
definition for it to be, you
know, incorporated into the
share system and the state
accounting, so there's multiple
levels so anything that's
planned but not obligated.
That's money that
Potentially is at risk that risk
9.1 million of the entire
shooting match here. That's what
the last so each agency will
have. How much is at risk from
that Agent agency? Okay, We have
a rolled up amount here.
So we have 16.7 through economic
development We have. That's what
those are. That's what those
are.
Um 2.6 with the state Fair 346
with Congress and Toltec 16.7
with H S, D a k a. The
Healthcare department.
Or healthcare authority, 1.7
with the Environment department
17.9 with D O T and 9.1 with
higher ed. Okay, so I just asked
the secretaries to please move
that along. Alright. Thank you.
That's all I have.
Any other question members.
Senator Woods.
I noticed one about the
E V charging stations with the
Department of Transportation and
Okay?
I thank you. Explain to me, Uh,
Mr Chair. Uh, Adriana, Thank
you explained to me that
obligated is not
Placed in service, not brick and
mortar.
Ah, so
What happens when
Transformer is ordered.
But it's not in place. It's it's
it's
We don't know when the delivery
date is it's still it's still
qualifies for being obligated.
Is where I understand that so
I guess what I'm asking is
Why is it all this stuff?
Obligated.
You're talking about is
Is it just simply the paperwork
that it's not
Put in the right column.
In their budget.
When they
Father budget.
Is that? Is that where we're
getting at here?
Uh, I'm having a hard time, but
we've had trouble years.
This stuff has been out there
several years.
And and
You know, we've got smart people
like that.
Right. These budgets and
In our state budget. We we put
other state funds or other funds
or other federal funds to put in
the budget line item.
And
Was it our hiccup for not
putting it in the right item?
I'm having a trouble.
Madam chair.
Understanding.
Why this is even in front of us.
I mean,
It should have been taken care
of. And so I'm I'm having that
connection problem, Madam chair
and tried to explain that to me
one more time, if you would
sure. Thank you, Senator Woods.
Very good question, And I'm sure
the staff can give us a synopsis
as to why we are here today with
this and what led us to today's
presentation.
Thank you can proceed. Would you
Adrian or the Southern Gentleman
Madam Chair, Senator Woods. I
will defer to the executive
branch since this is on their
end, and they're the ones who
are going to be held accountable
on whether this money gets spent
or not at the end of the decade
and tell me your name once
again. I'm so sorry. Good
morning, madam. Vice chair. My
name is Patrick Schaefer. I'm
the general counsel for
Department of Finance
Administration and, um Madam
Vice Chair. Senator Woods again.
Thank you for your question, As
I believe it does help us
understand?
Collectively what is at stake
with this money? How it's been,
um, operating through our
system, the the monies that
remained that may not have been
obligated are a small fraction
of the entire 1.7.
Billion dollars that came to the
state of New Mexico with this
award, So what we're really
talking about here again as a
marginal amount that we're
trying to make sure it gets
obligated and come bird and
expanded by the end of this year
to Matt Meet that federal
deadline, So your question is
really important because it
makes us understand that we have
to have all this money obligated
by the end of this year or
expended.
So if, for example, an executive
agency enters into a contract or
sub recipient agreement with
this money by the end of this
year, the federal government
allows two more full years for
that money to be expended so it
can receive that Evie charging
station or that part or those
services anytime through 2026.
So the other thing I'll mention
here, as the acting secretary
mentioned in his remarks is that
the ability for the state of New
Mexico to digest $1.75 billion
of federal money is a
significant accomplishment, and
it requires a lot of compliance
with federal rules and laws that
all of our state agencies have
had to learn together with the
FAA to make sure that we don't
send any of this money back.
So the federal money is, in some
ways a blessing because there
are it doesn't come from the
General fund, but it does have
more restrictions and more
compliance requirements than New
Mexico General Fund money. So
the ability to digest this money
and get it out is perhaps a
little bit slower than just
using general fund money.
Jeremy. Good to see you this
morning,
Mr Chairman. Uh, my line of
questioning.
It is.
Is this next question is this
Okay, so
We've got a huge lump of money
from the federal government.
And
Not all of it has to do with
capital, but a lot of it has to
do with capital.
Is it the fact that
We didn't plan for enough ahead
to get the projects that we want
to do.
Um, In other words,
We've got these strings. We've
got these requirements We've got
Um, agency that says you can
And and I believe
Maybe the question I should ask
beforehand, Mr Chair and
gentlemen.
Did the New Mexico Legislature.
Describe the projects.
This is these management to be
spent on
What part did the Legislature
having?
These projects that are
described here.
Mr Check.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee, Senator Woods, the
Legislature appropriated these
funds for specific purposes to
specific agencies with specific
reversion dates that was the
activity and prosecutive of the
Legislature.
But Mr Chair with that didn't
the agency's kind of request.
Didn't they plan to tell the
Legislature? We can use this
money here?
I mean, it wasn't it wasn't the
Legislature saying, uh, build us
a ballpark over there. It's
agencies that said, You know, we
think this is in our general
plan. This isn't a master plan
and we need this project. So
this is one of the projects
would like to do. I'm I'm trying
to get the planning part of this
down. Uh,
Uh, we're criticized a lot of
here for saying, man, You're
just taking all that bacon home
for yourself. But these are the
this federal money. This was
projects that were in the mill
to be done in my right, Mr Chair
and and
Uh,
Mr General Counsel. Um, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee senator was yes. I'm
sure that there was a
significant degree of
cooperation and collaboration
with the Legislature to
appropriate these funds for
these purposes.
But what I'm getting at
It's been several years that
we've had these funds.
And I know I'm badgering. You're
not apologize for that. I'm
trying to get it in my head.
We've had several years to
encumber these funds because
that's the word that we need
encumbered right?
That's the word.
Is it? The fact that we don't
have
Contractors. We don't have
vendors.
Where is the hiccup here?
Michigan chair.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee senator was yes.
Another very good question. The
the, um I would just remind all
of us that what we are
discussing today is a fractional
marginal amount of the entire
award, the executive branch and
the other appropriate entities
have done a significant job in
appropriating I would say we're
obligating and expending.
A significant fraction of these
money such that they do not
revert to the U. S treasury and
are expended on time. What I
would also say, is that the
federal award has that 2026
reversion date precisely because
of scarcity of goods and
services to bring about the
projects that were appropriated,
for example, affordable housing
projects that are funded with
this money.
There are shortages with
materials shortages with
contractors, engineers,
etcetera, so part of the money
part of the, uh, answer to your
question.
Is that this is money is going
to purposes that require not
just a lot of time in order to
be compliant with federal rules
on the accounting side, but also
to make sure that the goods and
services are even available in
the marketplace, so there are
probably some reasons why some
of these amounts are not
currently expended or obligated.
Because they could still be
searching for an engineer or
professional services or the
required goods.
That's the That's the answer
that I was looking for.
We have put so much money in the
Kana Me.
That we literally can't find
someone to give it to. You can't
find the first professional.
The contractor. The
The vendor.
Are all stacked up. They've got
all the work. They can do they
there is literally
Nobody else to give it to an
That's one of my concerns in
Personally as a group.
Driving an inflation.
Because we are literally
Trying to push money towards
someone.
They've got all the work they
can do if we want them to do the
next job.
They may have to go get a crew.
Inexperienced.
And now
The guy that's been there for
one or two years.
Becomes a foreman guy that's
been there two years becomes a
general foreman, the guy that's
been there three years becomes
an estimator.
And they know that the
inefficiencies are there so
That's the way I see this deal
and
It's a shame that we put this
much money out there and it's a
bigger shame if we put more
money out there and
You see where I'm coming from,
Mr Chair.
Change. Um, um, um, I'm keeping
you in the loop, sir.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Senator
Bert.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Just just
Kind of a sidebar. Is any of
this re occurring money?
I mean, because I see you line
for payroll.
And then I don't see an
explanation for, uh
Behavioral health, Children's
behavioral health.
I don't know if there's a
programs that are ongoing under
the, uh
The
Department of Environment.
There's a line nine for agency
payroll.
Side.
I was under the impression all
of this would not be reoccurring
money is Was this just a
transfer or something for one
time?
Mr Chair, Senator, Bert, Um,
basically
Can be used for payroll and
executing ARPA functions, but it
only covers it for that
duration. So even though it's
going towards payroll, which is
normally a recurring expense of
the agency, it's only for the
specific project that it's
covering that okay, I appreciate
clarification hurt me on that
because I didn't I didn't see in
here unless I missed it. Uh,
I appreciate that, because I
know this is all supposed to be
one time money. Thank you.
That's all I have.
Senator Brantley. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you guys for the
presentation it, Adrian I I
think if there's a
representative from E, d d r,
first pick five pages in front
of us about outdoor recreation,
and it looks like we're not
getting that money out. I would
like to know if it's
potentially. That's because
we're not getting the grant
agreements to them.
In a timely manner than anyone
from outdoor rec.
Mr Chairman,
Senator Brantly and Mark Roper,
the acting director of the
economic development.
The acting secretary. Excuse me
the economic development.
Outdoor recreation was very
detailed in your, uh In what we
what we gave showing all the
grants have been, um
Provided in round one.
Ah, the current, uh
State of Round two.
Where we will then move into
rounds three.
For that money. So as as we have
moved through
And taking grant applications
for these outdoor recreational
opportunities. We have continued
to move through this money and a
timely fashion that fits with
the abilities of the entities to
spend the money.
Ah, we've had great response on
every one of our requests for
grant information, and we we
absolutely anticipate having the
the entire amount Income Bird
and spent by the end of the
fiscal year. Thank you that
that's helpful to know. And I
guess, um, Adrian, my questions
really for you. Senator Woods
was saying, Why is this before
us? They're saying they can get
the money out. What? What gives?
I think
Thanks to you, and thanks to
this chairman, there's been a
lot of steps made this year when
we're kind of restructuring the
way we used to do junior money
now, with the grow where there's
more accountability and a follow
up
What? How do we spend this
money? Adrian? What? What are
the solutions? Why is it to
echo? What Senator Woods is
saying is what do you want us to
do about it With this list in
front of us? We have you you
have on page.
Well, line six. The New Mexico
State Fair, You said, pay
attention to the line that says
planned but not obligated.
They're not going to spend that
money. There's there's no way
they're gonna get this money out
by those reversion dates. Same
with Toltec behind us. And yet,
then we hear that the outdoor
wrecks are on track to get the
money out. What do you want to
what are some steps that we can
do to help?
Get this money out.
Uh, Mr Chair, Senator Brantley.
Uh, um, more than anything this
exercise was, let's find out
where everyone's at right. Get a
full sense. And this follow up
today was for all of those that
were very concerning because
they didn't provide detail.
We have the detail now, in terms
of that line of plant but not
obligated. Those are funds that
may or may not become obligated
by the end of the year. So what
we need
In terms of the Finance
Committee's is to make a
determination. You all need to
make a determination of what you
want to do with that money,
whether you want to let it stay
with that agency for its
intended purpose, or if you want
to potentially swap it with
General fund and move all of
that in a lump sum to something
else.
Or, you know
You have options before you It's
just a matter of direction. So
the the idea behind this hearing
today is for hopefully you all
to provide us with directions.
So this way we can execute your
your wishes.
Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Are we
doing that right now?
I'm gonna give you direction.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr Chair.
I mean, the whole and I don't
see anybody else asking
questions. The whole idea of
this exercise is
The Legislature. This is the
last time I'll chance have a
chance to touch his money.
Probably one of the new states
that has an expended all there
are
Other states have expanded it by
making a line item and saying
General fund expenditures and
spin it all.
And saying that replaced General
fund expenditures across the
board.
I mean, we're in trouble to be
one of the only states.
That
May revert to
And that's what this exercise is
about.
I mean, you're looking the
outdoor rec and say Okay, well,
those are good projects, right?
Are they really going to get
done right?
Are we going to be the state
that sends money back to the
feds? I mean, if I throw $500 on
the floor
Who's gonna walk by it.
Somebody's gonna pick it up.
And then this is this is the
agencies. I mean the state fair.
What could have been the
simplest operation to transfer
$5 million
And three years later, it didn't
get done.
It was for lost revenue. Simple
line item lost revenue replacing
and budget funds.
I didn't get done.
Now.
I talked to the stating you're a
little bit. I haven't really
talked to him personally, but we
know dams are important, but I
mean any dam project could go
awry.
And should we be looking at
saying, Okay, we'll put General
fund there.
To make sure that damn gets
completed and we'll spend the
Harper somewhere else. It's just
a swapping of the money, right.
We're just swapping money and
accounting for it to the federal
government and seen
We've expanded this money.
But I don't. I mean, the problem
is
The exact has two more years.
And when does that expire? 26 or
27?
26
26 kind of their last year.
Mm hmm. And do you do you?
Cabinet secretaries really care
What happens? I mean, they're
mainly going to be
All gone.
And
I may not be here.
We have an election cycle.
And and are we really gonna let
that happen?
I mean, are we really going to
not tell people we could have
gave you 5 million more?
For healthcare or for the Y F.
D.
But they wanted to hold the
money.
And we're gonna lose it.
I mean, this is a hard look, If
it was up to me, I just say I'm
taking everything.
And you come to us and you make
your case whether you're going
to get General fund or not Good
General fund.
And if you're not gonna get the
money out, I mean I'm $200
Million short and education.
have a deputy director talking
about all the Legislature
doesn't care about education and
in in meetings. I mean, I'm 200
million short and one agency
alone for this budget year.
Tell me where you want me to
cut.
Tell me somebody tell me where
you want me to cut.
Hmm. That's five. We got 195
left to go. That's one agency.
We're still short 197 million on
on the healthcare authority
yesterday, right?
I mean, these are I don't know
about you, but
My son is called me and said,
Hey, I gotta make payroll from
my company Tomorrow, Dad and and
I have my receivables and I
haven't got it. I need $18,000
tomorrow to make payroll right?
Good thing. Dad saves it and Dad
can help them out. But this is
the exact same scenario that
everybody's doing at home in
their personal deal.
I mean, we're 50th in education.
Who else in those world war
50th, right?
And we're going to sit here and
say I'm 200 million short, but
don't take my money. Don't take
my money I may not ever spend it
Don't do reasonable things like
swapping them money so you can
expended in timely manner. Don't
do anything reasonable. Just let
us hold it and keep it. It's up
to me and maybe Well, we're
gonna have a conversation and we
just take it all.
Let them come back and let them
say Okay, either Get it or we
don't get it.
Because we know I'm not. I'm I'm
Republican or Democrat or
whoever and in goodbye,
secretaries bad secretaries.
People hide money.
And they hide money so you won't
take it.
They won't come to you and say,
Hey, I can really get this out.
They'll just sit there quietly.
I'll just put in the report put
in a report and they'll never
get expended.
Common sense tells me if I could
just swap everything for General
fund and counting to the federal
government say we spend all our
money. It's just a swapping of
the money. But there's so much
pushback from that that doesn't
make any common sense to me.
Maybe I'm completely wrong,
Maybe on the wrong person.
But I mean to me.
If you take a billion dollars in
general funding, you swap it for
Arpaio, and you account for it
in one single motion and
counting scenario, it's simple.
And you save everything. Every
program that you had and you
thought was
Pressures with our money.
I mean, look at the film school.
I mean, we're funding, more film
and intimacy you but they
haven't spent 18 million of it.
Well about you and and R and had
three years to do it or two
different scenarios. I mean, it
takes time.
But we're gonna fund we're gonna
fund it up more film school in
Las Cruces, and we already have
two funding sources. And now
we're gonna do a third one.
We had our papa. We did.
State film last year, and now
we're doing the college.
And and
Everybody's about you, but who's
going to get it done? It's
really about I mean,
If you guys want to send money
back to them.
$500 on the floor. Many people
walk over it today.
That's what it's about.
I don't know how you want to
continue this exercise, but if I
was going to make a decision,
they start right here with this
list. Maybe we form a
subcommittee and tell him to
bring us the background
contracts and everything that's
exercised.
And if it has been, we don't
have the contracts and we take
the money.
Just in the day.
I'm still 200 Million short in
education with $3.5 billion
And and not enough reoccurring
money and not enough money for
this and and big ideas, but a
lot of content on them.
Are you ready to quit now?
Adrian? Not yet. Mr. Chair. Uh,
want to make sure members of the
committee so just to provide all
the executive agencies who are
behind me and listening at home
you have till Friday at noon to
provide Senate finance staff
with those contracts at the
senator is asking.
We will convene the subcommittee
this upcoming Monday. So because
we have a very short turnaround
in the event that we have to
swap any of this, um, because we
have two weeks before Senate
Finance basically passes the
budget.
So we're on a type.
Timeline, So we're going to hold
the agencies to that same type
timeline.
Mhm and and that for the
agencies like I don't want to
take your money. But if you want
to swap, Mike, I mean, I would
love to swap you for general
fund money.
Makes complete sense to me.
Anything goes wrong and dam
project soils, contractors
equipment. We still get the
damn. We're just accounting for
the money differently.
And this is not I want to take
your money and not give it back
to you. It's like
I don't want to give the money
back to the federal government.
But if you like paying your
taxes, I guess I don't like
paying taxes.
That's my comment.
So maybe we'll have a
subcommittee Saturday. I have to
figure out who wants to be on
it. It's due Friday in there do
Saturday and then
We'll have a rack up for Monday
morning.
For the dollar amount.
Yeah, I guess you could just
start on this sheet right here
and just take it all.
And and, you know.
Who in the the Legislature stood
up.
And said to the executive, you
can't spend our money and we
took her to quarter one word.
Harper is our prerogative, and I
think that's the Legislature's
prerogative is
Is appropriating the money.
Very clear in the court case.
The next one getting fired at
Adrian, You have d f A next so
perfect.
Entities.
Good morning, Mr Chairman. You
ready for us? Yeah. Ready for
something.
For some chicken and macaroni
chairman. It wouldn't wouldn't
be surprised if you're tired of
seeing me. I understand. Speak a
little louder wing. Mr Chairman.
I wouldn't be surprised if
you're a little tired of seeing
me and I wouldn't blame you
either, but I'll try to try to
be brief this morning.
My name is Wayne props on the
secretary of the Department of
Finance Administration joined
today by Mark Malkoff, who is
the state comptroller.
We appreciate Mr Chairman, the
opportunity to follow on to the
hearing that you had last week
on deficiencies.
Because, while the presentations
made last week may have been
interesting, they were a little
short on facts, and I'm happy to
have the opportunity to provide
some facts today.
Because I know this is the
Finance Committee.
And you know that numbers don't
lie.
Mr Chairman, I'm gonna speak
briefly about deficiencies over
the last couple of years. Um
I'll start by saying, Mr
Chairman.
Actually over the last
Last five years since FY
20
There have been 47 deficiency
requests.
To the Legislature. So on
average, about eight
A year.
Of those 47 deficiency requests.
27 came from state agencies.
11 came from the judiciary.
And nine came from boards and
commissions.
Now, Mr Chairman. Let's look at
it deficiencies that were
submitted for the last two
fiscal years. If you'll turn Mr
Chairman to your executive
budget document Page 64.
Which lists the deficiencies for
Fy 23.
This one right here.
I'm sorry, Mr Jim, I'll give you
a minute to get their page 64.
You'll see Mr Chairman. That's
total deficiency requests for FY
23 Total $78.2 million
However, Mr Chairman, if you
take out the deficiency request
for employee health benefits.
A horse that I think we can all
agree has been beaten close to
death. If you take out the $60
million deficiency for employee
health benefits.
There are a total of
approximately $17 million in
deficiency request for the
current fiscal year.
Out of an annual budget of over
$10 billion.
You'll see that the district
attorney's
When you're on page 64. This is
the executives right
legislatures, and he's on 64,
and he's on appropriation in the
middle of the page.
I'm sorry, Mr Chairman, I should
have given you time to catch up.
Our budget committee. We don't
Have trouble getting into the
financial. You have lots of
documents on Friday, Mr
Chairman, I understand that. So
let me briefly start again. Mr.
Chairman. I think we're all on
page 60 for looking at FY 2324
deficiency appropriation
recommendations or in the middle
of the page page. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. The executive is
recommending a total of $78.2
million in deficiencies.
If we take out the deficiency
For employee health benefits.
That's approximately $17 million
in deficiency requests.
You'll see that there was a
there is a deficiency
recommendation of approximately
a million dollars for
Uh, the second judicial
district.
There's a recommendation for the
economic development Department
of $90,000 deficiency.
Uh, deficiency that you heard
about yesterday from the
Veterans Services Department of
approximately $900,000. This is
a deficiency from
2019
You'll see Mr Chairman. There is
one of the largest deficiencies
is for fourth million $600,000.
To correct the deficiency in the
facilities management program
from physical year 2023.
For the Department of Health.
You'll recall Mr Chairman that
the Department of Health in late
spring brought this potential
deficiency to both the LSC and
dfas attention.
Mr Chairman, I remember
discussing this with you.
At the time deal H was
recommending that the deficiency
would be
$15 million or more.
The good news is while it's
still deficiency, Mr Chairman,
the deficiency is 4.6 million
instead of 15, the originally
estimated 15.
Million dollars.
So again, Mr Chairman, taking
out the health benefits
deficiency request for the
General Services Department.
Total deficiency recommendations
for FY 23.
Total approximately $17 million.
Or 0.0016%.
Of the state's general fund
budget. While we don't have
deficiencies for the prior year
in front of you, Mr Chairman, we
can certainly provide you those
Again if we take out the
deficiency recommendations for
FY for the previous physical
year.
The total deficiency
recommendations were $880,000.
Or 0.00008% of the state's
general fund.
Budgets.
Ms. Chairman, Um
I want to make clear.
That I take very seriously my
role as a chief fiduciary.
For the state of New Mexico.
We are, after all, first and
foremost the Department of
Finance
I appointed mark as controller.
Shortly after I became
Secretary of the department.
So he's out about a year.
To help carry out
Clear directive to him.
That there is nothing more
important to me secretary than
having strong
Financial controls. He's going
to be reporting.
In a minute, Mr. Chairman on
what those financial controls
Are and some improvements that
he has made.
But I want to be clear that from
our perspective
Deficiencies are rare.
As they should be.
We take them seriously, as I
said at the Department of
Finance Administration.
Often times we're able to
identify them early.
And Mark and his staff are able
to work with agencies to ensure
that one they don't get any
bigger.
Than originally thought. And in
many, many cases they're
actually resolved before they
become
Deficiencies.
Um
This is something that again I
made very clear as a priority
for Mark and his staff.
I would submit Mr Chairman that
deficiencies
Or not out of control.
Agencies as markets going to
demonstrate do not have a magic
button that they can press
And overspend their budgets.
There are financial controls in
place to prevent that.
And so, Mr Chairman again, I'm
gonna turn this over to mark
But I appreciate the opportunity
to clarify this matter a little
bit more than was clarified that
you're hearing last week.
Because Mr Chairman as I'm often
remind myself as our Twain once
said.
It ain't what? You don't know
that gets you in trouble.
It's what you know for sure.
That just ain't so, Mr.
Chairman. I'll ask Mark to go
through our presentation morning
Chairman Senators, I'm going to
go over the
This PowerPoint slide you should
have in front of you over
internal controls here in the
state comptroller's office. I
would like to echo what Wayne
mentioned about the magic
button. There are budgetary
controls in the share system
that would not let an agency
overspend their budget as long
as revenues are collected to
what's what's budgeted and then
there's a budgetary process if
those revenues don't come in to
work with the state budget
division to reduce those budgets
to ensure that doesn't happen,
so that's from budgetary
perspective or office is looking
at it from a cache control
perspective. That's what the
controller
The office is responsible for so
understanding the difference
between the two I feel is
important. There's not as great
of a
Cash control mechanism within
share. We have to develop
internal controls within the
financial control division at
DFA, the comptroller's office as
well as working with the state
agencies to come up with a
process to monitor that cash,
and we'll go through that today
to give you an understanding,
but I want to echo that.
The budget checking control
process and share works very,
very well. And if an agency
tries to overspend their
approved budget, they get an
error. The system doesn't allow
them to move forward with that
procurement that payment,
Whatever it might be, um they do
have to monitor their revenues,
and they do have to work with
their budget analysts to ensure
that those revenues if they're
not general fund are coming into
what was budgeted. They do have
to do that, and those controls
are also in place.
But that's more of a business
process so we'll move to page
two.
Prior to Wayne bringing me in as
a controller and all the way
back to cash remediation. So
we're talking 2012 2013 when the
state went through cash
remediation when we had the
The large contingent liability
on the books because we weren't
able to balance cash at the
time.
They have put processes in place
as a state to monitor those cash
balances.
At a higher level prior to the
changes we've made recently.
Past controllers and DFA. We're
monitoring cash at an agency
level. We call it business unit
but at a business unit level,
not at a lower fun level so that
the agency had positive cash at
the at the highest level. That's
what they were made mainly
focused on since I have come in.
We've updated those procedures.
To drill down all the way to the
fun level. Some agencies have
hundreds of fun, so we are on a
daily monthly annual basis.
Monitoring those cash balances
and then going through this
process of working with the
agencies if we identify an
issue, and this control that we
have in place is very manual.
Um, but we have an entire staff
at D. F a R Cash Control Bureau,
who is monitoring these things
daily, and we try to prevent it.
These controls are there.
To identify a deficiency from a
cash perspective before it
happens so we can work with the
agency. So it works. Well, it
works very, very well the
majority of the time as a
secretary property mentioned
deficiencies are very rare, so
our process works. It's working
even better now that we are
looking at a more organic level
at the fun level, which which I
believe is the best approach and
that's what we're doing now.
It also takes collaboration.
This isn't just a D F a thing
right? It takes collaboration
with the agencies with the CFOs
with the agency heads because
they are ultimately responsible
for their finance financials,
and we're there to help them,
But we also have to work with
the budget Division. We board a
finance. We work with external
auditors if they identify
something from a prior year's
audit, we work with the
externals. So it's a
collaborative effort that that
our office undertakes with the
entire state. All three branches
of government.
On the next page. Page four.
There's a flow chart that that
we kind of put together to
explain how this works once we
identify a potential deficiency,
or we think there's potential
for deficiency. The first thing
we do is reach out to the
agency.
Because there are certain
situations where where funds
operating a deficiency on a
regular basis for federal
funding on a reimbursement basis
for capital outlay because it's
on a reimbursement basis, So we
communicate with those agencies
to determine if that deficiency
is allowable.
And if so, we go through an
exemption process that has to be
reviewed by our office. If it's
not
We escalate that to the next
steps with the agency to
determine what's going on and
see what what next. Next steps
are required to solve that, and
also as part of that, that flow
chart there you see in the
middle, we have to be in
constant communication with the
state budget Division, because
if it's a special revenue that's
just not generating at the
level. It should be. We have to
work with them in the agency to
ensure those budgets are reduced
so they can't overspend.
And that's part of the internal
control that we're trying to do
to prevent these efficiencies
from from arising.
Page five. Moving on
The majority of the time with
with deficiency, especially when
we're talking about the federal
funds. Capital Outlay grant
grant reimbursement funds.
Those receivables and and
Senator Munoz, I've heard you
mention this a few times that
receivable process is really
important because there are
state statutes that allow
agencies to go into a
deficiency if they have a
receivable process in place, and
that's what we did for our
monitoring with the agencies to
ensure that what they're doing
is is justifiable that we feel
comfortable with it and that
they are true in up by the end
of the year, which is what that
state statute requires A
A receivable or there's also a
state statute that allows
agencies to float themselves
cash within their agency as long
as a true that by the end of the
year, and that's part of our
review process that we're doing
on a daily and monthly basis.
And then page six.
Just a quick graph to show you
out of our 127 agencies and
share at the end of every year.
There are very, very few
instances where an agency is
negative cash at the highest
level, and and we'll just focus
on 23. And I'll just call out E
C. D. If you were to look at
their audit, if you were to pull
a cash report, Senator Woods
Look at your cash report at the
end of June. You would have
noticed that e C. C d had a cash
deficiency.
But if you look a week later
that cash defense deficiency was
recovered through a federal
receivable that was received
because at the end of the year
they had true expenditures that
were allowable, but they were
waiting for the feds to send
them the money, which which
isn't allowable use of of the
federal funds and and it's in
line with state statute, So you
have to kind of look at these
things. Connect the cash reports
that we sometimes see on the
Sunshine portal and that we
share our snapshot in time.
You sometimes have to follow
that through on a daily basis to
see the recovery of those funds,
and that's what my staff does at
the FAA to ensure that those
agencies are recovering those
funds and if they're not, we
will ask him to come in front of
you to get a deficiency, which
is one of the reasons you see a
few of the deficiencies that
secretary props noted through
this process that we've created
over the last year, we found
those smaller deficiencies that
I won't say agencies have hidden
but I've been sitting there for
a while, like the one from
veterans Services from 2019.
They've been sitting there for a
while, so we're pushing them to
get those results and prevent
future ones from happening.
An example of the process when
it works on Page seven, and this
is something that our office did
last year. And I think some of
you may remember the tobacco
settlement program fund that's
appropriated to DFA. And that D
F A. Then we distribute those
funds to the recipient agencies.
Last year we got noticed from
the federal government through
the M s a settlement agreement.
That the revenue was going to be
three or $4 million short
compared to the budget. So as
soon as we were notified of that
we worked at state budget and
the individual agencies to
reduce their budgets
immediately so they could not
overspend. And we did that about
the march timeframe. That's how
the process should work, but it
takes agencies monitoring takes
us in the comptroller's office
monitoring and working with
those agencies to ensure those
things are happening.
And my final slide before we
turn it over for questions. Um
Training I feel like is very
important and I recall this came
up in a hearing with the state
audit about training for
accountants, financial people to
understand what cash balances
are to understand the budgeting
process. That is something my
office has been working really
hard with over the last year
because we do have a lack of
talent around the state. We have
a lot of turnover. CFOs. We have
a lot of turnover and financial
staff, so we host monthly
trainings.
We do. A lot of webinar
trainings were working closely
right now, as we speak is the
monthly CFO meeting where all
state agency CFOs have to attend
the comptroller's office and we
go through a whole spiel of
different topics where we meet
with them every month and cash
has been one of those. Those
presentations over the time, so
we are committed to helping the
state improve their skill set.
And
As we move towards a steering
committee for the new RP system,
which we have talked about a few
times the new share share
upgrade over the next few years.
Cash control is at the top of
that wish list Better controls
for for the cache control module
within the E R. P system. A lot
of UPS systems we've researched
in the in the past didn't have
cash control functions.
The way the budgetary functions
not, but we will be looking to
add that to the new year peace
system in the future, and that
is the end of my presentation.
If Secretary process anything
else to add, if not, we stand
for questions. I'll start off in
the first question. I'm looking
on page 64.
And GSD $60 million, right?
Clear statutory violation.
Clear violation.
The statute wasn't followed
increases in premium increases
required by by statute. $60
million went out with a clear
statutory violation.
Now. It wasn't necessary. Need?
Yeah.
But the comptroller has some say
in saying, this is a statutory
violation. I'm not going to
authorize it until we figure out
how we're gonna handle this.
I mean, sometimes we have to
turn our nose and government.
And do that look at the 9 962
for the second D A. I mean that
was a prior administration that
miscalculated or my
understanding did something
incorrectly, right?
But then I look at the second D
A s cash balances on that day,
and I'm looking at $4 Million.
Maybe he didn't have the
authority to make that transfer.
Cash balances were in that.
In that range.
Or some that were beyond our
control, and we in in
appropriating money to
Department of Health for $3
million for the vaccine program.
I mean,
Pretty clear the money wasn't
appropriated through our part of
the money was spent. They
overspend in some way, shape or
form, so the controls weren't
there.
But the clear $60 million is
pretty simple.
I mean,
Do we hold our nose at some
point and say people need health
insurance? Yeah.
But I mean, if we're really
gonna say
We're gonna hold the comptroller
accountable. I mean, this goes
back to and
Treasurer Eichenberger when we
didn't have any money at one
day, and people may not know
this in the state, we had no
money in our coffers.
We? We were writing paychecks
that we couldn't cash and he had
to make the decision. Should I
go to jail or should I make sure
the state police
Aren't paid right?
There's some decisions we have
to make in government.
And we had to come back and and
do budget cutting and do all
that.
But there's some decisions that
are out of our control that are
clear violations of statute.
That
Somebody has to stop.
And unless a legislator or
someone steps up and says
I'm gonna sue the administration
for the clear violation of this
statute.
Because the 64 has now turned
into 150.
Roughly. I don't know what the
exact number is.
That we got a backfill. When do
you know the number then? Mr
Chairman. It's not 150. It's not
150 Million for backfill. There
is another deficiency.
Both the L S C and the executive
are recommending to the
Legislature this year.
We are also requesting a
supplemental, uh, this year as
well. The total Mr Chairman
probably comes close to 100 and
50 million, but it's not $150
Million deficiency.
And there's a clear distinction
between supplementals and
efficiencies that I think we
need to keep in mind.
Health benefits The health
benefits fun for the state has
been challenged. You've held
hearings on it.
It has been reported on
We all understand it. I
inherited it. When I became the
secretary of Department of
Finance Administration,
something I take very seriously.
I was not willing when I became
secretary of the Department of
Finance and Administration.
To drop health care for 20,000
state employees.
That wasn't even a hard decision
to make.
We're addressing the healthcare
deficiency.
Cooperatively with the
Legislature.
We'll continue to do so.
We are increasing premiums.
Premiums were increased 10% last
year.
They're going up another 9.2% of
this year. I am hopeful Mr
Chairman with your support.
Support the legislature.
But now that we are trans
positioning employee health care
benefits
The people who actually have
experience and expertise in
health care at the new
healthcare Authority.
That we will finally get the
reforms frankly, have been
needed for at least 20 years to
the health benefits program, so
there were no longer faced with
deficiencies that's gonna take
some time. Unfortunately, it's
not going to happen overnight.
We're gonna take a couple of
years, but I am optimistic.
Thanks again to the Legislature.
For your support for a new
healthcare authority that will
manage healthcare benefits for
state employees that we won't be
faced with. Those kind of
deficiencies are going forward.
Woods.
I am a better understanding of
this. Appreciate it have a
better understanding on a lot of
this, and I realized that
You know?
We can take up this figure and
this will all look better.
Uh, it reminds me of a story I
heard from paired one time.
When I was first in the
Legislature.
And they told me that if we took
these schools out
Of her calculations while we'd
be in the middle of the pack
But we can't take
Peace out because we have to
look at the overall deal.
I'm I'm kind of with the
chairman in saying that
Okay, continuing ongoing
problem.
Deficiencies.
Means that we're not
Addressing the premium side of
it.
And even if we go
Transfer this to a new agency.
We have no guarantees that
they're going to address
The premium.
It's a management deal. It's
it's agency management, and it's
also somewhat of a
Maybe a
A direction.
From above.
That says we're going to keep
premiums down.
We have a huge healthcare
problem in our state.
We're having doctors leaving our
state. We having
We have services from huge
healthcare providers that are no
longer provided in the state.
We keep talking about? Well,
we're paying too much for
healthcare.
There's so many problems with
our health care deal that
It's beyond me.
I'll admit that it's more than I
can absorb. I don't get that
close to it.
So
Our job is trying to bring in a
balanced budget.
That's what we try to do
Deficiencies means that it's not
a balanced budget.
In my eyes.
We can talk about all of these
different ones and and some of
them are small. Some of them are
large.
Good.
You know?
We need to take care of this.
Enter budgeting process.
And if if if these are
continually being
Upside down.
Either. We gotta figure out how
to do that. With
State phones.
General fund money.
To correct this, or we need to
raise the fees that we charge
for these services.
There's two ways to do it.
So
That's the choices we make.
And and I understand the
controller's job is very hard to
understand that because
Federal dollars come in
different things come in
different funds. Go, Mingo.
Uh, accounts receivable, as you
say The money is is a day off
and you know the checks in the
mail.
I had that.
Told that
Cattle buyer one time and he
wasn't real happy. I was buying
the cattle and I told him the
check was in the mail. And he
said, Man, I don't know you have
many times. I've heard that
story.
We
The 11 statement that you made
Mr Control of that.
And maybe I misheard it.
I thought you said you had to do
quite a bit of this work
manually.
Uh,
In other words, it just doesn't
pop out at you immediately. So
you have to do quite a bit of
internal work to get to these.
Did I hear that right? Mr.
Shared sure, Chairman Senator
Woods. That's correct when we're
talking about the cash
management aspect, not the
budgetary control by cash
management. Yes, the current
system does not have cash
management functioning, built in
The process that I I explained
today is is a manual process
being done by a group of folks
idea on a daily basis. That's
correct. I've heard the same
thing from the state treasurer's
office.
Uh, that they had to go in when
they have to get a percent to go
to a beneficiary somewhere that
a lot of their stuff is. Don't
spreadsheets have done
automatically jump out.
And
In this day and age of
Computers.
How efficient is our share
program?
Are we moving to another
program?
Mr Chair and
Ms Secretary, You may or or Mr
Controller, either one of you
want to answer that question.
Chairman and Senator Ward's Yes,
we are actively beginning that
process to look for a new
system. We've started a steering
committee and we will be doing
that over the next few years.
So, yes, it is a shared system
efficient to answer your
question. I believe for what it
is. Yes, I believe when when it
was implemented in 2006 and
upgrade in 2017 at the time,
yes, but times change, and it
does need to be upgraded.
We are in agreement with that,
and we are working towards that
well.
I understand what I talked to
the auditors how hard it is to
to do government accounting.
And it's just getting more
complicated. It wouldn't
surprise me at all this summer.
The stuff over here is not nude
or some government accounting.
That we lost funds somewhere.
And so the other part of the
deal. Uh,
I've I've heard through the
rumor mill that we also have
some problem in our capital
outlay, accounting as to
What's expended and what's not
expended or what's obligated.
Uh, I've heard that that
particular system maybe
Little
Behind on reporting. So to
speak. Is there any truth to
that, or I'm asking the wrong
group on that Mr Chair?
Mr Chairman and members of
Committee and Senator Woods.
I'll try to take that one. I
don't know if Wesley is still
there. Genetics still here?
Mr chairman there, and Senator
there is no doubt whatsoever
that our capital outlay.
Financial accounting system is
not
At the level that I wanted to
be.
And that's why we've requested a
million dollars special
appropriation this year to begin
replacing it.
Far too much of what we do at
the ESA is still handled on
spreadsheets, including capital
outlay.
It's not. It's not the system we
need. It's not the schism system
we deserve and as we share
One of the reasons you'll see Mr
Chairman in our budget
presentation this afternoon.
We recently brought share back
to D F a from the Department of
Information Technology It used
to be at at D. F. A.
During the Martinez
administration, and this is not
a criticism. Martinez
administration They made a
decision for whatever reason
they made it, but they move
share out of the FAA.
Shares rightful place is in
The FAA. So we entered into an
MOU with the Department of
Information Technology to move
share back to the FAA. They
moved back in November.
Are the reason why we wanted
them to come back is because of
Mark said. It's time to start
looking at Sharon. Whether or
not we need to either upgraded
significantly.
Or replace it.
That same scenario, Mr Chairman
and members of committee and
Senator Woods applies to our
capital outlay, tracking and
reporting system. There is no
doubt it is not at the level
that I wanted to be.
Or MS Chair, are we? Are we
still getting vendor service on
these programs?
Is that some of the problem
Mr Chairman, Members of
committee. We are getting vendor
services and I don't want to. I
don't want to throw anybody
under the bus. That's not my
style. Um, I I again, I think
for the time the systems were
adequate, they're just not there
anymore. So it's not so much a
vendor service issue or the
vendors that we currently have.
It's just that things imagine. I
mean, I
Started government in 2005.
22 or three months after I
started
Share went live so shares 20
years old. Yes, it's been
upgraded in 2017.
But imagine you look at your
phone. You didn't have one of
these 20 years ago. I didn't
either. So things have changed
and changed significantly, and
it's just time for us to move
into a different
Decade.
With our systems, Mr Chairman,
and when you start and this is
may be way off the subject and
people are waiting and I
apologize, guys. One last
question.
I worry immensely.
Of buying
I should say this right now, so
Worry terribly about buying a
pig in a poke.
Buying something that don't
work.
And
I know you guys have got the
expertise on what you need. And
and when you go out shopping for
system
It's got to be. I know there's
probably several vendors out
there that that do a wonderful
job, and I'm sure not when
trying to second guess you on on
what you buy and what you decide
on
But
Yeah, um
I just hope you do a lot of
research and
With that. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I will be fast. Um and
I appreciate you both coming
before us today. And I thank you
for your work. Thank you.
Secretary Probst. And of course,
Mark. Thank you. Um, I just have
a quick question. Make sure I
understood what you said. And
you can explain it. I know
you're doing your best to get us
to understand this whole
convoluted process.
But, um, you mentioned mark that
agencies can go into the
biggest call it negative if they
have a receivable.
Um, coming. That's the part that
I'm a little blanket. If what if
the receivable doesn't come in?
Who? And that's explained that
briefly to me again? You may
have already but I had to step
up. Chairman Senator agrees.
Yes. So when we say go negative,
That means they have a budget
established and they have a
revenue budget established, say
it's a federal revenue program.
They? A lot of those programs
operate on a reimbursement basis
They have to spend upfront
request the funding from the
feds after they've made their
expenditures after they've met
all the requirements of the
reporting period for the federal
government or similar to Capitol
outlay. They have to request the
funds from Board of Finance. So
that receivable is there to show
that we are owed this money and
we are actively
Working to recoup that money,
and that's where we are watching
and making sure they do recoup
that money if they're allowed to
even go negative in that fund
because it's on a receivable
basis, So that's how that works.
And if if, if we don't see that
receivable coming in a timely
timeframe, we will reach out to
the agency and work with him. I
don't have a specific time when
every program is a little bit
different, but that's why we are
monitoring on a daily and
monthly basis, because if we
don't see that receivable if
they're still sitting in that
negative
We are reaching out to the
agency and you know at the end
of the day if it gets to a point
where we feel like it's never
going to be recovered. That's
what that's when we would go to
secretary props and say, Hey, we
have a problem. We're going to
need to address it because the
agency is not
I see. Okay. Thank you. And if
that money doesn't come in, you
know is is expected. For
example, do you? Um, I mean, how
do you replenish that? Besides
going to Wayne here and saying,
Give me some money or figure
this out. Do you actually go to
the state Board of Finance for
For a loan or grant or how What
do you do if it doesn't come in?
I guess I'm trying to figure out
how we would replenish that.
Thank you. In our chairman U. S
Senator Rodriguez. It would
really depend we made they made
the agency may have to come to
you in a deficiency request that
you see and ask for the money
from the Legislature on my I
don't think Wayne or even the
board of finance necessarily
have money to just give agencies
that there's a process like the
emergency process do Board of
finance. Sure, and I believe
some agencies and local
Girls have done that.
But it's either that or come to
the Legislature and ask for the
deficiency. We don't have money.
a D F A that we can give to
agencies. We don't have that
authority and we wouldn't our
our authorities to make sure
that they don't get into that
predicament and that's what
we're trying to prevent. I see.
So I just wondered, and thank
you. That makes a lot of sense.
But I just wondered if you would
go like for example.
You're expecting to receivable,
but it hasn't come in and you
have fun balance somewhere that
you can tap into to ensure that
it's like collateral for these
so that they don't We don't
appear negative and the negative
on the record or on the books
and and then have to comfort
efficiency later.
Jeremy Nelson and Senator
Rodriguez.
I don't think most agencies have
fun balances they can just used
to cover other deficiencies. I
don't That's not really
something most. They can use
other cash balances to to float
themselves cash until the end of
the fiscal year, But then they
need to recover to the purpose
of that fund or that stream. So
yeah, I don't think most
agencies have the ability to
just take from one area and put
somewhere else they would have
to get help from you or from the
border finances, right? And and
that does make sense. Well,
thank you for the explanation,
Mark.
So I have Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Uh um
I mean, this is a good exercise.
Whether LFC s comments to me,
we're in true facts or not,
right? I don't think anybody's
ever seen the controller.
No. I've never seen him in front
of the legislative committee and
may not have ever have appeared
right?
Yeah, and we hear the stories,
but I mean,
Well, yeah.
Hmm. But there's good reasons
and there's bad reasons, right?
And and then we go into bars and
adjustments, right?
When an agency comes to the end
of the year and says, Okay, I'm
gonna borrow this money out.
In the Legislature really has no
say in them borrowing that money
out.
And then they come and say,
Well, I need more money, but you
look back at their bars.
And did they really need the
money and I'll give you two
examples of bars should have
been
Probably well, one of them
should have been asked at all,
but the other one should have
put it been asked in general
fund
The Mar example when he uses is
from the treasurer's office,
where they borrowed money out to
take headshots.
And to buy flooring in to buy
furniture and fixtures.
I mean, I think in the bar it
was $3000 for headshots.
I mean,
Not a good situation to be in.
You look at the prison secretary
and she's sitting there, right?
She borrowed out money for
parking lots and air
conditioners. And I'm not seeing
those aren't good uses, but
those should be general fund
requests.
But in the Legislature we've
taught agencies like over. We
don't give you the money and you
have extra money, borrowed that
money out and maybe they'll
catch it or they won't catch it
and we'll ask for more money
next year.
Hmm. And I think the purpose of
this whole kind of exercise goes
to. It's fine when you have
money, right?
But when you don't have money,
right?
To come back and do a $60
million deficiency.
It's a different story.
And believe me. I mean, I don't
want money. I don't want oil and
gas to go away because Mexico
will dry up and and go away.
But I mean, we gotta realize
There's a balance here, right?
You have a big job to do You
have a you have, er, statutory
responsibility, right?
And we don't want to send
anybody to jail for doing the
right. Right. Right thing,
right?
But it also falls upon the exact
into the right thing. And
And
I know I get my health care
through the state.
And
I may have not have had a
premium increase, but now I'm
going to pay but to the everyday
working person. Is that really
fair for them to see 25 30%
increases in one year? It's not
fair at all.
We should slowly done those. I
mean, we've done almost what 12%
increases to state employees
across the board over the last
couple of years.
Maybe including the Shermeen.
Those are large increases that
never happened before.
Hmm. And so they're getting
those adjustments, but
It's fine to do this when we
have money, but when we don't
have money
And we don't exercise your
strength and control.
Calls it 60. The total cost to
the state is 150 could have all
been avoided.
All been avoided.
I just following the statute.
Um, we look at cash balances and
agencies in
You know, at the end of 22.
There was November 22 years.
Your comparison there was about
$4 billion
In cash balances. I don't know
where the end in cash balances
was, but maybe you ought to look
at sweeping here in cash
balances, but that
That just pushes the bar effect
even more.
Because they will bar out and
and I think the legislator
Need legislate your needs.
Objection to bar authority.
Other than to object and not
have a recourse.
The Legislature needs that
because it's the appropriating
body.
And when we deny the D, a no
denying the healthcare probably.
No, I wouldn't.
They can hold me deal with you,
and it's still the right thing
to do.
But
Are there other things that are
Not up on the up and up.
Yep.
I see him every day.
And so I don't know how we get
in control of bars. I think I
introduced a bill. We'll see if
the governor messages it.
May be placed in house Bill 22
very stringent language.
That helps the Legislature get
some cash control, But I mean
You heard me earlier. I mean,
$3 billion and I'm trying to
balance a budget and I'm
$200,000,400 million short,
right? Where the hell did the
money go? Right?
And where did it go? I mean,
Agencies have have have in do
their right paid employees where
they should be paid funded
agencies. But there's a point of
waste.
Point where agencies don't use
the money.
And it's not moving for years.
I love this example in 2020 in
Arba funds, we put money for
mental health care $20 million.
And it never got moved. Never
got touched until an LFC meeting
in Albuquerque in September, and
then all magically they commit
the money. Same thing with RP
funds. All of a sudden, we We
started asking questions and
everything's magically committed
and contracts are let and
everything else, But I mean, you
have money, use it.
It's for the public, and it's
for the good of the public. It's
their taxpayer dollars.
It's not ours to hoard and and
and hide and in revert back to
the federal government. Use it.
They use it right.
I mean pain. People's health
care That's the right thing to
do. And I don't know. Maybe next
time the statutory violation
happens, more legislators will
step up to the plate.
And get punished like me and
Senator Cervantes and a few
others.
Protecting the people of the
state in in the Legislative
Authority.
Um
Good lesson. Good exercise.
Think I think good to meet you,
Comptroller.
And probably one of the only one
that has read the The States.
Budget.
In its entirety and and spend
probably a day and a half
routing from the front to the
back and
On this committee. You should
probably do that because
There's a lot of moving parts to
understanding that budget. But
you know, we appreciate you
know, we put you on the spot
sometimes, but
Sometimes it's it's for our
knowledge and for our good and
no wings dying to get out of
here, So I'm just gonna talk for
another 15 minutes.
Yeah, So, uh,
Appreciate your timing. We'll
see where we go. Thank you.
I'm gonna run the committees
Committee, huh? Oh, you're done.
We're gonna go chamber.
You push my
Let's see what time is it
minutes. Madam Secretary. We got
eight minutes before we go to
the floor.
So we may just roll over you.
H I mean, eight minutes and
How quick are you gonna be okay?
You can start with your bars.
Scott, start us off.
Got to alright, Mr Chair. I'll
be quick. We're looking at
Corrections Agency Code 770
behind have seven more
information on corrections You
can find in volume two starting
on page 393 with me today.
Cabinet Secretary Alicia Tafoya
Lucero are kind apart from D F a
Diego Jimenez and, uh
The director of the adult
Prisons division. Uh, Garry
Marshall.
The key differences between the
recommendations are the degree
to which each recommendation
uses vacancy savings to fund the
agency's priorities.
For context in the past, 10
years and M C D s General fund
budget grew by 64.4 million or
approximately 30% of prison
populations have declined by
14.2%.
The LFC recommendation. Adjust
the personnel budget and the
inmate Management and control
program to fund most of what the
agency asked for both within
iMac and throughout the rest of
the department's budget.
This is accomplished by reducing
the personnel budget to more
closely aligned with FY 23
actuals, accounting for the
$24.5 million, the agency barred
out in FY 23.
The LFC recommendation also
assumes the Legislature approves
the purchase of the northeastern
Mexico Correctional Facility
from the town of Clayton,
resulting in approximately $5.95
million in savings in FY 25.
All told, the LFC recommendation
reduces the corrections
departments overall budget by
9.4 Million, or 2.5% from FY 24.
Including 11.4 million or 3.3%
in general fund.
The executive recommendation
increases the overall budget by
9.4 million, or 2.5%.
Including an increase of 10
million, or 2.7%, from the
general fund Programmatically.
Both recommendations support the
majority of the agency's
requests. As you can see in the
high level in the packet in
front of you. This includes
increases in rates for
healthcare premiums, utilities,
food and least cost as well as
specific programmatic changes,
including increased funding for
transitional living services and
the reentry program programs for
veterans in the Community of
Vendor management program.
And medication assisted
treatment in iMac, as well as
electronic records in the
administrative services
division. And with that, I'll
hand it to Diego.
Thank you, Scott. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee just very briefly.
Scott whenever the difference is
pretty well, but from the
executive perspective, we also
found some vacancy things to
use, but, um, from the executive
Point of view, the LFC
recommendation goes too far by
reducing the general fund
appropriation. Um, a understand
that you know, the agency has
done a substantial amount of
bars moving money recently. Um,
but
You know, the executive believes
that that the better approach to
to doing their budget instead of
reducing it as significantly as
it was in the LSE
recommendation.
Then, um, you know, we could do
some kind of negotiation and
place the money where, um, where
it is more likely to be
expended, Um
Additionally, Mr Chair Scott
mentioned the purchase of the
northeastern New Mexico
Correctional Facility if that is
approved by the Legislature than
the purchase probably won't be
completed until next fiscal
year. And so there will probably
be another couple of months that
the department will have to pay
leases on and, um
In the
Budget that was adopted, they
will not have funding available
to do that.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair. Thank you so much for
letting us, uh, present to you
before you go back to the Senate
floor. So you see, we have a
very quick slide show for you. I
won't go over all of the slides
in the interest of time on that
first one is just basic
information about our FY 24
operating budget. The two
recommendations and then it
shows you the difference between
the two recommendations and
really only thing I want to
point out here is just that the
difference between LFC and the
executive recommendation is 20.8
million, and the
Mm.
As you can see, And I believe
that Scott said it But the
recommendation by the
Legislative Finance Committee is
$11.4 Million General fund below
the 24
budget. So you move on to the
next slide on the history of
appropriations. I'll just
explain to you what this is so
what you see is FY 21 through FY
24 General fund appropriations,
and you see that there's a one
point
2% decrease over that period of
time in our budget, and then in
that next section, what you see
there is the accumulated
statewide compensation that was
money that was given to all
state agencies to do across the
board pay increases for staff
members. But even with that our
budget over this period of time
has increased by just 4.2%. And
then in that second section of
the slide what you see or just
some of our expenses. These were
the items that were very easily
extractable, but definitely do
not include all of our expenses.
And what I really wanted to
point out here was that
With the medical and behavioral
health contracts, the food and
facilities. This is utilities
just for facilities and then
building leases across the
state. Um, you see that there's
a 22.4% increases in increase in
those costs. And, you know, of
course, our agency has a lot of
various costs all kinds of
things like daily life expenses
from
The inmates, clothing and
mattresses to their programming
and vocational training, But it
also includes things like
ballistic vests for probation
officers, stab vest for
correctional officers and all of
those other items. Um, now I'll
just move very quickly into the
differences. Obviously, these
gentlemen went over that
already and like to thank both
of them for their diligence and
hard work and putting together
the recommendations that they
They did some of the items. I
just want to point your
attention to very quickly in
these slides is, um, the first
thing that the executive
supports, um this public safety
compensation increase that's
specific for law enforcement
entities and the Legislative
finance Committee is silent on
that, Um, the next item I want
to bring to your attention is
that the LFC recommendation
reduces salaries and benefits in
Imax by $14.5 Million, which is
Um, millions dollars millions of
dollars below what our agency
needs to operate. Just that fy
24 levels And then finally, um
there's other items of note are
the differences where the
executive funds and expansion of
our partnership with the
university's project Eco. Um,
which is a project that we do
with university for peer
mentorship? I believe that many
of you saw her presentation that
we didn't tell us a couple of
years back, highlighting that
program.
Um and then the executive also
supports things like broadband
accessibility, connectivity
expansion and inmate records
storage. So these next two
slides. I'll just leave them for
you to look over on your own.
When when you feel like you want
to do that, And then finally, in
our last slide, I just want to
draw your attention to this top
portion here. So what you see is
inmate population between FY 21
and FY 24, and I'll be real
here. I mean,
Between FY, 21 and 22. The
population did fall by 354
inmates and then again between
22 and 23. Our population fell
by 147.
But so far in that time period
between 22 and 24, the
population has risen by 253, and
it appears to be on pace to
continue to increase. I will
point out that the sentencing
commission has discussed the
complexity of projecting our
population. Since all of those
oddities that happened during
the pandemic and at last check,
they thought that would they
that we will remain flat.
But if right now is any
indication, and what we've seen,
particularly in Albuquerque,
with holding offenders
accountable, arresting them and
then taking them through the
justice system. It looks like we
may be on pace for an increase
in population and that we may
need to work with the sentencing
Commission to revisit population
projection methodology.
And then so below that section
in the chart. Uh, what you see
is the blue line. It represents
the population and then the
Orange line represents the
General fund in dollars.
And, um
So, as you see between 21 and
23, the department budget and
the inmate population they fell
in pace with each other. And
then in 24. We saw an increase
in inmate population, but we
also saw an increase in the
budget. And so what The concern
is here is that if the
Legislative Finance Committee
recommendation
As it was adopted in the House,
Appropriations and Finance
Committee goes through without
some of your help to do some ad
backs and other ways to possibly
reach a level that is closer to
flat. Then our concern is that
we would be in a situation where
we're seeing a population
increase while at the same time
seeing a budget decrease.
Um, And of course, Mr Chair.
I'll talk to you about those
bars. You know, I do believe
overall that we've been
responsible stewards of public
dollars and we've been able to
manage our increased costs, even
with the decreases to our
general fund appropriations, and
but I do want to acknowledge
that our agency did seek out
bars. We did a $15 million.01 in
late October and then again $7
million in April.
And we did so because we needed
to. We, um
We initially when we took over
the facilities in Santa Rosa in
grants, we thought that we would
need more money in our two
hundred's than what we actually
did. And so later, we rectified
that we had to do that by doing
bars, and then we have fixed
that in this new budget
recommendation, and we've put
the money into the proper
categories where we belong,
where it belongs and where we
will need to spend it for those
Important items that you
mentioned during the last
presentation. Um
So
You know, also, as far as our
revisions are concerned that we
reverted only 8/10 of 1% of our
total budget, and, um, so while
I do understand the thought
process behind the Legislative
Finance Committee
recommendation, I really
honestly believe that our agency
will be very short if the LFC
recommendation is finalized
without any further
consideration. So, Mr Chair and
members thank you for your time.
I really do appreciate you.
Allowing us to speak now this
morning, and I would just ask
that you consider in any way
working with us to reach a
middle ground for our budget by
considering potential add backs
and something that would take us
closer to a flat budget for FY
25. Thank you, Mr Chair will
stand for questions questions
from committee members.
Woods.
Good morning.
Glad to see you again.
Um
You know, there's there's a
little statement one of these
books here.
That kinda makes me think a
little bit.
When? When
You borrow money? Mr. Chairman?
Sorry to leave you out of this
conversation.
Madam secretary When you
borrowing when you bar
You're actually borrowing money
from one line item to another
line at him.
What kind of my question is?
Yeah. Gallup basis. Why don't
why don't you realigned your
budget?
If you're expecting those
expenses are are. You would like
to do those expenses and you
have continually money left and
one line Adam 1010 when we
receive your budget, why don't
you just have it kind of
adjusted?
Instead of
Making the chairman met about
Bari. Mr. Chair, Senator Woods?
Yes, sir. Thank you for that.
And I think that we've done that
now, initially, we, you know,
like I mentioned before, it was
truly a mistake that we made
when we were taking over those
two institutions and we thought
we would need a lot more money
in our two hundred's. But we did
recognize that and so in the
executive recommendation we are
using
Um, some of that money that
vacancy savings to put into
those other categories that
three in the 400 areas so that
we can cover those expenses that
we did cover with the bars and
that we definitely need to be
able to cover to run safe and
operational facilities to me
that that would be a lot
So they're calling accounting.
We have to approve your budget
And you, You know, I can see
that you're going to do a
particular thing. Well, it would
help us a lot when we
appropriate that money.
And
That's all I have, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Rodriguez. Thank you,
Mr Chairman Very quickly,
because I know we've got to go
to the floor. Good morning,
Secretary and staff. Thank you
for your work. Um, I've always
thought you were certainly not
only a tough lady, but, um, you
know, you're doing enormous
amount of work and very
sometimes unstable
circumstances, and I've got to
give you lots of credit to you
and your staff. Thank you. Just
quickly. Um, I know you're
you've provided lots of services
for hepatitis C.
For the inmates and in others in
your organization. Um how is
your funding is that's through
Echo still are used to work with
Echo on the hepatitis C program
that you have
Mr. Chair, Senator Rodriguez. We
do work with Echo. We have two
separate areas that we work with
them. One is in the facility
with the hepatitis work and also
basically public health
education. And then the other
area that we work with. Project
Echo is impairment or ship where
they help work with people who
are leaving facilities and
reached returning to communities
using people with lived
experience. Did you get any
recommended?
I can't talk recommended funding
for that program at this point,
Mr Chair represent Senator Sorry
about that. Senator Rodriguez.
We did seek 1.5 0.1 $0.5 million
appropriation in our reentry
area, but that was not included
by the executive. The
legislative
Finance Committee
recommendation. It was included
by the executive Okay and was
that in addition to your current
balance that you have in your
program that you asked for it,
It's not wiping your program out
because you're not getting the
1.5 Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez. It does not wipe out
the program. We were looking to
expand. The work that we're
doing with the echo a peer
mentorship, and so what it does
is it just prevents us from
expanding.
Okay? Yeah. All right. Thank you
very much. Thank Mr Chair Like
an anxious to tell us something
was that in their request, mr
Chair, So in the LFC
recommendation, if you look at
the footnotes for the high level
that we provided, Um the LFC did
not recommend the $1.5 million
for peer support workers because
it was the belief of the
committee that funding should be
available through HST through
Medicaid.
To allow for those same programs
to move forward and expand
without having to add to the
General fund budget for that
program.
Excuse me, Okay? Yeah, Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chairman Scott.
But let me ask this triggered a
question for me because what you
said, because the LFC believes
that HST should included in
their Medicaid requests. Is that
kind of what you meant, Madam
Chair? Yes. Okay. Mr. Chair,
Senator Rodriguez. Chairman
Scott. Is that mean that anyone
is working with HST to ensure
that that happens, Mr Chair left
without any expansion.
Mr. Chair. Senator Rodriguez?
Yes, our analysts for H S D. S
working with the Correction
department and with LFC staff to
figure out how we can get this
included in the FY 25 budget. Um
and again, we can get more
information on that and get back
to you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, I
guess, um
I mean, if you're giving bar
authority
And this is a shell game that
not only maybe you wasn't played
out in necessity, but other
agencies play the shell game
with us and say, I'm gonna
borrow out this money before the
end of the year. Versions come
so I can expand it and say,
Well, I didn't revert but 0.18
of my percent of my budget.
Yeah.
You just got it right. It's a
game that we we shouldn't play
with agencies or the
Legislature, right?
Find this correctly fund this in
the right places, right?
But that
That goes partly to
You know?
There's a change that that's cap
and over the last couple of
years we've had money changing
in agencies have entrenched
themselves in playing this game
of moving money and moving
money.
It doesn't really work out for
either one of us at the end.
We don't put it where you want
it.
You don't use it where we
appropriate it and you get this
bar authority in it, and it's
it's getting dangerous,
especially
The growth of our budget.
Mhm and making adjustments as
money flattens out over the next
couple of years, and we're gonna
start tightening some control
center compost. She had a
question. Thank you very much.
Mr Chairman just very quickly
and Madam Secretary if we can go
out and meet after for a few
minutes
Couple of things, of course to
talk about. Maybe the $15
million that needs to be
restored. The other part would
be what about a prerelease
facility? Let's say like in
Santa Rosa, where what we do is
we take the inmates when they're
getting ready to be released so
that we can return them back to
their communities and their
families in such a way so that
they're going to continue to go
ahead and be if you will.
Good stewards and good citizens
of their communities. But that's
just a part of an idea. Mr
Chair. I don't have any
questions. I just would like to
go and visit with the secretary
can agree with Senator if it's
program program, all right.
Prerelease programming project
Echo that's like a fancy zoom
meeting for someone to sit face
to face. And does it really
work? I mean, at the end of the
day, do you really need to be
face to face with that person to
get a better read right?
And see what their needs really
are. I don't think we get that
electronically because we could
put you on zoom and you can not
get the same presentation you've
got today. Mr Chair if I may,
Uh, project echo in the
facilities, the one that covers
health public health issues.
That one is over Zoom because it
includes all of our facilities,
but the pyramid ownership is a
face to face one on one
interaction.
Good. It's good to hear.
Okay. Thank you.
We're going to give the state
police some guys go times and go
work on. I 40
From Gallup to Albuquerque. I
thought I'd been pretty good
friend of state police, but I
drive that road a couple of
times this year and
I sure see a lot of trucks in
