about Senate Bill 3.
Uh, I will certainly begin, Mr.
Chair, and I know Senator
Scherer is on his way up.
Um, I was just visiting with Mr.
Avila Senate Bill 3 is the
result of a collaborative
discussion with the three
branches of government in a way
I'm just not.
Really seen. it doesn't happen
very often, but, um, with the
work.
Done in this committee. I know
you've had several hearings, Mr.
Chair. Uh we're here to present.
Um
The Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3,
it's 0.230522.5, probably we
need a motion just to put this.
Do not pass on Senate Bill 3 and
put this into play for
discussion.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I'll move that
we do not pass Senate Bill 3 and
we do um
Move to discuss Senate Bill 3's
substitute for purposes of
discussion.
Or something like that.
I move a do not pass on Senate
Bill 3 and they do pass on
Senate Bill 3's Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 3 for discussion purposes.
Thank you. Can you, uh, Senator,
what, what tracking number do
you have so we make sure we have
that, uh, 0230522.5. Perfect. We
got great, Mr. Chair and perfect
timing, Senator Sheer is here. I
just said, Senator Sheer, that
this is a pretty unique uh piece
of legislation that's had all
three branches of government
working together and it's had a
lot of input and I think we've
got a product here that uh is
gonna really help in the
behavioral health front. We've
called this the guardrails and
ability bill and I appreciate
your, you scheduling this first.
I think this bill really is the
key to the whole package and
without it, uh,
We'd have lots of trouble, uh,
because again, putting in a
process to set up regions,
putting in accountability, I
would send a Bill 3 does is uh
what's important. Uh, the
courts, um, are gonna play a
critical role in this process,
uh, something that they have
been doing now.
Uh, this past special session,
we appropriated $3 million to
the courts for pilot programs or
uh AOT administrative.
Uh, assisted outpatient
treatments and criminal
competency and one of the things
that I have been absolutely
Thrilled to see is the work that
the courts did between the
special session and us coming
into session on these pilots,
uh, the first judicial district
here in Santa Fe, Rio Reba and
Los Alamos kicked off a new AOT
program, uh, the 2nd week of the
session.
That took a whole bunch of
collaborative work between the
courts, the local governments,
and the providers and really
showed us that they have a
unique ability to be able to
convene and do that work.
Uh, so what's different in the
sub, uh, there's a new
behavioral health executive
committee to serve as the final
arbiter of regional plans. I
think that's something this
committee wanted to see. I think
that actually is a really good
move, uh, because again, the
courts and the original bill
we're going to do that. The
courts will still play an
absolutely critical role uh in
doing the sequential intercept
mapping, which is figuring out
exactly what these uh regions
are going to do with their
plans, but having
an oversight role that involves
the executive and the key uh
cabinet secretaries that are
involved in behavioral health
and Medicaid, which plays such a
big part of this. Uh, I think is
a good step and I know Senator
Steinborn, you just walked in,
but that, that is incorporated,
that's in the new section 3 on
page 4, line 6.
So what else does this bill do,
um, one of the things that we
spent a lot of time in the
health committee uh was focusing
on.
The behavioral health
stakeholders, that's on page 2.
There's been a lot of work on
that to figure out how to make
that broad enough without having
to list every specific group,
but I think we have the
different voices in there, um,
and so.
That's the general framework for
what this bill does, and I think
provides a a really good
oversight for then uh the
recurring money coming out of
Senate Bill 1 and the
non-recurring $200 million
investment in behavioral health
out of Senate Bill 2. I'll just
say one final thing and then
yield to Senator share, um.
It is absolutely critical as we
talk about public safety and
passing public safety bills that
deal with
Uh, those that have competency
issues on houses, those that are
pulled into the criminal system,
um.
That as those bills pass, we
have the support network, the
behavioral health support
network in place to be able to
get those folks into treatment.
We can pass all the bills in the
world, but if we don't have the
system in place, it's not gonna
work, so this, this bill and
this package I think is a huge
step in moving forward from, you
know, really the dismantling of
the behavioral health system 10
years ago. And so I'm very uh
Uh, encouraged by where we are
on this, and I would yield to
Senator share.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
First
Without this particular bill, I
would not have signed on to this
package at all.
Um, just because it seemed to be
a billion dollars.
That can be squandered anywhere
anyway, but with the guard
rails, I think that this, this
makes this, this focuses this
and does what we want to do.
And what we want to do is help
New Mexicans and so there's been
some, some pushback, at least
from my side of the aisle, uh,
well, there's no real guides,
there's nothing measurably, you
know, we, we need step by step
what's going to happen.
And I don't disagree with that.
But what this does, these guard
rails is set it up so that the
regions.
can build that.
And they, and they get to build
the guidelines that are right
for that region. So San Juan
County has different issues than
Union County, which is different
than Lee County.
And so that's why a set of rules
you're gonna do this.
Doesn't work.
Because
were different.
OK? And so that's, uh, to me,
that's the biggest part of this,
and AOC well another thing was,
oh, they don't know how to do
this.
OK.
But AOC has a couple of valuable
portions of this.
One
They're in the districts that
are involved, OK, so it's not
AOC from Santa Fe that's doing
it. It's San Juan County doing
it versus the districts, uh,
anywhere else in the state.
So they're they're the.
Experts in their area.
But to me, the biggest part is
administrations change.
And that's why we're here today
because administrations changed
and things happened.
Because only the executive had
any authority.
We change
Um
And so there can be other things
going on. So we've accounted for
that change.
But AOC
Changes slower.
And so we have some continuity
in what's going on, so we're not
going down a particular path and
all of a sudden taking a hard
right or hard left because we
have a new governor.
Or a new chair of health and
public affairs Committee or
whatever.
So I think that that's an
important part.
Of, of keeping us on track.
As Senator Wirth pointed out,
AOC is not the ultimate.
arbitrator of this, we now have
a separate one, but because this
includes all three branches of
government.
Um
Ultimately, we as the
appropriators.
Kind of get the final say.
And that's appropriate.
The governor still has.
Veto power, which is
appropriate for all of us are
playing in who's the final, uh,
you know, if something goes way
uh uh amiss.
There's a lot of people that can
step in and say, whoa, don't do
that.
But there's also a lot of people
who can say, OK, now we have to
collaborate, we have to at least
talk to each other every once in
a while.
Because, well, we don't.
So now we have to talk to each
other every once in a while to
make sure that this big package
is, is there.
One of the reasons that AOC was
involved was because an awful
lot of the people that are in
need of behavioral health, show
up in our court system.
They know, they're there, and
they show up repeatedly.
And so at this point we say, OK,
so what can we do now to help
this group of people?
Most of them are not, you know,
serious criminals, yes, they may
be involved in some crime, but
they're not, they're not the
murderers.
And so how do we help them? How
do we get them on the right
path?
But because we've included a
bunch of other people.
You also get to take the people
that aren't involved in the
court system and say, OK, how do
we help them as well?
Because it's not just the
courts.
So with that, I think, I think
that this
These guard rails.
Make this work.
And without these guardrails.
I don't think it works.
So that's why this is important,
Bill.
Just Mr. Chair, one thing I want
to publicly thank, uh,
Mr. Avila, Adrian Avila for all
the work that he has done and of
coordinating doing these
meetings, and he's certainly
here to answer any technical
questions that come up, but
again, this is a big, big lift
and
Getting the input of all the
different stakeholders, he
really took the lead on that. I
just want to publicly thank you.
OK, we're gonna go to the
audience real quick and then we.
Go to discussion purposes on the
substitute, and then we'll have
to adopt the substitute.
So, let's go in the audience,
I'll take 3 and support, 3 in.
Against, just come on up.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main
speaking on behalf of the League
of Women Voters of New Mexico
and the American Association of
University Women, and I think
this is a beautiful, uh, that we
have coordination.
Um, among the branches of
government and working on this,
and I think this is really gonna
be an investment in New Mexico.
We have seen so much, uh, need
for behavioral health services,
and so I, I congratulate the
sponsors and the um everybody
who's worked on this bill, and I
urge you to support it. Thank
you.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
just, I'm Carrier Mijo, I'm the
cabinet secretary of the
Healthcare Authority, and I'd
like to start by saying that I'm
really proud of working in a
state, um, that is willing to
play so much emphasis and focus
on our behavioral health system
and trying to fix it together.
These are major investments, uh,
that I think will greatly
improve the health and
well-being of New Mexicans. I'd
like to also echo the
appreciation to the leaders at
the table today.
And especially to Mr. Avila, who
has worked really hard with us,
uh, to make sure that the bill
uh incorporates and addresses
some of our concerns and
feedback, um, up until last
night, so working with that. So
we stand in support of the bill.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, I'm Gina De
Blasi, secretary designate of
the Department of Health first,
just thank you for prioritizing
this. It's such an important
issue for the state. Thank you,
Adrian. We really appreciate the
collaboration and the
willingness to work together on
this important package and um
with that what I'll say is we
really want this to work, and we
know you do as well, so we're
committed to be there and
support. Thank you.
You may say your speech for you,
JD.
No, no, Mr. Chairman, I've got
it. I'd rather hear from Doctor
Richards.
That must be Doctor Richards.
I'll be brief. Uh, good morning,
JD Bullington with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
uh, supporting this bill and
also Senate Bill 1 and 2. This
bill's the roadmap for the other
bills that are going to be
coming before you to lay out how
our core system's gonna oversee
the establishment of the
behavior healthcare regions.
It's a large task, but this bill
ensures the best data is made
available and that the key
stakeholders have a seat at the
table as the plans are developed
and rolled out.
The very smart approach is to
identify the gaps in providing
behavioral health services and
then to identify the top 5
actions that need to be taken to
close those gaps. Thank you.
Yeah.
We're gonna end with Doctor
Richards there.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
honorable members of the
committee, I'm Mike Richards,
the executive vice president of
the UNM Health Sciences Center,
and we're here today to offer
our strong support and gratitude
for this bill, um, as one of the
identified key stakeholders and
one of the key providers of
these services, we appreciate
the investment that you're
making to help identify and
create services to ensure that,
that we have the safest,
healthiest communities in New
Mexico. Thank you, sir.
Go to Zoom. Is there anybody in
support, OK, to one minute a
piece because we can get through
them.
Good morning, Mr. S. members of
the committee, I'm Dorothy
Seaton representing more than
560 members of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus. I'm a
retired Army officer, a former
clinical supervisor and licensed
chemical dependency counselor.
I'm also the child of an
alcoholic raised in a time and
place where there were no
addiction services. My dad died
at age 55, younger than many of
you in the committee room.
There's a better option than
death jails and hospital
emergency rooms.
The Veterans and military
families caucus supports all
three of these bills in the
package, because access to
behavioral health programs in
New Mexico is a critical issue.
Not all veterans get VA health
care and their families do not
as well. They need access to
programs and support in their
communities.
Because of the traumas
experienced during service by
members of uh significant number
of veterans. The incidence of
behavioral health issues is
higher than the general
population.
I thank the sponsors for the
bill, the thoughtful approach,
and I thank you for allowing me
to testify. We ask for your yes
vote.
You there, Gabrielle?
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich, and
I am the executive director of
Nami New Mexico. Nami New Mexico
is thrilled as an organization
to stand in support of this
bill. We are very excited to see
the de-siloing effect that this
bill is going to have
specifically because we see lots
of efforts happening across the
state of New Mexico, but they're
happening in isolation from one
another, and so the idea of a
centralized accountability
source for funds in the state of
New Mex
Mexico is, I, I, we think it
will be life changing. So thank
you so much for supporting this
bill and uh have a great, have a
great morning.
Thank you. Anybody in opposition
in the room? Anybody on Zoom?
It
need a motion to
We're still in discussion
purpose for the Senate bill
substitute for Senate Bill 3.
And so questions on the
substitute.
The
Uh thank you, chair. I don't
actually have any questions. I
just want to acknowledge that,
um, again, all the work and
everyone's done a wonderful job
on this, and I'm so glad to see
this bipartisan and this unity
work being done by our two
leaders in the Senate, um, on
section 3 pages 4 and 5 and the
substitute I had brought up
quite a fit bit of uh questions
and, and uh thoughts yesterday
on, you know, how do we
How do we, uh, provide some
governance here. How do we make
sure that the trains continue to
line up on time as they keep
moving on time and so I'm really
appreciative that the sponsors
agreed to, and I think I'm
actually a co-sponsor of this
also, but uh that that you
agreed to the behavioral health
executive Committee, um.
My question then, chair and
sponsors is.
And I think, Cherry, you might
have mentioned this yesterday as
well, and that is uh we don't
want the, we don't want
designees running this executive
committee. Are there, is there
an option for a designee with
all of these executives, um,
being a part of this discussion
or how, how did you address
that?
Uh, so Mr. Chair and Senator
Padilla, the designees are
removed. I think it's really
important that the primary
players are part of this and I
just elevates the importance and
so I think that was a good.
Catch and when it was brought to
my attention, we just said take
him out.
Excellent, thank you, because
you're right. I think we need
fast action on this, and I think
that you, you run the risk of
having designees not being able
to make decisions for the person
they're representing. So thank
you for doing that. And then on
page 5, lines 3 through 5 there.
um, I think that the project
manager role is gonna be
just
extremely vital to making this
work, you know, again, uh,
remain focused, um.
Can you just talk a little bit
about how would you envision
that working because that that
is going to be a very senior
role in this process.
Where is that person going to
report and who, who um is going
to oversee this, that particular
role.
I have Mr. Avila address the
specifics.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator for the,
so I actually talked to uh
Secretary Armijo last night in
regards to this and one of the
changes you'll see inenate Bill
2 is including an appropriation
for the current fiscal year to
get the ball rolling, to ensure
they're able to have the
management.
Um, initially, she's envisioning
probably getting a contractor to
get the ball rolling, but
eventually maybe bringing it
in-house through the growth
funds that would kick in for the
next 3 years.
OK. All right, thank you, chair.
I really appreciate you doing
that because I was having a
really hard time with how is all
this going to get done, when's
it going to start, who's going
to keep it on track, and this
absolutely does it. So thank you
for including it. Thanks, Chair.
Senator Steinor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, thank you all for putting
on the bill. I, I appreciate
you.
You're adding a section with
project management thought that
was a big
big gap, um.
Yeah, you know, whoever you hire
for this project management
role, it's really.
I mean, that's gonna be a a
really big job. I, I know
taining like the 50 year water
plans.
You know, now we're requiring
regional behavioral health
plans. I think these regions are
going to need a lot of support
and sometimes some tough love
and probably some expertise in
saying, here's what our data
says about your region and
brainstorming real
collaboration. It's, it's much
more of a hands-on expert kind
of a job as it seems to me to do
it well than just somebody who's
brought on to convene calls and
meetings and move paper around
and do make work, but
Um, rather somebody who's going
to help create product that can
be deployable. So I just say
that for you all, but for the
secretary as well. I mean, um,
Hopefully, we choose wisely, we
choose somebody who's actually
got the power, even if it is a
consultant. I mean he's got the
power to reach in all the
agencies to actually
Pull things together and be a
collaborative part of creating
these regional plans, I think
they're going to be needed. I
think that will be the reality.
I could be wrong.
And then, you know, work with
the executive committee to move
the ball down the field. So I
hope we choose that person
wisely because that would be a
crucial. That's all I have
though, and I look forward to
seeing its implementation that
could work, everyone. Thank you.
In there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks, Adrian, for all the
work. I, I know how hard you've
worked on this, um, I, I've just
got some.
The major concerns, um,
Through some of the testimony,
where does the AOC exactly
stand?
When we visited with them, it
just didn't seem like they were
on, on board yet, they weren't
ready for it, um.
They didn't understand the
process it was gonna take, how
many people are we're gonna have
to hire? I mean this is a huge
undertaking, 200 million.
And I just feel like we're
rushing into this.
Without having a lot of answers.
So Mr. Chair and and Senator, I
know we've got uh
Director of AOC here, but I also
just want to say that I have
been in very close communication
with both the Chief Justice and
the governor, and we had a
meeting Monday morning uh where
again you had the three branches
of government and the Chief
Justice has been clear that this
is a policy decision and we're
making that policy decision, but
they have a willingness to step
up and do this. And I think part
of that comes out of the fact
that they are the front line.
And I appreciated and I have
appreciated uh Justice Zamora.
Who,
when she was on the magistrate
court.
Kind of talked about seeing the
same folks over and over again
coming in having to be dismissed
coming right back in and she was
instrumental in setting up the
whole discussion of criminal
competency and we're going to
see that in the public safety
package that's coming in the
other direction. And so in the
special session, we specifically
appropriated $3 million for
these pilot.
Projects
Or assisted outpatient treatment
and criminal competency which
necessarily put the court in a
role of.
Doing MOUs with local
governments with providers and
building this up from the ground
and we've had testimony from the
Chief Justice about those pilot
projects and the success that
that's happened doing that and
again, I'll let Carl speak
specifically, but as I sit here
today.
I mean, the idea that the courts
Aren't willing to do this, I
think needs to be countered and
he can certainly address on
behalf of AOC I just wanted to
let you know specifically that
those conversations have been
happening and again what's
unique about this bill is you've
got all three branches of
government and of all working
together.
To collaborate and make it work.
So let me yield to, so, so, Mr.
Chair, so
Um, Senator, you're saying that
the governor's on board with
this.
Mr. Chair, I'm saying that the
article in the journal today.
Basically stated and quoted from
the governor a week ago.
Uh, and so after the meeting on
Monday morning, yes, I think it
is fair to say, and I'm willing
to say it, that
The three branches together kind
of walked out of that meeting
with some additional tweaks that
were needed. Those have
happened. You heard her cabinet
secretary is here today all
testifying in support.
Again, I think we can represent
and I'll let, I'll let
Uh, Carl, speak on behalf of
AOC, but again, I can certainly
represent that in the
communications and conversations
with the governor. Yes, she did
have.
You know, concerns potentially,
but we've worked through those
and I think the product that
we're presenting in this
substitute.
really addresses the issues that
and the concerns that were
raised and the point that
Senator Sheer made is, is
incredibly important.
Having AOC in the courts in this
formative stage upfront.
Uh, I've been here long enough,
Senator She Sher has been here
long enough to see the roller
coaster that we go on when
administrations change.
It is too important to have
stability here and that's what
the courts bring and that's why
they're such an important piece
of this. I'll yield to Mr. Rice.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
uh, so yes, we want to be a
willing partner here with the
legislature and take on the role
that you're giving us. Um, it is
a big lift for us, but we know
this is a big problem and it's
going to take serious people
bringing serious effort.
Um, to try to move the needle
here and
As you said yesterday, Mr.
Chair, we just have to try in
the face of these big problems.
Um, so we're, we're willing to
partner um with the in the role
that you're giving us and and do
that. I think this, um,
As the bill has evolved here,
it, it's kind of clarified our
role is that sort of convener,
um, and uh that's a, that's a
role that we're
Very comfortable with, right?
That's something that we do um
already in a number of levels.
So I think that's an appropriate
role for us and and when we want
to take on.
And just briefly, I want to say
one more thing that I think is
important, especially speaking
to you all as the finance
committee.
It is critical that the
different entities that are
stepping up here, whether
they're project managers or the
courts have the resources to be
able to do these jobs.
And one of the commitments that
I made to the Chief Justice
because they've agreed to take
this on. This isn't part of
their normal base budget.
So we need to make sure, I think
Senate Bill 2 that you're going
to hear in a minute has got
provisions in there to make sure
they've got the resources to be
able to do this and we're not
asking them to take money out of
their current.
Budget to be able to do these
functions.
So, Mr. Chair.
How many positions are you gonna
create?
With the bill that you have in
front of us, how, how many
positions is this gonna create?
Uh, Mr. Chairson I when here,
uh, the short answer is we don't
yet know exactly the number
because we don't know the final
version of the bill. Um, it's
going to require, um, some work.
We are already engaged in the um
Sims mapping uh on a smaller
scale, so we'll need to bring
that to a bigger scale, um, that
will likely involve a mix of
contractors and a couple of
staff, I think we'll start with
likely 3 staff and then kind of
see where we, where we where our
capacity is and where the need
is.
From there, it's going to
require some really close, um,
coordination with the healthcare
authority, um, and then also our
local partners, so I think.
We're going to dive right in,
but then also be real cautious
about
You know, we don't want to build
some giant administrative
structure either.
And Mr. Chair, I
There there's nobody on this
panel that we all know we need
to address this.
I, my
My point is, I just feel like
we're, we're jumping into this.
We just like you just said, we
don't know yet.
And we have so many agencies
involved.
We, we, Adrian, thank you, we
built in that oversight.
You know, part of it.
That that we want, but I still,
I'm really having a hard time
understanding. So for example,
how, how many agencies already
are working on behavioral
health.
Are we overlapping?
Or
You know, I just feel like we're
throwing a lot of money on, on
something we're
We're gonna pass this and not
know exactly how it's gonna
work.
And, and that's
The old coaching me, I, I like
to know the game plan before we
go in and I don't feel like we
have that.
So
a room near.
It's because there's
differences. It's because San
Juan County is different than
Lee County.
And the problems that we have in
San Juan County are different
than the problems in Lee County.
And so I know people are talking
about the game plan.
The difference is there's going
to be multiple game plans,
because there's multiple.
Things that are happening.
Uh, is there overlap? Well.
This corrects the overlap. Yes,
there's multiple people doing
things today, none of them
effective. That's why we have
such a huge problem.
But for the game plan, it's
going to be specific for each
district.
And that's why it it you can't
say this is what we're gonna do
because Lee County is not San
Juan County.
And so from that perspective,
Uh, I also want to point to you
on page 5, line 17, AOC is not
driving this train. They
coordinate regional meetings.
That's what they're doing.
They're not in charge of
The program, they coordinate
regional meetings and then all
the other stakeholders come and
so again the stakeholders.
For San Juan County and the
stakeholder for some of them may
be the same, some of the issues
may be the same, but they could
also be very different.
And so the first step of this.
is to develop the game plan.
It's right for the region.
And so that's why.
None of us are smart enough to
say, or we would have done it
already 10 years ago.
Uh, to say this is the plan.
A lot of people have had plans.
None of them have worked.
None of them for the last 10
years before that.
And that's why our problem keeps
getting bigger and bigger and
bigger. So in this case we've
tried to narrow it down, OK,
what is, what is Aztec High
School capable of doing what
they need to do versus Artesia
High School capable of doing
what they need to do.
not the same team.
Playing in the same place.
So that's, that's why I think
this, this set up.
With AOC coordinating regional
meetings.
Being in charge.
is simply to help us develop
that game plan that's
appropriate for each district.
All right, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
One of the other things I wanted
to bring up is
The big movement around the
state right now is the crisis
triage centers.
Which I'm, I'm very in support
of.
And I don't, I don't see how
we're going to coordinate with
that.
Um
As, as most of you know, and I
know Senator Sher knows leader
share knows that.
Um, I worked really hard on the
triage triage center in in
Farmington, and I think we're
very close on it.
But
Again, it, it's a lot of money
and I want to make sure that
we're not trying all to do the
same thing.
A different way.
And I feel like this bill is
It's just kind of guess. I, I
don't know how to say it, we're
just kind of guessing at what
the result is going to be.
So Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier,
let me just
And frame it and then have
Adrian speak about the specifics
because I agree with you. I also
believe those.
Crisis triage is a critical
component of this.
One of the comments you heard in
the testimony that I think is so
important from those first
there's no one here in
opposition.
Given all the different folks
that have a stake in this,
that's a pretty extraordinary
statement itself.
But I, I noted and I wrote down
the siloing.
That's the real issue. There is
an accountability that's being
created here that just hasn't
existed in this arena that's
super important.
And so this will create the
structure and just like Senator
Sheer said for your region,
which may well be based on the
court.
Whichever district is up there
or the counties, well, that'll
get set up and then within that
region will be the discussion of
what that plan's gonna look
like, which definitely can
include
The crisis triage piece of it
and the funding is in Senate
bill too to make that happen. So
let me have Adrian walk through
exactly what that would look
like in in San Juan County
because I think if you start
from a
You're looking for some
And I get that. I need to know
how this is going to work and I
think Senator Sheer's right,
it's hard when you're looking at
the big picture and all these
different pieces, but if you
build it from the bottom up, I
think it'll it'll make more
sense as to how it's going to
happen in San Juan.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
so when we're thinking of these
plans, right?
The
Healthcare authority is gonna
provide kind of a breakdown of
like, this is what we know so
far about every county, every
region of the state to those
local stakeholders. And in those
local stakeholders will bring in
and address other things and
bring up other assets that exist
in the area. So you brought up
the crisis triage center.
You know, you, you would know
that there's one in San Juan
County, O stakeholders in San
Juan County would know that
healthcare authority may know if
they're billing with them, but
if it's some type of small
entity that doesn't have a state
contract.
That's still an asset.
Right? So when you're convening
everyone at the table that's
local, you're really capturing a
full sense and a real picture of
what's available now.
And
What capacity can be built on
top of this existing
infrastructure.
Right? And that's the key,
because if you know your assets,
you know your gaps, you know
where you're trying to get to.
Then you can identify the key
players in your plans of who's
gonna be responsible for what
part? So the crisis triage
center might need to expand a
few more beds.
That's going to require some
infrastructure money to, you
know, build out a little bit.
That money's in Senate bill too.
However, the billing of the
services is covered through
Medicaid.
Right?
And if that's center serves a
population that isn't covered by
Medicaid.
That money's covered in Seville
too. So you heard earlier
testimony in regards to
veterans.
Right? If a veteran isn't on
Medicaid, for example, and they
don't get VA benefits.
Then
There's that pot of money.
That's a gap that would be
identified at that local level.
So
This framework of Senate Bill 3
allows that flexibility. And
that's why it's a little bit
more broad in general.
But it's very much
Supplemental and builds on what
exists today. It's not meant to
replace. It's not meant to
supplant, it's very much
building on the strengths of a
region.
To address the gaps.
Miss
I, I also want on page 8.
Of the substitute.
Um, if you start on line 12, I
mean there's G starts on line 9,
but, uh, line 12 says, uh,
behavioral health region to
provide a written report to the
legislature and judicial and
executive branches then it lists
uh several things here, the
status of the implement
implementation of each plan
available data, uh, public
feedback, uniform responses uh
to data requests list of
qualified and certified
behavioral health.
services
Service providers. So, I think
that that includes the San Juan.
Um
triage center, OK.
Um, but so when you're talking
about building the plan.
Well, there it is.
But it's for San Juan County.
It's not for the rest of the
state.
So there is a plan here.
But it's certainly
I think very much.
Involves
San Juan triage Center.
Very much so.
But we're not leaving them out.
We're not siloing them, they're
brought in specifically.
Mr. Cha, thank, thank you. um,
and I do, I want to thank all of
you for coming and defending
today, and uh it's just, it's
something that's very close to
my heart and I, I just, I really
wanna make sure that we get this
right. I, I don't want to be
back here in 2 years going, OK,
we, we totally
Mess this up.
We're gonna have tweaks. I, I
understand that.
But I, I don't want it to be
just a total flop, and so, so
that's my point of view, that's
kind of where I'm coming from. I
appreciate the uh patience of
the, of the committee and thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
actually echo some of um Senator
Linnier's concerns. Um, I
actually coached leaders around
this state through what feels
very nebulous for most business
owners, navigating the ins and
outs of what it means to be in
business in New Mexico. So in a
way, I'm very comfortable with
the fact that this feels a
little nebulous. I'm OK with
that, but
I will refer to my colleague
here, it
I'm concerned that we don't have
enough detail and it, it feels
rushed because this is a massive
undertaking. And I thank you for
all the work you've done here.
Um, I know the committee, we've
done a lot of work too, giving
our input of what we would like
to see, um,
And most importantly, I think
New Mexicans are watching.
Our everyone that lives in this
state is watching and saying, we
know we have to have a solution
for everyone. Is this the
perfect solution? I don't know
that it is, but it appears that
at least there's some groundwork
here that we can all work from.
But I say again,
New Mexicans are watching.
They're expecting us to deliver.
finally deliver for everyone,
the people that will get these
services for the people that are
working in these organizations.
We need results as a state we
have to have it. This is a
foundational issue to everyone
that lives here. And I do have
an additional question for you,
which is what's the target
population in our children, um,
and the challenges we have with
the welfare of the children in
the state of New Mexico, are
they a part of what we're
putting.
together here.
Thank you.
So, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna let Mr.
Ivala address because they had
the youth have been added in.
That was one of the concerns
that was raised and he can walk
through exactly what the
target is.
And the page and line number.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Tobias,
and so on page 2, subsection C
on online 10, 1 of the
behavioral stakeholders that
will be involved in most of
these meetings is the CYFD
department and then online 15 um
school districts within the
region are also included as a
stakeholder. So the behavioral
health of the children is going
to have to be considered within
that region as well. And part of
Senate Bill 2 appropriates money
to PED and DOH to be able to.
address some of these concerns
in relation to um behavioral
health for, for kids in schools.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So what
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Golly
I, I think it's very unique.
That
The legislature.
is now assigning things.
For the 3rd
Legislate the 3rd piece of
government to do.
That
It's very unique. It's, it's
something that
Uh
I hope that they don't have to
share in the
I don't know how to even say it,
the
Culture
That we see advertised every day
on TV.
But more lawsuits. I can, I can
settle for you. I can bring you
millions of dollars, so now
we're gonna send them a task
that's gonna lead them wide
open.
lawsuits too.
In a position like that.
Senator and Miss Cha Senator.
Who
Would be the judge.
To oversee a lawsuit against
AOC.
And who would all that be
contract labor?
I mean
How would that work if AOC's
sued as in a.
And a suit much like we see
advertised every day on TV.
Uh, I can do things for you.
Explain that piece to me.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, I, I
really appreciate this line of
questioning. This
These kind of thoughts about
what is our correct role in the
judicial branch.
Is, is what this ask.
From the legislature is, is it
consistent with our
constitutional role.
And our primary function to, you
know, hear and decide cases. And
that's why I really appreciate
our sponsors, Mr. Avila and the
chair really working to make
sure that our role
is really well defined here as
the conveners and that we're not
the folks really deciding.
Um, any of this, our job is to
get folks together and to kind
of do the survey.
I agree that there is
You know, it, it, if
Somebody comes out of this and
sues us, we're going to have to
look at
That
You know, in, in, um.
You know, in the facts of that
situation.
We're already an employer,
right? So it already happens
that every once in a while, um,
folks sue us, it happens in in
federal court, typically.
Um
Typically those don't uh go too
far, um.
And we just kind of have to see
what happens when that happens,
but I think our limited role
here.
Is, is the primary protection.
This year that.
We, we assign this to many.
Agencies where we expect them to
be both the puncher and the
protector, CYFD.
Has, has got that line all the
time, uh, we would pick up a
youth and all of a sudden, uh,
the court goes to CYFD to
decide.
What to do.
And so now I explain how the
courts, how that's going to
change with the courts now.
Now that you are you gonna
actually
Change the law so that you can
actually send it someone.
To behavior or health.
Um
can't say institution. What can
I say? Um,
You can say anything you want
that words you're looking for,
OK,
Mr. Chair.
So, so, Mr. Chair, um, currently
there are laws that deal with
Civil commitments.
Uh, there's criminal competency
laws and and we're going to see
the centerpiece to the public
safety package that's coming
over, uh, is a revision to the
criminal competency.
Uh, laws which include some
additional diversions instead of
just dismissing the same folks
that are over and over coming
in. How do we get them diverted
into something that can help
them.
Which is what this bill is
doing. So there is a certainly a
connection here and
I would just know that it was
the court.
And justice Zamora, who really
led the
Discussion about the need to
update our criminal competency
statute, which hadn't been
looked at in 30 years.
And so there was a working group
and
Then out of that came Chair
Chandler's.
Revised bill which I'm happy to
report seems to have
You know, buy in, and we're
gonna see that coming over, uh,
if when these cross over.
So there's definitely an an
interconnection.
Uh, but we've also, this isn't
completely new, and I just want
to reiterate.
Uh, in the assisted outpatient
treatment statute.
Uh, which Senator Pain buried in
2016, I think.
We were here, and that was a
tricky one. That was a really
tricky one, but we asked the
court to step into this actual,
the same rules this convener
role and to facilitate and put
together.
an MOU uh with the local
government with
With the providers in that
district.
And just this special session.
The pilot projects that we
passed and the $3 million went
for exactly that.
And I think it's the success and
it's the
The
Kind of momentum that's been
building.
That leads to this next step,
which is a continuation of
what's been, what's been
happening. So I mean they are
all interconnected. It's not
brand new but it's definitely an
expansion of what we're asking
them to do. So I, I do. I think
it's it's a spot on question.
In this chair and senator.
You hit on a very fine point
there.
That we constantly pass laws up
here directing agencies to do
something, mostly funding.
Those processes and whether they
do it is kind of their own damn
will.
And the will of the executive
that something is done, it's not
the legislative will, it is and
it's funny.
Often it goes to court when
they're sued and the judges has
to determine what the
legislative intent was, and it's
always
As, as a poor old dirt farmer,
the chair.
It's an amazing process that we
get.
Government does anything.
Um
We have directions.
But Agencies and executives go.
Whatever the hell direction they
want to go, and then on courts
interpret.
How they interpret.
It's, it's beyond comprehension
at times to me.
How this this process works, but
I have, I guess one problem I
have is the problem.
Of punishment and protection.
Being kind of put under the
AOC
Which you may have right now if
we passed a law in 2016, and we
decided
This year to fund it.
In a special session or last
year, so it's been on the books
and the courts hadn't done a
damn thing about it.
And now we're gonna put
something else on the books and
say, now you do something this
time.
I'm having troubles. I'm having,
I'm having trouble buying, Mr.
Chair. Um.
Do I think there's a behavioral
health problem? Yes, I do.
Do I think this is direction.
You're gonna have to convince
me.
Because
We're taking an agency that that
maybe this was her job all along
and tell them, well now you up
your game, I don't know.
But
They had the.
They have a a worry about their
expertise, you're saying all
word is going to go in here and,
and suggest you guys get
together and
And, you know, uh, we know that
you, uh, we know that CYFD has
expertise. We know the
healthcare departments got
expertise, we know, uh.
The health.
Has expertise, we know all of
this stuff and, and you guys get
together and we're gonna do
regional stuff and yeah, there's
a regional group in my area for
5 counties, which don't match
your apps.
And
Questions that
Because everything's up in the
air.
I wish that we would have had
this.
More thought out in the interim
and brought forward to a regular
process.
That we tried to start new
program we, we do a lot of, and
I know there's probably a lot of
brains put into this already,
but
You know, when you start talking
about finance and stuff, well,
There should have been something
put in HB 2 on that's a long
time ago, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK.
So, uh, Mr. Chair and Senator,
on page 9, it really talks about
the accountability piece. Let me
back up first.
The state gets sued by
Advocates over everything.
All the time.
This bill doesn't address that.
That's a whole different thing
that I think we ought to
address.
Because it seems to me that
People view us as a bottomless
pit of cash, and that's what
they're going after and they
don't really care if we're doing
anything right or wrong.
This does not address that at
all. That's a whole another
world.
And, and Mr. Chair, you and I
and Senator Woods have discussed
many times about how we put
something in the budget, we give
it to XYZ department XYZ
department does whatever they
want with it.
This doesn't address that, but
it does in a little bit. I'm
gonna show you that.
But this isn't piling on AOC.
And I know that has been the
problem, but.
Senate bill, the substitute for
Senate Bill 3 really clarifies
that that AOC is the
coordinator, not anything else.
And so on page 9.
There's a whole paragraph
starting on line 3 goes through
line 14.
Um, but what it says is that
legislative committees, the
healthcare authority, we will
receive we will receive monthly
updates but then starting on
line 11, the behavioral health
executive Committee shall
provide the legislature
quarterly updates on the
implementation of regional plans
starting when the regional plans
begin to be implemented, so
that's the difference between
what we get from every other
agency who shows up.
And says, oh, dog and pony show
doesn't really answer our
questions. They don't do
anything, and you and I have
been frustrated by that as we've
tried to beat up cabinet
secretaries, including the one
that's here.
OK.
And we don't even get any good
answers. This
At least makes the framework of
we will be notified, we will be
briefed quarterly.
And I think that's the
difference quarterly instead of
once a year and it's specific to
what they're talking about, not
a gigantic.
Um, department.
Uh
That has so many things going on
that we can't even figure them
out. We don't even know. This is
very specific, they're gonna
talk about regional plans.
quarterly.
To us.
And Mr. Chair, can I just say
one thing that I think is
important.
You know, this has been built by
the three branches. We're not
walking in and jamming.
The chords so that it's super
important to me as a lawyer's
practice for 34 years and
certainly understands the role
of courts. I think the fact that
the courts are willing to step
up to the tables because they
realize the magnitude of this
problem.
And Senator Tobiasson is right.
I think people are watching us
and they're also watching.
To see what we're gonna do with
this because this is a, you
know, when you've got advocates
standing up saying this is a
life changing type bill because
it's de-siloing what's happened.
We've had a disaster.
I mean, it has been an absolute
mess, and I think that has led
To a lot of the public safety
crisis that we've seen. They go
hand in hand.
And so the fact that this is.
Come forward in this manner has
this level of buy in. Yeah, is
it new? It is. Is it scary? It
is. This is a big lift. I'm not
minimizing that for a minute,
but I think each of us need to
sit and look at, you know,
what's, what's our role up here?
And I just feel like this is,
this is what we're here to do.
This has the potential to be
game changing for this state and
Again, Senator Lanier's right,
is it, is this absolutely
perfect?
No, there's no way there's gonna
need to be shaping. Is this
though a direction that I think
is.
Something that I'm very
comfortable supporting. It is
because it's such a rare thing
to have the three branches here,
step up, get to the table, come
up with language like this. One
final thing, there was a
briefing.
October in LFC on exactly this
issue, so I don't want to hear,
you know, again, the challenge
when you're building something
like this and this is a
Challenge with the structure of
our process. We're here for 2
months, and yeah, we're, we're,
this is moving pretty quick, uh,
but I think that we've kind of
reached a point here where there
wasn't any opposition to this
bill.
And again, I think that is an
extraordinary thing.
Given the complexity of the area
we're in.
And so
Again, each of us needs to make
that decision.
Moving forward, but again, I
feel like we've, we've hit a
spot here.
That's, that's an opportunity
which we could lose quite
frankly as the other side to
this is if we.
You know, don't do this now.
Or try and delay it, punch it
into the interim.
The whole thing could fall apart
and then we're back to square
one, and that would be something
where I think folks that are
watching would be very
discouraged the moment where all
three branches have stepped up
and I just wanted to respond in
that manner.
Well, I appreciate the response,
Mr. Chair, but
Back when I was in college.
God come by and was selling
encyclopedias, and he told me
how important it was that day
for me to do something because I
was missing a, a chance of a
lifetime I will never have
again.
And by golly, it was now or
never.
Mm
And I think we do have more time
than
this particular session to
Accomplish something, but uh uh.
I know you've done a lot of
work, I know, I understand you
put big brains together to do
this, but to
To say that.
We can't think about this.
And think about using the
public's money.
And put it into more scrutiny.
I don't know whether I can just.
buy into right this second or
never.
So
I understand where you come
from. I appreciate you putting
your effort into it. It's, it's
a lot of thought, but we're
putting in my mind, we're
putting the AOC.
Directly
At the top of this.
They
Are the ones that are directly
and I could be completely wrong
with the way I'm looking at
this.
They are the ones that are
saying in our criminal justice
system.
We have a problem and in our
criminal justice system, we're
seeing people.
Returning, it's a returning.
Deal.
And they now have
An opportunity.
the way I understand this, an
opportunity to direct people two
ways.
I could be misunderstanding this
altogether if I am OK, but as
long as the court.
Would make me the promise.
That they're gonna say mandatory
here are mandatory there.
I can kind of buy into this.
But until I get that assurance.
That no, there's some middle
ground here.
You get, you just go on about
your way.
You know, nothing to see here,
just move along.
And I think that's the objection
that the general public has.
That we have done too much of
that. Well, you fall in the
crack, you just move along. You
just, we're not gonna, you know,
hold you responsible. We're not
gonna do you just move along.
If you can guarantee me that
what we're doing here today.
It is something that I can take,
take home.
And so, yeah, we spent a lot of
money, but we're gonna take care
of that move along.
So.
Thank you
uh
Sorry
Senator Woods, I'll make you
that guarantee, but I'm gonna
tell you some numbers here real
quick that I think will bring a
lot of perspective.
Over the last 4 years, including
this budget year, we're going to
spend about $3.4 billion in
behavioral health.
And we have nothing to show for
it.
1.1 billion is just in provider
rate increases.
25% of the 3.4%.
So 3.4 billion.
Over a 4-year period.
We're gonna go to 900 million
this year, really brings it home
when you say the numbers are
expensive to cost, well.
We're spending 900 million this
year.
Compared to
875 million last year compared
to 800
840 year before and 750 the year
before, I mean, we have not seen
the little needle move, and so
when you really want to talk
about
Adrian hasn't failed me yet.
He's manage to turn water into
wine in certain places, and so,
um,
That's
I'm sorry, Senator Sheer.
I'm sorry, I didn't hear you
said.
Mr. Chairman, Adrian is good,
but he's not that good.
I might agree.
Don't tell him that.
So that's a perspective that you
need to think about.
In over a four-year period, 3.4
billion and tell me how it moved
the needle. Senator Campos is
next.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and of course two members of the
Senate Finance Committee as we
Move forward on this package of
bills and of course, this bill
is very important as we're
talking about the guard rails,
but.
To begin, I'd like to indicate
that over the years as we
continue in this process.
Uh, what we do is we listen
throughout the whole committee
process taking it both to both
the Senate and the House.
Uh, to continue to make proposed
legislation better and this is
that process.
The second part of that is we
talk about.
How quickly we've worked to put
together information. This has
been an ongoing process.
Through this last legislative
interim period.
We've taken a lot of testimony
we've continued to, if you will,
crunch the numbers.
We've dealt directly with uh
what is going to be for the
common good.
And in some of the areas that
we've already discussed, of
course, this is the healthcare
piece, or at least one of them.
We talk about, if you will, as
we go forward with public
safety, there'll be that package
that will come forward.
There'll also be, if you will,
the environment and if you will,
even the wildlife east that'll
be coming forward.
But along the way with those
that are advocating for
particular projects.
And programs and the same thing
the adversaries or if you will,
the.
proponents and the proponents as
we use the terms.
The whole intent of of what we
deal with is to continue with
public civility and discourse,
and that's what we have here and
I want to thank the sponsors.
We going through their due
diligence, listening,
continuously working very
closely, if you will, with those
agencies and others that are
affected by it.
Into Mr. Adrian Avi, I want to
thank you very much for.
The tenacity that goes into
dealing with this because you
have to absorb all of the
information and help us to
decipher and then disaggregate
and then if you will
re-aggregate so that this makes
sense to ourselves and to the
public.
Along with that to the people
with Senate Finance that
continue to work behind the
scenes.
To ensure that those numbers are
brought forward so that we're
accurate.
In terms of what the projections
would be as we deal, if you
will, with not only the
possibility of a trust fund, but
also a direct appropriation of a
large amount because what we
want to do.
is make sure that we do have, if
you will, resources going
directly to where the problems
are.
So within this entire process,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
Senate Finance Committee.
But I continuously remind myself
of as I hear this.
Maybe some of these ideas are
not new, but maybe the concepts
of how we're going to coagulate,
we're going to, uh, collaborate
and how we're going to
communicate.
Definitely are and the way for
us to do that is to continue
with that discussion.
So what I see today.
is the ability for us to bring
these things forward, and I
really commend.
Senator Woods for your ongoing
questions.
Because in this,
As we move forward, if we just
say.
Here's the rubber stamp, and
this is it.
It may not work.
But as we continue to go forward
and we find that there are
Instances where maybe we can
make those adjustments.
So when the final piece does
make it through the House and
Senate.
There would be the opportunity
or at least more so.
That it would work.
There could be more and more
that we can all discuss, but it
leads to a couple of questions
that I have in regard to uh the
substitute.
And in the first question, as we
see the language that deals
directly with.
An equitable amount.
For each region.
And, and again, we go into
Berlio County in the inordinate
needs that they have.
When we start dealing with the
Northwestern, northeastern.
Southeastern, southwestern part
of the state.
Or if you will, if the districts
are going to be designed in a
different manner.
And we start talking about
equitable distribution.
What does that really mean,
particularly when.
Maybe in a part of the state
where the population is, uh,
sparse.
But the needs, let's say, for
example, for a recovery center.
The need for, if you will, the
psychiatrist, the psychologist.
And the programs that our
schools to go ahead and address
those issues or possibly more
immense than maybe in a more
concentrated, uh, densely
populated area where services
are readily available.
If you can just elaborate a
little bit more in terms of the
equitable equitable amount of
distribution for the uh the
different parts of the state, so
with that, Mr. Chair, that would
be the first question that I
have.
John
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos. So
you're referring to page 12, uh,
lines 4 through 7 for the rest
of the committee. Uh, so,
With the money that's been
appropriated, it will be
equitably distributed on the
priorities that are submitted in
regional plans. However, there's
the caveat on line 7 that it'll
focus on and prioritize
disproportionately impacted
communities, which we define in
the definition section. So for
example, if you have a
behavioral health desert in a
more rural area, even though
they don't have a larger
population, that's a huge
service gap. That's a
disproportionately impacted
community and because of that,
That would be a priority in
terms of the funding compared to
something else.
Um, and part of the
kind of delineating how this
would work would fall on the
behavioral health executive
Committee, which was created
within the bill as well. And
they're gonna figure out the
balancing act at the end of the
day based on all the regional
plans once they're submitted.
So, so, Mr. Chairman, uh, bill
sponsors and of course to Mr.
Avila.
Help me to better understand,
and this is for the the public
that's paying attention to this
today.
So if a person lives in Mora a
person lives in Animas, a person
lives, uh, we'll just say in Las
Cruces, regardless of where
they're they're residing.
And in there there uh
participants in the services.
When, when we say equity, are we
talking about?
Facilities, programmatic issues,
uh, addressing, if you will,
what the regional group comes up
with as a priority.
How, how can people?
Best trust what we're putting
together for them.
So the resources are going to be
going to those areas.
If you can better explain what
that equitable means because
equitable is a huge term.
When it comes to if we have $200
million available or we have a
$2.4 billion expenditure that
we've used before to fund
behavioral health.
Out of the agencies and this is
one of the things that keeps uh
brought to my attention.
How did the agencies then?
Participate in what that money
looks like in order to go ahead
and provide the best services
possible.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, um,
so the best way to
Conceptualize this equity is
equity in terms of service,
right? Access to service.
And in certain contexts, for
example, you're not going to
build the gateway Center in
Albuquerque in County.
Right? Or in Otero County.
Um, so that's not equity. Equity
is actual access to services. So
in certain cases, if you have uh
a small community that doesn't
have any access whatsoever
mobile units make sense.
So it's being able to customize
it based on the different types
of service capacities that exist
in the system.
Or that could be built out.
In that region.
Um, and that's one of the key
reasons why, for example, UNMH,
the health center.
At the University of New Mexico
is going to play a pivotal role
in all of these regional plans.
Because they are able to
mobilize things and they can
actually get the physicians out.
Um, same thing with having DOH
and the healthcare authority the
players and stakeholders in all
of these discussions. So it's
being able to leverage.
Existing mechanisms.
In a more efficient way, but
then also allowing that
customization at the local level
to ensure that the equity
question is answered by ensuring
everyone has some type of access
to service based on their
specific um dynamics and needs
with health.
Thank you very much. And so Mr.
Chairman, I would say that it's
not going to be necessarily
equitable. It's going to be
accessible, uh, but we'll we'll
leave that language alone.
Mister, Mister Chair, and, uh,
as we move forward, uh, just one
other question, whenever we
start talking about
The stakeholders themselves, uh,
over 30 years ago, I was a part
of a Fleming fellowship that we,
we traveled all over the the
country and we're dealing
directly with uh issues that
affected our state and at that
time it happened to be
corrections, and that was one of
the issues that I, that I chose
to deal with.
So over the last decades we've
been dealing with that and as I
take a look at the list of the
stakeholders, uh, I see jails
and I see um.
Other, other types of
facilities, but, but I don't
really see overemphasizing and
dealing directly with.
Corrections and
But it really comes down to
behavioral health.
That's where the service is
definitely need to be as strong
as possible as we move forward.
And the reason I say that
because we're rebuilding.
Individuals' lives and preparing
them, if you will, for
reintegration so that the lives
of themselves and those of their
families.
will be able to then to become
stronger as a uh they, they live
out uh their time and on this
earth.
Again, the point that I'm
getting to with all of it is.
Uh, this is a, a, a period for
us to
Continue to discern, to discuss,
and hopefully to continue to
make this piece of legislation
better and uh with that, Mr.
Chairman, after the responses
there, I'd like to close. Thank
you.
It's in her trail.
if I could have the response,
Mr. Chair, and then I'm sorry.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos,
uh, so this was part of the like
balancing act, right, without
having a full laundry list of
everyone. uh, we figured that
the other appropriate stay on
line 14 of page 2, or local
agencies captured corrections.
Um, but we really wanted to make
sure that at the local level
since it is regional plans that
the local detention centers and
correctional facilities are
incorporated within the
including language on line 16.
So Mr. Chairman, as we go
forward into the sponsors and of
course to Mr. Avila. When we
deal with Springer and we have a
woman's facility there when we
started dealing with Santa Rosa,
there's a correctional facility
there, and we deal that's just
one region that we go up into
Clayton and there's another
facility there. Uh, these are
important, uh, this is an
important part of behavioral
health within uh the rural parts
of New Mexico and so I'm just
very.
Curious for the Department of
Corrections, and I realize
they're stakeholders, but why
we're not giving him the you the
impetus of, of the level of
importance in in delivering the
behavioral health services. So,
Mr. Chairman, if I could just uh
please respond, Mr. Chair, that,
that actually came up in the
original version of the bill.
Why didn't we list and then all
of a sudden there were like 50
people. Why didn't we list?
And
As soon as you start listing all
of those, the one you forget.
Then becomes the issue. You
didn't mean to forget him, you
just.
You know, there's, there's so
many stakeholders, so in this
language what we tried to do was
say,
Instead of listing everybody.
Everybody's invited.
If they're a stakeholder.
That way you didn't have to list
everyone individually cause,
cause we really viewed that as.
Is being counterproductive
because the one you forget, then
it's the one that sues.
For an unlimited amount of money
and so the the catch-all
language was really to try to
catch all.
Without
eliminating anybody.
So Mr. Chairman, I'm not going
to go ahead and uh.
continue with the point, but
again, what we're doing is uh
when we really talk about how
we're going to deal with
behavioral health, uh, there are
those and other questions that I
know are continuing on people's
minds and so in closing again, I
thank you all very much for the
hard work that you put forth
into this particular piece of
legislation, looking forward to
not only continuing to support
it, but uh monitoring during
the, the interim in terms of how
we're going to prepare come July
1st to implement uh the
resources in the programs.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and again, I'll just repeat what
everyone has said. Thank you for
all the work that you guys have
put into this, um, I, I'll have
to say I really truly appreciate
Senator Sheer, your con your
comments about mental health
being really broad.
It's not limited to criminal
justice. It's not limited to
those extremes. It really
impacts our families, our
schools, employment, our
communities, it has such a broad
impact and I really see this
piece of legislation looking
forward to the other two, but I
see this piece of legislation is
And like a circle with entry
points and anyway where someone
can enter the system and they
can find the help because we're
all working together and earlier
when we first started hearing
this, I said, it feels like
we're not rowing in the same
direction.
This has become a I'm confident
that this is gonna get us rowing
in the same direction.
Um, my mom was diagnosed as
manic depressive when I was a
young girl.
And that's now called bipolar.
And um she struggled with that
her whole life.
It impacted our family. It
impacted a lot of things um
throughout my lifetime.
And
The idea that we can help those
families. We can help our kids
in school, we can help those
that haven't gotten to the point
where they're in the criminal
justice system really encourages
me.
Um, a couple of things I want to
point out, um, that I'm really
excited about and that's on page
9, the involvement of the higher
education institution.
Because this is where we're
going to build the pipeline.
This is where we're gonna build
a pipeline and that we've
included pathways for people
with lived experience, that's
key.
That is really key.
Um, I'll put in a plug for the
compact licensing that I'm
working on. Not only do we need
to get people through the
system, but we need to get
people licensed and we need to
get people from out of the state
able to work in this state, and
that's key to it is having the
people. The other thing I'm
really excited about is that
we've identified that there'll
be data points of collection, so
that 5 years from now or 2 years
from now, we're not wondering.
Oh, if we would just have
collected that data, we might
have been able to analyze the
success or the failures of this.
We could identify what those
gaps are.
So those two things really make
me feel like we're gonna have a
handle, we're gonna be able to
monitor it as the legislature,
we're gonna see those quarterly
reports and we're gonna have to
be honest with one in there. I
heard um Senator Steinborn say
we may have to have some tough
love conversations, and that's
really what we may have to do in
3 months, in 6 months, and, you
know, 9 months, we may have to
have those conversations.
But
You know, Senator Wirth said,
um, before I was sworn in.
Uh, we attended some, you know,
um, community gatherings and a
couple of times I heard him say,
we're not going to incarcerate
ourselves out of this problem.
And this is evidence that we're
looking for other solutions than
just incarcerating those that
are really struggling with
mental health problems. So thank
you, thank you for the work that
you've done and I look forward
to supporting this.
Jim.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
Adrian, I'll, I'll ditto
everyone on, on appreciating
your work, um.
It, it feels like this is
rushed, you know, I brought it
up yesterday that I think we
ought to do it more of a
delayed.
And put some of that's kind of
in here and built in here, um.
But
I just want to make sure that we
know what problem we're
addressing.
Because if it
is, is, is it a funding problem?
Is it a coordination problem?
Is an authority problem.
Or is it all of the above?
So, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Brand.
It's partly all the above. It's
not a funding problem. We've
been pouring money into this
system for 10 years, pouring it
in.
With your results.
In some cases negative results.
Well it's not the money, it's
something else. And I think the
term used earlier was
de-siloing.
not coordinated
So the courts do their thing.
Department
now, not the Department of
Health.
Healthcare Authority the
Department of Health been doing
their thing, um, and so there's
not been a focus on anything.
And I think that's the problem.
Uh, and that's what we're trying
to address with this particular
bill.
So
The goal, of course, is to have
some results as opposed to just
pouring more money into it. And
so if we delay it, we've been
delaying it for 10 years.
If we delayed another 10 years,
we're gonna get the same result
if we delay it another year,
we're gonna get the same result,
at least for that year, and this
does have built in things, you
know, starting on May 25 and
then somewhere else in here it's
27, so there's, there's
Built in
Uh, measures
To move us in that direction.
But it's, it's certainly not the
money part. I think we've been
squandering tons of money, and
this is an effort to stop the
squandering and do something
useful.
We just have Mr. Cha and and
Brand, it's creating the
framework.
And then having the
accountability.
And that's what's really been
missing. And again, I think that
the way this is being proposed
to have it in regional districts
and have each regional district.
build up their own system.
Is critical
Because as Senator Sher has
said, this is, it's a problem
that's different in different
places in the state.
And what happens in San Juan is
different than what's happening
in Santa Fe.
And so again, I think this is
creating that framework and it's
Centralized, you know, having
the, the ability to overlay
that.
And then having the report back
that I think is so important,
uh, that's why this bill, and
again I really appreciate.
We, we learned in the health
committee, we didn't hear this
bill first and you have to hear
this bill first because it goes,
it's, it's the framework that
then lead to the other two
pieces.
And thank you. I appreciate
that. Um,
Sure sure I agree with you on
that it's not the funding.
Right, um
Seems like we tend to throw
money at all of our problems in
this state.
Without ever thinking about how
that money is being spent or
ever requiring any
accountability.
We've done that with education,
we do it with behavioral health.
We, we, we've done it from
pretty much every area.
We do it with the courts all the
time.
They just need more money, OK,
we'll give them more money.
Come back next year, we just
need more money.
It's always the same thing.
Um
I'm, I'm concerned a little bit
about the authority side.
Yeah, I remember when Mary Kay
Pain was here and we had
proposals to do the black robe
effect.
And, you know, that was killed
pretty much every time she
brought it.
Maybe if we had done that 10
years ago, Senator Sheer, we'd
be a little further along on
this issue.
Um, instead of just saying no,
no, you don't know what you're
talking about when she actually
did.
Dick had a son who had those
problems and she knew what she
was talking about.
But I, I'm not sure the courts
are getting the authority they
need in this.
To make sure that people are
referred to and and kept in uh.
Mandatory treatment until
they're better. Does the courts
feel like they have that
authority in this package?
So Mr. Chair, I think.
There's two prongs to it and
we're gonna hit coming over in
the public safety package from
the house is a revised criminal
competency bill that's creating
new diversion options for the
courts, and that's what I talked
about with Justice Zamora kind
of leading the effort, the
realization that they, they got
to have the tools to be able to
do it. I think the problem is
Without having the
infrastructure to get those
folks to the treatment.
Without having the
infrastructure there, it's just,
it's not gonna work. And, and I
will say this because I think
there was some
Senator Pain did get the
assisted outpatient treatment
bill through in 2016.
You know, I really struggled
with that bill, but I ended up
voting for it because we needed
to do something.
And then thanks to her
leadership in Donana County,
they started in ALT so it didn't
just sit there and languish. She
went out there and she got.
You know, the, the local
government.
She got the providers to all get
together and work, so they
actually started this and what
was, I think the big thing that
came out of the special session
was a willingness and a
recognition that hey, this, this
is an important piece here. It's
a civil, it's a civil side of
it.
But we should continue that, and
the courts were willing to
continue that and so that
funding in the special session
turned out, I think, to really
be.
A critical step that leads us to
where we are today, because I
was amazed and I said this back
then, if we don't give them the
money to start this process now,
we passed something like this
and we're gonna be waiting
another.
7 months will have been lost.
I don't think we lost that time
because the court stepped up big
time with those pilot projects
and we're able to show that they
could get them off the ground,
which I think gives me
confidence that we're moving in
the right direction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. I'm gonna wrap up
here real quick. You know, it
takes leadership, right?
Something's not working.
And worse than Senator Sheer, it
takes leadership to change it.
And and
In this yesterday, you know.
We don't try, we don't know we
can succeed, we don't try, we
don't know we're gonna fail.
Right
And so
We know that spending 3.4
billion.
does not move the needle for us.
You haven't seen anything
happen, it continues to grow and
grow and grow. Out of the 3.4
billion in my calculating this
year's money, 11.1 billion is
just provider rate increases,
25% of that total numbers
provide a rate increases.
I mean, so are we really
targeting
What we need to target.
Well, this bill kind of takes
care of that, right? So there's
some Medicaid issues and so
there's some providers are gonna
play, but it's gonna change this
number in the in the future.
And we're going to start
swapping money for what's
working and what's not working,
rather than just saying, oh,
here, go Blue Cross Blue Shield
and all the other providers go
do behavioral health and in
everywhere.
And it's gonna shift that number
and we're going to see what
really works and what we really
need to target.
I mean, a lot of this is
Medicaid match, but I mean, we
put 46 million in in2YFD for
behavioral health services.
That's a large number, DB 5
million, I mean, the behavior of
collaborative, which is never
really functioned 353 million is
headed in that direction.
Um
The largest
Number is, is the behavior
Medicaid behavioral health can
managed care, which is $520
million.
And then, uh,
The managed care expansion $311
million this year we're on
target altogether wrapped up is
1.1 billion.
Is it really gonna change
anything?
We just, I, I can't argue with
them we're not funny, but I
mean, every legislator is going
to have to step up to the plate
in their regions, right? They're
gonna have to play in this
arena.
Uh, I know I am.
Because I know that Santa Fe
recovery and Santa Fe is 4
corners and gallop, and they're
standing that up and it and it's
starting to work, you know, how
do we make them more successful
or how do we get more providers?
That's a lot different question.
I'm not an expert.
But have sent Worth and Senator
Stewart and Senator Shearer
hadn't said, OK, George and
Adrian, go tackle this for us,
right?
Get a comprehension of it and I
probably spent more time on
Zoom.
Behavioral health than I did
during COVID.
Um
In, in learning this, it's just
we have to learn, but everybody
in this room, everybody that's a
legislator is gonna have to take
leadership on this. They're
gonna have to go into those
regional meetings and listen and
see what's happening and make
sure that they're, they're
getting what they need in their
regions that are compos made a
point a while ago, well, how do
we write size it, how do, what
is equitable is that? I mean, if
you look in Albuquerque, what
they spend is 300 million on
behavioral health services.
So really how much help do they
need or, or we, or we're gonna
help them tell them spend your
money correctly.
Um
And, and so that's what I think
is gonna have to happen, but
don't just think you're going to
pass a bill today.
And you as an elected official
are not gonna have to go back to
your districts and make sure
you're
The 11th is doing their job
where I
Preside from and AOC is pushing
into that district to get it
home cause it's not just gonna
happen unless we all take
leadership.
To make sure it's happening for
us.
Uh, the competency is a big part
of this, I mean, I blame a lot
of this on President Reagan when
he
Starting that decline and it
changed the way institutionals
be born institutionalized.
And that was kind of decline in
families could kind of take care
of them and then, you know, I
think COVID hit and and people
are just like there's just so
much worldly struggle and and
and a lot of people got pushed
aside by their families, so.
So Mr. Chair, can I a brief
close because I want to answer
some of the concerns we're
we're, we need to adopt the
substitute.
Right, and then
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'll move a do
pass on Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3.
I do not.
Do not pass. Thank you, Mr. Cha.
I'd already made the motion.
well right discussion purposes
now we're gonna thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, I'll move a do not
pass on Senate Bill 3 and they
do pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 3.
second in on the motion.
And
seconding the motion was my
center a second my senator
Tilly.
So Mr. Chair for my guys.
We
Are we actually voting on or
y'all actually voting on this
bill right now.
We're voting on.
Moving the substitute, moving
the substitute just to discuss
it so that we can.
Yeah,
on the, yeah, so we are voting.
So go ahead and close and then
we'll vote. So
Just to address mostly the
comments from this side of the
room.
Um, we've already improved this
bill several times based on
input.
From various people, so one of
those, uh, the big concern is
we've piled on AOC.
And made AOC in charge.
So let me just ask.
Is AOC in charge?
As chair Senator, I, I do not
believe so. I believe we've got
this very uh defined convener
sort of role.
So that was certainly a big
thing and that was in the first
draft or the first version, the
substitute, we corrected that.
Because that was a big problem.
Um, and we recognize that AOC
recognized that. So we've taken
these things with some very
serious thoughts and tried to
correct.
The, the flaws that were in the
first one.
And while this is not the total
solution for everything, I
believe this is the direction to
a solution because we have been
a rudderless ship for a decade
or more.
And at least now.
We're trying to put the rudder
on, is it on? Is it correct
everything? does it know?
Because we don't know what
everything is.
But I also want to ask the
committee.
Mhm
Have we ever passed a bill ever?
Since 1912.
That we had a guarantee that it
was going to do what we said it
was gonna do.
As any legislature ever.
From the Athenian democracy ever
passed a bill.
It was guaranteed to do what we
said it was going to do, and the
answer is no, so this isn't any
different than that, but this
one at least is giving us
direction.
And that is something that we
have not had in the past.
So the years of funding.
We can continue down that same
path, or we can look for a new
path.
And I believe that this path.
While not the end result.
Not even pretending that it's
the end result.
It's giving us a road map.
That we've never had before.
And so, uh, one of the big
concerns for San Juan County is
our own triage center, big deal,
big deal.
At least in San Juan County,
the.
The delegation
In the city, the county, the,
the hospital, the college have
all agreed that is the number
one priority for San Juan
County.
That thing
and I believe that this.
Well
Senate bill too funds it, but
this gives us the guidelines on
how
Uh, it will function in that
district.
And so for that, for no other
reason, it's gonna help San Juan
County.
It helped Santa Fe?
I think so.
But I know that the the city,
the county.
Uh, the college, the hospital.
All want that one thing.
Uniform.
And I think the delegation.
On that one thing.
And if we can just pour money
into it, get the same result or
we can have the guidelines, we
can have the reporting, we can
have all of the things that will
help make sure that this is at
least pointed in the direction
of success.
And work you did, and Mr.
Chairman, can I just restate the
motion so it's done properly, I
move that Senate Bill 3 is
amended do not pass of the
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Send to Bill 3 do
now pass, and that is the the
motion we have the second base
in Treil.
What do you call it wrong.
Senator Brandt.
Yes. Senator Brown votes, yes.
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
votes yes Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Lanier.
Yes. Center Lanier Botsia Center
Padilia.
But yes. Senator Padilla votes
yes, Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborne Bosia, Senator
Tobiasin, yes, Senator Tobiasson
votes yes, Senator Trujillo.
Yes, Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. No.
Senator Woods votes no. Senator
Shino.
Yes. Senator Shendo votes yes.
And Senator Munoz. Senator
Munoz yes,
into one.
has been adopted. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Sher. Thank you
members.
Shi, you have a substitute on
that bill, OK, so we'll need a
motion.
to.
back in.
in this committee room.
We don't want you to find it, we
moved it.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, to help
Senator Shindo if it's all right
with you, I'll make a motion.
Yeah, go right headless. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I'll move a
do not pass on Senate Bill 2,
and they do pass on Senate Bill
to Senate Finance Committee
substitute for discussion
purposes.
Sindo, we want to explain that.
Uh, yes, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 2 is the
appropriations bill or as one of
this referred to as down payment
on the state's behavioral
health.
Investment, uh, to build out.
And build up our decimated
behavioral health system.
Uh, the substitute ads an
additional $60 million to the
package to result with a $200
million package.
Uh, the additional money will go
to ensuring our 988.
In our 911 or coordinate $9
million to behavioral health and
Uh, behavior health patient
investigation supports.
million dollars to the LFC so
that they can complete uh
Completely fulfill their role uh
based on behavioral health
reform and Investment Act, uh,
$9 million to the Department of
Health to implement behavioral
health support over the next 3
years.
To the school-based clinics, 6
million to PED to implement
other targeted behavioral health
support.
Over the next 3 years, uh,
directly to schools, 1.8 million
to facilitate.
provider training, uh.
200,000 to the healthcare
authority to begin their Senate
Bill 30 in the current fiscal
year and 3 grow appropriations
of 10 million to each of the
healthcare authority.
For regional certified peer
support workers just as
liaisons, regional behavioral
health services staff and to.
complete their audit role based
on the behavioral reform and
investments.
The
Mhm
Thank you. We're gonna go to the
audience, anybody in support?
Steak
All three the same, all 4 are
the same. Let's take 2 real
quick uh JD where no I can, I
got your script down to pep.
The chamber, we support this
piece of legislation.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, um, I'm Meredith
Main, and I'm speaking on behalf
of legal room voters of New
Mexico and the American
Association of University Women,
and we thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill, and uh I
know it's not perfect, you know,
the last one I think was
absolutely beautiful, um, this
one is very, very important, and
it's gonna serve uh as a bridge.
in many ways, so we definitely
need these services of the 988,
um, for instance, I think has
saved many, many, many lives, so
I really appreciate um the, the
spill and all the effort that's
gone into it and urge you to
pass strongly support. Thank
you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee carrie R Mijo, cabinet
secretary for the Healthcare
Authority. I'll be very brief.
Uh, I spoke earlier, uh, just
wanna reiterate our
appreciation, uh, on the
collaboration that's gone into
uh the work on this bill and
stand in support of these
efforts to support the
behavioral health of New
Mexicans.
Anybody in the room in
opposition.
Not the state police are
standing up already.
On Zoom, anybody we have 2 in
support, 1 minute a piece.
Dorothy.
Uh, good morning again, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm Dorothy Seaton, I introduced
myself earlier. So I'll cut
right to it. Uh, this
investment uh is essential,
wishing to solve a problem
doesn't make it so. You guys
know that you have to throw
money at it and you have to
organize it, uh, as you have
well done. I want to speak from
my experience as a clinical
supervisor and, and counselor
and an in-prison treatment
center for 13
years I worked with families and
men in recovery.
This investment will bring you
uh from my observation, a
decrease in crime, including
domestic abuse, child and black
DWI burglary and assault. It'll
bring you an increase in a
healthy and stable workforce,
and it'll provide safer and
healthier families and
communities. We stand in support
and ask for your yes vote.
Thank you. Next.
That's you.
Somebody put, type their name is
an admin. uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, thank you very
much. My name is Nat Dean. The
chat is disabled, so I can't
update my name, um,
Can you hear me? Yes, go right
ahead. Thank you very much. I'm
a person with multiple
disabilities. I'm a disability
advocate, and I encouraged the
funding of this to fund such
programs as 988 and other
related supports. I think that
it is extremely important that
we vet the individuals that will
be working to support people
with needs and make sure that
the information they're
providing is accurate, it's
resonant, and will be
operational for the individuals
that they're supporting.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
Thank you, we are on the
substitute bill questions from
committee members.
Seeing none, can I have emotion.
Mhm.
we.
Hey Mr. Avila, you want to add
some chairman go ahead we need,
uh, go ahead, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, just
really quickly, the 202 number
for the motion will be 230521.4,
but I'm gonna ask that you
approve a 0.5 version because
the contingency language at the
very last section isn't exactly
right, and I want the correct
version to come down. Um, so
would at the emergency clause
and ensure the contingency
language is correct.
So the 202 number would be
230521.5.
And why did council service not
get that to us in time.
It, it was a last second catch
that we caught this morning.
OK, Senator Steinbor we're on
the bill.
Mr. Chair, thank you. So we
don't have the 0.5 version here.
Right?
And you want us to prove the 0.5
version, so I would just in
terms of process, I think it'd
be important that you read
exactly what the new language
is.
Because otherwise we should
never vote on a bill we don't
have in front of us, but it's
almost like a verbal amendment
in a way.
So if you read it, then I think
that passes the smell test a
little bit of process, so.
That'd be my request, Mr. Chair.
Well, we can amend, we can amend
the language in and then the 0.5
version will be 0.5 version, so
we can read the language and
we'll adopt the amendment to the
language and then that will be
the 0.5 version. That's true,
right?
So Mr. chair, so for clarity and
for everyone here, um, basically
within the sections that are
contingent and reverting back to
the behavioral trust fund,
technically that fund isn't
officially created until you
pass Senate Bill 1. If you
decide to pass it, so we need to
add contingent on the passage of
Senate Bill 1 throughout the
bill on all those uh reversions.
Uh, within the sections. And
then within
Section 24, the contingent
effective date.
Um, it just needs to add the
emergency clause to that
portion.
need that as a motion.
Schindle since your next.
Uh
OK.
The men were stated contingent
on passage of Senate Bill 1 is a
portion of the amendment,
correct?
And then
And then adding the emergency
clause is
The other part of the amendment,
correct, correct, and that's
what we're voting on.
When you call the role on the
amendment.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos,
Senator Camposia, Senator
Gonzalez. Yes. Senator Gonzalez
votes yes, Senator Lin
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos,
Senator Camposia, Senator
Gonzalez. Yes. Senator Gonzalez
votes yes, Senator Li
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
Bosia, Senator Steinborn,
Senator Steinborne Bozzia,
Senator Tobiasin.
Yes, Senator Tobiasson votes
yes, Senator Trujillo.
Yes, Senator Trujillo Bosa,
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Schendo, yes,
Senator Shando votes yes,
Senator Munoz. Senator Munoz
votes yes, has been adopted 11
to 0.
We're back on the bill.
You need a motion to pass.
would be
Oh Senator Brent
So you're just gonna make the
most.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
I'll move a do not has one
question.
Thank you, um, and, um, I, I, I
was.
hoping that Senator Sheer was
going to stay here and present
this because I guess I'm, I'm
wondering from his testimony on
Senate Bill 3, why we need this.
He said there's plenty of money.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, uh, the
thought process on this was that
the uh siloed money.
is going to be there for later
use. This bill here was for
money right now. Uh earlier we
had in Clovis for they give him
$10 million and we realize, even
though that's a large amount of
money, uh, by the time you do
the planning design location,
that kind of uh detail that
we're gonna need some upfront
money.
Now
Before the siloed money starts
paying out.
On the 5%.
So, so, Mr. Chairman, why aren't
we moving money from the
programs we know aren't working
now.
And putting it into this.
We spent, would you say, Mr.
Chairman, 4. something billion
dollars and got nothing out of
it.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Brent. So
the money that's basically not
really resulting with too many
like impacts in the community
that you can see is all funneled
through Medicaid.
Right? So it's paid for service
when people receive the services
that are eligible for Medicaid,
then, you know, the state will
pay for it.
This appropriations bill allows
the expansion of actual
services. So for example, if a
provider like Clovis, um, needs
to hire new individuals or build
out their facilities to be able
to
Incorporate more beds. That's a
cost that Medicaid does not
cover.
Right? And this is meant to
allow that capacity to grow, and
then the siloed money would kick
in and pay and actually result
with delivered services.
Um, so it's actually making that
money that you've consistently
invested over the last several
years.
Function better and more
efficiently and in a more
targeted way, but you need to
build out the infrastructure to
get to that point.
Mr. Chairman, um, help, help me
out with the added 60 million.
What was that for again? and
And uh explain that a little bit
more.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Bran, so
with starting in section 15
through the end of the bill.
Uh, I'll go piece by piece. So
section 15 gives 9 million over
to the healthcare authority for
patient navigation, right? So if
we're going to invest in these
regional plans, the patients
need to be able to navigate and
access the services. So that's
to make that happen.
Um, the appropriation section 16
is to the LFC, so that way they
can do the audits and evaluation
that's the external external
audit component that was added
in center of Bill 3. Section 17
is to H, so they can do youth
behavioral health services and
supports throughout the
school-based health centers over
the next 3 years.
Um, section 18 is to PED for
youth behavioral health uh
initiatives, but going directly
to schools, it would not flow
through the districts. Section
19 is um in order to provide uh
Bber Healthcare providers and be
health services to patients,
leveraging telemedicine, and
then section 2 is to the
healthcare authority so they can
get boots on the ground right
now, the second bills get passed
to, you know, complete their
work for this current fiscal
year.
And then sections 21, 22, and 23
is basically addressing that
staffing issue that um Senator
Lanier brought up. It's like, we
don't know what the real number
is going to be of how much
staffing they need. So here's
some money.
Figure out your balance of
contractors and actual
employees. And then eventually,
you all can consider if it's
working.
To fund it in the recurring
budget, but we're not putting
anything in recurring until
they've proven that it's
working. Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator.
Does every district have a
school-based health program.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brent, I
don't believe so, but I genius
right here behind you.
There was a number she testified
to the other day, but it wasn't.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Brant now,
we roughly, well, there's
roughly about 100 school-based
health centers across the state
and we're looking towards
expanding those, um, what we've
seen through our the Department
of Health Youth Risk and
resiliency survey. We're really
seeing some really great results
in the work that we're doing at
the school-based health centers
with the youth, um, as it
relates to substance misuse, um,
suicide prevention and overall
education.
really starting to see some
great results there. Happy to
share those with you, Mr.
Chairman, I'd like to see those.
And see their suicide rates
before those came in and
Ones now
Um, I, I know there's some
districts that don't have them,
my district does not.
Um, and there's reasons for
that. So I'm, I'm guessing
that's why the other 6 million
is to go to districts that don't
have those.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, it would go to
districts who want those.
That currently don't have them.
But there's districts that don't
want them for a reason.
So they're not gonna have access
to this funding.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that's why we're
working with the public
education department and they'll
be doing that directly within
the schools within the
classrooms, providing youth
mental health supports.
OK, thank you.
Yeah.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um
colleagues, I have a kind of a
fundamental question, which is,
Do any of these bills do
anything for the recruitment. I
know we have a higher education
department about working to
create a pipeline, but do any of
these bills do anything kind of
concretely to grow the amount of
behavioral health providers.
Leading this funding in this
bill, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, so the legislature
has invested money in building
up the workforce pipeline
through previous iterations
possible to do, and right now
there is a grow appropriation
that's out there, that's doing
that. So there's not specific
callout in Senate Bill 2, but
there are other appropriations
that are doing that.
And thank you and Mr. Chair and
and Secretary Miha, it seems
like I always put you on the
spot in these hearings, uh, but
you're kind of an important
player in these conversations,
uh, or whoever can answer the
question.
Where are we at? I mean we're
talking about really standing up
more resources around, including
schools, where are we at as far
as like our needs of behavioral
health providers, are we short,
generally speaking, have we
quantified that? I know you're
doing a gap analysis, but
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
Steinborn, uh, the answer is
yes, we're short, uh, we will
know exactly how short we are,
uh, once we've completed that
gap analysis by the end of the
fiscal year. So, uh, that is
really specific for adult
services, uh, I know, uh,
there's a similar gap analysis
underway for children's services
as well, um, but that will tell
us sort of how we need to focus
our provider efforts, uh, what
strategies we may need to employ
around central payment
differentials, for example, to
try to recruit providers to
rural areas, uh, so lots of
things that we need to look at
there, uh, collaboration with
higher education, for example,
but um we will have that full
analysis by the end of the
fiscal year. Thank you, madam,
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary, does
that gap analysis look at where
we're short also, not just total
numbers, but like where
geographically we're short with
resources. Uh, yes, Mr. Chair,
Senator Steinborn, that's
exactly the purpose of the
analysis is to get um as
granular as we
Can, um, in terms of either by
county or by region, uh,
determining what that footage
looks like. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary, what is
our most effective tool for
growing behavioral health
providers in the state.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Steinborn, I think.
Um
We do think that the
reimbursement rates have really
helped. Um, I think I showed you
all some data in my budget
hearing about the growth uh in
the network, uh, we've added
2700 providers just since July,
uh, many of those are new
providers in New Mexico and a
lot of that gross growth was in
behavioral health. I think
that's not the only strategy and
I, I would kind of say that now
that we've invested in rates,
it's kind of time to look
elsewhere at other strategies,
for example,
In the higher education realm,
um, and some of the other, uh,
we're also our agency is looking
at sort of implementing a white
glove, a recruitment approach,
uh, to sort of do a warm handoff
transition for providers
interested in coming to New
Mexico to kind of get them lined
up with jobs. So those are the
kinds of things that we're,
we're looking at. It's a
multifaceted strategic approach.
Chair, you know I've got a bill
that we're hopefully gonna have
scored soon to eliminate GRT on
health providers. I know that's
a huge issue, not as
some others, but probably right
up there in the top 3.
So, OK, well, I think this is
just a crucially important thing
and I guess I was wondering.
Did we need more money?
In any of these bills to pump up
those efforts about recruitment.
I'll leave that as an open
question because the bill is
just starting off.
But I think
That's obviously crucial for the
delivery of these services.
I realize we're doing a gap
analysis, but we're also
deploying this now, so.
Do we need more money for
recruitment or any of those
efforts in this bill or like
looking at some of these other
things like GRT that
They are out there this session,
and I would welcome your
thoughts too.
See the secretary, anybody who
wants to speak to this. Senator
Steiner, I, we heard this the
other day and I think I can
probably Mr. Chairman, I think
it's a comment I want to make. I
think on the presentation that
we heard is that we have a lot
of folks that do go to the
social program, but the
licensure piece is where people
aren't testing or the, the
I guess the uh the amount of
folks that passed that test or
Decide not to take the it's
pretty significant. So I think
that's kind of where the
bottleneck seems to be, so I
don't know. I just want to make
that point.
That's true. That's true.
Well, this chair, it's up, up to
you. They can answer, not answer
it, but I think we need to be
looking at this piece too. It's,
it's a big part of it.
I, I think there's funding all
over. I think in House Bill 2,
there's funding, uh, for all
that, I mean, I don't know how
many years.
It's been going on, um, and so
I, I mean, that's a portion
house built too that will get
that question answered for you
in house building.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, if
it's uh right with you, I'll
move us uh do pass, I'm sorry,
do not pass on Senate Bill 2,
and they do pass on Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 2 as amended.
OK, can I have a second on the
motion?
by Senator Gonzalez.
Cholera.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes no. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Senator
Lanier.
Yes. Senator Lanier votes yes.
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes yes, Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Tinder Steinborne Bosia, Senator
Tobiasin. Yes, Senator Tobias
Simbozia, Senator Trujillo, yes,
Senator Trujillo Botsia, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Schendo.
Yes. Senator Shando votes yes.
Senator Munoz, Senator Munoz,
you have a 10 to 1.
do pass 10 to 1, you're gonna
think I'm.
Ter Stephonics is not here, so
I'll have to, oh she is oh there
you go.
There's the one.
We do have an amendment on the
bill, Adrian, you have the
amendment.
You have a copy of the
amendment.
And then
the you wanna explain the bill
and then while they're handing
out the amendment, then we'll
explain the amendment for you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, pleasure to be
here today. The behavioral
health Trust Fund, which is
Senate Bill 1,
is a long term investment in
public health.
The creation of 1 billion
behavioral health trust fund and
I understand the money will be
struck.
Represents a forward thinking
approach to addressing the
state's growing needs for mental
health and substance abuse
services.
By setting aside this
substantial or a substantial
amount of funding, the states
ensures a sustainable financial
foundation for essential
behavioral health services for
years to come.
It also includes comprehensive
support for behavioral health
services.
The fund will cover a broad
spectrum of needs from mental
health and substance abuse
treatment, intervention,
prevention, critical
infrastructure and workforce
supports.
This holistic approach ensures
that individuals facing
behavioral health challenges
will have access to a full range
of services designed to improve
their quality of life.
It leverages additional funding.
The funds, flexibility includes
the ability to match federal,
local, and private funding
sources for behavioral health
programs, including Medicaid at
the federal level.
This will amplify the state's
investment, allowing it to tap
into additional resources and
support a larger number of
initiatives to address the full
scope of behavioral health
challenges.
Compliance with federal
requirements as federal
regulations surrounding
behavioral health services
evolved. This trust fund will
help cover the costs associated
with ensuring compliance. This
proactive financial planning
ensures that the state remains
in line with federal guidelines
while continuing to deliver high
quality services.
The fund also is very
instrumental in the
implementation of regional
behavioral health plans across
the state.
By focusing on regional needs,
the state can tailor programs to
local populations, ensuring more
effective and responsive
services that address specific
community challenges.
And it addresses behavioral
health as a statewide priority.
The creation of this fund
signals a commitment from us to
the state that treating
behavioral health is a priority
issue that deserves long-term
sustained investment. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, we can
stand for questions. We do have
an amendment.
Um, kind of a motion to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
and, I'll move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
motion, uh.
Uh, the number I have is
229916.1 is the amendment,
correct?
And just so we stayed right on
the bill is 228612.2.
Um
you want to explain the
amendment real quicker.
It's
Mr. Chair, the amendment
basically strikes the transfer
from the general fund for the
billion dollars, that's normal
practice within the Senate
Finance Committee, and then the
other change is um in the
reserve language, it, the
initial bill had this fund
counting as part of our reserve
calculations for 2026. This just
changes it so it's for 2026 and
2027 to provide you more
flexibility.
I
Any questions on the amendment?
No questions, can I have emotion
to adopt adoption of the
amendment and the motion by
Senator Gonzalez, seconded by
Senator Padilla.
Any objection to the motion.
No, you have the amended bill.
We're gonna go to the audience
now, uh, anybody in support.
We'll take
Maybe 2 or 3 that haven't
testified, Bill Lee and and the
gentleman in the hand coat.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, we
stand, uh my name is Bill Lee,
president CEO of the Gallup
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce. We stand in support of
Senate Bill 1 Behavioral Health
Trust Fund, as well as the other
bills in the behavioral health
package. It is unfortunate that
a number of years ago behavioral
health care system in our state
was all but completely
dismantled behavioral health
issues continue to plague my
community, the negative impacts
extend from economics to quality
of life, most of all, it is the,
the toll that it takes on the
souls in our region.
where there are far too few
resources to help those who are
afflicted. It is critical that
we address this issue in our
state, if we continue to simply
kick the can down the road,
ignore what has been taking
place. The consequences in our
community and across the state
will be devastating and possibly
deteriorate beyond repair.
There's been a great deal of
discussion this morning about
cost and funding SB1 provides a
very suitable funding source and
a plan for restoring behavioral
health services in our state.
There's a lot to this bill and
it will.
be critical to have keen
oversight and accountability.
What we have heard in recent
open discussions in this
committee, the sponsors and the
committee members have
diligently worked to bring these
needed measures forward and it
put into place sensible
guidelines. This is not an easy
lift, but it's imperative that
we take positive steps to
address this need, please
support SB1 and move it forward
with due pass. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is David
Burke. I'm with Serenity Macy
Youth Recovery Center and also
the board president for Nami
Albuquerque, um, this is an
investment into our mental
health in the state, the whole
state, um, at our facility, uh,
we've served a little over 600
kids from all over the state,
every county in the state we've
been able to serve. This can
help all three of these bills
are just gonna be a miraculous
thing for all the different
states or sorry for all the
different counties, we have 14
beds and
have 12 kids on our waiting
list. Where do those kids go?
There's not a lot of other
options for them. All of this
funding can help provide those
options for these kids, um, our
youth have been struggling, or
you have been suffering um
without the needs or one of the
most underserved populations.
In the state and in the nation
for that matter. We need to be
able to provide more er more
resources and more funding, and
I believe this is a long term
solution to continuing that fun.
Thank you.
to go to the audience or anybody
in the audience pose see no, we
have two people on Zoom, same
two people admin and who else?
OK, Dorothy, why don't you start
us off one minute.
Well, good morning again, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. Um, I want to commend
the sponsors on establishing
this fund because the stability
of the workforce and the uh the
provider, uh, being able to
depend upon a steady stream of
funding is essential to not only
building this structure of
behavioral healthcare, but
sustaining it. So we urge your
support. Thank you.
E E
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich. I am
the executive director of Nami
New Mexico. We stand in strong
support of this bill for the
capacity building, uh, purposes
that others have already
mentioned, and we urge a due
pass. Thank you very much.
Thank you. We're gonna go to
committee members for question.
But before we do that, the two
young kids I brought them up
behind me, right?
This is gonna benefit them more.
And their kids and their
grandkids, cause I probably
won't be alive then.
Right? This is why we create
these trust funds that are
beneficial for decades and years
in in New Mexico and so I think
it's important that you see some
kids in the room and in their
shadowing this today, isn't it
almost once a week, I think. And
so, but really that's why we're
creating trust funds. That's the
whole purpose of the trust fund
is create beneficiaries for long
in the future. Questions from
committee members.
See that can have a due pass
motion.
I would do pass on Senate Bill
1.
motion for new pass. We have a
second. I'm sorry, as amended,
as amended.
Yeah, the 2nd by Senator Treil.
What do you call it?
Senator Brent, Senator Brent
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos Lucia, Senator
Gonzalez Gonzalezs yes, Senator
Lanier.
Yes. Senator Lanier votes as
Senator Padilla. Vote yes.
Senator Padillas yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Yes, Senator
Tobias and Bosia, Senator
Trujil, yes, Senator Trujillo
votes yes, Senator Woods. Yes.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Schendo.
Yes. Senator Sendo votes yes,
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz votes yes, you
have 11 to 0.
Thank you,
thank you Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Thank you. I
think we won't hear the budget
and accountability will, will
break in, and maybe reschedule
that for.
Another day.
And so we are germed.
Senator Brandt, I need to
We're not a John Wayne. Wait,
wait, wait, we're not a dream.
Why are we're not.
We still have
is
I, I just told them we're, we're
