The budgets are being passed
out.
Mr Chair R F Y I as we passed
off the house floor yesterday
with a 53 to 16 vote. We have a
recurring budget total of 10.18
billion from the General fund.
As you know, Mr Chair. That's a
$620 million increase from last
year, Mr Chair. This keeps us
within the lfc framework that
was passed under your
leadership. Uh, we stayed within
that on our recurring increase.
Mr Chair, the main areas where a
lot of that work occurred was
regarding major differences
between LFC an executive
recommendations in the courts.
the new healthcare Authority and
the Public Education Department
as long as well as with the New
Mexico Environment Department,
where
Shared work over the past
summer, I think has given us a
good place to equalize. Pay
there, Mr Chair and in many of
these areas think there's great
opportunity for you. And yeah,
the committee you lead your
colleagues to continue that key
work with core stakeholders.
This budget maintains a robust
reserve of 32%, Mr Chair.
Um
The expendable trust, which is a
unique feature this was provided
for in the LFC framework.
That remains intact. We did move
some money around in the trust
the biggest change in
consultation with agencies and
with our committee is taking the
trust duration from four years
to three. So you'll see, uh,
waging career ladder with E C c
D still in the trust still in
the LSC framework.
Ah, but for three years and not
for
Uh um One appropriation included
in the expendable Trust for C Y
F D foster care programs.
Which was a recommendation from
our House Appropriations and
Finance Committee, C Y F D
Working group. It was something
that they felt strongly about.
Mr Chair. 1.2 billion is set
aside for endowments and trust
to support future spending in
areas of natural resources,
housing and government
innovation. And this more or
less remains the same from the
LSC budget recommendation. There
is $1.5 billion in special and
supplemental appropriations.
Actually slightly larger than
last year. This is one of the
places Mr Chair and Committee
where HFC did the most work with
our executive colleagues, and,
um, a few of these. A few
highlights include
1.5 million to the AOC, which
can be used to improve
monitoring. Uh, pretrial
detention monitoring with folks
who have ankle bracelets. $7
million Mr Chair to the Crime
Victims. Reparation Commission
to support Victim advocates
support for sexual assault
victims and the supplement
federal grants for crime
business victims.
One of our very largest changes
175 million for Housing and
economic development initiatives
under the existing Opportunity
Enterprise Fund.
We added 15 million to the of
The office of the state engineer
for Indian Water Rights
settlement.
$40 million for workforce
development and apprenticeship
initiatives. $3 million for
health councils of greatest need
across the state $20 million to
shore up the current year. Um
And fund the upcoming years
Universal Free lunch program.
2.5 million for rural libraries.
$10 Million Mr Chair Committee.
I know this is a high priority
and an opportunity for you to
establish a new program Interest
issue low interest loans to
provide access to critical
infrastructure for
decarbonization.
Uh, Mr Chair. One of the largest
changes we made was with $150
million for transportation that
increased 110 over what came out
of lfc, Um, from the General
fund. I do want to know Mr Chair
that house transportation, um in
the LSC budget recommendation.
There had been a $50 million
appropriation from the road
funds to wildlife crossing to
the wildlife crossings, fun that
was changed in house
transportation. Uh and and we
did not change that in HFC, but
I know Mr Chair. This remains a
high priority, given our strong
support of the general fund,
for, um
From HFC. I would encourage you
and the committee should look at
that, Uh, the original lfc
recommendation regarding
specifically wildlife crossings.
Mr. Chair. I do wanna share that
There was an amendment on the
house floor that sought to
prohibit funding for the Public
Education department.
To enforce 181 they in potential
rule makings for 181 days. Um,
Mr Chair. Uh,
The tobacco. We we assume now
that the tobacco settlements
fund will come out in fy 26
instead of fy 25.
And, um, continuing to work with
you and your staff on the grow
fund as part of potentially part
of reserves. We know that,
frankly, Mr Chair, ending the
session at 30% reserves and then
coming back into the session at
50% reserves isn't really
serving the state well, and so
if there are other
Uh, reserve funds that need to
be identified that allow us to
invest in, particularly in non
recurring special priorities
were very open and up for that,
Uh, Mr Chair, I would, um,
conclude their, uh wrote, uh,
share that we according to our
house joint rule, this is
exactly where we're supposed to
be.
On the 16th day. We need to have
the budget here to you and your,
uh, Committee and your
colleagues and Mr Chair we want
to remind in sort of close with
the joint rule.
Expects the bill back to the
house on the 21st day. I believe
it is. I'm not mistaken. So
which this year turns out to be
February, the sixth
With that, Mr Chair. Wanna very
much complement Director Sally's
leadership. He and his team. Uh
And of course you know, Amanda
Dick Petty, our our House
Appropriations chief of staff.
They're here with me to answer
any questions that you or your
Going with anything just to
answer any questions. Mr
Chairman. Questions from
committee members, Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Um
No on this page before you go to
the
With 20 million for
Indian water rights.
Wasn't that a 30? Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Senator Gonzalez, the
executive asked for 35 million.
The LFC recommendation or the L
C budget had 5 million.
And so what? We We basically
added, uh, roughly half of that
in house appropriations finance.
Mr Chair. There was some back
and forth about whether that
money could be spent prior to
some of these settlements being
completed.
And at least in a few cases, we
HFC was compelled that there was
work, including outside of
tribal areas that were part of
the settlements that merited the
additional 15 Million investment
percentage. Do you have the
green on your mic? I do. Sorry.
I'll get a little closer. Okay,
so thank you Text messages.
Okay. Sorry about that. Mr
Chairman and chairman
So how is the state engineer
with
Does he feel that that will
work? 20 million Mr Chair in my
communications with the state
engineer After HFC took action,
there was appreciation for the
work that we had done. I haven't
asked if it's like
Fully filled to the top, but it
sounded like there was a lot of
appreciation for the work today,
HFC and, um, I'll just end with
this, Mr Chairman.
This part is a little bit
different because you do have
the settlement.
And, uh, you don't want to have
any violations to that because
of any if we do
Brings the entire whole thing
back again. And, uh
That has many, many years.
Working with just
See where the state
Engineering's with this
Thank you. Thank you.
Padilla. Thank you. Chair and
thank you, Chairman and Charles
and Amanda. So just two
questions, then on the universal
free breakfast. There's just
been a lot of numbers thrown
back and forth. Every time we
sit down and talk about this, it
seems And I would I would
consume this whole thing in two
minutes, But I just can't do
that. As you know. So can you
give me some sort of rundown?
Where we are with.
We're recurring would wind up in
this budget.
Mr Chairman, Senator because the
numbers have been jumping
around there was a um somewhat
of an agreement.
Two.
Use another round of non
recurring funding. Um, for the
supplemental need for sure. For
this year, the House did half of
that Estimated shortfall.
And then for next year not to
put it in recurring because
these numbers are kind of still
moving around for many folks,
and to do that amount that the
executive asked for it. Half the
House did half of that for FY
25, and you'll see it as a
special.
So okay. Thank you, Chairman. So
what's the actual number then?
That we can plan for for
physically you'd be looking at
the Senate matched the house.
You'd be looking at an
additional 20 million on top of
the 20 million. That's in the
recurring base for a total of 40
million for one year, but then
recurring would still be 20
million. You need to come back
next year, Mr Chairman to figure
out how much to build in on a
recurring basis once the
program's finances stabilized,
stabilized.
So it's recognizing New York,
creating a somewhat of a
liability for next year and the
chair of the second question. I
want to ask those on the special
transportation appropriation.
There's
I'm used to that being about
three pages worth of. I see less
than almost less than half a
page there and and you know,
there's there's There's a lot of
dollars. They're a lot of zeros,
but, um
So we would call out specific
things in years past. I know in
section
I think this was Section nine
last year, and we were able to
put in specific things. I don't
see anything specific about
this. And just as though here is
$250 million, have added good
luck if you can fight your way
into getting some of that Mr
Chair Center for the I think, in
large part due to the fact that
we didn't have we had a lot to
add in a very short time.
Ah, there wasn't sort of that
full process, Mr. Chair. I am
working with chair Hochman V
Hill and others in the house.
And I know so I think we have
time to have that orderly
process. We were proud, Mr.
Chair, Senator to sort of step
up pretty substantially. And
then add 100 and 10 million on
the house side.
Ah, understanding that there's a
lot of detail work to do. Even
as you all consider, maybe
additional, and this question is
for you then so we would wind up
with
I think you call him in years
past the language committee.
Or subcommittee or
We've already reviewed Link got
here last week. We were reviewed
language and disgusting.
What new language comes up. Try
to get rid of notwithstanding,
cannot
Great law in the back of house
bill to you, Anybody can go to
court.
So clearly not running a bill or
not legislative and and Mr Chair
Center just to put everyone's
mind at ease. We don't have any
notwithstanding language that we
added in HSC, and I appreciate
that chairman and chairman. I
don't wasn't proposing
notwithstanding language. I just
hope that we use a similar to or
Like process that we used last
year. You might recall it's very
painful experience for me
personally when we were able to
get some stuff put in there at
the end. Um just to make sure
that you know this was not just
a big blob of money out there
and, you know
Good luck trying to get it for
your you know, for something
that needs to be done and
In your region of the state or
whatever so
Will we be following that
process in the Senate?
Mhm. Ah will determine that
because
We still have
In the executive fulfill.
Part of that.
Some people know I worth of
exactly
Another 200 million of
Reoccurring request from the
kind of been saddled with that
over the last and where we get
You guys are thinking about this
year's budget.
I am already targeting next
year's budget when reoccurring
money will only be to the tune
of 250.
Roughly 250 million.
So that reoccurring number is
constraining if we have to come
back and spend 20 million and
just
That's 1/10. So we are on this
cliff of reoccurring money and
how it can sustain the budget.
Um going to higher and higher
levels.
$2 billion.
Roughly $4 billion over the four
year period.
Is another. A lot of work in the
Short time and everybody has a
just be my last comment. I guess
on this topic. So, um,
everything I've just talking
about a little while ago. This
is all one time money.
Especially where transportation
projects are concerned. I just
want to make sure that I want to
ask that we have that discussion
that we had last year so that we
can try at least
Form a little more with this is
Senator If you ask me the
question on D O T E g O T s
numbers do not add any
additional roads with current
funding, even if we added
additional 200 million
That does not add new roads to
their program.
That brings them up to inflict.
They already have.
In bed BOT ahead of the curve.
You have to find another day, he
said. You guys said well,
They can only
If they give them the house
would've gave him 250 million,
they would only be at the
current level.
They would not be adding road
projects above that level as a
real projects got completed,
they'd have more money, but they
also paid off $100 million worth
of debt.
So they're gonna have 80 million
their budget.
We have the motor vehicle excise
tax, which is about
70 that could go to them.
But that doesn't even include
100. So that's why I d O t what
they think.
Or being mean and
Laundry.
I mean,
Everybody in the capital
represents small. How many
amendments were there yesterday
on road product, Mr Chair on the
floor, none and how many? How
much push was in your committee
on road projects, Mr Chair, I
would say within the committee,
uh, there was significant
feedback around. Uh, certainly
there are regional road
projects. But Mr Chair, I would
say there was significant
feedback from committee members.
That was part of why we
increased and added a
significant amount of 110
million.
And do, you know? Have any total
house Bill two or three That
comes from Transport House Bill
three that comes from
transportation. We know what the
request out of House Bill three
was when it came in.
Mr Chair they didn't have. They
didn't add. An additional
request came over with, um
The we added another 60, so they
came over Essentially Mr Chair
Committee with 100.
Ah!
There was not an additional
request included there.
And did did d O. T maker request
to them for additional money,
Mr. I can't speak to that right?
That's all I have. For now. I
just hope we continue this
conversation.
Senator Rodrigues.
Chairman. Thank you. And thank
you, Mr Chairman, Um, small and,
of course, our staff and Amanda
I right now I don't have any
questions because truly, I
hadn't seen a lot of this, So I
just need a little time to look
at it. And and then we will go
from there. I suppose Adrian
will do a breakdown. And maybe
later, Mr Chairman. Thank you
very much.
Yeah, sure, Senator Woods.
Mr Chairman, I I am convinced
That you should bring a bill
forward if you want money.
You should bring a bill forward
that says I want money. In my
case, it was a president
Clayton.
I brought the bill forward now
that Bill may not
Go.
But the whole state can look
under my stuff and say, By
golly, I want money for Clayton.
And it's transparent.
So
That's all you have to do in
this deal.
If you want to earmark money.
Bring a bill and vote on it.
It's pretty simple.
I know that in the past, uh
we've we've passed a late
minute. Uh, well, I make a
motion.
And all you have to do is is get
a quick
Uh, motion to through the chair.
And, uh, spend a million
Half a million quarter million.
Whatever it is
Nobody out here votes on it.
Only only this committee votes
on that.
Particular deal.
At least bring it through the
committee work.
To show that transparency is
what I'm asking for Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman on that note. I just
want to echo the same concerns
and really, thank you. I think
in the end of last session, you
made it very clear to this
committee and really anyone who
wanted anything in the budget
that unless you have a bill
before me that tells me how much
you're looking for, and really
outlines exactly the intent of
how that money is going to be
spent.
We weren't considering it. No
more of this, like seek sneaking
stuff in And because of that,
you can kind of look up and see
where some people have.
Have money appropriated
contingent upon
Their bill passing, and so if I
want further information on
where we're spending, you know
$30 million or $6 million
somewhere else, I can look up
and see the details of how that
money is appropriated because
it's attached to some sort of
bill and the public and the
lobbyists and everyone. It's
very transparent. How we're
spending the money, but I to
echo the same concerns with
Senator Senator Woods.
And and I would say that was
made very, very clear.
By this committee last year.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um you know
how I feel about transparency
and I, and that's the problem is
is that we see standards that
tend to go all over the place.
quite frankly, and selective
application of them.
So
You know their initiatives
started in the house LLCs talked
about that we may see
Attempts to try to take him away
in this committee, so I think
you know we should be consistent
about it, and I
We'll definitely be watching
some of those provisions and, uh
But also, I think, generally
speaking as appropriators, we
should be a transparent with
everything we do in all of our
meetings and all of our
documents. Um, in our disclosure
of what we're funding
And that's just I feel very
strongly about that. So
I just want to add that Mr
Chair. I have a question for
you, Mr Chairman. I'm good job
on the budget. I know how
How hard lfc worked and how
inclusive your committee was,
and I mean it's a lot of hard
work, and I'm just I would go
home and watch your committee at
night and see all the just
countless public comments and
testimony and just
You know, doing the extra work
to be inclusive. Tip my hat to
you and your staff and of C and
I just want to ask. I'm seeing
some things in the summary with
economic development. It seems
like they're a little bit
different than what we've heard
a few days ago were their
amendments on the floor for
economic development funds that
were added Mr Chair, Senator.
No, no amendments on the floor.
Specifically, I saw Lida
I saw it kind of a bigger lead
in number than I thought we were
left with a few days ago. Mr
Terry. Yes, Senator. Er
Excuse me, There's a 13.5 or
Yeah, $13.5 million lead US
special 13 million of that Mr
Chair senator meant for the
overall lead of fund 500,000.
Mr. Chair Senator for a site
Readiness survey that was
bipartisan House legislation.
Ah sort of making sure that as
we look, including with the
Opportunity Enterprise fund,
where we added $175 million,
there might be a lot of larger
scale development and we want to
make sure that the site
readiness that communities have
the chance to essentially get
their areas ready.
Okay, so we'll be looking at all
I have for now, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Do you have a lot of ketchup?
That just tells us the exact
that they can't
They can't make a rule. Will B's
communication is is key in this,
but
We see that you took the tobacco
settlement money spent part of
it through the other.
We understand where we want to
be with the reserves. There is a
notwithstanding unpaid first
line item for the
Fire.
Charles, do we know why that
would be there?
Mr Chairman That is there to, um
find the administrative cost of
the fire marshal's office from
the Fire Protection fund, and
that came through an lfc that
was not
And why did Alessi putting up
with standing in their Why did
we not draft an LFC built to do
that?
Mr Chairman. Um, that's a
Suggested change that staff will
be bringing forth because we
don't think that you need that.
Does it still change statute
without the one we will visit
with your chief of staff to go
over? How the okay
Let me ask ones. One thing
represents small
On the water rights settlement.
How much of that was really
declared by the federal
government.
And how much
Mr Chair. I don't have the
breakdown in front of me, Mr
Chair. Well, we heard was that
as Senator Gonzalez talked
about, there are some ongoing
settlements where these
resources could be helpful.
There are others in
representative Sanchez and
represent Garcia talked about
this, uh in their respective
communities.
Where there is work in the
Espanola Valley. Uh,
And in northwest New Mexico,
sort of off that not on tribal
lands that's connected to those.
I don't I'll ask this to, I
think would encourage. We can
work with the state engineer to
get what that breakdown is.
Ultimately, Mr Chair. This was a
much like there was initial
asked last year of $100 million.
In this area.
And there's seemingly over the
course of a number of years, so
We can get you a breakdown of
what the 15 Million is meant to
do for sure.
You know, we appreciate your
help on non reoccurring. How
much communication did you have?
With the exact on on the
reoccurring costs in the special
appropriation sections. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Amanda just noted
the number. We added $330
million Mr Chair and Committee
members that were related
directly to the executive
priorities.
Ah Ah ah, And that came and I
want to thank the executive for
sharing their priorities and
being we had a couple of
different special supplemental
and efficiency hearings. Um, so
Yeah, the that overall number Mr
Chair stands from our reckoning
at $330 million of non recurring
added specifically for not for
executive.
Connected to executive
priorities.
And and so as we move forward,
and I did talk to one
representative on appropriation
that was for capital, nobody's
perfect.
And in the end if we don't
communicate communication, we're
not knowing what's happening is
your members are gonna be coming
Agencies and secretaries coming
to
Everybody on the Senate side
with
A flurry of papers and ensure
that it will make notice that
To the secretaries, and
hopefully they're listening. Is
that all our recommendations
will come through the come in? I
asked her if she liked her house
budget. She agreed. No need to
hear you were good.
Some sat down. Some did.
And so as they come to you happy
with their budget.
Sometimes you should be happy
and go home.
Mhm and call it good rather than
trying to keep
Taking a bite.
I don't know if people really
know this, but it takes a lot of
hard work. A lot of time. This
budget is not one form of
representative thought when she
was here, at one point that it
just magically showed up. It's a
lot of hard work and dedication
and a lot of back infinite. I
did hear a comment in the hall.
Um, that really alarms me.
That tells me that
There.
Not willing willing to work
together.
The Senate moves anything. We're
going, that's no way to start
off.
Start off. You don't start off
with the fight.
We'll have disagreements if they
think that's where the budget
should go.
I'm not. I don't have time in my
life.
577,600 million.
I can't buy time.
If you want to fight
It's it doesn't do anybody in
the state any good?
So, Mr Chair, I think we I want
to say really appreciate the
dialogue through the LSC. You
know, having to outstanding
chiefs of staff. Now with our L
S c. I think we've been able to
stay in close communication. The
particularly when we talk about
the recurring increases that we
did in the areas that I
mentioned.
I think there's a lot of
balance. Um
And we were happy to share those
with folks ahead of time. Think
totally agree continuing to work
in that manner, Mr Terror again
on the, uh, the non reoccurring.
There's um You know, there is
certainly continued executive
appetite and their continued
high priorities.
I think we We feel like there is
strong, non recurring capacity.
we understand and respect you
and the committee's worked at
all. Go in there.
Noted again in my opening as we
look at how we balance and right
sized reserves, there's an
argument to be made that some of
the growth funds or other
reserve opportunities are the
appropriate way to do that. That
could free up non recurring
capacity. Um, but I'll and also
say, you know, we feel really
good about
What we're bringing over here,
investing in the reforestation
center some other things, but we
appreciate and we know that this
is a process that depends upon
communication. You all have a
lot of work over the next four
or five days, according to that
joint rule, and we respect it.
We support it. We appreciate it.
It makes us a better state and
really appreciate.
Again going back to the
summertime. I think we've set a
very good standard. It's focused
on work, communication and
outcomes.
Well, you know.
The joint rule is there and you
know this as well as I do.
We went from 4 billion
5 billion
Maybe those those rules
shouldn't apply.
Because time is critical to what
we're hearing and what we're
looking at.
I don't know about you, but you
know, walking through the hall
is like almost impossible.
To even go to the bathroom
without some lobbyists or
someone handing your sheet of
paper that saying Don't do this
do that. And so, I mean,
As we move forward. I mean, I
don't know how we get more time.
Right?
Maybe not in the 60 day and then
a 30 day. That's critical. I
mean, because Charles, it takes
72 hours.
Print the changes correct.
Mr Chairman were
Depending on when we're allowed
to start. Um, we've got a rule
of thumb of better not turn that
around.
And I know last year we did have
a
I mean, we can talk about rule.
I mean well.
You try to buy two. But is that
really is that really you guys
started a week earlier than us.
We kind of just hang around and
go through each. If you're
getting the different story than
we're getting on that side, and
and so
We might want to look at
changing that rule.
Because as we grow if we don't
change when they grow
We're going to continue to
The short change ourselves.
Everybody every every every
Prior. I've I've been on lfc. It
means they're compost. Let me
ask you this question. Has there
ever been a time when, when one
chair, another said by rule, You
have to have this over to us.
So
Thank you Appreciate it. We'll
have some conversations and it
I mean, I made him
Lot of which your fault, but
Changing statute. Your
committee right, so make that
Thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for the
opportunity Company, Mr Chairman
um And as you indicate so that
we can continue if you will,
with a line of communication and
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, um
I see this as a great
opportunity for us, and I know
there's going to be a lot of
work ahead of us.
That communication is going to
be not only, uh,
Imperative. But as we go
forward, I hope that we're going
to continue with that
communication because this is
the Legislature's budget tied in
with the chief executive sort of
go back to Mr Chairman. Your
comments as we deal with this.
We definitely want to continue
that relationship to to build
this into the strongest budget
that we can to take care of the
people in New Mexico.
And then lastly, Mr Chairman.
I really appreciate working with
chairman Small and this was gosh
going back several several years
in terms of the etiquette. The
transparency in the issues and
if there is any misconception
today, Mr Chairman, I hope that
we're able to resolve that and
be able to move forward so that
we do get not only a good budget
for the people of New Mexico,
but as we talked about
How this is going to grow out
for the next several years, so
that we take care of the needs
of people. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
You can't let the ghosts of the
past goes to the future already
hunting us.
You know that's happening. So
thank you for your time.
Appreciate it and appreciate
your all work. Thank you. Chair.
Thank you.
