At the table will be starting
with this packet that says
Um, review of public school
support, it's got a blue bar at
the top, and then after we talk
about that, the SCG piece.
We'll be moving to the LAC
presentation.
So if you could turn with me to
page one.
Of your handout, you'll see the
public school support high level
requests here.
Um, you'll see the executive LEC
LFC and then HSC recommendation.
This reflects the changes that
the House approved, um, for
public school support. I'm just
gonna go over the major changes
in this high level and then we
can move on to the presentation.
So the first major change you'll
see is online 22 of this high
level.
This is $10 million in the HFC
recommendation for secondary
education reforms, that's an
increase in recurring
appropriations for the SCG and
that brings the SCG to a 6.3%
increase, which you'll see
online 28.
That's the only change ATFC made
for the recurring peace for
public schools, um, it's not
tied to any specific program
units. It's just an increase in
the unit value.
The next change is on page.
Yeah
Sorry, page 5.
So, so, page 3.
You could turn the page 3.
We are going to start online.
83.
Line 83 is a K-12 plus
supplement, um, which the
committee
Moved to line 84.
This $5 million line 84 is just
the funding formula, hold
harmless provision um related to
changes proposed in House Bill
63, which Johnson and we'll go
over in a bit.
The committee also added 30
million online 85 for secondary
education reforms.
They also added two
appropriations of 3 million 1
line 86 and one on line 87 for
steam initiatives and a STEM
network.
The increased line 89 for
special education initiatives to
the department of $4 million.
And they
Added 30 million on line 96 or
Indian Education initiatives.
Now this is 10 million a year
for 3 years, um, this
appropriation was originally
part of the Perth grow
appropriation.
Moving down the line.
11.
The HMC sub adds 5 million for
universal school meals,
potential cost overrun.
Online 103, they increased the
Ed fellows program to 20 million
from the LFC recommendation of
15.
On line 104, they increased the
summer enrichment internships
program from 5 million to 10
million.
On line 111, you'll see that
it's a reduction of 10 million
in CTE, however, that is
actually still 40 million. The
HSC sub uses 10 million from the
CTE fund to make that 40 million
in line with
The LFC recommendation level for
that.
On line 113, school panic
buttons goes up from 1 million
to 1.5 million.
And then if you go with me to
page.
4
On line 126.
The
Adjustments that you
Just uh were created by reducing
the transfer to the public
education reform Fund from 150
million to 84.5 million.
Moving further down, we'll get
into the public education reform
Fund appropriations.
I'm not gonna go through each of
these, but I'm just gonna
highlight lines 136 through
Alliance 149.
The HFC substitute rearranges a
lot of the public education
reform appropriations to create
new
Funding items.
And to adjust some of the
existing recommendations to
become closer to either the
executive or the LESC
recommended funding levels. Um,
and with that, those are the
major changes to the public
school high level, mostly a
non-recurring, um, we'll stand
open for questions on that, uh,
but before that, I'll turn it
over to John Senna to talk about
um House Bill 63.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members, you're getting a copy
of this very brief presentation,
sort of a recap, uh, this is a
condensed version of the
presentation that you all saw
when I was here a few weeks ago
about hospital 63 and the
A funding formula revision.
Hopefully this will serve as a
Brief but good reminder of what
that proposal asked the
legislature to do.
On page 2, just a brief history
of how we've approached this
funding formula review. This is
something that's happened over
the last 2 years, 2 years
through the interim, our staff
has put together a working group
that um essentially culminated
in House Bill 63
recommendations.
On page 3.
You'll see all the recommended
changes for House Bill 63 on on
one slide.
And so I'm gonna go through each
of them individually, but I
wanted you to see them all
together. Obviously the cost
there, the total cost is $132.9
million.
For each of the, for all three
combined.
Uh, the current budget bill.
Includes 56.5 million for
portion of those changes, and
I'll talk through each of those
very quickly.
Uh, leaving 76.4 that you would
need to appropriate if you
wanted to do all of the
proposals that are included in,
in, in hospital 63.
So on page 4.
Very quickly,
At-risk funding in New Mexico
currently is made up of 3
different factors. I talked
about this the last time.
Essentially, we're talking about
Title One, which is a, a proxy
for poverty.
The, the percentage of English
learners in a district and
student mobility, the sum of
those three components are
multiplied by 0.33, and then a
school district or charter
schools membership.
And that, that's how you develop
the at-risk factor for that
individual school district.
The current proposal in House
Bill 63 is that we would replace
that methodology.
Uh, with the family income index
methodology, which is, I won't
get into the details here, but
it's essentially a more accurate
and more transparent way of
identifying poverty at the
school site and district level.
And it's information and data
that we have access to in our
state, so that we can double
check the, the, the veracity
essentially and the validity of
that data on a regular basis,
whereas uh that's not possible
with Title One. That's a federal
number that we get directly from
the federal government.
Again, provides more accuracy
and transparency. This
component.
In House Bill 63 is already
funded.
In House Bill 2 in the, in the
HAFC substitute for on page 5.
Um, Hospital 63 also includes
the creation of a standalone
English learner factor.
Again, English learners are
currently embedded.
In the at-risk as one of 3
components in the at-risk
factor.
Which means we capture those
students in in some ways, but
school districts really don't.
Can't track how much money their
English learners are generating
for their school district and
how much money they have then to
support those students.
So creating a stand-alone
English learner factor creates
more transparency around that
process, helps districts, school
districts, and charter schools
understand the amount of funding
that those students are
generating for their school
districts and ideally be more
intentional about using those
funds or services for those
students.
The English, the standalone
English learner factor is also
already included in the current
version of the budget.
And then on the last page 6,
Is, uh, when it's spend a little
bit more time here is on the
secondary. So, as I said, I
think the first time I was here,
the school funding formula for
those of you who aren't super
familiar with it, essentially
provides funding based on the
number of students and the types
of students, either the grade
level in which they're in, or
some other characteristics.
So the current factor for 6th
grade is 1.045, so every sixth
grade student generates 1.045
units.
For 7 through 12th grade 12th
grade, each of those students
generates 1.25 units.
It's in this area where we heard
from school districts and
continue to hear from school
districts about the need for
additional service for services
for secondary students.
Both in the kinds in things like
pure technical education.
Performing in fine arts.
Behavioral mental health
supports in the, in the form of
counselors and social workers.
These are all things that we
know are critically important.
And not just for high school,
but for middle school too.
So the proposal that that
working group and our committee
brought.
to the legislature is to
increase the factor for all
grades 6 through 12.
To 1.30.
That's an additional $91.3
million.
That would flow to school
districts and charter schools or
students in those grades.
Hospital 2 currently includes an
increase to 1.1475 for grade 6,
so there is a small increase for
6th grade at a, at a cost of
about $15.2 million. That's
already in the House
Appropriation substitute for the
budget.
To fully fund the increase for
all grades would cost an
additional 76.4 million.
to increase for all secondary
students.
Um
It just so happens, and this is
something we've been talking,
I've been talking about with a
few people and we just
And a memorial was just
introduced on the House side to
look at.
To look at how we fund or don't
fund things extracurricular
activities and other kinds of
options for students.
Things like band or
Drama, debate.
Athletics.
And it's asking us to look at
how we fund those things because
uh one representative is hearing
from their community that
students and families are paying
hundreds of dollars a year to
participate.
In the kinds of things that we
know engage students, keep them
coming to school.
It's probably for a lot of us,
the things that we remember most
about our secondary experience.
I'm sure some of us have a
really favorite math teacher.
But a lot of us also remember
some of those other things that
happened in high school.
These are the kinds of things
that an increase to the
secondary factor.
could help school districts and
charter schools to pay for.
And with that, Mr. Chair, uh,
we'll stand for questions.
Go ahead.
OK. Any questions from committee
members?
Cos I mean.
Senator Senator Campos.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Uh just uh quickly in
one of the uh thematic pieces
that continues to go ahead and
be uh
Before us as we deal with the
SCG and in particularly if
We were to appropriate
additional resources and going
back to some of the things that
you've already alluded to.
Does, does that
Help us if we're able to go
ahead and put more money into
the SCG so it goes to the
formula, goes to the schools and
of course through the uh
governing body, superintendent.
Um, then we're able to address
more of these, these resources,
or if you will, more the, the,
uh, the programs that are.
That are there as well as the
ancillary services that, that,
that, that are provided.
Just trying to figure out how
can we get the resources.
Directly to the students, but do
it as equitably as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't
know if anyone wishes to
respond.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, I, I
appreciate the question.
Our formula, I should say, um,
is one of the, the was a
An innovative formula at it when
it when it was created in the
70s and continues to be so.
Across the country, states are
just now adding some of the
things to their formula that
we've had in place in New Mexico
for a very long time. And so I
think we should be proud of the
way that the formula works in
distributing funds to students.
One thing to keep in mind, as
you all make appropriations
every year is.
We'll make an estimate, for
instance, about um how much it
costs to fund teachers'
salaries.
That money goes into the formula
and then flows out to districts
again based on those those
student populations.
But that money is essentially
spoken for when it flows out
because districts are then
required to provide those, those
raises to to teachers and and
all school personnel.
Adding money to the formula for
things like secondary units, uh,
and potentially just to put
money into the formula to
increase the base as a whole,
does exactly what you're, what
you're suggesting, Senator. It,
it provides some local
flexibility for school districts
to make decisions about their
funding to provide the kinds of
services that those communities
want. We've heard a lot about
career technical education,
super important as a way to
engage students to provide um
other kinds of skills to
students to connect, applied.
Academic learning to real world
scenarios.
But that's not the only place
that can happen. There are other
kinds of activities that
students can participate in, and
by allowing school districts to
make some of those decisions,
they're able to decide which of
those services and opportunities
they want to provide for their
local students.
So Mr. Chairman and uh related
to this, and I'm not gonna go
ahead and uh
Continued too much on this
point, but with the SCG.
And you take small school
districts let's say, say like uh
Vonn or Maxwell.
Um
And, and they're working with
the SCG and then possibly
they're gonna need the
additional resources and then of
course we have below the line,
but.
I'm, I'm trying to figure out if
If there is definitely the need
for more resources going
directly into the SCG.
And, and how we can let school
districts know.
Possibly a little bit sooner.
how they can best plan for that
budget because there's a
compaction period.
Um, here's the SCG that they're
waiting for it and they're
trying to go ahead and develop
their budget present that.
And uh I'm trying to figure out
how as we move forward.
Our school, our school boards,
or school districts or
superintendents.
And best plan for the resources
and uh and use those resources
as optimmately as possible as
well.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know if
anyone wishes to respond to
that.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think that
is um
The question that is at the
center of this debate, which is
how much do you provide in local
control.
versus how much you provide
under state control. When you
flow funding through the SCG
that's not tied to any units or
it's.
Um
Tied to something like a
membership weight which is.
Simply a difference between how
much it costs to pay for a high
school versus an elementary
student.
You're essentially giving more
local control for those
decisions to be made, and the
money is flowed out.
On the front end each month.
When you appropriate money for a
specific factor that's tied to,
say, let's do K-12 plus for
instance or bilingual.
Schools have to demonstrate that
they're doing the program.
You have essentially put state
control over those monies, they
have to demonstrate that that's
happening in order to get that
funding. When you do below the
line funding.
That money has to be applied for
and to your point, sometimes the
timing of when those funds flow.
May require schools to hold on
to a certain amount of cash. And
so then you sort of have this.
Moving target of how much
funding is available, so at the
state level you have a real
opportunity to make a decision
on how much you want local
control.
Uh, to dictate the funding
that's being allocated versus
how much the state is
controlling and how that affects
the timing of funds that schools
have access to.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, uh, to the
panel. I really appreciate your
wisdom and it's something that I
know we need to consider and
continue to contemplate as we
move forward, and I hope in the
next uh few days as we take a
look at HB 2 at all that uh
within the educational
components, uh, that we were
able to go and come up with.
Um, some of the additional, uh,
Financial infusion in order to
go ahead and make that decision
a little bit clearer for our
districts.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Trull.
Excuse me. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for this
presentation. So, um,
I will just say that I, I, I
get.
Like the local funding is
something that I advocated for
when I was on the school board.
Advocated for when I was
Um
uh
President of the School Boards
Association.
And the reason was for that
flexibility.
But now that I'm on this side,
um, just
Call it that, I guess, um, I
recognize because I hear from
school districts.
All over the state, not just my
own school district, but other
school districts that it's
because we historically
underfund public education, we
tell them to keep doing more and
doing more and doing more, and
we know that public education
needs have changed over the
years and so we're trying to be
flexible. It's harder for them
to find money in the SCG for
things like
CTE
And, um,
I will just point out that
On line 88 and this budget.
We have made the decision at
least preliminary decision to
not add any funding in
specifically for um attendance
for success.
And I've heard that it's a
great, it gives them the
opportunity to hire coaches. Did
you wanna say something?
He has just
Just wanted to make sure you
understood on line 145.
That is uh where the attendance
got you. So it's moved to the
thank you very much for pointing
that out. That's, that's really
helpful. So, so when it's in the
SCG it just becomes harder for
the district to sort out and pay
for all of the things and so
they kind of give a little bit
of money here and a little bit
of money there and we don't
focus attention in on the things
that we know are helping because
there's so many other things
that are helping.
That said, I am a, I'm very
concerned that we've made the
decision preliminary decision,
I'll say cause we're still here
in Senate Finance.
To only move 6th grade up to
1.1475.
There's a reason that it needs
to be at 1.25.
And I am wondering earlier in
the beginning of the legislative
session.
I pretty sure that I heard that
it was 40 million that 40
million that the LESC and the
Joint Committee thought was what
was needed.
Um, now I hear that.
We've put in 15 million, which
is 35 million less than what was
recommended, but we're saying
that to get there, it would be
an additional 76. Can you answer
me understand that Senator
Trujillo.
So the 40 million was for 6th
grade alone. Got you. The, the
additional 50 has to do with 67
through 12 also being increased
to 1.3.
So the original proposal was to
take all 6 through 12 to 1.3.
What you see in the budget is
just affecting 6th grade. And so
you're right, the original 6th
grade was 40.
That's the additional 50 for 7
to 12. OK, Mr. Chairman, so to
get to 6th grade being the same
as what 8th, 9th, and 10th,
11th, and 12th grades is right
now. We need an additional 35
million.
25. Math is not my thing.
Go ahead,
um, Mr. Chair, so currently, as
John mentioned in his
presentation, 7th through 12th
is at 1.25.
Units per student.
If you wanted to get 6th grade
to 1.25, that would only be 15.
And the house is already added
10, so you would only need 5 to
make up.
That difference. If you just
wanted to get 6 to 1.25.
Um, Mr. Chair, can
Because I saw 40 million.
Was what the ask was to give the
original was 40, um, there is 15
already. There is a 10.
So I think it's, you know,
we're.
started with straws a little
bit, but.
So Mr. Chair and Senator, the
proposal was to take 6th grade
to 1.3. So that's why it's 40 in
the in the other.
And Mr. Chair, if I could very
quickly Senator, on your comment
about SCGA. What you're hearing
from Superintendents, I think
often is that.
Um
Again, as I said about salary
increases or minimum increases,
that money is spoken for when
you put it in the SCG.
It's not money that districts
can, even though it's
discretionary, the, the, the pot
of money as a whole.
When you put money in for
salaries, that's where it needs
to go. And so when you say
something about, you know, we
can't hire attendance coaches or
another social worker or
something like that. It's
because the money generally that
you put in the SCG is assigned.
Or something.
So it doesn't leave that level
of flexibility at the local
level, whereas something like
the either the hospital 63
proposal or even the 10 million
in um that Sunny mentioned as a
difference at HAFC puts in.
That's less tied to a particular
purpose. So it does give a
little bit of room. I will call
your attention very quickly if
you will, to lines.
I believe 12 and 14, but let me
double check here.
12 and 14.
which also puts a little bit of
pressure on school districts.
Every year for the last few
years, uh, there's been a
recommendation to decrease the
amount.
In the um in the formula.
Based on dropping enrollment. So
the assumption there is that
fewer students means fewer
costs.
And for those of you who've been
on school boards or worked in
schools, that's possible, but it
isn't always the case.
And so 12 and 14 actually add up
to a negative 35 million.
So when you talk about school
districts, being able to use
that SEG funding to do other
things that are not assigned.
That squeezes just a little bit.
Right? And again, it it and it
affects every district
differently depending on whether
or not their enrollment actually
went down because some, some
districts don't see dropping.
So, um, Mr. Chairman, I will
just say that
A school costs the same
functionally.
E
To repair, to keep clean, to
All of the things that are
operational.
Whether you have
150 or 250 students, those
operational are the same. It's
like a bus. You can have 5 kids
or you can have 30 kids. It's
gonna cost the same to operate
the bus and so I understand that
declining enrollment may seem
like, oh, that's a good place to
cut.
Um, but I, for me, it just seems
like it's a better place for us
to then have more investment
instead of less investment, and
I don't mean more. I just mean
then that makes the SCG bigger
because you have less students.
I do also understand and I will
acknowledge that districts need
to right size.
However,
I also believe firmly that kids
and families need to have
schools in their local
communities, and it's not, it's
not appropriate for them to have
to be, you know,
Uh, way out of their
communities. It's just those
local schools have always been
really helpful for families and
for kids to know when you come
home, I don't know about you,
but we came home from school and
we played with the kids and our
neighborhood and they went to
the same school we did. I happen
to live on the border, so across
the street from me was another
school that went the other
direction, got to know those
kids too, but I played more with
the kids that were at my school,
so I do think local school.
are important.
And I think you were, uh,
somebody was raising their hand.
Mr. Chair and senator, I do
wanna give school districts and
charters some credit. If you do
look back 10 years ago, they
have actually studied the
decrease their workforce in
relation to enrollment declines
as well.
They usually wait till a
retirement happens and they
don't refill those positions. I
think the biggest challenge
right now is we have big schools
in several areas that used to
have a larger population. So
those facility costs are
becoming increasingly
challenging.
I
And Mr. Chara, um.
Deputy Director Courtney just
reminded me that um as the
enrollment decreases and the
units.
Decline in the formula, the unit
value does inextricably rise.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I will just say one of
the things we've done here
locally is increase our um
schools to K8.
Um, and that helped us to
consolidate some of our middle
schools, and that was something
a preference that our our.
He actually asked for. So that's
really all the questions I have.
I will just close with saying
that
I think it's time for us to look
at those extra activities. I, I
can tell you a school on this
side of town.
And raised $30,000 at a
Halloween event.
Mm
And you could have a Halloween
event at the school in my
neighborhood, and they'll be
lucky if they can raise $1500
for the whole year.
And that 30,000 that that school
on this side of town is able to
raise in that one afternoon and
it's a fun event if you've never
gone, I encourage it.
Um, I'm not gonna call out the
school, but um,
They use that for things for
after school programs.
They use it to provide those
extra activities, which means
then those neighborhoods that
can't raise that money.
Don't get access to those kinds
of activities, so I'm really
happy that we're looking at.
Thank you, Mr. Chaney.
Thank you, Senator Brent.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. I've got
a couple of things, um.
I, I wanna actually start with
some of my questions and then
I've got some questions from the
rearranges asked me to ask, um,
but
Which one of you want to answer
this.
Maybe Sonny and John.
Can answer, but um.
The, the LESC recommendation.
Um
And the LFC recommendation are
different.
When it comes to the proposed
SCG changes.
Um, neither one though actually
put a separate factor for CTE.
Um, I, I think that's a huge
lost opportunity, you both know
I do.
Um, it's not like this is a
secret, right?
No one ever has to guess how I
feel about things.
Um, CTE is one of those one of
those places that we see massive
increases in graduation rates.
They go from like 60% to 96%.
For for kids that are in
CTE concentrators.
Which for everyone that doesn't
know, that means you're taking 2
CTE classes in the same field.
That's a concentrator.
Um, and so, but we're not
funding those even though we see
this massive increase.
Yeah
graduation rates and then what
we're trying to get to.
I have a real hard time with
that.
Sorry, my allergies are killing
me today.
Uh, I have a really difficult
time with that. In fact, when
you we started this group.
I pulled a bill that would have
increased.
Funding separately in the SCG.
4 CTE because I was told it
would be
The top priority of this group.
And I also want to bring to to
everyone up here's attention
that there wasn't a single
legislator part of that group.
Not one, this is a bureaucrats.
Uh, recommendation. None of,
none of our recommendations were
taken into place and none of us
were on the uh working group.
So I think that's a problem.
Um
This
Again, there is an agreement
between F LFC and LESC, but
neither one of you funded.
Uh, either one of the groups
recommended funding CTE. Why?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Brandt, uh, we.
Just wanted to, to clarify that
we did have uh a couple of
members that were that were uh
Invited to the working group.
In the end, Representative
Garrett was the only one who
participated, but she did
participate.
Um, what we heard from folks in
that working group was
definitely the emphasis on CTE,
your, your point about, uh, the
success rate for CTE is well
known and and something that we
talked about as well. Something
that we've talked a lot about in
our committee over the interim.
Um
What we heard from folks is,
The need for some local
flexibility to be able to
provide funding for
A number of different
activities.
And so the secondary, the
increase to the secondary
factor.
would allow school districts who
have made CTE an emphasis and a
priority in their school
districts to use that funding.
For those programs.
In the case of a school district
that is either, you know,
Has other priorities or maybe
isn't um in an area where CT is
the best fit for all of its
students that allows them to do
other things. So it wasn't
necessarily a
That folks didn't think career
technical education was
important.
That, that this, this proposal
allowed folks who wanted to do
that to do so while still
allowing some flexibility for
them to make some decisions.
So
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I do
want to point out that there was
um alignment on the changes in
that the family income index
transition for at risk, but you
are correct, there wasn't a
recommendation that came out of
the task force related to CTE
even though there was a hearing
that the task force had on CT
specifically.
Um
The first year of the task force
was just the study and
fascinating point was that CTE
was a part of the formula back
in the 80s.
And it was taken out, um, I
think secondary was actually
much higher weight because of
it.
Um, the challenge with the CTE
proposal, I think, um, and the
workforce only got one meeting
in the 2nd year to approve
changes, so there wasn't.
More discussion after the
initial proposal came out.
Uh, it probably could have
benefited from more meetings to
go back and forth on what the
changes could have been.
Um, one challenge with CTE
though is that as you're also
aware, some CT programs just
don't cost the same, right? Um,
a nursing program may not cost
the same as a heavy machinery
program. I think some of what we
found nationally for a single
weight CT factor is that
Um, it may not be dynamic enough
uh to cover the costs of
particularly expensive or high
demand programs and so, um, you
have to be very um
Very intentional about what type
of CT programs you're funding
and how your formula, um, sort
of pivots and it's agile enough
to cover the costs of those
types of programs. The second
challenge I'll point out is that
the federal Carls Perkins uh act
requires a maintenance of effort
for operational CT funding. So
the state does decide to move
forward with the CTE factor, we
will be held to similar
standards um like special
education where you cannot.
decrease the amount of CT
funding um coming from the state
on a recurring basis. So we have
to get this right the first time
if we're gonna implement it.
Um, I sure think that it would
have been a good challenge for
the task force to take this up,
um, I don't know if we had
enough time to.
If the task force had spent
enough time on that particular
topic.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Um, both of you for those
answers, um.
I don't like the answers, but
uh.
Thank you for at least giving me
answers.
Um
I, I think we're again messing a
huge opportunity.
Um
I, I, I think that we should
have had some kind of
recommendation.
Um, just saying we're gonna.
Bump up, you know, 6th grade
through 12th to 0.13.
Um, doesn't cut it and anyone
that's actually doing CTE, you
know, Sonny, you alluded to the
different costs, I get that. So
maybe we need to look at a below
the line answer and not a.
Through the funding formula.
Um, but when we do that, we
can't have themed using it for
something else, which we have
seen.
Um, and creating their own
programs when we actually
Say it's gonna go to CTE.
that needs to actually go to
CTE.
Because
Mm
65% of our kids.
Don't go to college.
Everything we talk about in the
SCG is to send them to college.
We need to put a priority on
those other 65% of the kids.
And right now, when you look at
our budget for education, there
is no priority put on it.
The only priority in there is on
everyone going to college.
It doesn't work for everyone and
and it doesn't work for everyone
straight out of high school.
So we're ignoring 65% of our
kids, in my opinion.
With the the current funding
formula and the suggested
changes to the funding formula.
Um
So
With that said, rear rancher has
some, some concerns about their
funding. I know they've talked
to both of you.
Um
I think that we've tried to
answer most of these questions.
I don't know that there is an
answer to most of these
questions.
But a couple of things have
happened in Rear Rancho, and one
of them is they
Lost about 1000 students.
Which obviously
they've lost.
A lot of units
Um, they've also had to, uh,
They were also early adopters on
the extended school year.
Um, and that funding went from
being
Below the line direct to
districts that did it to flowing
through the formula.
When that happened, rear rancho
no longer had enough money to do
it.
But they've now made a
commitment to their
students into the parents to do
it.
Um
So
Do, do we have any kind of, of
funding separate.
To make old ones that did the
extended.
Or that were early adopters of
it or
You know, do we just tell them
who no longer do the extended
days.
Mr. Chair, Senator Brant, I
wanted to speak very quickly
just about the formula in
general and and sometimes how
districts like Rio Rancho.
So in, in, in the last few
years, as I said earlier,
you've, you've actually put a
lot of money into education.
Um, the majority of it has gone
to a couple of things, um, one
is personnel in the form of
increased salaries, and the
other is time.
Um, you've, whether you were
funding K5 plus.
An extended learning time or
when you increase the, the
minimum minimum instructional
hours to 11:40, you paid for
that.
The other place where you've put
a lot of money is into at-risk
factor.
We've actually increased the
at-risk factor over the last 5
years. I want to say almost
nearly 3 times as much as it was
in 2019.
That money flows to districts
with students who generate those
funds. So, as I said before,
currently you're talking about
low-income students.
English learners and those with
high, high percentages of
mobility.
A district like Rio Rancho,
although it's uh a different
district than it was even, you
know, 1015, 20 years ago.
Isn't generating as many at-risk
units as a district like.
Well, where I used to teach in
Espanola, for instance.
And so the formula directs money
to those districts when you put
it in.
Something like increasing the
secondary unit.
Actually flows money to anyone
who has a high school.
It isn't based on a particular
demographic of student.
And, and actually would affect.
School districts like Rio Rancho
because it would blow money to
them the same way as it flows to
anybody else who has a
As a high school, rather than
directing money to particular
issues where individual
districts might be either
serving a particular um group of
students or providing particular
services like CT or bilingual.
That money only would flow to
districts providing those
services. And in this case, uh,
a proposal would actually flow
out. It would provide a little
bit of flexibility. The
districts could then decide to
use, or things like extended
learning and and other issues
and so you can speak.
more to some of the other
specifics if you want.
Mr. Chair, Senator, to your
specific question on Rio Rancho.
Um, and I would say this applies
to Las Cruces and Carlsbad,
those.
Adopters of KO Plus out of
school time funding.
Um, not all schools and charters
actually did that pilot and so.
We would actually probably
recommend in this instance,
doing something like what you
have online 84.
Which is sort of a non-recurring
appropriation to essentially
hold them harmless until they
can recuperate.
From those losses because
Those 3 districts constituted
about 2/3 of that 60 million
appropriation. So this is not
something that's affecting most
districts. So we would actually
recommend you take a more
targeted approach to addressing
those shortfalls from that
specific program. Um, I would
also point to line 85 as an
option given that um you have a
decision on whether you want to
approach secondary this session,
um, but if not, um, this would
be a place that you could uh
leverage funding to address.
those needs.
So, so the, the other um
part of that with the, the
Loss of almost 1000 students.
Um.
You know, that conversation we
were having a little bit earlier
with Senator Trujillo about, you
know,
You're still gonna open the
school, they open the building
and sometimes when you have a
drop across a district of 17,000
students.
Um, it's not enough to actually
Not have the same number of
teachers.
And so that's another area of
concern. I, I don't know how we
address that. I know I'm being
very specific to my district,
but I do know that that Las
Cruces, Hobbs, Gadsden, and Rear
Rancho are kind of all in the
same boat on uh having a real
shortfall.
This year, and I think it's
something we as a committee need
to look at.
Um, and then rear ranch is just
gonna have to make some
adjustments also going down the
road because we can't hold them
harmless forever, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, that, that, you know,
that's a tough question.
And you know, I'd say a couple
of things on that. One, we
The LFC has done a number of
programs, targeted program
evaluations a number of years
ago we did one on Albuquerque,
who's undergone some, some
enrollment shifts, you know,
they have their own funding
formula that they dropped the,
the SCG into their own kind of
Rube Goldberg hopper machine.
And um we talked with them
during that evaluation and, and
one of the things that formula
did was suggest um uh kind of
ideal staffing levels for
schools and, and one of the
things we found during that
evaluation was that they were,
they were staffed very high for
the, the lower enrollment that
they had. And so they've been
working for a number of years to
to right size that which has all
kinds of, of other, other
issues, but the, the other thing
that I, I'd point out and go
back to is
I when, when we do see these
enrollment losses in schools.
Um, you know, that's, it's
compensated to some degree by
that unit unit value going up.
So, in, in the example of, of
Rio Rancho, and I, I know
that's, there are other issues
that, that they're facing, but,
you know, I was just looking at
the last.
4 years of program costs,
despite their, their enrollment
decreases, they're
The program costs and and their
Um
Uh
Amount awarded through the SCG
is actually increased over those
years, um, maybe not, but it
sounds like not to the magnitude
that it, it potentially needed
to to make up for those
enrollment losses. Um, but
that's something that, you know,
Our team and, and probably LEC
can certainly look at and dig
deeper into during the interim
if if the
If our committees direct us to
do so.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Lanier.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, gentlemen.
Um
Well, Senator Brand, he, he
asked all the questions I really
wanted to ask.
scary we're on the same page.
Um
And I appreciate your answers. I
really do.
But on, if we go to page 3,
On your, on, on the
presentation.
So we're talking about impacts.
If you go down to the 3rd bullet
point there recurring fund 9.13.
You kind of skipped now high
school students for long, long
term.
Um
Workforce needs such as career
connected learning, including
career and technical education.
So CTE that I'm a big proponent
of CTE. I think it's a great
thing. I think in the 80s, early
90s when we took it out of the
schools was, was a horrible
thing to do.
So
In there you though you have
music and art program. Isn't
that already?
pretty covered. I mean,
Statewide, I, I don't know of
anybody that doesn't have art.
And music in it.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Lanier,
it's a, it's a good question.
I'm gonna say two things first
to answer your question directly
is, um, so music and art is
usually covered at the, at the
school level in the term of
In the case of uh individuals,
teachers.
Right, but what we're hearing
from folks across the board,
honestly, and there was a big
advocacy group over the, over
the summer about.
Performing arts, especially
support for performing arts and
the kinds of things that we're
hearing from families is,
they're still pitching in
hundreds of dollars a year to
cover the cost of these
programs.
And so you're right that most
school districts have some
version of music and art.
Um, and I would just point you
to the, the winners of the Zan
competition every year. My, my
son is a drummer. And, and
you're gonna see the same folks
over and over again. Rio Rancho.
Uh, some of the Las Cruces
schools, Cleveland, which is
also Rio Rancho, um, Clovis,
like you've got perennial folks
who have built big programs that
are supported by outside
funding, to be honest.
And so some of those things in
terms of experiences for kids
aren't always covered by the
school.
Your point about taking CTE out
of schools.
It's actually something we've
been thinking a lot about
internally.
As the pendulum swings in
education, as it often does.
How we have either supported or
not supported particular trends.
Has meant that we've sometimes
gone overboard and putting a lot
of money into something or
taking a lot of money out of
something that was also part of
the conversation about CTE.
We definitely want to ensure
that school districts have the
resources to provide those
programs.
But we also don't want to commit
them necessarily long term to be
having to provide those programs
if, if interest in their
community shift, if they feel
like they've not been able to
put together a particular kind
of program that they should that
they want to support long term.
A little bit of flexibility in
that funding allows them to
make. Right. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Sonny.
As the chair senator, I would
just add that there is an
elementary fine arts or factor.
There's not a secondary fine
arts factor.
And the question that John's
alluding to is, do you want
state control over specific uses
of formula funding or do you
want local control on this,
right?
Thank you both. That was, that's
exactly what I needed. Um, the
only other thing in, in that
little section.
I want to make sure if when we
fund these that
That the money is getting to the
student as as close as we can. I
understand we can't.
You know, we can't put it right
in their pocket and and do what.
What we would like to do, but
counselors
You know, I don't, I don't
understand why counselors would
fall under CTE.
Just for an example,
In mental health. I mean, we
have mental health so many other
places.
What do you, what do you mean by
mental health, you know, putting
underneath that.
That section.
Mr. Chair, uh, senator, so this
section refers to not just CT
but also sort of secondary
supports.
So those are the kinds of things
that we've heard from school
districts that there's just been
an increased need for mental
health supports for secondary
students. Sometimes that comes
in the form of counselors.
Oftentimes, those folks are also
doing scheduling and testing
coordination. You've worked in
the high school, you know, you
know what that looks like.
But the other kinds of things
like social workers and other
behavioral health supports at
schools are.
You know, it's the reality of
the of the times we're living in
where students need those
supports in districts could use
some of this funding to do that
if they, if they chose.
OK, and that's, you know, Mr.
Chair, that, that's what I'm
worried about is I wanna make
sure we're not losing the CTE
money.
On other things that it's not
really.
Mm
You know, when you look at the
budget, there's so much overlap,
mental health, food services, I
mean, everything kind of
Um, it's a spider web, it, it
works within itself.
But when we, when we start
funding CTE, I want to make sure
that that money is going to CTE
and not to some of those other
I, I don't want the money to get
lost, in other words.
But I think, I thank you for
that question.
Um, and really,
Brent is, and
Got most of my stuff answered.
So if we go to this one,
P on line 36.
Sunny, this one was kind of
Um, you went 136 through 149,
Mr. Chair.
And I was just looking down
through some of those.
And
If, if you look like, for
example, Hispanic on 136,
Hispanic Education Act 137
bilingual multiculture,
education, 138.
Black education, 139 wellness.
Room's pilot.
Would wouldn't that be just as
easy to lump sum that money
together instead of into it. So
for example,
In
In Aztec line 136 is gonna be
very important.
And 138 is not.
So when that money goes to those
schools, do they have the
flexibility?
To, to move those funds between
those categories because each
school is a little different.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I would
just.
Um, clarify that this money is
going to PED.
There are um programming and so
they may use some of this
funding to issue grants
specifically, you could bundle
it all up. um, but then I think,
um, it becomes another issue of
How much did the legislature
intend to go towards some of
these um activities versus
letting the department make
decisions on how much.
goes towards those individuals,
but you're right, you could
ostensibly bundle them together
if if that's um the desire of
this committee and it may be
just a little detail that's not
really that important. I don't
know. I'm, I'm not in on that
end. And Mr. Chair, my last
question, I did forget to to ask
one thing back on page 3 again.
Was the um
Under the CTE.
So in my school districts, I
have
5 high schools within 15 miles
of each other.
So
When, when all the money was
stripped in the 80s, early 90s,
we
We move that around and we
started a program through San
Juan College. So San Juan
College now has auto mechanics,
woodshop, for example, welding.
You can go down the list,
nursing.
And then those high schools, all
transport students to those
classes, instead of having their
own in each each high school,
and I know we're in the benefit
like I said, 5 within 15 miles.
That, that's pretty easy for us
to do.
That won't affect that money,
correct?
The CTE we can
We can still use that money per
student.
Even if, if we're
in San Juan College to.
To have those programs, yeah,
Senator Munoz, uh, Senator I'm
sorry, Chairman Senator when you
exactly, and again, because this
is not tied directly to CTE.
It, it shouldn't negatively
impact any of your programming.
You, you get to use what you've
used before and potentially a
little bit more.
All right, thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Munoz, thank you. You,
you know, I, I didn't realize
that we weren't funding 6th,
7th, 8th, and 9th correctly.
It's been a long time to get
this caught up and we know why
it never came up before.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Jimunos.
Um,
you know, best practices that
you look at funding formulas
every 10 years. And we have
looked at components in, in, in
the previous version of this
presentation, we've talked about
actually a joint LESC LFC study
that was done, I think in 2011,
but sixth grade hasn't been
touched since 1993.
And 7 through 12 hasn't been
touched since the 70s.
Um, other than I think that CTE
component. So I don't know that
there's a reason why it hasn't
been touched, basic program,
what we call just funding the
grades, if you will.
It's something that we haven't
looked at. We've often looked at
specific components within the
formula adding or tweaking, um,
this is the first time we've
looked at that basic program in
a long time.
Sonny
Mr. Chair, I think one of the
challenges is if you think back
to 2008 when the legislature
contracted with EAR to study the
formula.
They did a very intensive.
Uh, sampling of rural urban,
large, small districts, they had
a professional panel. They
looked at how much it actually
cost middle schools versus high
schools versus elementary
schools and try to triangulate
whether the factors were
different and that, that's a
pretty intensive process. I
don't.
Um, there was not, I think,
enough time during the task
force meeting to.
Go to that level of detail and
you know staff to
Um
Sort of
Develop a factor that was that
accurate and so I think that um
that's probably why you haven't
seen proposals of that magnitude
because it is a pretty intensive
process to get an accurate
differentiation between these
cost factors.
the music, I'll be, you know,
it's, it's clear this is not
cheap.
Doing these kinds of things is a
is is a is a big undertaking.
But I also think if you look at
the number of school districts
that apply for below the line
funding.
The amount of districts that are
talking to us about
cost of CTE and, and the need
for additional services, right?
It is pointing to an underlying
need for additional resources
and how you choose to to provide
those resources is up to you.
But the need is there that the
the the desire and the and the
the districts want to provide
these kinds of programs, and
that they're telling us they
need additional funding to do
so. That's a real thing.
And, and there's a study I
remember where I read it, but
I've read like 5 or 5 times
between 6 and 9th grade is where
we have the most dropout.
We never get those kids ever
connected again, and that could
definitely change our numbers in
the graduation rates, I mean, if
I've said this in numerous
times, if we just get
100 students scattered
throughout the state, where all
of a sudden in the middle of the
pack, we're not at the bottom,
right? We're in the middle.
I, I hope this does that.
Senator Lanai is the point about
kids that take welding or auto
body, I mean, and gallop at our
dual credit school, they go to
UNM, they take welding and they
can get a certificate or
associates and they get up
there, they're welding.
We transport kids from the 30
miles out.
They go to the adult credit
school, and then if they take a
welding or a framing class or
whatever it is.
And they're still back at their
school in time if they played
football.
They're in the band and, and so.
I mean
That's the way you get kids
graduated early and get them
connected, uh, in, in the CTE
program, and we should formulate
that so that some of these
locals, colleges have to do that
at at one place cause they
already have the infrastructure.
Um, we'll just have to fund
them.
Have the funding follow the
student, which Gallup does and
other schools don't indul
credit, um, but I think that
really
That's really a success story in
my family, right? I have 2 boys,
both of them graduated with
associates, 1 with 2, right?
Basically just COVID hit and
kind of messed around and rodeo
didn't went all over the.
got his pilot's license during
that time, right? And a junior
college in Arizona and, and
graduated with a degree at like
21.
Right, that, that's how you set
kids up and, and they're both
different, right? And but it it
kept them connected in school,
doing welding and whatever else
they did.
I, I, I don't, I don't,
somebody's asleep at the wheel
that we never caught this or or
what, but I'm glad we're gonna
do it. I mean, we're gonna fund
it fully, I'll tell you that
right now. I made that
commitment.
To you, to the pro team and
we're gonna fund it fully. I'm
gonna, we're gonna get it taken
care of. I just want those.
What else can we do in that 6th
through 9th range to keep those
kids connected in school I mean
puberty is a big part of that.
And, and you keep mentioning,
oh, parents got subsidize their,
their, their a after school
activities as well, they'll
spend 400 to $500 on the gaming
system.
Um, I imagine everybody's got
one, you're smiling at me, so I
know your kids have one, but
then they'll complain cause they
gotta, they gotta participate in
band or some other activity, I
mean, we all got to make tough
choices.
And, and, you know, you want
your kids to be active because
when they're not active, bad
things happen, they hang out
with their own kids and they
fall in the wrong places, but
what else in this 6th through
9th range, could we do to keep
those kids more connected in
school, so, so we don't have
that high of a dropout range.
The secretary's chomping at the
bit to give me an answer.
But I'm gonna ask John first.
And then you and we'll see what
the answers come out, Mr. Chair,
the secretary's probably gonna
have a better answer, but I'll,
I'll do my best.
One thing that LESC did also
over the last interim was was
have a middle school study
working group that included
students.
And, and this is not going to
surprise you, but one of the
biggest things that we heard
from students is safety.
And that's not just about
physical safety in schools,
although that's, that's very
important, but it's also having
enough adults in a in a school
that care about them and having
those services and supports that
they need.
Uh, Senator Lanier, I absolutely
agree that we want to make sure
schools are able to use those
funds for programming.
But as, as important as that is
students feeling that they can
come to school.
And knowing that they, they have
a trusting adults, and whether
that's a teacher or a social
worker or a counselor. Those are
also the kinds of sort of
comprehensive things that need
to happen.
It gets kids to school so that
they can participate in some of
those, those activities as well.
That's what we found in the, in
the middle.
Middle school working group as
well as a couple of other
things, but I'll defer to the,
to the secretary. Yeah, Mr.
Chair, what, uh, Director Senna
said is absolutely right. We've
surveyed students and they've
said,
They, um
Want to know that the adults in
school care about them that if
they fall behind.
They're, they're gonna, um, lean
in and help them get caught up.
Um
And that they feel like they
belong there, that that the
adults in the school are
invested in their success. And
again, if they are struggling.
They have the means.
To have those issues addressed.
We need to be much more targeted
and helping, helping the very
students, Mr. Chairman, that
you're talking about.
We see kids start to struggle in
middle school.
We need to target our efforts at
that time to make sure that
we're engaging them, that they
are adults that are supporting
them, that they're getting um
academic supports if they're
behind in school that they have
access to CTE and work-based
learning and other opportunities
that keep them engaged that they
see the relevance in school for
them. And it really does need to
happen in middle school, and it
needs to continue through high
school. The revisions that we
made to high school.
graduation rates, I think
supports, I'm sorry, high school
graduation requirements helps
support this.
But I just, I really want to
make a pitch for targeted
efforts, increasing the SCG is
important and the example of Rio
Rancho is is real, but it is
also unique.
In terms of why they have
budgetary shortfalls.
Increasing the the SCG could
First and foremost, address a
lot of the budgetary needs of
our school districts.
And our charter schools. I think
that's the first thing that they
will need to do. Rio Rancho
situation is is real. They need
to address their budgetary
shortfalls, but if you want
programming.
That is really targeted to
support those students that are
that are struggling.
At PED you need to, you need to
be targeted. And so both are
needed. We need to address the
SCG sort of needs.
But to really be targeted in the
way that you're talking about,
Mister Chair. There's, we need
to target funding in that way to
make it happen. PED will be
rolling out an early warning
system starting in middle
school, identifying students who
have chronic high rates of
chronic absenteeism who are not
having um uh growth in their
academic academic achievement so
that we can work with schools to
be much more targeted. We will
be doing that as
as an agency. We're already
laying that framework to roll
that out, but we also need the
funding to make sure that they
have those resources and
supports at that critical time,
Mister Chair and members of the
committee to make sure that we
get them across the line in
graduating in 4 years. That's
how we get to.
The national average for
graduation rates. That's how we
get 2400 more students graduated
in New Mexico.
And what is that dollar amount
look like?
Um
Mr. Chair, it's
It's investing in those things
that we're talking about, that
will get them support. That's
the tutoring, that's um
Making sure that our teachers in
our school, um, uh, staff are,
are supporting them. They need
more counseling, counselors,
they need more behavioral health
supports.
Um, we need to invest in CTE
what's the number because we're
gonna have to speed it up
that I can tell you, but the,
the funding that um is in the
budget proposals, I think can
very much support that. We know
how many kids we want to
graduate, Mr. Chairman, we've
talked about that 2400 more
students graduating in 4 years
will get us to the national
graduation, um, rate average.
Um, but again, there
there's just a different
approach, putting money in the
SCG.
I dealt with differently than
having targeted funding.
In middle and below the line. So
out of the $4.2 billion where
can I send to get you that?
Um, Mr. Chair, if you send it to
the department in middle and
below the line funding we're
able to do that.
If you send it through the SCG
you are, you are sending it out
in not saying sand.
But putting it in the SCG, you
know, again, back to Rio
Rancho's points. They have
budgetary needs.
And they will address those
needs with the increase in the
SCG's funding. They need that.
The cost of providing
programming everything that
you've talked about is real.
We're not really funding
extracurricular. We're not
funding transportation fully.
There are a lot of things that
That are added costs to
secondary students that are real
at-risk students have specific
needs that need to be supported.
So all of those things are are
needed, but I'm also trying to
make a pitch that targeted
funding with specific outcomes
that we expect to see that are
measured over time is real, and
that's what's gonna help us
improve, um, academic
achievement in the long run. So
I just wanted to say that, Mr.
Chair, members didn't answer.
My question, so I guess we'll
have to determine that as a
committee where we're gonna
stand to get that number
my wonderful colleagues here to
my right, and talk to you about
what that would look like. Um,
But you know, I think it's also
in our budget. I think that our
budget from the executive
reflects very targeted sort of
efforts related to school
transformation, attendance, CTE,
those are things that you're
talking about shepherd. I don't
want to keep interrupting you,
but you're talking about
shepherding a child from 6th
through 9th grade where they
need the most help, right? Where
they puberty is happening and
their minds are everywhere and
those shepherding. I mean,
that's a targeted approach, and
you just said he wanted.
Do a targeted approach. So we'll
sit down with you.
Think about a number.
Think about where I'm gonna get
the number out of the 4.2
billion.
It's probably minute.
Overall, but I think you target
those 6th through 9th where
we're losing most of our
students.
I mean, that changes it's.
Talked about that for 2 years,
Sonny squirming over there.
He knows he's gonna have to stay
late tonight.
Um, but that's what I really
wanted to see, so I, I don't
want to take everybody's time or
kind of running late and and so
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, just a
couple of questions, I believe
this question um related to the
chairman's questions on line 8
and 9, if the house 63 passes
with the budget allocates.
sufficient funding to cover the
uh factors for 6 to 12.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Sindo, so currently the House
Appropriation substitute for the
budget includes uh essentially
sufficient funding for lines for
8
If you look at those, all that
accounting up to that 15
million. It includes all of
that, but if you go to your
left, a couple of columns over
on.
On line 8.
The original request was for 40.
To take that 6th grade to 1.30.
And 51 on line 9.
7 through 12.
So, the difference between that
91 and the 15.
Is the difference currently of
of what you're funding in House
Bill 2 or what the current
version of Hospital 2 looks like
versus what the original
proposal was. So it wouldn't
fund the, the entire proposal
that would only fund that
increase.
To 6th grade, uh, uh, about
halfway.
OK, and then uh yeah.
Could you go ahead, go ahead,
Mr. Chair, I also just want to
point out that health
appropriations did amend House
Bill 63 to match the recommended
levels. So it will be coming
over to you, um, however you
decide to amend the budget, um,
you'll also need to make
amendments if you change, um,
the appropriation level to a 63
as well.
appreciate it and then uh the
other question on line 36, I
believe, uh.
With the density factor and
transportation funding formula
will be fixed again like it was.
Last year
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, given the
immense amount of
Duress that was caused by that
change. I don't anticipate the
department will want to.
Yet again, make another change
to their distribution or last
LFC evaluation did suggest that
the department stayed the
course. So this is simply going
to increase the appropriation
using the same methodology.
OK.
Right. Appreciate it. I don't
have nobody else, so, uh.
Thank you for the presentation,
good discussion, good questions
from senators and uh so we'll
move on to.
Our next item, uh, state
employee health insurance. I
turn it back to the chair.
OK
Paracute
Eric John, secretary's right in
the middle of the.
Um
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
My name is Eric, and I'll be
going over, uh,
It's like around the right page
there.
analysis of state employee
benefit shortfalls. This is the
program that provides um state
employees and most local public
bodies, uh, with health
insurance.
I'll just be going over some.
We have that presentation or
show us the sheet so we can hang
that up.
Uh, it's, it's, uh, part of the
packet, Mr. Chairman. OK. All
right, it's in this packet.
OK.
Yeah, and it's on page, I
believe that's page 6 in the
packet.
Right, you're good.
Sorry about that, Mr. Chairman.
So I'll just be going over some
background talking about how we
kind of got to
Uh, the point
Um
Where we've been
Required to provide uh
multi-year, year over year.
Um
Uh
Appropriations uh to deal with
the shortfalls within the state
health employee benefits
program.
New Mexico has continued to
experience total health benefit
program costs succeeding
employee premium revenues since
about 2021, and if we could go
to the next slide.
When the state first suspended
employee premium increases.
Program financial deficiencies
continued to grow during the two
succeeding years, um, when the
state once again suspended
employee premium increases. The
state once again implemented
employee employee premium
increases in FY 24, taking the
first steps toward reducing
ongoing annual deficits.
However, at current trend, and
will program deficits are
expected to continue due to
both, um, the cumulative effects
of 3 years of 0% premium
increases.
Um, and program medical costs
exceeding uh national trends.
Mhm
And if we go to the next slide,
Um, I just, I put this in here
and if you look at the line that
says total costs covered for
life.
And you look at the revenue for
covered life.
You'll see that um
On the next line down, deficit
covered for life.
We're falling short, um,
uh covered employee, local
public body employee by about
$235 in the, on the under BCBS
or Blue Cross Blue Shield and
about $230 per person per month
um under Presbyterian.
That's the shortfall of about
30% or about 29% in each of
those. Moving on to the next
slide.
Uh, you can see this is just to
illustrate our year over year um
deficiency appropriations that
we've had to provide to the
fund in order to cover the total
costs.
Um, and I think this up this
upcoming year, we're hoping to
kind of um curb this, and, and
this trend of having to um
provide those deficiency
appropriations or supplemental
appropriations each year.
Moving on to the next slide.
Uh, this is an illustration.
Of how we kind of got here.
Each year, if you look at the,
the top line.
You can see an FY21 through FY
23. We didn't do any revenue
increases, um.
And
Then there was also the National
Medical cost trend, the medical,
uh increase every single year of
about 58, 4%.
And then, uh, on the next line
down, we had an estimated needed
revenue increase, uh, um, at the
national trend.
Um
Where we didn't do those
increases, right? And so then we
just kept building up these uh
this.
Kind of program deficit year
over year.
Um, until we got to this point
to where we're at now, to where
we have this large deficit that
um.
Is requiring an $85 million
appropriation for FY 25, uh, to
cover the shortfall.
So, moving on to the next slide,
premium changes if maintained at
similar levels which slightly
exceed national trend will
continue to reduce deficits.
However, the benefit of those
higher premium increases are
limited by medical cost
increases, which um are
exceeding the national trends.
Um, planned medical costs reset
at higher levels exceeding
national trends in 2022 and then
again in 2024 and 2025. Although
COVID likely contributed to
initial higher costs. We do not
know uh what caused this
permanent reset at the higher
levels.
If we go to the next slide.
Um
Continued without uh specific
changes to target the higher
level of medical costs in
addition to premiums, the state
will continue to experience
deficits or the need to increase
premiums at rates that exceed
market trends.
Um, FY 25 program funding
deficit is currently at about 85
million, as I said, with premium
revenues projected to cover
about 78% of the total um
revenue. I just wanted to go to
the next page. This is uh Senate
Bill 376, the projected costs of
that bill.
Um, and you can look at that on
your own. One thing I wanted to
go over though, and if we skip
to
Page, I believe it's page 16 in
this packet here.
Um, and then if you could flip
it.
I did give you a scenario.
Um, FY 26 SFC scenario under the
Healthcare Affordability Fund.
Um, where we could look at
possibly trying to fund um on a
non-recurring basis, um, and
then coming back next year and
looking at funding it on a
recurring basis.
Um
The, your, your Senate Bill 376.
Um, and this is a possible
scenario to do that.
Uh, and with that, Mr. Chair,
um, I'll pass it over to the
secretary.
And um she can have further
comment.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, um,
you all have already heard, I
think you've heard a couple of
times, uh, my spiel on state
employee benefits. I'm gonna
really focus on Tenneville 376,
and I'm gonna, for once I'm
gonna try and be brief and then
hand it over to you all for
questions, um, so as you know,
uh, I mean, as Mr. Cheney, uh,
uh, described the state health
benefits plan, uh, which offers
coverage to state employees had
has faced a deficit for years.
At the same time.
New Mexico contributes just 65%
of the cost of insurance, which
is the lowest level of any state
in the country. The healthcare
authority has been working on
this data-driven proposal for
months identifying ways to set
the state's health plan on a
fiscally responsible path while
making health coverage more
affordable for our employees.
Senate Bill 376 is a critical
step to achieve these goals. The
bill saves taxpayers money and
paves the way for other state
public health insurance partners
to adopt.
similar reforms next year. The
changes in the bill reduce
employee costs by more than 40%
on average, eliminate the state
health benefits budget shortfall
decrease the uninsured rate
among members of the National
Guard, give local public bodies
more certainty around their
costs and save the state general
fund 155 million over the next
five years. Um, in launching the
new healthcare authority last
July, the governor charged me
and the team uh to fix.
The state of New Mexico's health
insurance, uh, program and this
deficit that covers about 60,000
New Mexicans. Uh, Senate Bill
376 does just that, uh, as the
largest payer of healthcare in
New Mexico. We have a
responsibility to the market,
our providers into New Mexicans
to leverage our expertise at the
healthcare authority, our
partnerships, and our purchasing
power as the largest payer of
healthcare in the state to make
the state of New Mexico's health
insurance more accessible and
more affordable.
At its core, the bill does 5
things. It requires me as the
secretary to submit actuarly
sound budget requests. This
means that when we set the
premiums, uh, they will be
sufficient to cover the
liabilities, uh, and the
projected claims. Uh, so that is
very important, that is
something that has not happened,
uh, in this fund, uh,
historically.
The bill also replaces the
outdated salary brackets for our
insurance contributions with an
80/20 split for all employees
eligible for state health
benefits. Uh, this was about,
uh, the state was paying 80% uh
back 20 years ago when this was
established, uh, trying to get
back to that, uh, much more on
market, uh, with what uh other
employer competitors are doing.
Um, the bill also provides a
program to pay down a portion or
all of the premiums for lower
income employees through the
healthcare.
Affordability fund and we are
targeting employees with income
below 250% of the poverty level,
um, the bill also creates
patient protections for
initiatives related to the
establishment of fair hospital
pricing so that when we cap
hospital rates, uh, they can't
go and bill our patients, um,
and then lastly, it creates a
program to lower premiums for
members of the National Guard
who qualify for Tricare Select
Reserve. Um, with that, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, I think I'm just
gonna, um, stand.
for your questions. You do have
a, a document, uh, here is a
two-page document that um kind
of describes.
greater detail and addresses
maybe some of your questions.
Thank you.
I don't see anybody jumping up
to wave their hand. I, I mean.
This was created in 2020 when we
started no premium increases.
The exec decided they're not
gonna change anybody's premium
costs.
And it's just snowballed into
this.
Massive cost we spent when we
spent 86 million last year. um,
Mr. Chair, I think that's
correct. Yeah. And we paid for
the cities and the counties with
the 86 million, correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that's correct.
And so we're sub-society in
their healthcare, when we're not
focusing on on what we do. I
mean, this is one of those
things if we don't fix it now,
if we do not exist now, it's 124
million until we decide to fix
it. And so we better fix it now
while we have the money. Eric, I
don't know why.
I, I thought I made it pretty
clear to Charles that I wanted
to fix this and why I would get
a offset for the next year.
Uh, I mean, that's we.
Where the arteries bleeding out.
And you guys wanna put a
band-aid on the artery and it's
not gonna work at some point we
have to fix stuff in government.
And then move on to the next
problem.
Um
And I mean, we're gonna try to
get 376 on where it's at right
now, but we're gonna try to get
in this room. It's gonna save us
money in the long run, and it's
gonna fix the health care costs
for.
state employees and for local
government employees, so.
That's the key to it.
see any other questions?
The woods.
OK, from what I understand,
Mm
When, when the chairman says
we're not going to fix it all
this year.
I did say that we're gonna fix
it this year, yeah, but I mean,
why, why we don't have it right
here in front of us.
To fix it this year.
Senate Bill 376 is the fix.
I don't know where that I have
to look in the bill finder. I
think that
Senator Woods, Senate Bill 376
is scheduled for this committee,
uh, so, uh, it is ready to get
more than me.
Well it's, it's scheduled for
tomorrow. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
In Steinmore.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, and, and guys,
welcome. Um.
Question though, um, so 376 if I
heard you say right, requires
you to set a premium that
matches the obligations. So in a
way, that's a fix, right? That,
that is the sustainability
portion of it. That be a fair
statement Secretary
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn, it
is part of the fix. Yeah, it's a
very important part of the fix,
and it does, uh, set in statute
and expectation that the
premiums would be actually
sound, uh, which is sort of a
scientific way of saying, uh,
that there would be enough.
Money collected through premium,
uh, to cover the projected
liabilities. OK, so, uh, Madam
Secretary and Mr. Chair, so I
have a little concern, which is
that
My knowledge of what's happened
with employee health costs over
the last few years since COVID
is we've had these occasional
spikes, right? Like when COVID
happened, we had, we were
funding COVID tests and things
like that. Tell me if I'm wrong.
This is my recollection, and we
ended up having like a $20
million shortfall or things like
this to cover these situational
things really, which we were
doing the right thing.
You know, spending that money,
but the point is, is that if
you're having by statute to keep
it actuarly sound, adjust rates.
Under that scenario, would that
not force you to just shoot
spike up rates to make up that
difference. How would we handle
those fluctuations.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, it is, um, good best
practice and see and federal law
actually is that Medicare,
Medicaid rates actually sound. I
mean the reason is just what we,
what I described, which
You can't, you're really as an
insurance product can't run a
product where you're not
collecting enough to see to pay
your premium. However, the bill
does more than just set, uh, the
actuarial sound requirement. It
also sort of compels me to do
some cost containment, um, you
know, through that fair hospital
pricing initiatives, so as Mr.
Shee talked about, um, you know,
that trend line it is absolutely
a goal to make sure that we do a
better job.
Applying some cost pressure and
some levers to that cost trend,
um, and I think, you know, this
just makes sure that whatever we
collect is sort of based on the
projected um acuity of the
population and the claim and
utilization patterns, um, but it
really doesn't, um, it's, it's
based on a science. It's not
inflated above that or it
wouldn't be actually sound. So,
um, we would, I'm actually this
proposal, uh, factors in about
40 million in cost.
containment through hospital
pricing, um, and make sure that
our patients can't be billed the
difference, so there this is a
multifaceted bill. It doesn't
just focus on the premiums, but
really tries to modernize the
structure of this employee
benefits program. So that's
thank you for that answer. So
Mr. Chair, I think it's pretty
interesting. So if you're
accounting for a kind of
unanticipated potential spikes.
I would think that you would
maybe need to have a balance
like, like you'd have to be
running a pretty good balance
sitting there.
To deal with things and that is
something we see a balance
sometimes in state government,
we act like you're not spending
the money.
Or right, there's a problem, but
in this particular case, that's
the only way you could actually
have the money to deal with it.
So I, I just kind of put that
out there, um, put that out
there, something I would expect
to see, I guess, for you to
help.
Have a financially sound future,
Mr. Chair, um, Senator, I do
want to make one point, which
is, um, and this is kind of on
the first page of that two
pager, um, that there are pieces
of legislation that contribute
to the cost of uh the employee
benefits package, you can kind
of see that from 2023 to 2024,
um, about $14 million worth of
our shortfall is because of
benefit changes that are made.
We understand why benefit
changes are.
made, but there is a cost and an
expenditure and so our goal is
to make it very transparent, um,
when this body is passing those
changes with the true cost will
be and what that cost would be
passed on to our employees too,
because they share the price,
uh, for all of those, um, so it
also requires, um, sort of the
exercise of really making sure
that these are these decisions
are made by this body about
legislative mandates, um, with
that full price tag in mind.
Fair enough, we we're, we're
giving you a check to pay for
it, right?
Oh, thank you, Mr.
Excellent. Thank you. Uh did GSD
increase premiums, what is it?
10 or 15% and steps, but we're
not catching up and that's a big
part of our problem.
Uh, I see the municipal League
back there. We'll see soon. His
head pop up right now that I
said it. I mean, they sued us
over this 2 years ago.
And in that lawsuit is still
sitting there, so this will
settle that lawsuit.
We'll adjust rates, right?
Otherwise, we'll cut off the
municipal league and let them
pay their own healthcare, uh,
and they won't have the
benefits, um, but this is just,
this is fixing a big problem
within our state. Eric, you want
to add some?
Yeah, Mr. Chair, just based on
an earlier comment, I just
wanted to mention the use of the
HCAF. It's not meant to be a
non-recurring.
Um, it's meant to be a
non-recurring use to kind of
soften the blow to the general
fund for this year. Next year we
would have to, we'd have to get
the general fund. That's where I
misunderstood you, so I
apologize for that. I
misunderstood you how that was
gonna play. I thought that was
pushing it into 26.
the sheet, so I misunderstood
that, so I apologize. Yeah,
yeah, I don't see any other
questions. Thank you.
We're gonna get to uh who's
next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Early
childhood.
We may try to get to these
bills, if not, we may come back
this afternoon and try to get
them cleaned up.
May have a few more on the
agenda so we because we can.
Subcommittees are starting to
meet, so they're gonna have to
pull you out, so.
Kelly I'm going to start us off.
Chair members Committee, Kelly
Clinton legislative Finance
Committee, um, we're gonna be on
page 21 and 22 of your packet.
On the screen that you copy
should be.
They're all stapled together in
one, so you just gotta. Yeah I
was talking about up here for
some reason it's
17.
I'm sorry, 19 through 20.
So, uh, LC staff was asked to
come back and give a
Another review of what.
The House Corporation and
Finance Committee did for the
early childhood education and
care department, when you're
looking at your packet.
You're gonna see um a colored
sheet. It's got yellow and
orange on it, and the second
page has got yellow on it, so
those are the two pages we're
looking at the back of your
packet.
And so what we're looking really
at is um those orange areas in
the 2nd table.
And those were the major changes
coming out of HAFC, which
increase the early childhood
education and care fund.
Uh, distribution to the agency
to 400 million, up from 250
million in the current fiscal
year, and everything you see in
orange is the additional spend
of that 101.1 million.
Coming out on top of the LFC
request. So you can see, for
instance, on line 42, they
increased childcare assistance
to a total of 67.1% additional
million dollars, the change,
that change being an additional
56.1 million on top of the LFC
wreck.
So you look at line 42. You'll
see the LFCreck had that.
11.2, HAFC did 67.3 for the
difference of an additional
56.1.
So when you see each one of
those orange lines, that's the
additional, uh, revenue that the
uh HAFC added, so they added 1.5
million for IT infrastructure,
which was requested by the
agency. They added $5 million
for fit state match, uh, they
added $10 million.
For home visiting expansion.
3 $1 million for food
assistance, $1.5 million for uh
educator incentives and 25
million for additional pre-K
expansion.
Um, and those were the main
changes. I will note that those
are.
On top of the LFC requests. So
if you're looking on the second
page where there is a yellow
header. There was already 10
million in pre-K, so that is now
35 million for the two tables in
pre-kindergarten.
$2 million for tribal language
support, 3.5 for pre-K quality,
uh, 3 million for home visiting
rate increases and some program
support.
So you'll see that that was the
major changes from HAFC and with
that I will stand for questions.
And Secretary
Hi, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
just wanted, I shared 3
documents with you to give you a
sense of, uh, the need that we
have in New Mexico to continue
to expand services to eligible
children and families and also
to, um, just give you some
highlights of how the early
childhood Trust Fund has been
used to promote school
readiness, improve maternal and
infant health outcomes, support
our tribal government to
government relationships and
improved family and community
engagement and of
Of course, making sure that the
agency is strong and healthy and
delivering services with
excellence. So this fact sheet
tells you about New Mexico
children under the age of 5 and
who we're reaching, we've added
that Heart on there. I do wanna,
you know, we've heard a lot of
things happening at the federal
level, so I do want to highlight
that those children are funded
directly by federal dollars
going to um those programs, and
that includes both tribal and
our regional Head Start, uh, and
that's about $120 million that
comes into our state.
directly to those programs from
the federal government.
The other thing that I wanted to
share with you is a statewide
snapshot of the early
development instrument because
this committee as our committees
want to know is what we're doing
working.
Is, are all these investments in
early childhood actually turning
the corner for our New Mexico
children we consider this data
baseline. I left some individual
packets for each of you, county
by county, but I think it's
important to know that we have
this measure that we'll be using
every few years, so you can have
confidence that the department
is looking at this data at the
local level with your local
early childhood coalitions,
which we hope will be funded
also in this budget and
increasing our tribal investment
to the 3 million.
that the executive asked for,
because it's with this data that
we drive change for children in
your communities. So I did want
to highlight those. I also want
to highlight that we have an
evaluation plan in place for our
growth funds that should be
fully executed with our external
evaluator by July 1.
We have a 5-year strategic plan
that we measure and promote our
annual progress or our progress
annually. We also have a 4-year
finance plan that was required
by the legislation that Senator
Padilla, uh, brought that, uh,
and Senator Trujillo to create
the department and a soon to be
released five-year finance plan
that will take us out to FY 30,
fiscal year 2030. So I just want
you to know, and next week we're
gonna release our 4th annual
family survey. So this is a
department
that wants to be transparent. We
want to be accountable and House
Bill 71 increases the
distributions from the trust
fund to 500 million, so that we
continue building this
incredible family centered
universal system for New
Mexicans. We're leading the
nation. The chances of us
eroding or undoing what we've
done could be great if we don't
continue the build, and I know
that you have families and
children in your community right
now who want and need services
that they're eligible for, but
the resources aren't there, but
We do have a great community
across the state in early
childhood. And so I just want
you to hopefully have the
confidence um in this department
that you created 5 years ago, 6
years ago, uh, this is my 6th
coming to you for a budget, but
those dollars have been used
wisely, and I just want you to
know that, um, we stand ready
for more accountability, more
transparency as needed, but
these dollars and these revenues
are absolutely needed right now
in New Mexico. Children start
falling behind as early as 18
months.
So they're coming into the
public school. If we don't reach
them early prenatally and with
those great home visiting
programs and childcare and early
intervention, the chances that
our K-12 system is going to be
impacted by children coming not
ready, they're gonna have to do
remediation is great. So you
made wonderful decisions, um, so
many, it's really together that
we have built this incredible
system and so I hope you can
share, uh, in the pride that we
feel and really continue to
support the expansion as
outlined in our strategic plan,
our 5-year finance plan, the
work we're doing across the
cradle to career educational
governance and with my health
secretary partners as well on
improving outcomes for young
children.
Thank you, Mr. Chair Stein.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Madam
Secretary, good morning and
great job. I mean, you just
continue to
build this thing the way we, we
hoped you would, so I have, I do
have a few questions, just kind
of checking in on benchmarks.
What percentage of eligible
pre-K.
kids in the state are we now
serving?
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
um, in, and I've I've meant to
bring you, you already have a
copy for my budget presentation,
but about 84% of 4 year olds and
a little over 50% of 3 year
olds, but with this 26 budget
request will be um at Universal
for threes and fours, uh, even
with what we have right now in
the HAFC for pre-K, I think we
can reach that 70, 72% for 3s.
Thank you. You know, Mr. Chair,
I remember when we started this
whole thing, the number that I
remember anyway was that we were
serving less than 10% of the
state's population.
Just as a benchmark of, you
know, meeting this need. I don't
know if that's accurate.
But Mr. Chair, Senator Stein
Warren, that might have been
with home visiting, we're doing
much better too with home
visiting. We actually met our
exceeded our target for Medicaid
funded home visiting, uh, this
month, but, um, we were serving
also many of those children in
pre-K were in part D.
So the first years of the
governor's term, she really
focused on moving that to to
full day options, but we do have
half day and full day options
still. OK. And then Mr. Chair,
the other question I wanted to
ask is about home visiting, what
percentage of the eligible home
visiting kids or were you
getting home visiting for?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, we are, yeah, we're,
well, the way we look at um home
visiting is the Medicaid
population of births and those
in the high risk um being
served, so right now we are
serving about 56%
6666. Thank you.
Thank you, um, but we, but that
is um that as we move to 26,
we're focusing more on the
universal touch, trying to reach
all eligible.
babies, I mean, all babies born.
Right.
OK
Mr. Chair, just to, um, further
elaborate on that. Yes, we are
serving on a higher number, but
we are still not reaching them.
Having completion of the program
to get our full ROI, so as we're
looking at expansion of those
programs, making sure that
families receive the full dose
dosage is really kind of the
public policy issue on top of
leveraging as much Medicaid as
possible. Those are the kind of
the two big focuses in home
visiting.
Thank you and Mr. Chair, why,
why is that? Why, why, why are
they not completing the program?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, uh, so some of it is
that the data that we're
collecting needs to be um
refined how we collect it cause
sometimes the family will say,
I've got what I need out of the
program and so I'm completed,
uh, but we do know that they're
without paying our home visitors
and having that continuity of
home visitors sometimes at home
visitor will leave, uh, because
they seek a higher paying job or
they do something else and then
the family doesn't maybe want to
meet a whole new home visitor
and start over, so.
we're gonna, we are really,
we're digging into the data that
better understand it, and I
think that professional
development for our home
visitors around rapport building
and connection with families and
also making sure that the
families are connected with the
right model. Sometimes they may
be enrolled in a model that
does, isn't really what the
family needs, so that's us
getting better and better at
what we do and being more uh
strategic in those um
conversations with our home
visiting providers. I thank you
Kelly, I'm glad you're paying
attention to that. You are Madam
Secretary.
So good job on that. Well, keep
on keeping on. Thank you.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you Secretary. Good to see you,
Kelly. Um, in regards to the
childcare, I'm just looking at
this, uh, flyer right here. We,
uh
We know that there's about
115,000, almost 116,000.
You know out there.
How many of those do we actually
need to serve.
I see the number below that
there's like 30,000 that are
qualifying for childcare
assistance, and, and let me just
tell you the reason I'm asking.
Maybe that'll help you answer it
better. I'm looking at the
childcare assistance on line 42,
and I, I know that the executive
request was 96.5 and the LFC
recommendation was 11.2 and um
the final number was 67.3.
How many more kids do we need to
serve and how many more centers
do we need to
Open.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Trujillo,
thank you for that question in
my budget presentation, we
shared that we're we're, we're
focused on infant and toddler
care. And that is what the, uh,
house appropriations put in
their language, uh, right now
we're serving less than 1/3 of
eligible infants and toddlers in
the state, um, so we want to
increase that to 46%, and that's
where the governor's budget ask,
uh, and where our budget
outcomes at that higher 98
million. We also know that the,
um, in terms of the HAFC did.
Fund the New Mexico Finance
Authority, $10 million to
support supply building, to
support low interest loans for
childcare programs or businesses
that want to start childcare,
uh, if that's actually in a bill
that's working its way through
the Senate right now, um, uh,
that will help do that as well.
So we are, we want to see an
increase in the number of
infants and toddlers that were
serving and this body last year,
this year gave us funding to do
contracted slots. We think
that's gonna help us stabilize.
And improve the quality and the
availability of um infant
toddler care, Ellie.
So Mr. Chair, I just want to
make the point that we can't
just think about this as just as
childcare. We have to think
about it as a braided kind of
system, so that $35 million that
you put into pre-K, that's no
longer the children are no
longer be billing childcare
assistance and so yes, you
increase childcare assistance by
67 million. But you also freed
up an additional 35 million
because you increased pre-K. So
when you look at those together,
that's a massive amount of
additional money in pre-K that
or in childcare that pre-K is
freeing up for you.
as well and so trying to think
of those numbers as
complementary systems and
funding it. We also know that a
majority of 4 year olds have
access, um, not only just a
pre-K but to childcare, and 3
year olds also. It's really the
infant and toddlers. So
hopefully as we build the pre-K
system out, we free that money
up and we flow that down to the
younger years. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, thank you, Madam
Secretary and Kelly. So my, my
bigger concern is, do we have
and and I, I'm glad to hear that
we're doing.
Some capacity building and
pipelining for facilities, my
bigger question is, what's our
capacity and pipeline for
employees to work in those
facilities and what are we doing
to ensure that that is
expanding, because I think
that's the bigger issue. I think
I, I, I'm, I'm not gonna say
that we're overfunding, but I
think we might be right on the
edge of what our capacity is at
this point.
So Mr. Chair members of the
committee, if you remember last
year in Grow, you all did a, oh
sorry.
You were here. Um, if you all
remember, last year and grow,
you did a pilot to do wage
supplements for infants and
toddlers in particular because
that's the the system that we
need to grow.
Oh
Um, no pun intended, no pun
intended, um, so.
We're not far enough into that
pilot to know if that's working
yet, to be honest.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Padil.
Yeah, thank you, chair, and
thank you secretary and, and uh
everybody. Thank you. Um.
So on line 60, the wage and
career lattice, did you tell me
last time that this was
somewhere else? I'm, I'm just
there's, we have so much going
on.
Mr. Chambers as I was just
saying, we have it in pilot and
grow for infants and toddlers
and we don't know the results
yet of if it's working as a
program, Madam Secretary. Yes,
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, I'm,
just to clarify that in our
statute that created us that we
were to do a wage scale and
career lattice for all the
programs we administer and so
the infant and toddler is great
and it's helping those working
in childcare, but it doesn't
help like early Head Start
teachers because oftentimes
they're not serving.
somebody who is on childcare
assistance, and it also doesn't
support home visiting and early
intervention providers,
developmental specialists and
family service coordinators
working in that field. So we are
um engaged in a very robust um
session with the entire field of
the early childhood community,
um, to develop that and have
that released in July, so.
So July and we would, you'd come
to us next year for whatever
the.
Financial impact is Mr. Chair,
Senator Padilla, we're hoping
that we can get the 10 million
that the governor requested so
that we can actually implement
and support that our
professional development
information system that you've
heard a lot about is, uh, going,
um, soft launch inside ECECD
right now, we're training up
staff and so we'll be able to
track and understand the field
as a whole, uh, and you'll have
better data on who the workforce
are and what kind of wages that
they're earning and why this
wage scale and career lattice is
so important.
It really is important to
recognize as you're just talking
about K-12 people who have years
of experience, higher
credentials, uh, and uh
languages they speak and other
things that they bring.
Need to be paid at a higher
compensation so that we can keep
them in the field.
Uh, thank you, Chair and
Secretary Kelly. So yeah, I mean
that was about a 2.5 week
portion of the negotiating when
we first did this thing, um.
But if we put it in the grove,
that means that it's there one
year and we know that I don't
know that that would be.
with, so it's for 3 years and
the point of the grow was to
pilot these programs, get the
data, and make sure that it's
actually working for your
intended purposes before we put
it in the recurring budget for
the longevity. And so that's why
we're waiting to see if it's
first implementation if it's
actually gonna work before you
grow it to the full workforce.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
we, in our first year of getting
trust fund money, we put 4
million towards pre-K parody,
and it is working tremendously.
We expanded that to Head Start
last year. We are now like there
are, there are more people who
need it, and that's again to
compete with those public school
teachers, and we want to pay
them the same.
Compensation that a public
school teacher would get the
same years of experience and
credentials. So it is working
and we hear every day from our
pre-K programs, how that has
helped retain staff and
community-based programs and
actually has brought them back
to community-based programs, so.
Anecdotal, but we can get data
and I agree with Kelly that
having the growth fund on infant
toddler pay parity, that
evaluation is gonna be so
beneficial, um, we know that
getting.
Hey, to people who do this very
intense relationship-based work
to keep them in this field to
attract them to it and then to
retain them. We do absolutely
have to invest in our workforce
in a, in with the wage scale and
career lattice.
So then do you know at this
point, I might be a silly
question, but are the building
blocks are 10 million to make
this, I mean, is that the price
tag? I no pun intended it is
that, do you know what the price
tag on this is?
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, that
is what we have estimated, um,
for the wage scale and career
lattice going forward as this
analysis so
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, that
is what we have estimated, um,
for the wage scale and career
lattice going forward as this
analysis,
it will change. There was
analysis done for the LFC, I
think 2 years ago.
Uh, by, uh, that was requested,
that was huge. It was like an
$80 million price tag, um, and
we looked closely at what we
understand from both pre-K
parody and what we're seeing
with infant toddler pay parity.
As we push the workforce that to
the professionalizing it and
getting them higher credentials
and working with them to improve
their um.
Uh, credentials, then there may
be down the road a need to
increase that, but we feel that
10 million uh in this uh fiscal
year in 206, we'll be able to
support it. OK, thank you
because it's in the law, so
there's, we can't get around to
it, so thank you.
And
Senator Leer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome.
Thanks for visiting with me the
other day. I appreciate getting
those answers from you. I just
have a couple of little
questions. Um,
As you know from our meeting, my
biggest concern is to make sure
that we're not pushing out the
private industry.
And so do you want to
For other years, you want to
elaborate on that for just a
little.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier,
uh, yes, uh, we agree, uh,
because it is, we rely on our
community-based, what we call
public um private nonprofit
private for-profits to deliver
infant and toddler care, pre-K,
um, school aged care, but also
home visiting and early
intervention, so all those
programs are critical to our,
uh, building a a quality early
childhood system. In pre-K right
now, about 53% of our pre-K
slots are in private nonpro.
profit or for-profit programs
and 47% are in school-based. So
we feel that we're really
keeping, keeping the sectors,
um, healthy, keeping a mixed
deliveries that families have
choice when they're selecting
their pre-K.
Well, thank you.
And then, then my other question
is I was noticing in the exact
She was asked, she was.
She asked 500 million for you.
And then
You were only, I think it was
the house put in.
LFC and the House put in, and I,
I'm sorry, I don't have it in
front of me. They put in 400
million, so they reduced you 100
million.
Where, where is that 100
million? Where, where would that
go?
So sure I won't make that is not
a reduction that is still a big
growth, giant growth over the
last, the current fiscal year is
spending $250 million from that
fund. That recommendation brings
it up to 400 million. So a large
increase, not a reduction. What
that bill does, House Bill 71 is
it says, here's our savings
account, which is the corpus.
We're gonna take 500 million not
from that corpus and send it to
our checking account?
And then the appropriations bill
is writing your checks for 400
million.
That 100 million is just in that
checking account, um, if this
body decides to write more
checks to it, but it doesn't
necessarily mean you have to if
you don't do it at the end of
the fiscal year, it'll revert
back into your savings account.
But it does revert back to
Senator Lanier, I think House
Bill 71 that is waiting to be
heard on the House floor is uh
is what increases it to 500
million. So it sounds like the
this body has the opportunity
to.
Appropriate $100 million
hopefully in line with some of
the priorities that we see as
the department is continuing to
build the system to support
families and young children in
New Mexico.
Right. Thank you. And I just
want to make sure that 100
million wasn't getting lost.
Somewhere or somebody was
dipping into it somewhere else.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We don't have 100 million to
appropriate. We only had 13 or
18 come over from the house, so
it's gonna be a struggle to
figure out how we're gonna get
100 million. I, I know. I'm
preaching to the choir right
there, Kelly.
Uh, uh, Senator, I never forget
this. Senator Rodriguez sat here
and says you can be a jack of
all trades and good at none.
And you know, we're in this wage
war.
In this agency.
You keep increasing wages, we
keep increasing wages, we keep
trying to attract. We're not
really adding that many kids.
Um
And and so we're gonna have to
stop this, we have to add some
language to to house build too
and and start capping where we
are with wages because
we'll outspent on wages than we
are services to children.
And that wasn't the goal of the
fund.
And, and so we're gonna have to
do some cost containment in
there. You're smiling at me like
you don't like that very much
because you, you can make
everybody happy, but do you
really get that when you've said
this in your own words between
Gallup and Shiprock, it's a
desert for early childhood care.
and it's hard to get care. It's
just one of those things that's
hard, right? But the hard things
you have to try your harder to
get done.
And I don't want all the money
to be going to be increased
wages in Albuquerque and Santa
Fe to attract them and then all
of a sudden we're out of money
and now we need more money to
expand the program.
And so cost containment is gonna
be this. We've seen it with the
police and with the fire.
We're in this arms race to who
can pay more, the state police,
the city police, and they just
move around everywhere they go.
And, and now we're really gonna
have to say, OK, we're gonna
focus on their well-paid jobs.
And we're gonna focus on cost
containment and serving the
children. That's the, that's
what the trust was originally
set up for. Wasn't to
Provide health care later on or
or retirement or anything like
that. There's chatter about
that. That's never gonna happen
as long as I'm here. Uh, you're
paid a wage, you can do whatever
you want with your wage. There's
private providers. We went
through the war with private
providers that nonprofits had to
pay the GRT and for profits did,
we missed the fit stuff like fit
stuff last year. Now we're
playing catch up with that.
And so what we want to see is an
efficiency out of the agency and
start to end that wage war. I'm
sure we're gonna have to
increase some money to get
training and get him into
college.
Keep pushing employees in that
direction.
Uh, that's not an issue, but I
think we're gonna have to really
focus on
How are we going to do some cost
containment. So the next time
you come,
That they don't say, oh, we ran
out of money and, and we're
still serving 115,927 kids. I
mean, that number needs to shoot
up. Not everybody's gonna do
that.
Um, but we're going to have to
start focusing on that, so, Mr.
Chair, the budget that the
governor put forward serves
10,000 additional children and
without increasing our wages, we
may not have an early childhood
system that will support the
police, the fire, the teachers
who want to come to this state
and we right now are leading and
I just encourage us to say the
services that they're providing
deserve a compensation that
reflects the value on their ROI
to the state, the return on
investment.
is huge and I'm concerned that
we won't have a workforce to
serve the 10,000 additional
children without increasing.
What we compensate them at
what's currently the hour rate
or salary rate for, for an early
childcare worker makes about
$20,000 less a year than a, a
kindergarten teacher, what's the
rate is not how much you got
less 30,000 for uh early
childhood professional in a
childcare.
About 40, let me get my numbers.
Um
Early intervention is even so, I
mean, it's the question is, do
we wanna do we invest in our
early childhood professionals
we're building.
The system. So right now it was
23 8 23,800. They were the
childcare people were the lowest
paid people in our state when
you created this department. Now
they're making 3 and 23, it was
around 30,000, average salary,
so still very low compared to
the work that they're doing for
average salary for home
visiting, non-nurse clinical
positions was 34,000 in 2020.
It's now 41,000, so that's
better, but.
These are people driving all
over your communities delivering
services to families and so I
don't think asking us to pay.
Primarily women doing this work,
a wage that reflects the value
of the services they're
delivering, and we are
increasing services year over
year, every year we're gonna be
at 84,000 if this budget is
supported out of 115,000
children total in the state.
Each year, the plan is to
increase service access to
eligible families and invest in
our workforce.
Kelly.
Mr. Chair, I just, you know,
when we're looking at rates to
remember the secretary is
correct, but we're paying
$23,400 per one infant in a 3 to
4 infant room and so that room
revenue is, you know, uh, close
to $100,000 and that, that,
those are all business
decisions, but it's, and we
increase those rates almost 28%
just a couple years ago and we,
we're flowing all of this
through the rates now, we have
found in previous LFC analyst,
yeah, evaluation.
that even with increased rates
really significantly. It didn't
necessarily mean those teacher
pays were going up, so we have
to be very careful that
Two things. We don't make the
rate so high that private pay
parents can't be in the system,
and 2, that if we do increase
the rates that it's making it to
provider education salaries.
Mr. Chair, I would, I agree with
Kelly, and I think that the
department can work with the
legislature and the governor's
office to talk about what are
the guard rails that we want to
put on there to make sure that
the dollars are flowing as the,
as the rate structure is
defined. We talk about what's in
the rate and what we actually
assume will be paid to who. So I
think to not, there are, there
are levers that we have
collectively to use.
I think saying that we're, we,
we have to put cost containment
on what we pay early childhood
professionals when we were
woefully underfunding the work,
you know, and we've made such
great progress, like the, the,
it's the continuation of this is
gonna be a boon to K-12, to
public safety, to behavioral
health. This is where all the
foundational learning and health
and development happens. So we
are recognizing and compensating
our early childhood workforce.
You're providing them, as you
said, professional development,
coaching.
The results when they come in
K-12 are going to be tremendous.
They're gonna be ready to take
up that K-12 experience you're
telling me the story, not the
front load story. I mean it's
Ellie said roughly $100,000.01
person with 4 kids.
So where's the money going? So,
and we, I don't want to delay
this cause we're gonna try to
get to the floor, we got some
bills.
I want you, Kelly, to give me a
breakdown.
Of where
Cost for one kid down don't
shake your head yet.
43.
23,000 per kid.
4 kids in a classroom, right, at
69 roughly.
Whatever number it is.
In in
Why the pay factor isn't in
there. I mean, the net profit is
taken out, what's the cost? I
want you to find a couple of
those situations I don't wanna
know that the operating cost is
and see it on paper.
Mr. Chairman, I, I know that um
ECCD is working on a on a
database where they should be
able to pull that type of
information pretty soon. We,
we've looked at that in the
past, not, not for a number of
years to, just to be clear. But
what we found is that as those
rates increase according to to
um national data for New Mexico,
worker pay stays about the same
or actually decreases and
childcare center director pay.
Increases quite sharply.
Um, I'm not sure if that's
what's the continuing to happen,
but we, it's something that we
should definitely look at to
make sure that, that these
investments are, are resulting
in the intended results. I mean,
that's why we're not getting the
childcare workers in there
because they're saying, oh well,
I'm only gonna make 20,000 or
$30,000 when the cost in the
overhead, I mean, if I'm in
business, you can make your
numbers look any way you want.
Sure, you're gonna pay your
director more because they're
managing more people. That's,
that's part of the overhead, but
if, if they're ignoring
the labor force in in taking all
the overhead costs and moving
the money around, uh, to keep
those those employers low and
then coming to us and saying,
give us more money for pay, give
us more money for pay. We can
give you more money for pay, but
it isn't it's not reaching the
employees and so you're gonna
have to fix that. And so it's
House Bill 11 comes around and
over.
I expect to see some fixes in
that for for cost containment
and and getting that pay up.
I mean, 23,000 a kid.
Uh, you know, if you have one
kid, the operating cost is
different when you have
40 kids in a, in a room.
And, and you're doing the math,
and
Somebody sure they're allowed to
make a profit, but
Where's the money really going
and if it's not going to the pay
where you need the workforce,
and you're not attracting the
workforce at the right pay
level.
And we're gonna have to figure
it out for you guys. I'm like
you and add some
wrap up, Mr. Chair, I want to
say that, um, I think our early
childhood care and education
programs are making very good
business decisions and that's
why we are not seeing gaps in
staffing capacity. They're able
to, they're using the market,
they know if I don't pay 10
number of dollars, I'm not gonna
have my classroom staffed and
they want to serve the children
and families, so I, I do think
that they're, you know, I, I
would like to see a little more.
Um
I guess some appreciation shed
on the work that our childcare
industry has done in this state
to keep our workforce working to
keep people going to school and
supporting families in such
profound ways. I mean, they are
doing, they did it for COVID,
they served school age kids when
the schools closed, they were
there. They were making much
less, and they are paying their
staff the wages that we want
them to, and they are paying
directors, um, what they should,
so I will show you the entire
cost model breakdown and I can
either.
share with you, with Adrian and
your team, so you can see
exactly the assumptions that we
build. And in addition, you
know, you know how much
insurance is, you know how much
building costs in terms of rent
or mortgage, so these businesses
have done an incredible service
to our state through a very
difficult time and.
Well, we're, we're over that,
that, that's, that's past
history now we're moving
forward. So I mean, you, you
have 10 kids and that's 230,000,
you get 40 kids and it's almost
a million a year. So I, I wanna
see the committee wants to see
the breakdowns. I'm, I'm
questioning it, but the
committee deserves to see these
breakdowns, so we know what
we're actually getting for our
dollar, so.
Thank you for your time, Kelly.
Thank you.
No, thank you.
Senator Brent, we're gonna start
off with Senate Bill 70 and I do
have an amendment.
Oh, I'm sorry, sorry, Senator
Brent, we got.
Or CYFD secretary, she's shaking
her head no, but yes.
She doesn't want to go after
that.
You will be when it comes to
your budget if we don't hear
about it.
You, you're already housing me
in the halls last week.
Mhm
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, just like Kelly, I
will go back through the high
level for CYFD.
Um, the copy is in your packets
that looks like this, uh.
Oh, I'm sorry, I, uh, Mr. Chair,
I'm Rachel Garcia, the LFC
analyst for CYFT, um, I'm very
rude with me at the table, uh,
as Secretary Theresa Casado and
John who stepped out, he'll
still be here. Um, so the CFD
high level is on pages 17 and
18, and what we did for the CYFD
high level is we put the entire
bill on one document, um, so
that you can see all of the
sections, um, recurring and
non-recurring altogether. And
the why of that is
Because, um, as you know, um,
the house adopted a budget for
CYFD that maintains essentially
a flat operating budget that
makes investments in
non-recurring. And so for that
reason, you can see um kind of
the entire agency and bill um on
that high level.
Um, I'll point out just a few
key points, reminders about the
CYFD budget and then look to you
all in terms of where you wanna
go or ask questions.
Overall, uh, the House budget,
as I mentioned, maintains a
relatively flat operating
budget, it would increase the
operating budget by about 1.8
million, um, really just for two
purposes. One, to fund the GST
rate increases for vehicles in
IT as well as backfilling some
federal revenue, um, in, in
domestic violence for grants
that are going away and fees
that the agency no longer
collects.
Aside from that, and the
household CFDs operating budget
flat, as I mentioned, but made
significant investments, um, in
non-recurring. Um, before I
point out some big investments
in non-recurring, I will note a
couple of things, um, one, the
executive budget recommendation
would have backfilled federal
funding, um, you all have seen
presentations about um federal
funds have declined both in
terms of the dollars selected,
as well as the ratio of federal
funds to general fund within
CYFD.
Primarily within protective
services, um, the executive
budget recommendation would back
would have backfilled about 10
million. The LFC budget
recommendation and the House
budget did not do that within
the operating budget.
Um, so that was one of the
biggest differences.
Uh, in addition to that, I'll
also note before I point out
investments in non-recurring,
um, when CMD came in front of
HAFC, they requested an increase
of somewhere around 38 million
more than what was in the
executive budget recommendation.
So what you're seeing in front
of you in the high level does
not reflect what you may have
heard the secretary talked about
in front of you a couple of
weeks ago, what you may have
heard the governor mentioned
during the state of the state or
what you may have read in the
newspaper. What is
In front of you is what was
actually in the executive budget
recommendation. Um, so you have
to ask for additional funding
for a variety of things um
related to Kevin's arbitration
including some increases, for
example, for foster care
provider rates, um, but those
were not actually in the
executive budget recommendation
that was in front of HAFC. There
were additional requests. Um, so
what I'll point out is what is
in non-recurring, um, for CYFD
because that is where all of the
the investments are currently
made.
So if you kind of look at the
bottom of your high level, I'll
point out a couple of things,
um, yeah, Mr. Chair, um, uh,
line number 73 is where we'll
focus on the, the non-recurring
because that's where the
investments are.
And so you'll see first, uh, the
House budget includes 1.47
million um for a liability
insurance premium increase, that
is the increase in cigaretteFD's
liability insurance that has
resulted from increased
litigation, uh, and instead of
funding within the recurring
budget, the House budget funds
in non-recurring to kind of
increase oversight related to
that cost.
Uh, next line, uh, there's a
budget of $100,000 in
non-recurring to do a foster
care in TFC rate study. You all
have typically done a rate study
before making big investments in
rates to have a sense of where
the market is in other states
and what kind of um rate
increases might get us. You all
did that with Medicaid, for
example, before making big
Medicaid rate increases, and so
that's what that appropriation
is.
Um, the second one, the House
increased what was in the LFC
recommendation, um, to 500,000
for an external contractor, uh,
to reclaim and maximize the
drawdown of federal funds within
CYFD. So in lieu of backfilling
federal funding within COYFD's
operating budget, the House made
an investment, a one-time
investment in technical
assistance to try to help CYFD
understand what may be happening
with federal funds and go after
federal funds, they may be
eligible for.
For backfilling federal funding.
So that's what that increases.
Um, and then you'll also see
$100,000 non-recurring uh
investment for, um, an
organizational health survey
related to better understanding
what may improve retention. Uh,
below that lines 77 and 78 are
some of the biggest
non-recurring investments, both
are in the grow and both are
related to workforce. Uh, so the
House budget includes 5.4
million in general fund matched
with an estimated 1.9 million in
federal funds to establish the
child welfare.
A training academy for workforce
within protective services, uh,
and then 24 million in general
fund matched by an estimated 6
million in federal funds um for
workforce within protective
services specifically. Um, that
should provide about 10 million
a year for 3 years within grow,
and that should allow CYD to
hire about 100 caseworkers
within protective services. Uh,
last fall, that was about the
number they estimated they
needed to meet Kevin as case
load standards.
Um, below that, um, you'll see a
few lines, lines 79 through 86
are a few other um increases,
things like fund transfers to
the uh Children's Trust Fund.
Uh, I'll note in that
non-recurring, uh, the house did
not fund either a supplemental
or a deficiency for CYFD, um,
COYFD had a deficiency of about
12 million primarily within
protective services in FY 24 and
the agency is projecting a
deficiency of about 20 million
in FY 25. The House did not fund
those in part because they
instead made that investment for
technical assistance related to
federal funds because the gap
between the budget.
Um, an actual revenue collected
for federal funds is largely
what's driving those um
deficiencies and shortfalls
within the department.
Um, so those are kind of some of
the big key points within what's
in the budget, um, and if you're
interested, there's kind of a
roll up down at the bottom
across all of the different
sections of the bill.
Um, if a helpful data point for
you all to consider because
CFD's budget, um, much is in
non-recurring, um, in lieu of
making investments in recurring
helpful kind of benchmark for
you all. If you look at general
fund for FY 26, that provides uh
COFT would currently have about
a 5.6 5.6% increase in general
fund if you take into account
both recurring and non-recurring
together available in FY 26, if
that's a.
kind of benchmark for you all.
Um, so that is sort of the big
summary as I noted, uh, CFD made
significant requests for HAFC,
um, that the house did not add
um as the bill came over to you
all that were not included in
the executives budget
recommendation. That's a shocker
that the house didn't fix
something.
Well, uh, Mr. Chair, what I
might notice, um, many of those
requests, they just weren't in
the executive budget
recommendation. So the House is
considering two budgets in front
of them, um, and they were
hearing from COID requests that
weren't even in the executive's
recommendation. Let me ask one
question. Was it Kevin asked
order out when the the exact did
their budget.
And so you couldn't align.
Yeah, I'm looking at Rachel and
the secretary.
So I mean that's something that
you have to look at and plays
into the request.
I mean, the house, if they have
the deficiencies. I mean, they
either fix them or it ends up on
their auto fine, so.
That's the other thing that they
chose not to do.
In, in the supplemental was for
how much?
Um, uh, Mr. Chan, Senator, so
the Kevinist arbiters agreement,
uh, sort of.
Statement was released in
January. So all of the hearings
occurred in November and
December.
So yeah, it was, you know with
their exact budget was cause we
got it early for once.
Even before the deadline.
It is a good thing now they need
to do that to PED so we can
figure that one out.
Um, that's the only thing I
wanted to make sure, cause I
read that Kevin asked and I
just, I mean, they went in with
a flat budget or 1% increase,
got everything they want in the
house, in the cabers came.
And
Requires them to do even more,
so that may be the difference
that we need to resolve and
Madam Secretary, your next.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you. Um, so
yes, the Kevin S remediation
order was not entered until
after the budget was submitted
and although it was submitted
early, um, we didn't have those
findings to include them in the
executive budget. Um, so they
were asked for separately during
that hearing, and we provided a
sheet of each of the remediation
orders and what they required us
to do and what the estimated
amount was that we um, believed
that we needed to be able to
fulfill that.
You're up, Madam Secretary.
All right, thank you. um, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, um, thank you,
Rachel, as she stated, you know,
there is a difference, a
significant difference between
what we have in the request from
the agency at this point in time
versus either the executive
recommendation or what came over
from um the house. I just wanted
to point out a couple of things
and to me, um, you know, whether
it's coming in through the base
budget or grow, it is funding
that the department gets that
we're able to spend to really.
Um,
fill the needs that we need at
the department and do what needs
to be done. The only concern
that I have with Grow funds for
FTEs is it doesn't give that
stability and the ability for us
to say um that it is a funded
position. It's a temporary
funding, um, and requires us to
advertise it differently for
people. So that's a little bit
concerning in the issue and
trying to recruit individuals
for the department. I also want
to point out that about 10
million of that funding is a
pass-through for C.
IFD and so that goes to either
Children's Trust Fund or um
other entities and so.
Mm
They're so 10 million.
No, I, I understand that, but
I'm saying of the entire amount
that's put into grow, there is a
portion of that that is a pass
through the Children's Trust
Fund. That is not explain that
to us because Rachel shaking her
head and you're seeing it does
it so explain that to us, uh, if
you look up at the screen, you
can see the breakdown, the funds
transfer is in section 10. Uh,
so there is a $10 million fund
transfer, but when I mentioned,
for example, the general fund
increase in non-recurring, it
does.
Not include the fund transfer.
That's in a different section of
the bill. So you'll see it in
line 91. That's the fund
transfer if you look at section
9, I'm sorry, uh, yeah, section
9, row 90, that's the grow. So
that's where you can see, um,
You know, 29 million in general
fund so it's not.
39 million, it's 29 million
that's going in to grow for FTEs
and the other sources and then
10 is the transfer of that
explains it.
That's correct. Thank you. Bye.
OK. So the increase that we're
looking at for the budget um for
CYFD is we're asking for a total
of 437 million and as they
stated some of that is, um, you
know, not in the original
request. It's specific to
CYFDD's remedial order that we
received from the co-neutrals.
So that includes funding for
additional positions, um, to
reduce caseload, um, it reduces
And then there were also other
asks from the co-neutrals that
CFD had not put into the
original budget. So they asked
us to create an on call center
at all of our offices. We did
that through a regional um call
center, so we will set up
regional response teams and the
idea for that through the
co-neutrals was to eliminate the
need for overtime for our staff.
Um, so we would have a night
shift that would go out on call
if an emergency came in at 2 in
the morning, um, it would.
wouldn't be our regular staff
who were on call. It would also
address if we got an emergency
hold of a child in the middle of
the night, we wouldn't call in a
staff member, um, in that office
while they found placement for
that child. So you can see in
our request that we're doing 20
new FTEs um to do regional call
centers and that would be one in
each region.
They also asked us to fill
positions or bring people on to
work on the data. As you know,
we're working on the new CWIS
project that won't be available
probably till the end of this
year is what we're anticipating
roll out to be, um, which then
hopefully our data will be
different, but we need
additional people to do data and
make sure that it's accurate and
work on that. That's been an
issue that we've had in
Kevinness for quite some time
within the department.
Currently, we have been using um
Falling colors to do our data,
that contract ended and we
brought on a new provider to
help with that, but we're
looking to build our internal
team of about 6 FTEs to do that,
um, as they mentioned, um, we're
looking for new FTEs to expand
our training. We're setting up
regional training centers to be
able to support our staff in
those offices and not just have
a training team in Albuquerque,
but to support them regionally,
um, we're not asking for any
additional dollars because as
Rachel pointed out through Grow
you have funded.
Training, we're just asking for
the FTEs for that, um, and then
one of the large requests that
we're asking for is an increase
for foster parents stipends.
That hasn't been increased in
quite some time, um, I
understand that there's a
$100,000 in there to do a study,
which I very much appreciate
that study will allow us to
determine how other states, we
can look and see what their
rates are, but we don't know
what's actually built into that,
right? Does it include
everything or are there other
expense?
that are still provided outside
of that rate. And so this study
will allow us to really look at
how foster parents, um, their
stipends are built in other
states? Is it just care and
maintenance or is it other
supports as well. And so I
believe that that study will be
beneficial, but I still believe
that our rates for foster
parents at $21 a day in some
instances are too low and so our
request to increase foster
parent payments and that stipend
is $15 million.
9.8 in general fund and the
remaining in federal funds. Um,
so those are some of the
differences that I wanted to
point out and the reason that it
has increased from even what the
executive budget recommendation
was, um.
And then the last thing that I
wanna say is, you know, the
study to look at federal funds,
I think is warranted. We did
bring in an expert to do that
who has been able to help us
identify some areas where we may
be able to draw down additional
funds, but as we pointed out in
our previous presentation, a
large portion of the loss of
federal funds was due to grants
ending and not necessarily
because we weren't drawing those
funds down, um, and I'm happy to
provide a breakdown of what that
looks like. Um, we are working
right now on going back and
trying to recover some federal
funds that
we've identified, um, and so we
will be continuing to work on
that. So I appreciate the
initiative and the funding for a
study.
And with that I'll stand for
questions.
I don't see anybody raising
their hand.
Like, I guess, could you,
Senator Steiner,
then Senator, OK.
Madam, madam, uh, Mr. Chair,
Secretary, welcome. I know it's
been a challenging session
probably and I just respect you,
standing strong and, you know,
fighting the fight. So, um, in
spite of, you know, differences,
I know it's it's tough, you
know, and, and I can respect
that, you know, we're all up
here fighting and it is tough
sometimes. I used to have a kind
of an overly simplistic
question, OK, just kind of from
a Senate Finance perspective. So
we do know about what we read in
the paper about, you know, why
the House did what they did.
And you know what you're asking.
If I were to ask you just real
high level like.
What is the main difference you
would like us to pay attention
to and address.
And summarize it real simply,
what would it be?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Steinborn, first of all, I just
want to say thanks for
recognizing the difficulty of
the job. I think, you know, CYFD
is a challenging agency, and I
just wanna say I think there's a
lot of differences, but I think
at the end of the day, our goal
for every single person here is
the same, and that's to build a
better child welfare system for
kids in our state. And so I
think we all show up and
continue to do that work every
day and I appreciate you guys,
um, pushing back and standing up
for our kids as well. So thank
you. Um, I think the biggest
priority right now is.
Um, the funding of the caves.
Situation and the requirements
that they have placed on the
agency, um, and whether that be
through one time while we try to
figure that out or um.
In the recurring budget, um, for
me it's money that we can use to
write this system.
But I think also a top priority
is to really look at where we
are with the federal funds. I
think there's a huge difference
in opinion on what that looks
like, and I would love an
opportunity to sit at the table
to really dig down on that and
understand because, um, as the
chairperson said, we don't want
to carry a deficit. And I think
that we're so far apart that I
would just like consideration of
that.
And, and Mr. Chair, and I hope
we give you that consideration,
you know, it doesn't mean we'll
agree, but it's too important to
not be communicating and see if.
Um, you know, we need to do any
more adjusting to, to make sure
we get it right and uh.
Thanks for doing what you do.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
the.
Uh, thank you, Chair and thank
you Secretary. Thank you
everyone presenting there, um,
you know, I've said it before,
how very, very grateful I am for
the work that, that everyone in
the department's doing. I know
it's a
It's a yeoman's task and it's
very difficult emotionally,
physically, the whole nine and
everyone that I've worked with
there is just doing a phenomenal
job. Thank you Secretary, for
your commitment. I know you've
got a lot of
I hope I don't put my foot in my
mouth. I know you have a lot of
things going on outside of this
building too, and my heart goes
out to everything going on with
you right now, so thank you.
Staying in the game.
Number one, and number 2, we
have a significant amount of
legislation moving through the
roundhouse right now. I'm gonna
have a pretty significant one
tomorrow evening, uh, that's
gonna turn the lights out in the
building from what I understand,
it's gonna be a lengthy one, but
um we're having that scored
right now. I just want to let
you know that that from a, a
fiscal impact, you know,
standpoint, and so I, I don't
know what that's gonna look
like, but the chair was
supportive this morning of, of
having LFC do that work and so
they're working on it right now.
I spoke to Mr. Courtney earlier
and I, he already has it and I'm
not sure when we're gonna get.
it back, but I think it's gonna
be pretty significant there too.
So we need to be aware of that
and I just wanted to call that
out in this hearing because um
you have a budget right now, but
I don't at the moment know
exactly what.
What's it's Senate Bill 42 and
it's, it's gone under.
And there's been a lot of work
to put this entire thing
together. It's about 5 major
pieces in that one.
And I don't know if you want to
comment on that, but, but it's
uh it's gonna be a Whopper, I
think.
So
We're gonna bring you back and
we're gonna do some wrack-ups.
And then let's see what 42 does.
I think we need to dig deep into
into fixing problems. I, I mean.
I like to fix stuff and move on,
right?
And we don't know what that's
gonna look like, so when that
bill comes out, we're probably
gonna have you back early
childhood's going to come back,
I think hear much out of PED on
on shortfalls.
Um, but we're gonna focus on you
in early childhood and in so you
plan on spending a couple of
days in this room, so.
I had one thought follow up.
Um, and so Mr. Courtney, um,
You, I don't know if you had an
opportunity, you've had 900
balls in the air. I know you're
in charge of the place over
there right now too. Uh, do you
have any sense for how, how long
that might take to get that new
FIR produced.
Mr. Chairman, we're, we're
working on it and by we I mean
uh it's a 77 page
um, the, the good news is I
think it's a, some of it's an
amalgamation of of some other
legislation we've seen, um, so
we expect that to, we expect to
kick that out today, Mr.
Chairman and Senator Padilla and
I appreciate your work over at
LFC as well. Thank you both.
Could you bring us a spreadsheet
across the board with what's
happening with
With CYFD and the comparison to
bills and dollars and then we'll
figure out what's going where
and how it's gonna work and
that.
Rachel, can you do that for us?
That'll help us understand what
each piece of legislation is
doing and and what that looks
like is it comes to us wrapping
up the budget.
Mr. Turner, I will do that. I
will add a lot of those, those
bills, um, have costs that
aren't necessarily in CYFD in
addition. Um, so they do involve
other agencies potentially, so
I, I will just put that on here,
we need the rack up so we
understand, right, where all the
moving parts are and who's
getting what and how it's gonna
work, so that if it
We do see it moving and then we
can put it where it needs to go.
Senator
under Tobias.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Rachel, can you give me a little
clarity just cause there are a
lot of moving parts. I wanna
make sure I've got it right,
but, um, between house Bill 2
and the LFC budget, um, does it
address the Kevin S um
requirements for like staffing
workforce development, foster
parent recruitment, data
positions, etc. Is that all
there?
Senator, I'll point out a few
things that are in the budget
right now that do those things.
I do think to some extent there
is a little bit of double
counting in some.
cases things that may already be
funded. So, um, the, the house
budget, for example, in the grow
provides that $30 million over
three years, that should be 101
caseworker positions, um, back
in December that looked like
what they needed to meet the
caseload standard component.
Similarly, CFT asked for, I
believe, 6 million for the
training academy, uh, I, I
apologize, 2 million, um.
And then x 3. So if you look at
the child welfare training
academy, that should provide
funding both for startup costs
as well as some FTE in the years
2 and 3. so some of those pieces
are addressed. Um, I will note
that for the foster care rate,
the arbiter didn't specifically
specify, for example, that the
state needed to have a specific
foster care rate just that we
needed to recruit and retain
foster families. Um, so what is
in the budget is the money for
the rate study in addition last
year, CYFD got some money for
recruitment and retention of
resource or foster families,
they're using that grow money
this year, um, for a pilot
program they're calling Foster
Care Plus, but they do have some
grow money in FY 26 that also
could potentially support some
FGE focused on recruitment and
retention, uh, and then in
addition to that, if you look at
your PS calc um while protective
services is running really
tight. It does look
like they could find a couple
additional positions in program
support and that could address
at least some of the data needs.
So while they may not fully
address all of what the
secretary mentioned, there are
pieces in the budget right now
that do address um some of the
KevinS components.
Thank you. And then, um, one
more question, what's the
average time that a new employee
stays with the department
currently.
Um, and I'm sure center to buy
and we looked at this for a
subset of employees probably
about a year ago, so this data
is, is old, about a year ago,
well, I'll point out one thing,
um, right now, the turnover and
protective services, uh, is
about 38%. That's where, uh,
CYFD ended the year about a year
ago, we looked at a cohort of
case workers who had been hired,
um, and then kind of tracked how
long they stayed. The turnover
was quite high, particularly for
new employees, I think the
average was about 6 months. Um,
so they have a, they've had um
challenges with significant
turnover, and that is not new,
that has persisted for some
time.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tobiasson, I agree 100% with
what um those numbers that she's
providing, it is one of the
reasons that we're really
looking at revamping our
training. Caseworkers don't
start carrying a caseload until
they've been with us for about 6
months, and we were seeing that
once they started carrying a
case load, we were really losing
them and so we've revamped our
training to ensure that they
have what they need to be able
to do that job, and we're doing
more on the job training early
on because I think they got into
that position and then they
started carrying a caseload and.
felt completely overwhelmed,
one, because we have high
caseloads and they were
immediately getting a high
number of cases, but a lot of
them felt that they weren't
adequately prepared to be able
to do that work.
OK, and Mr. Chair, that, that
would lead me then to ask you,
are they mentored?
By anyone in the department as a
new employee in those 1st 6
months.
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator
Tobiasson, yes, that is part of
the new um model that we're
using, they are assigned a
person that works with them
throughout that training period
as a mentor.
And Mr. Chair, do they like
shadow that person? Do they help
carry that, that tenured
person's case load in the 1st 6
months.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Dubison, yes, they will work
with them to shadow and be their
mentor, um, as they start
picking up cases. So our hope is
that at 4 weeks, they can start
to carry a graduated caseload
and that person will still work
with them and mentor them.
OK, thank you very much.
Thank you.
Um, just Rachel always amazes
me. I remember things so.
From years ago or past, I mean,
you're really on top of this, we
appreciate that. So, work
together, get us a rack up,
right, of what moving parts
we're gonna have as well
probably put you back on
tomorrow.
Uh, cause we're gonna need to
see when's that bill getting her
center?
So, what is today, Tuesday?
So maybe uh Thursday morning
hearing, uh.
Don't shake your head no, cause
I I don't have a lot of time
left in wrapping up the budget.
I mean, I, I don't have time. I
mean that's.
And if we have to do it in the
afternoon and not in the
morning, that's, we can adjust
that, but we're getting tight on
time for wrapping up the budget,
tightening it up.
Working over the weekend to get
it.
There in in trying to get it out
sometime next week.
Um
It's just, it's a time issue. We
don't have that time, so you
spend that oil.
Um, that's the only thing. The
other thing I did find out is in
in ECECD 22 of our staff members
left for for low pay, and that's
under the secretary, so.
She's also doing it, so.
OK.
Thank you. Appreciate your time,
get it ready for us so we can do
that. We're gonna do send worst
bill first, Senator,
Senator Trujil, you're gonna
chair.
You're gonna share, we're gonna
do send worst bill first and
then we'll go to center branch
bill we'll let.
Senator Lanier chair one and
Senator Tobiasson chair one.
And then we'll go down the
floor.
And the reason we got to do this
one first because center but
needs to go to the floor.
All right, thank you very much
Mr. Chairman presenting for
Senator Worth. I do have some
expert, an expert witness here.
We do have an amendment, we do
have an amendment. I'll move the
amendment for discussion
purposes, but essentially, um,
I'll give you a quick on the
bill. Uh, we have, uh,
thresholds that the board of
Finance have to, that they
oversee for uh disposition of
personal property, real
property, and uh disposal of
property without uh agency
disposal. Uh, these have not
been adjusted since the late
1980s. The amendment actually
adds community colleges to.
The definition which was
inadvertently left out. So I'll
move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Um, move them for a discussion
person.
OK.
second the motion. Any objection
to that? None.
So essentially that's what the
bill does, uh, I mean, just in
more detail,
apologize, the amendment adds
community colleges community
colleges to it's not in the bill
currently, so that adds it for
community colleges, that's what
the amendment does. That's what
the amendment does,
questions on the amendment.
None can have emotion. Oops,
you're supposed to be.
Let's start all over, Senator
Trio. Let's
take over from right there.
Sorry about that. No, that's OK,
um, Mr. Chairman. I thought that
you were gonna go ahead and
cover for me there. Um, so, uh,
you just left any, is there any
comment?
From the committee.
No, see, none. Uh, what's the
Motion to adopt.
Your first. Oh, you made the
motion, you made the 2nd dinner,
um, onos made the motion,
Chairman Munoz and Senator
Padilla made the 2nd, um, is
there any opposition to that?
See none, the amendment has been
adopted.
Move on to the bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So essentially what
you have here is 3 thresholds
that needed to be adjusted.
These are all approved by the
board of Finance. Again, uh,
through inflation, these are
adjusted to inflationary uh
standards from the late 1980s
essentially real property uh
goes from $5000 to $30,000 in
disposition under um uh disposal
of real property, 25,250,000 and
in state agency disposal goes
from 100,000 to 550,000. Again,
uh,
Current oversight, you know,
just has told us that we need to
do this, so we haven't adjusted
in such a long time, which we do
many areas of state government.
Stand for questions.
I have no questions on the bill.
Do you stand for questions then
Senator? I do, yes, thank you,
thank you. All right, do we have
anyone in the audience that is
for this bill.
Is there anyone in the audience
against this bill?
It's a busy audience today. Is
there anyone on Zoom that is for
or against. All right, thank
you. Uh, what's the will of the
committee? Sorry.
go to Senator Steinburn for
questions,
uh, real briefly, I'd like to
just hear from your expert here
and um
So you got something to say. I
like
Yes, uh, chairman and Senator
Steinborn, thank you, Ashley
Lee, director of the State Board
of Finance. Um, so we have been
looking at this bill, so
property dispositions uh real
property and personal tangible
property, uh, either go to a
state agency or the board of
Finance for, uh, review and
approval. These thresholds have
not been updated as a, as the
senator mentioned since the 80s.
So what we've done is we're
taking a first approach of
trying to bring those thresholds
in line, so they're not.
Uh, you know, creating an
increasing burden on these local
public bodies that come for
approval. Uh, they're just
incredibly outdated. So we took
a CPI, uh, inflation, uh, factor
increases thresholds, and then
we'll, we'll also be looking at
the bill um over probably the
next year to evaluate uh the
entities that are included in
the bill. Uh, the only thing
that's changing, uh, with, uh,
this proposed bill are the
thresholds at this time, not the
entities that come before.
Thank you, ma'am, ma'am, and
then is this, it says essay at
the bottom. Did you all bring
this bill forward? Is this a
state agency bill?
Uh, uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Steinborn, yes, uh, the board of
Finance, uh, worked on this bill
and it's bringing it forward to
again, uh, just improve
efficiencies and reduce those
burdens from this. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Ma'am, is there, is
there a property involved at the
heart of creating this bill or
is this?
But
Uh, yes, Chairman, uh, uh, Madam
Chair, and, uh, Senator
Steinborn, uh, no, there's not
any specific property that
motivated this, uh, the board of
Finance has been looking at
increases, increasing these
thresholds for some time, simply
because we're just, we're seeing
a lot of lower uh value
dispositions coming forward, uh,
and we feel like that's just
overly burdensome considering
the original intent of the bill
and those thresholds not being
increased.
Thank you.
your answers. Thank you, ma'am.
That's all.
news.
How do we know that when they're
going to sell real property,
like if they're going to sell a
piece of property, they have to
advertise it or they just sell
it.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Munoz, uh, and Germany Munoz,
so, uh, they, uh, can sell it
with uh via different vehicles,
so it could be a negotiated
process where someone approaches
the local entity and says, hey,
we're interested in this
property. Would you be
interested in selling it?
Sometimes they uh employ a real
estate agent to list the
property if it's just excess and
they uh want to dispose of it.
So there are a variety of
different ways that are allowed
for them to to dispose of
property. It just depends on the
situation.
get in any public notice that
they're
They're they're selling this
property. I mean you could have
some underhanded deals pretty
quickly, I mean it.
County commissioner is going
down, the county commissioner
wants to.
buy a piece of land, you could
just make an offer and and they
could sell that without any
approval, I mean, that, that's
the other thing, there's no
publishing that it's gonna go
for sale and how a public not
gonna know, I mean, vehicles are
different, they probably send
them auction I mean other large
assets, they could say oh well
the value is this and and
And not have any advertisement,
letting the public know that
they are selling. I mean,
somebody may have a house in an
empty lot, the city got donated
to him.
And then selling the lot next to
him and there's no public
notice, that's
That's a big issue for me.
Um, yes, Madam Chair and
Chairman. Um, so what we
typically see is there are local
ordinances that require local
approvals of property
dispositions. This is simply
state oversight. So these local
entities, special districts
typically have a process. So
when these property dispositions
come to the board for approval,
they always have a local
approval of that disposition. So
that is, uh, uh, that approval
is provided at a public hearing
at the local level. OK, I'll ask
Senator Worth to see if we find
that out. Thank you, man.
Senator Gonzalez, do pass as
amended.
We have a second with uh Senator
Campos.
And is there any opposition?
Semen, the bill is passed as
amended.
Madam, uh, would you please call
the road.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brown
votes yes, Senator Campos
compost votes, yes, Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Gonzalez
votes, Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes yes.
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
votes yes, Senator Steinborn,
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobiasins, yes, Senator
Trujillo, yes, Senator Trujillo
votes, yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Sendo.
Senator Munoz, Senator Munoz,
yes, we have a do pass 9 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Senator, you have a due pass as
amended. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Tobison,
you're chairing next.
The rent which bill we're gonna
do first.
7
And we do have an amendment for
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and we
have uh
Bill 70, which is um.
racketeering
Legislation.
Most of us know it as Rico from.
The uh
You know, the old uh
days of the Mara
But uh we saw a racketeering law
in the state of New Mexico, um,
it's been trimmed way back from
what you've seen in the past,
um, we have, uh, cut back the
number of crimes added to it,
um.
But they're the worst ones,
right? Their sexual exportation
of children, criminal sexual
penetration, criminal sexual
conduct, um, dog fighting,
bringing contraband into places
of imprisonment and human
trafficking.
So this would be the way that
they would go after the head of
the snake, right? This is to go
after the person that's
organizing the groups for these
crimes.
That's what it does. It doesn't
change any of the penalties in
there, just adds these 6.
Are
OK, and Senator Brant, you have
an amendment. Did you want to
explain that?
I do have
the chair has an.
OK.
Senator Munoz, would you like to
explain your amendment? Uh, can
I have a motion to
Amendment for discussion
purposes. I need a motion to
move the amendment for
discussion, Senator Trujillo, do
I have a second?
And pneumonias.
The 2nd or is he 2nd?
Can you give me a second? OK,
there you go, your 2nd. And you
want to explain your amendment?
Madam Chair, all this does is
strike cockfighting. Currently
it's a misdemeanor for
cockfighting not already in the
3rd time it's already a felony
and so it just strikes cock
fighting.
OK, and is there any
Question. Questions on the
amendment.
Senator Seymo.
I'm sure, um, sorry, I was just
looking, uh, give me just a
second cause it's funny. I just
got an email on this, we all
did.
So Mr. Chair, who's offering the
amendment is cockfighting.
Or of the RICO statute?
Is that
it's added in look on page 4 of
the committee sub.
Uh, which is 0.30.
As dog fighting and cock
fighting.
as provided in section 30.
German Munoz is is recommending
taking out cockfighting because
it's a misdemeanor.
And this would make it a a
felony for organizing the cock.
I, um, Mr. Chairman, is
dogfighting a misdemeanor or is
that a, is that uh already a
felony?
That's
interesting cause we outlawed
cock fighting.
Already
misdemeanor.
In New Mexico
It's a misdemeanor.
Yeah, and Sha center, it's a
misdemeanor the first time and
the 2nd time and the 3rd time
it's a felony.
Um, hm.
Is that a friendly amendment
just out of curiosity. Uh, yes,
because, um, if you look at the
very front of the bill, and this
is something we just didn't
catch when we were putting it
together, um.
anything that's in the
racketeering statute has to be a
felony.
And so being that cockfighting
is not a felony in our state. It
really can't be in here. We just
messed it. It's really clean up.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
OK, I need a movement to
adoption of the amendment. I
have a second.
Senator Trujillo's 2nd.
And moving on to the bill. Any
objection Oh, any objection to
The motion.
OK.
you
see none.
Do pass.
The amendment is adopted.
We'll get there.
OK, now back on the bill,
audience audience, is there
anyone, um, for this amendment
or for this bill.
Anyone against the bill.
OK, can I zoom? Anything on
Zoom?
OK. And should I have invited a
couple of people from the
audience.
Three people from the audience,
if you'd like to.
step forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce that supports Senate
Bill 70.
Uh, this bill targets the
leaders of enterprises that are
committing heinous crimes. That
should be felonies, uh,
specifically makes it a crime to
solicit or coerce another
person, including a minor, and
being a member of or working
with a criminal enterprise and
we also know that human
trafficking is a growing
problem, largely because of the
organized criminal involvement
that's involved racketeering
statutes are designed to go
after these kinds of
organizations and these kinds of
people and prosecutors need.
Centervi 70 to have a new set of
tools to protect the public.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members. My name is
Grace Montano Irwin with Animal
Protection voters, and we stand
in support of Senate Bill 70,
which adds dogfighting and
cockfighting to the list of
violations to our state's
racketeering law.
Incorporating organized animal
fighting into a Rico statues
will align our state's
legislation with what law
enforcement professionals here
and across the country have long
known that animal fighting rings
are frequently part of larger
criminal enterprises that
include drug and armed
trafficking, human trafficking,
money laundering and other
illegal activities.
Utilizing the RICO statute to
disrupt these animal fighting
rings will enhance protection
not only for the animals that
are harmed and killed, but also
for our communities at large.
We urge you to vote yes in
support of Senate Bill 70. Thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Good morning.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Mr. Chair.
Uh, my name is Dale Wagner. I'm
a deputy chief of the New Mexico
State Police. I'm over the
criminal narcotics and Special
Operations Bureau. Expanding New
Mexico's racketeering statute
would significantly enhance the
state's ability to combat
organized criminal activity.
Racketeering laws are designed
to target and dismantle criminal
organizations
violin.
By enabling law enforcement to
prosecute a wide range of
criminal actions that are part
of larger criminal or
enterprises.
By broadening the scope of the
offenses covered under the
racketeering statue, the state
can better address and penalize
a broader spectrum of criminal
activities, particularly those
tied to organized crime.
This expansion would strengthen
New Mexico's efforts to combat
criminal organizations on
multiple fronts from traditional
crimes like drug trafficking to
emerging threats such as human
trafficking and financial fraud
in in doing so, the state would
improve public safety, increase
coordination between law
enforcement agencies and ensure
more effective prosecution of
high-level organized crime
figures.
DPS strongly supports this bill
as it addresses a long-standing
challenge in identifying and
tackling ups upstream criminal
actors that are part of a larger
criminal enterprises by
providing law enforcement with
additional legal tools. This
bill will focus on dismantling
the most serious and dangerous
criminal elements.
Rather than targeting low level
crimes that are often driven by
criminal organizations that
evade justice. Thank you.
Um, Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Chief.
Sorry, apologize. I want to ask
you a question if I may.
Um,
So, you know, it's uh there's a
lot going on in this session
you're gonna have to come up to
the mic.
And take a seat right next to
the center.
That
You can tease him if you want.
That's good.
Um
Mo chair chief. So I just have a
question about cockfighting. um,
which, which unfortunately we're
getting a little delayed
communication.
But, you know, I've
Be shared that that sometimes
cockfighting is an entree to
Rico-like activities and then
it's kind of showing up.
What's your perspective on that?
Are you seeing that too?
I'll be honest, I'm no expert on
cockfighting, but the times I
have found it, it, um.
I don't know about the entree,
but it leads into other aspects.
Of criminal activity activity.
Uh, drugs, um, etc. Horse racing
stuff like that.
OK.
And, and, uh, so it, so as far
as being like kind of like in
that Rico sphere, does it seem
like
It would be a fit to you based
upon what you see.
I'm just
I believe it could.
That's just part, every case is
comes on an individual basis and
it has to have certain elements.
To uh reach certain levels and
so it absolutely could, but it
just.
There's many variables that can
decide whether it actually
reaches that higher level,
right, Mr. Chair, I also, Mr.
Chairs, I also got information
that a 3rd degree offense is a
felony for cockfighting.
So
You know,
I would submit probably I mean
it would have been helpful to
have this information 5 minutes
ago.
But I would submit in terms of
criminal activity that surrounds
it, it probably would be
appropriate. I mean, if we're
gonna do this and we're adding
dogfighting.
Um
I, I would love us to kind of
reconsider the decision a little
bit, um, because of the premise
in which we voted for it.
I don't know how you'd feel
about that. I mean, it's just
kind of new information, but
seems to be more appropriate
now.
Does that,
what's that?
Yeah.
Yeah, and I may ask for the mic
back. I just, I would welcome
others' thoughts on that, you
know, I, I supported the the
amendment only because of the,
uh, you know, the feeling that
it wasn't a misdemeanor and
maybe it wasn't the right fit,
but now that we know it, it
can't be a felony.
And it is sometimes involved in
criminal activity. I mean,
Why not, right? Why not? So.
Did you have any thoughts on
that?
Senator Trujillo,
thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you, Senator for that. I
also looked up the um.
Crime uh for cannabis
trafficking, which is right
above, um, this, and it is just
a misdemeanor if you're 18 to
20, if you're 21 and older, then
it can be a 4th degree felony,
so there is a little bit of
Um
Comparison to what we're talking
about with the cockfighting too,
so.
I would, I would say the same
thing.
It's a horrible sport.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
respectfully, I would offer that
as an amendment to withdraw the
Senate Finance Committee
amendment.
So that we put this back in the
bill.
Um, and I would move that as an
amendment.
Awesome
Senator Steinborn first Senator
Trujillo seconds the movement.
And do we need to call the roll.
Yeah.
Mhm.
So it's a motion to remove the
amendment that we just approved,
so we'll call the roll.
Senator Brent
I'm sorry, ma'am, uh, chair, I.
So, so Senator, there's, we just
put the amendment on he has a
motion to remove that.
I, I did in my discussion say
that it already is a felony.
After your 3rd time, your 3rd
time they charge you with a
felony and cockfighting.
So this is under the RICO stat.
I did say that, so we weren't
paying attention, that's your
fault fair enough and
and so it is a felony after the
3rd time.
And the motion is to remove to
remove it, um.
At this point.
Senator Sternborn votes no.
Senator Campos no.
OK, Senator Brandt, so let's
roll, let's call the roll to
remove the amendment.
Right, OK, and no vote keeps the
amendment a yes vote removes
them.
The Senator Brent.
Senator Brandtboats no, Senator
Campos, Senator Campos votes no.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes no. Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes no
senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn, Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasin. No, Senator Tobiasson
votes no, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes no. Senator
Shando? Senator Shindo votes no,
Senator Munoz. Senator Munoz
votes no.
The motion to remove
The amendment that was just
adopted.
It's
Deals, 9 in the negative 2 in
the affirmative.
Thank you
OK, thank you. And now we're
back on the bill. Any further
discussion on the bill?
We should do pass.
Motioned for Dupas.
Seconded by Lanier, OK.
Perfect. And can you call the
roll?
Senator Brent.
Senator Brandt votes yes,
Senator Campos. Uh, yes, uh,
Madam Secretary, I, uh, vote yes
on Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 70 is
once amended.
Thank you, Senator Compos votes
yes, Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Linier. Senator Lanier votes,
yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasin. Senatorbiasson votes
yes. Senator Truil. Senator
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes, yes,
Senator Schendo. Senator Sendos,
Senator Munoz. Senator Munoz.
But yes, you have a do past 10
in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative.
OK, and Senator Brant, your next
bill is 18.
OK.
Mr. Chairman and and uh senators
this bill is, is not in its
original form, um.
Because the uh
The shooting threat, becoming a
felony went into House Bill 8
and it's already been signed by
the governor, so that's already
happened. Um, this was the
second half of that bill, um,
Senator Lanier is on this bill
with me as well as Catherine
Cullen in the house. This just
adds swatting.
Um
Which has become a real issue
around the country.
Um, and we've had some instances
here in this state, but swatting
right now is not illegal in this
state.
Um, and so this bill makes it a
felony to commit swatting, um,
swatting is
I uh
Real simple if I get really mad
at someone.
Someone gets mad at someone and
they want to send a SWAT team to
their house. They call it in,
say they hear shooting or hear a
disturbance or something,
usually shooting because that
will get a SWAT team response.
Uh, yeah, so and so's address,
the police all show up, they
kick in the door, and what has
been what has happened around
the country is sometimes that
homeowner.
There's nothing going on in
their home and they're armed and
they, they have a gun and they
end up getting shot.
By the police.
Um, and so this has become a
real serious problem throughout
the country. We need to make it
illegal in New Mexico and so
this makes it a 4th degree
felony.
Thank you, sir. Um, do we have
anybody in the audience that is
for this film?
Anybody against.
Anybody online?
All right, so we will have one
person come up and support.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. I'm JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce, swatting is a form
of violence and intimidation
that can leave lasting emotional
scars. Senate Bill 18 is going
to bring a meaningful
consequence by making swatting a
felony. That's what we should do
for our children.
Uh, there was a recent analysis
that just in September of this
last year, there were 2000
swatting incidents nationwide
affecting our public schools.
This costs taxpayers now with an
annual cost soaring over $500
million in terms of school
disruptions, lost instructional
time, mental health impacts, and
of course, there's the costs
incurred by emergency responders
and first responders. This has
become a huge problem and Senate
Bill 18 is an important tool
that can help mitigate this
situation.
All right. Thank you.
Anybody on the panel?
Miss trio.
rial.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator for bringing
this forward. This is a really
dangerous activity and um it
really rises to the level of
what used to be bomb threats
when I was a kid and we now, you
know, in the past 10 years or so
have had um shooting threats in
our schools, and we outlawed the
shooting threats.
Um
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes, that
was in the House Bill 8 crime
package was the shooting threats
becoming a felony and so the
governor's already signed that,
so that's now.
I'm not sure if that had an
emergency clause, but that's,
that will go into law.
So this portion was a part of
that bomb threat now because
it's a settled, you know,
sitting alone, we pulled it out
and put it in another section of
law.
So
Works a little bit better
instead of opening that chapter
again.
Thank you, thank you, um, Mr.
Chairman and Senator, um, so
thank you. I appreciate you
bringing this forward and I will
stand in support of it.
Mr. Munoz, Chairman Munoz.
I don't even know what to call
any board anymore. It really
changed names today.
Senator, do you think kids are
gonna be aware when they do
this. I mean, that's, that's the
big issue. I mean, they think
it's kind of cute and bomb
threats were so people didn't
have to take tests. That's
usually when ours happened in
school, right, because somebody
didn't want to take a test that
was gonna happen that day. Do
you think they're gonna, this
one is more directed at, not,
not the schools and not the
juveniles. This is more directed
at.
Adults. This is being seen a lot
actually with politicians.
Um, a lot of politicians are
having this happen to them.
Um, we have one person in the US
Senate that's had it happen to
him 7 times.
Um, just in the last couple of
years, and so this is, this has
become a real issue, and it's
more of an issue when it comes
to an individual's home in a
school, yes, if this was to
happen at a school, and they
called in and said they heard
gunshots going off at Cleveland
High School, and it wasn't true,
they could be charged under
this, but most likely they would
be charged under the shooting
threat bill.
than this one.
So this is really designed more
for if you're calling it in for
your home, your home, but
someone else's home. I, I've
actually even referred to this
as as uh
anyway
killing someone else by cops, so
you know.
Assassination by cop.
The suicide by cop, you're
trying to get someone else
killed, so you call the police
and tell them there's some
gunshots going on. So how about,
how, how does it not affect
kids, right? Because kids are
gonna be kids.
And
if they're somebody's caring
is what we have seen.
Um, is the shooting threats of
the schools is the biggest, the
bigger issue that we've seen in
the swatting. If you're just
calling in a shooting threat,
you're not saying you heard
gunshots, you're saying I'm
gonna come there and I'm going
to shoot up the school.
That's like a bomb threat.
OK, this one is to get that SWAT
team response. You're calling
in.
saying I heard gunshots in
someone's home. I heard, you
know.
And then it could be out of
school. I, I doubt that they
would charge it that way. I
think this is, this is mostly
geared.
words
That home situation, which we
actually saw that happening in
Farmington not too long ago.
It's happened to me that the
police couldn't walk to my
house.
That gates down the bottom and
it's a quarter mile and a couple
of dogs in between, so.
OK, I just wanna make sure
there's um intents and
consequences.
Any other discussion?
Uh, stand for motion.
motion.
in motion.
As amended.
2
If you'll please call the roll.
Senator Brant, wait, this bill's
not we didn't amend this bill is
not amended doesn't mean he has
so he just did a motion for a
due pass.
Do pass for Senate Judiciary.
All right, so let's clean that
up a little. Send her to the
bison, Tobiasin.
Motions to a do pass.
On the Senate Bill
18.
We substitute for Senate Bill
18.
substitute
Committee substitute for 18.
And second by Senator Sendo.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brant
votes yes. Senator Campos. I
vote on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Sentability.
Center Coposia Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes.
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
votes yes. Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Sinner Steinborne votes as
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobias in votes, yes, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillos, yes, Senator
Woods.
Yeah
Senator Woods votes yes. Senator
Sendo, Senator Shanddosia,
Senator Munoz Munoz votes yes,
you have a do pass 10 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
