Twenty six million dollars for
the P. twenty five radio system
a hundred and five million to
school districts for career
technical education and
prekindergarten facilities.
Twenty million dollars for
kitchen renovations and
equipment support improve milk
quality from public schools a
hundred forty three million
dollars for higher education and
specials school facilities Mr
chairman I want to also
appreciate the participation
from members of of this side of
the chamber which would include
Senator Nancy Rodriguez thank
you were super support
leadership as well as Senator
Bob Evans us thank you would you
for your support as well and we
also have Senator Benny Shendo
on the negotiation team as well
and and and including Senator
Pat Woods so with that Mr
chairman and committee members
we stand for questions.
We'll go the onyx real quickly
anybody in support.
Anybody in opposition.
Yes.
There was not on this but I
think that came on on this one
our system okay.
you so.
people know we're doing house
Bill five oh five which is a
capital outlay bill.
Just introduce to talk about
four numbers are placed on what
happened our technical issue but
it happened
so.
Questions from committee
members.
Mr chairman.
Yes I don't I don't I don't have
any in excuse me I'm sorry no I
don't have any questions
specifically but I I was privy
to how this became the thick
document that it isn't as we
know it's never easy to get all
this consensus and all this work
done so I want to thank you for
your leadership to and and the
committee and in working so hard
to get this to where it is today
and I don't have any further
questions or questions or
comments you.
We have an.
Yeah.
Which will make a motion for the
past six.
But I think I think I think with
you but you need to get the
other folks.
We to compounds provided.
The subcommittee.
Give it to the full committee
for consideration.
But just to put in for the full
committee.
When we have the most the court
and then you bring it back yes
committee we can have a motion
as a subcommittee to.
For the past.
Was second question not no Mr
chairman I was just wondering
it'd be nice if we could maybe
get one more member just trying
to reason we should we should
have those.
Senator Hemphill sherry we're
Senator Steinborn.
Two thirds in the house
appropriations.
Sentiments in the house so in
Senator Burt was testing house
tax so maybe I can if I can run
out there Mr Chairman give me a
minute I think is almost done
with this bill of the so there
we go yes.
Hello.
Finance.
Representative what's it thank
you Mr chairman I just got the
Legislative Council the line we
cannot vote and one point two
billion dollars or.
Thank you.
Okay we can this is the
committee so one to.
Six.
Six should have already should
have opposed the motion dot
centers share Senator share.
The.
Okay so Senator Maria there we
go well Representative don't
come in the morning then we'll
get a quorum in the morning
no just make a few past motion
for explain it up there's any
questions will set Senator
Rodriguez set there.
Okay take care and then just I
want to look to the left and
went to the.
Another one but look for him.
The delivery of and if you look
which is.
Whatever your pleasure Mr
chairman will just Sen Ron
Griggs presented different
questions Kelly make sure to
less you want first thing so Mr
