I'm just gonna take uh a couple
of moments here to, to go over
some highlights of the agency
reauthorization request, but
before I do that, I'll actually
wanna uh turn your attention to
what I believe is now the 2nd,
the last page in your packet. We
had a, we had to add on, so page
12 of your packet.
So, um, just sort of the layout
of this, of this item shows on
the, uh, left, the executive
recommendation for a a language
only or reauthorization and then
on the right, the LFC
recommendation where there's a
blank in one of those, that
means there was no
recommendation from that
particular uh entity, and then
you see 4 columns with numbers
in them. So you see in the first
one, the original appropriation,
uh, the second one, the amount
that's been expended so far, so
that's through essentially
the 1st or 2nd day of session,
I'm not remembering exactly when
we pulled this number out of the
state's accounting system, but
so the amount that's been
expended up to relatively
recently.
Uh, that that third amount would
be the amount we call encumbered
and basically that means it's
sort of sort of committed it's
under contract, and then that
final number would be the
balance. So that's essentially
the appropriation minus what's
been either expended or
encumbered.
So, um, if you look at the,
again, on page 12, I'll just uh
note that, so of the items in
the in the in at least one
recommendation, the aggregate uh
total appropriation of that was
842 million. So there are
You know, appropriations valued
at 842 million that that were um
at least one organization is
recommending or reauthorized.
There were additional requests
from some agencies that weren't
even recommended, so, um, this
is only a portion of those
requests and just, uh, you know,
of that 350 million almost, um,
333 million has been spent
already. That's money is already
out the door. 200 and an
additional 201 million is
encumbered is under contract,
but that leaves a balance of 295
million, almost $300 million
that would be covered by these
uh reauthorizations.
Uh, and I mentioned, uh, some of
this a little bit yesterday in,
in some cases, agencies asked
for additional funds for some of
these very same projects and,
you know, so in some cases,
particularly on the LFC side,
you'll see perhaps uh
recommendation to reauthorize
some funding, but we didn't
recommend to you, uh, when in
the specials, when we what we
talked about yesterday to
provide additional money. And an
example of that, I'll just start
going through these as an
example of that would be online
3 on page 1.
So the administrative office of
the courts a few years ago
received a $16 million
appropriation uh to upgrade
remote and hybrid judicial
proceedings equipment. Uh, that
was a $16 million appropriation
to date a little about 7 million
of that has been spent and we're
showing a balance of about 4.4
million, uh, and the both the
LFC and the executive
recommended reauthorizing that
request.
Um
Uh,
You'll, uh, uh, you'll know, um,
online 4 there's, there's not,
there's an executive
recommendation, but there's not
uh a recommendation from the LFC
to reauthorize some assisted
outpatient treatment money. And
the reason for that is, uh there
was uh an appropriation to AOC
or related to behavioral health
in the growth fund that was part
of the LFC recommendation.
Um, I'll just note, so, um, most
of these items, um, that you
have on this list are are are
reauthorization or
reauthorizations of special
appropriations. A couple of them
are what we call language only
and some of these are
Stuff we include every year.
You'll see that on page 2 just
some some language only that
gives the administrative office
of district attorneys and budget
authority to um to keep some
funds they they get from another
general fund, or sorry, from a
non-general fund source, um, and
you all appropriate that
reauthorization here in the
language only.
Um, so, uh, I'm just gonna keep,
keep moving on, Mr. Chairman,
uh, and members. If you turn to
page 3.
Uh, you'll see on line 10 a
request for reauthorization from
the Attorney General for a $6.4
million appropriation from the
consumer settlement fund related
to water litigation costs. This
was another one that we saw
yesterday yesterday had a had a
agency um request for additional
money. You see there's, you
know, that initial appropriation
was in 2001, about 2.5 million
has been spent and, you know,
about 1.4 is under contract with
about $2.6 million dollar
balance. We recommended
reauthorizing.
that.
Um, you'll see a number of items
from the Department of Finance
and Administration on pages 4
and 5,
on pages 4 and 5, excuse me.
A lot of these are for local for
the local government division
and those um flow through to to
uh local projects.
On page 6, you'll see a couple
of items there for New Mexico
Sentencing Commission, um,
again, this was another item
that um
That was the agency requested
additional funds and you'll
notice there was, there was not
um a recommendation from LFC,
uh, in this, in either the
special appropriation request or
to reauthorize these funds, and
that's basically looking at the
balances of these. It doesn't
appear that there's been much
activity, um, uh, and on the
2023 or the 2024 appropriations.
Uh, we talked a little bit about
do it yesterday as well. You'll
see there's a couple of um
reauthorization requests by the
fight.
$5 million for cybersecurity
online 23 as well as the Connect
New Mexico Fund money on online
24 and and the uh the broadband
plan money on page 7, line 25.
Uh
You'll, you'll, if we keep
going, Mr. Mr. Chairman, you'll
see some items.
Uh, some smaller items for uh
for a couple of uh agencies, but
I wanted to take a look at line
32 on page 8, where you'll see
the agency asks for a
reauthorization request for
some, some uh dam maintenance,
uh, and flood control money, um,
this, this particular request is
notable because the uh
The agency has to effectively
change the purpose of the
appropriation. So that's
something you'll want to um
to keep an eye out for it,
you'll notice in the LFC
recommendation, the LFC
recommendation recommended
reauthorizing that money as it
was originally appropriated, not
to change the purpose, but
that's something to watch out
for when you're looking at these
reauthorization requests.
Uh, you'll see a, a couple of
items, uh, I'll I'll show you an
example on page 9, line 38,
where there was no executive
recommendation, that's usually
because this was a a ad uh for
from uh the legislative Finance
Committee, you know, and, and
this one online 38, uh, in
particular, uh, the
reauthorization for um CYFD to
be able to draw down um federal
funds, uh.
You know, we highlighted the
importance of uh the ability of
the department to do that
yesterday and, and recommend
reauthorizing that
appropriation, you, you, you did
last year.
Um
And
I don't have a lot on these
other ones, Mr. Chairman. I
don't know if uh you, if members
have any questions, I'm happy to
address any questions.
Thank you, uh, before I go to
the members, just a couple real
quick.
Um, you've mentioned that some
are not here.
And, and the reason for that is
So, Mr. Chair, so
Um
Some agencies requested
Reauthorization, so both LFC and
the executive made
recommendations based on that,
and not all items were
recommended by either LFC or the
executive.
So
What happens with that?
So, uh, so both.
In some in usually those are
items where we have additional,
so agencies are requesting these
reauthorizations relatively
early in the fiscal year. A lot
of times when we look at those,
what, what happens is we think
the agency is going to be able
to spend the money before it
expires. And so that, that's a
pretty typical reason for not
granting a reauthorization
request and then uh the other
question is uh um.
On the DOT is that probably
pretty much based on them
because of their contracts, the
way they
Is that what
So, so were you looking at a
particular item on DFT Mr.
Chair just in general, so in, in
general, DOT did have a lot of
reauthorization requests this
year. That's because, um, part
of that's because
A couple of those big
appropriations that you've all
done from the general fund, um,
for DOT are set to expire at the
end of the current fiscal year.
DOT has some of that money under
contract, but, but still, you
know, has some pretty
significant balances in that.
That's probably something you're
gonna want to follow up with the
department with when they come
here before you, um, to discuss
their operating budget. Are we
able to get these general fund
dollars out, um, you know,
within the time frame that
you've all set um for those
appropriations for the
so, you know, I did follow up
and uh what they tell me is
because um.
Their situation is a little bit
different. A lot of it is with
permitting.
And uh especially if it
involves.
Federal and for service and any
other.
They have to wait until they
clear that before they can move
on.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee that yeah, that's
great. There are, you know,
issues sometimes with certain
DOT project that take a long
time at the at the same time,
you know,
Uh, you all have choices to make
and you have to decide whether
what the opportunity costs of
our making an appropriation that
is is going out and is not able
to be expended within the time
that you initially authorized.
Very well, thank you. members.
It will go to Senator Campost
and uh.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, just very quick.
Uh, in terms of the number of
the uh requested for the
reauthorization. I, I, I counted
about 2.
5 out of 52 um items there that
uh don't have any of the
encumbrances are, are we having
correspondence with a different
agencies in terms of why the
encumbrances possibly have not
occurred.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, in, in, in, yes, we
are, and um I have some
information on some of the,
those specifics. I could, I
could share with you if if
you're interested about specific
items, you know, in some cases,
Um, you know, the agency has a
Has a plan for spending money
that they've, you know, when we
ask about that, uh that item,
they'll say, OK, here's what,
here's what we're gonna do with
it and that.
Um, feeds into the the
reauthorization recommendation
that LFC and, and the executive
considered, so Mr. Chairman, the
second point would be with a
purpose change, and we've seen
this over the years where they
will go ahead and be the purpose
change. We reauthorize, we move
money from one area to another,
which in essence leads the
project, or if you will, those
resources uh going for some
other purpose that was not
intended initially, so with
that.
Are you see that as one of the
Or is that as Senator Woods
would indicate.
Not a problem as we deal with
it, so, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator, I would not, I wouldn't
use the problem, the word
problem, what I would say that's
something you want to carefully
consider when you consider
reauthorizations and um in some
cases, that's been a strategy
that um
The agency has, has come to the
legislature and said, you gave
us money for this, but this is,
this is a really critical need
and you all have said we're
comfortable with that. We
understand this is, this is the
priority, but it's just, it's an
area where you want to be
cautious and make sure you
understand, you know, what the
agency exactly wants to do about
um that with that money before
you uh approve that change. So I
was looking to go in and see how
many of these uh particular
items had uh.
Already been authorized or
reauthorized. Do, do you have a
number in terms of the number
that are listed here that have
been reauthorized more than
once.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, and and
senator, sorry, um, we don't
have that number, but we can, we
can maybe look into that and get
that. There are several examples
of that. So in some cases, um,
It's not that it's been
reauthorized, but it might have
been appropriated for a
multi-year period.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as we
deal with it, uh, the other
issue would be with these
projects. Have you seen a change
in the leadership of the
individuals that.
Initially began with the, with
the projects and again uh that
in itself.
Adds to, if you will, the delay
or to the changes that uh start
to happen and so are you
tracking, if you will, uh, the
continuity in, in terms of
leadership as we deal with that.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman and uh and
members of the committee, um,
we, we, we do sometimes see
that. I mean, I'll give you an
example. There's a couple of uh
uh recommendations from the
executive here for the
Department of Health. Um, that's
an agency where we've seen
turnover among, among leadership
and and funds not being spent.
So it's it's, it is something we
consider. So Mr. Chairman, the
last question that I have
relative to what we're dealing
with is as we uh
more into the reauthorizations
with those type of questions and
additional questions that are
going to be relative to the
accountability and transparency.
I hope that we bring that
forward so agencies realize that
as we move forward to possibly
Not eliminate but modify the
process for reauthorizations
that we're all going to be a
little bit more careful in terms
of the resources that we have
and the purposes that we use for
the intended resources, so
that's all I have. Anyone else
who has questions going next to
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. Thanks for waking us up
with machine gun fire this
morning.
Good, good morning, uh, senator.
Mr. Chairman.
Um
Just a couple of questions.
There's no time on here.
So when was the money
appropriated?
Versus now
So on some of these are the, are
we talking 5, 10 years?
just last year, but
So I
So, Mr. Mr. Chairman and
senator, can I, for example,
direct your attention to line 3.
And if you look at the language
there, you'll see, so it says,
Um, the $16 million appropriated
in in whatever section of
whatever law of laws 2023. So
that's how you know that's an
appropriation that was initially
authorized in 2023. Um,
You'll, yeah, yeah, you
have Senator, you do have to
read them, um, some of these
are, uh,
A lot of these are 2024. Some of
them are, are a little further
back, um, OK. And it just, it
depends on the item. Yeah, I
just didn't read far enough.
Yeah, thank you.
And Mr. Chair, the only other
question I have is when there's,
when the LFC doesn't recommend
anything like I don't see where
the LFC denied anything on these
papers. So, uh, I'll get, uh,
uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, I'll
give you an example. So if you
look at line 4,
The box under the LFC
recommendation is blank. That
means the LSC did not recommend
that item.
Right, and do we have a reason
for that? Is it, do they just
really not have an opinion or
so, Mr. Chair and senator, in
this particular case, it was
because the LFC recommendation
included funds for a similar
purpose elsewhere in the budget.
OK.
That makes sense. Thank you.
That's all I had. Thank you very
much. Next we move on to Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and thank you, Joey, for this,
um, information. Just a couple
of clarifications, so the
encumbrance, that's through June
30th of this year.
So, um, mister, Mr. Charon and
Senator.
I believe that's correct. I
don't know that that that
there's a hard and fast. It's
only through June 30th. I think
that's generally the practice,
but I don't know if there are
exceptions to that.
OK, thank you. I mean, excuse
me, um, Mr. Chair and Senator, I
believe all of these expired
June 30th, so sort of by
definition, yes, it would be
through June 30th of this year.
Yeah, OK, Mr. Chairman and Joey,
thank you for that. I, I, I
think the way it typically goes
is that the purchase order is
through June 30th, but there may
be contract money that is
extended to the next year, and
I'm just wondering if we know
that information of what will be
encumbered on, you know,
theoretically July 1st of 2025.
Um, so Mr. Chair and senator, so
I think, yeah, I think that
that's correct. There are
agencies that do multi-year
contracts, that's particularly
tricky when you have a
non-recurring funding source
that expires and you know we
wouldn't encourage agencies to
plan for a longer period than is
authorized by the legislature,
and I think I perhaps Lee has
something to say.
Mr. Sylvie, please.
You couldn't try to encumber
something like on June 1st.
And carry that encumbrance
through.
All the way into the next fiscal
year. There's gonna be a cutoff
date where
The controller's gonna say all
the bills need to be paid out of
that appropriation.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate that. So that kind of
um makes me wonder, there's so
many of these, uh, Mr. Chairman
Joey, that don't even have an
encumbrance. This is
February and we're looking to
reauthorize something that
doesn't even have a date, like
it doesn't even have
encumbrances right now to start
spending they are giant figures
and so.
Anyway, I just, I just wonder
why there's even anything on
this list that doesn't have an
encumbrance at this time that
money is in the process of being
spent.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair and, and
senator, I that that that's a
fair question. It would depend
on the um the individual
circumstances in in that
particular case that that fed
that recommendation, but I think
the issue you're raising is an
important one to consider, and
like, and quite frankly, a lot
of these in in prior years have
been more or less pro forma,
right? I, you know,
They just would be reauthorized
and I think given the amount of
money out there, the amount of
requests that you saw yesterday
with specials, you know, really
making clear to agencies that
when they're given a deadline to
spend that money, it's it's
expected to be spent is, you
know,
Probably should be uh uh.
Stronger message. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, um, uh, Joey, I
will just say that.
It does seem particularly after
listening to the Capitol outlay
yesterday, and, you know, we
haven't really gotten into the
weeds about how much money is
reoccurring from different
agencies, but clearly it seems
as though the legislature may be
appropriating too much at any
given time that things are just
not shovel ready and there's
money just lingering and, you
know, whether it's or turnover
in staff or whether it's not the
ability.
To get personnel to, to get it
moving, but I, I think we need
to think really clearly about.
What's capable of getting
accomplished because this still
is a significant amount of money
that
I don't know, I think there's
other people out there that
could clearly spend it and get
some things accomplished. Thank
you.
Thank you very much, Senator
Trujillo. Any additional
questions?
See and then Joey, again, thank
you very much for the
presentation. We truly
appreciated the points have
definitely been raised that uh
through the evidence-based
information we all need to
consider as we move forward in
this budget process.
OK, we're gonna move along then
to the next item on the agenda,
which would be the status of
liability fund payouts and
requests, and uh we'll go ahead
and we'll start.
Um, how do you want to begin,
uh, Anna, do you want to go
ahead and begin?
Uh, to go through your
presentation and then with the
other individuals that are here,
should we take that individually
or what are your, what are your
thoughts?
the
OK, but you'll have individuals
here specifically with each one
of the departments in case there
are those questions.
um
Mr. Chair, we do have
representative from CYOC.
OK, good.
So then, uh, Miss Silva, if you
would please, please begin with
a presentation, members of the
subcommittee of Senate Finance,
you will have uh
presentation, it'll be with the
uh blue and white covered.
Packet.
Thank you. Please begin Mr.
Chair. Thank you members of the
committee and thank you for the
opportunity to come and discuss
with you the uh status of the uh
claims for CYFD New Mexico
Corrections Department,
University of New Mexico and MSU
and DPS.
I would like to start by
introducing our team. I would
like to start with, uh, Gerardo
Wallace, who is the bureau chief
for Risk Management division, um
Marquita, she is our deputy
director for risk management,
Andrew Maida. He is our counsel
for risk management, a Joe Hill,
he is our public information
officer, and we have uh our
director who is a Jeannette and
our deputy secretary, which is
Jennifer Kahn and myself, uh,
Anna Silva, the acting
secretary.
So, um, the information that
we're presenting today, um, all
of the information comes from
the Sunshine Portal. It is real
information in real time.
As we discussed the claims, many
of them can be anything from a
trip and fall to medical
malpractice, um, all the way up
to the worst case scenario,
which could be um a death.
We're going to start with CYFD.
Um, this is your second page in
your presentation.
What you're looking at today,
um, the, uh, graph depicts 45
claims in the year um FY 23, 12
of those claims we're showing
have been settled for a total of
$6.8 million.
When we look at FY 24 out of a
total of 44 claims. We have 12
claims that have been settled
in, um, for a total of $12.6
million.
When we look at FY 25.
Out of a total of 30 claims so
far, we have a total of 7 that
have been settled.
Turning to corrections.
FY 23, we have a total of 3 out
of 241 claims. We have a total
of 39 that have been settled.
FY 24 out of 233 claims. We have
a total of 37 that have been
settled.
And for FY 25 so far out of 139
claims, we have 2 that
Turning to you and MH.
FY 23 out of 155 claims, we have
29 that have been settled.
For FY 24 out of 105 claims, we
have 31 that have been settled.
And for FY 25.
Out of 94 claims.
We have a total of 11 that have
been settled.
For NMSU.
For
For FY 23.
We have a total of 59 claims, 8,
which have been settled for a
total of $8.3 million.
FY 24.
We have a total of 10 claims
that have been settled or um
$1.1 million and that is out of
63 claims.
And for FY 25 out of 33 claims,
we have a total of 5 that have
been settled for 285,000 and
that's um just to date.
And for DPS.
With FY 23 out of 211 claims, we
have 13 that have been settled,
roughly $1.4 million.
FY 24.
We have a total out of 317
claims. We have 36 that have
been settled.
And for FY 25 so far, we're out
of 168 claims, we have 13 that
have been settled for $4.2
million.
So a little bit about what we
are doing to help mitigate some
of these claims.
So, um, I would like to start by
thinking uh Joey Simon. We have
implemented monthly meetings um
with the LFC and with our
agency.
And um with those with the
collaboration process in order
to help looking at some of the
um instances and some of the
issues that we're having, um,
with our, uh, fund liability and
the claims that we're seeing.
We will also begin monthly
agency meetings with each of the
different agencies that you've
um have seen here and some
agencies that are not
identified.
The purpose of those meetings is
sometimes leadership has no idea
what claims are um are happening
within their agency.
Um, claims are being settled
without the knowledge of
leadership, we'll be starting
those monthly agency meetings
with leadership, um, after the
session.
We also have implemented a
high-risk review, a team
internally so we can look at
some of these high risk claims
and before they are um given to
the secretary for approval, a
team reviews the high-risk
claims for a determination and
for a recommendation.
We've also um have.
Uh, hired, uh, and doubled the
staff of our attorneys.
Before, um, we roughly have
anywhere um
At least over 800 cases at a
time.
And we have had 3 attorneys that
have had to um.
I've had a caseload of roughly
300.
Her attorney.
That has been unmanageable.
So what we've done is we have
doubled the size of our
attorneys, so we now have been
able to spread the number of
cases. So instead of just
settling the cases, we are now
having the ability to fight the
cases. So we have doubled the
team and that team.
Um
We have also uh going to be
working with SO so that we can
start working on training for
the high risk positions that
we've determined to use
additional training to help with
the mitigation of some of the
claims and some of the instances
that they are having to deal
with.
And for CYFD specifically, we
are going to dedicate 3 contract
staff in order to help with the
training and on-site
availability to see YFD members.
So we will be starting that.
So with that, I'll stand for
questions and um I also have the
team here in the event that we
have anything.
specific you'd like to. Thank
you very much, Ms. Silva, and uh
we're now operating as a full
committee. We have the majority
of the members here, so we do
have the quorum. I'm gonna go
first to uh Senator Trujillo and
then I'm going to Senator Woods.
Senator Trujillo, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here. It's
nice to see you, Anna. Um, I'm
just gonna go to the DPS and ask
my questions, but they're
relevant to all of the slides
that you shared, um, so you
mentioned that out of 211 in FY
23 out of 211, 13 were settled.
Does that mean that 198 rolled
over to 2024, which which is why
there's 317. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Trujillo,
so if the claims are not
settled, then they will roll,
they will continue to roll over,
um, so it could be that the 317.
Partially are uh 211 and they'll
just continue to roll over until
they're settled. OK, and so, uh,
Mr. Chairman, Anna, I'm
wondering, um,
How many out of each of those
categories, like if we could go
back, I don't wanna go back,
maybe you can just get me the
information later, but out of
the remaining
198 and just FY 23, um, but I
would like to see for FI 24 and
252. How many of those have been
dismissed?
Um, or, you know, they just the.
Yeah, I guess dismissed. That
would be like or closed.
Um, Mr. Chair, as Senator
Trujillo, we can definitely get
that information to you. OK. All
right. Thank you. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Thank you very much, Senator
Trujillo. Next we go to minority
leader Woods, Senator Woods,
please.
OK, the, the question I have,
Anna, thank you for coming,
excuse me.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I apologize, Mister Chair.
And
Thank you for coming today.
Uh, as you know, I've got a bill
up today.
Uh, talking about transparency.
Um
And I'd love for you to come sit
beside me and present that bill,
if you would.
You may not be in favor of it,
but I would love for you to
come.
Check with the legal team.
But.
The question I have, you know,
I, I don't mind putting you on
the spot. We've known each other
a while, um.
Tell me
Tell me about
Your ability.
To buy insurance.
To claim to settle these claims.
Tell me, tell me.
The, the liability cost that you
have.
The premium cost you have, not
the liability cost, the premium
cost you have and how much of
this you just paid out of
general funds.
This chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, thank
you for the question. Um, I'm
going to ask um our director for
risk management to combustion.
Answer the question specifically
and we do have some information
pertaining specifically to see.
IFD, um, if you like identify
yourself and then uh prepare for
the questions. Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Jeanette
Chavez. I'm the director of the
risk management division, and
thank you very much for the
invitation to come and talk
about this. Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, Senator,
we don't currently have a
liability policy.
That we purchased to pay for
these losses, all of the
liability losses that we have
for the state of New Mexico are
paid out of the public liability
fund.
That is funded through cost
assessments.
and, and Mr. Mr. Chair.
Of course, the question in the
next obvious question is,
I that is a fund that we
allocate to.
Annually
In our budget
You, Mr. Chair, committee
members, yes, sir. And, and what
is the
Um
Approximate.
Balance in that fund right now.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
let me check.
I've, I've got a book here, but
I, Mr. Chair, we're gonna ask uh
uh Marquita Sanchez who's our
deputy director to come.
Again, as he Waller called to
come up, please identify
yourself and prepare for the
questions. Thank you.
He dissents from the deputy.
RMD deputy director.
Um, Mr. Chairman, the fund is
currently negative with
outstanding liabilities that far
exceed the assets, um.
And
Currently right now, it is um
the ratio is a -4%.
So we have a negative fund
balance of 3.9 million.
And uh 87.9 in outstanding
liabilities. 87.9 million.
So the question, Mr. Chair, is
this.
You've got a negative fund.
So how do you feel about fun
back up, Mr. Chair.
I mean, what, what I'm saying is
this.
We're doing a double entry
accounting here.
And when there's uh in, in my
case, in my own business.
It's a check. It's a checking
account.
So, uh, you know, that's how I'm
relating this is we've got this
checking account called the
public liability fund.
And when it goes 0.
My bank quits paying.
The checks.
It starts bouncing.
Now
Explain the process.
And I know, I know you turned
the the over to the DFA award in
the warrant goes to the
treasure, and the treasure pays,
but
But exactly.
Where does the money come from?
I mean, is, is that out of the
category that y'all want to talk
about. Uh,
Uh
Explain that a little bit to me.
I mean, if, if you don't have
money in the fund,
So how can we keep going to
negative. Uh, how can we keep
going negative if we don't have
money in it.
Mr. Chairman Senator, uh, every
year we have, we have an actuary
who looks at all of the numbers
and the losses and the exposures
for all our agencies.
And basically what we do is we
assess those premiums so that we
can stay on top of what we're
paying out.
Um, as of late, we've had a lot
of shot glasses that we've had
to deal with that have depleted
the fund in cash, Ellen.
Uh, but what we do is we came
forth during the um budget cycle
and we asked for approximately
100 million to spread across all
the agencies and premiums, um,
but we were told that we could
spread it out over 3 years, um,
so we're working with our LFC
analysts and our DFA analyst on.
Different scenarios and how we
could get this one back on
track.
Um, but essentially we are
passing those costs on to those
agencies that and those that
have higher claims will pay
higher premiums.
Good, good, but what I'm
What I'm getting at for sure.
We have.
Premiums
The agency pays a premium for
liability insurance, is what
you're telling me.
Is that a third party insurer.
I mean, like a, like a common
name that I know in church
stuff. uh, or Lords of London.
Or
Do this, are we self-insured?
I guess it's explain that part
to me Senator Woods, we are
self-insured. So we're pulling
in the premiums as we go.
It's kind of a pay as you go.
That's what Joey and I go back
and forth on. It is pay as you
go because we realize you're not
gonna fund us 100% for $400
million of outstanding
liabilities that we don't know
what will happen. We, we really
don't know when they'll
materialize if we'll ever pay
them out. Um, so as we go and as
we pay, we, we look at it
closely and we try to give you
an accurate number of what we'll
need every fiscal year.
Um, but it's very hard to pin
down and we don't know what's
gonna happen with all of these,
you know, these losses that
we've incurred that we've had to
deal with.
Uh, we weren't expecting it, and
now.
We're dealing with the outcome
of all those things, all those
pieces. Uh, Mr. Chair, or are
most of these suits, uh.
Um
Civil liability suits, is that
the federal suing to the federal
law.
Yes, it's civil.
Right.
Yeah, civil rights law, but it's
a federal law they're suing.
And Mr. Chair and committee
members, if I may, um,
Out of the public liability fund
we pay for all different types
of claims. They could be a trip
and fall on the sidewalk. They
could be in excessive force
claim coming out of the state
police, but it can also be
anything that happens at the,
the facilities for detention um
involve cases and um also civil
rights.
So there is a lot of different
components that are included in
the evaluation of these claims
and the types of claims that we
receive from the public.
So yes, we do pay for civil
rights and whistleblower
allegations, employment-related,
uh, type claims out of the
public liability fund.
So it's, it's more than one fund
you pay out of, Mr. Chair.
No, no, Mr. Cham, it's all the
public liability fund.
Is the is the fund that you make
settlements out of.
Yes, Mr. Chairman and committee
members. It's out of the public
liability fund. OK.
So
We've got actuary projections
for
For 2
24.
Of 2 362 million.
$940 is what my little book says
here.
So is that we don't, but we
don't ask to put that much in
that fund. You don't, you're not
budgeted for that much.
It's right, that's about 100
million is what we're budgeted.
That's correct, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, it's, it's, uh, that's
the.
Reserve them out for outstanding
liabilities.
Uh, but we only get funding for
what we're actually paying out.
Well, no, we're not funded to
that extent, no.
OK.
Mr. Chair, I don't, I don't
understand that statement.
So we budget them a pot of money
into the fund.
So if a claim comes in and say
there's 100 claims, and they
total over 100 million.
And I think, correct me if I'm
wrong, statute allows you to to
draw because it's a court order
judgment into the general fund
to draw that money from the
general fund to pay that out.
And then we balance that out at
some point, you know.
Correct.
And then we replenish a bucket.
I think we have 50 million in
the budget this year.
Or the the warrant fund, but
they shouldn't have killed your
bill in the judiciary the other
day cause we don't cap this,
it's gonna pop the $300 million
mark, and you look at the NMSU
settlements which were quick
quickly settled.
And
for whatever reason they're
quickly settled, there must have
been underlying issues that
somebody didn't want to get
deposed and so they settled them
quickly.
Rather than going to court, and
now NMS shoe on their insurance
premium bill that the state
builds, builds into the risk
fund, right? That's the other
portion that generally that you
guys generate to go into the
funds, so they charge them an
insurance charge NSus insurance
premium because of the 8300.
82,000.
Their insurance rates will go
up. I don't know what the amount
is, but they're gonna have to
justify how they're going to pay
the 8 million back to the fund
with
Rate increases.
Yeah, we pay for any issues?
Insurance, yeah.
No, we're just swapping money is
really when they settle these,
these health.
claims really quickly.
Then we become more reliable and
more liable and.
And for whatever reason.
Um
You know, CYFD.
I thought it was 20 million last
year that they had in cases.
And then they they settled 20
million because we backfilled 20
million last year. She said, I'm
sorry, I don't know your name.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, that's
correct so we settled 20
million, so the CYFD claim
number is not accurate at all.
This is 23 or 24, I don't no
matter what your we had to
settle.
That would have been one.
I think there are 20 million in
just CYFD.
Until the disease.
Plans get higher and higher and
settlements go quickly, quickly.
fun gets drawn down and then you
have to come back and increase
the rate.
Of cost to the state, I'm excuse
that you, for example, say they
went up 26% then because of
their judgments, their insurance
will go up 26% into the pool,
and they'll have to take it from
somewhere.
And so then they pay back at a
higher rate into the pole to pay
for those premiums in their
premiums may not go down for a
while. You and them will
probably, your name is not on
here, but.
They're probably not.
They have a claim out in court
right now, I think.
And so, but it hasn't been
settled, so it's probably not on
the sheet, correct?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, that's correct. All
of the, the numbers that you see
here for each fiscal year for
each agency are those claims
that actually settled in that
year and were posted to the
Sunshine Portal, but the one
that kind of sticks out to me is
CBYFD cause I remember those,
there's $20 million settlements,
we're only at 12 and 24, maybe a
23 claim but.
So you have something to add?
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
members of the committee. So I
think the, the 20 million that
you, you fed into the um
In the public liability fund
last year covered multiple years
of of CYFD claims. So it wasn't
just the 12 million that
explains it.
I thought it was a couple of
claims for 20 to 20 million, but
it's multiple year claims.
But, but my question I guess is
this, you're talking about
They, their premium rate goes
up, that's not the total
settlement price. They just get.
Uh, uh, the rate of the premium
goes up. I, uh, so,
you know, insurance is the game,
right? What, what, what is my
risk to that agency and what's
the liability and what rate
should they be at, I mean, so do
I pay?
Because I've never had any
claims. I still get insurance
increases is my talking
personally, right? Now NMSU has
claims, so what did it cost to
cover.
That claim in the insurance, so
if in you is paying annually a
million dollars a year. I'm just
using even numbers don't think
these are the truth in any way,
shape or form, then they got to
take
That $8 million cost and say,
here's what your risk is to the
pool, and here was what your
insurance claim was. So here's
your new rate.
In
But, uh, you know, I, I
understand we can have a
discussion. You and I can have a
discussion all day. They're just
shaking their head, yes, agree
with me, but they need to give
us the numbers that the rate
increases when they make a
claim. Well, Joey, do you know
that you're ready to jump up.
So, um,
Mr. Chairman Senator Woods, I
just, so I
Looked at this and then wanted
to look at the, for example,
CYFD's liability fund rate. So
if you look, you know, um, the
last 3 years.
We have, um,
That's for next year, right?
That's for 26, um, so the last 3
years we have at least $6
million in claim a year, so
currently the FY 25 liability
fund rate for the agency is a
little over $4 million right? So
$4 million settled between 6 and
12 million a year. That's
jumping up next year to 5.5.
So not
Even up to the 6 million that
we've been seeing recently
because it goes in over time and
the effect of that is it's
effectively spreads out.
The costs of those claims to
other agencies, right? So, you
know, most agencies, even those
without claims history saw, you
know, a large percentage
increase it might only be a few
$1000 right? But a large
percentage increase in their
liability premiums because to
make up those uh
Those other rate increases,
other agencies are pitching in.
So, so that when CYFD pays, we
pay $4 million into
the insurance fund.
And it's 4 million, they're
almost covering about 80% of
their claims in the $6 million
claims, so they're $2 million
short so then the next year they
come back and say, now you're
gonna, now you're gonna be at 5
million, now you're paying 90%
of your claims and the risk.
The, uh, the point I was trying
to make, Mr. Chair.
is this
A regular insurance company that
operates in New Mexico.
has to have sufficient balance
and reserves.
To cover
More than
Expected claim to be.
A valid company to be a, uh, in
other words, the insurance
superintendent is supposed to
look at this and say, all right,
New Mexico citizen, if you, if
you, uh, insure.
Uh, through this agency and this
agency guarantees you, uh, uh, a
certain value payout, your your
reserves have to be such.
Through some calculation that
you could cover that.
With the reserve.
Uh, uh, amount of money.
But when New Mexico is doing,
and then it's not your fault,
don't get me wrong, uh, but when
New Mexico does it,
We don't, we just say, well, if
you lose, if you don't have
enough money next year, we'll
put money in it, but just let
you write checks on.
Bank account that's empty.
Because it's a
Court judgment, and I guess what
I'm asking.
As always asked is
And it's a double-edged sword
because we're paying both sides.
were banned in a Maie if they've
got a higher.
Higher premium, we pay them over
here.
But what I'm getting at.
We should be charging more like
any insurance company and
finally get build up enough
reserves to, to, to say.
dislike the chair says.
Well, you pay in here in 2 years
from now, maybe your premiums
can go down when you kind of get
the house in order again or
whatever.
But
How transparent is all this?
Is, is, is, and that's the bill
I'm carrying today in judiciary,
Mr. Chair.
is transparency.
And it's uh Senate Bill 220.
So Senators kind of wrap this up
and but I mean, if we had to go
to the open market with any of
these agencies that we wouldn't
have insurance, they just deny
us. They just flat out say your
claims are too high, there's too
much risk, you're never gonna do
that. So we have to self-insure
in New Mexico for a reason,
because
But Mister Chair.
What happens when there's a
downturn and we can't pay all
the claims.
We'll have to because their
court ordered judgments and so
they'll get a priority to draw
warrants. Then we take food away
from the school teacher because
we got a claim that we have to
pay.
Do we sell bonds to pay and sell
bonds. But, I'll let you guys
wrap this up.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, um, I'll try to
answer as many questions as
you've got and remind me if I've
missed any of them. Um, we are
actually actively setting
reserves on every single
potential claim that we have.
So when we receive a claim in,
we evaluate it and we determine
what we think the claim value is
going to be, and then we set a
reserve on that on that claim to
essentially put money aside for
payment of that claim. And so we
are actively doing that and
we're trying to be as
transparent as we possibly can
on that.
Um, it is a process. The problem
that we have with any kind of
reserving system with any
insurance or insurance like um
entity is that it takes time to
analyze those numbers, and so
our actuaries are actually
working with us actively. They
look at our numbers, they look
at what we've got in reserves,
and they look at our lost trends
for those particular agencies
and then we try to
Figure out what may happen next
year.
Of course, if something horrible
happens, a shock loss happens
where there's a, a death or uh,
you know, something horrible
happens with multiple injury
type of accident. We're not
expecting that and so we're
trying to figure that in, but we
can't regulate that. We have no,
no ability to stop those
behaviors, but that's what
essentially insurance companies
do is that they look at agencies
and bet on what may happen here,
what may not happen here, and
then evaluate it as such.
So we are really trying very
hard to be transparent and we're
being very active about um
The types of claims that we were
paying and also what types of
claims we're going to start
trying. The, the, um,
Building up of our legal bureau
is essentially very important to
us and to the state and that now
we have more attorneys in-house
who will actually look at each
individual cases litigated and
determine if our defense
counsel's doing what they need
to do, um, maybe have a fresh
eye on stuff and also get
actively involved in this, the
discovery process and that the
motions practice process. So we
are trying to
Rain in the, the, the, or put a
tourniquet on some of these
cases that way as well.
And I hope I answered your
questions if I, if not, please
let me know. Thank you.
You know I'm sure you've done
the best of your ability to do
it, but it's a problem.
is that
We've got a wall coming at us.
And it's not like the wall is
decreasing.
It's in an upward trajectory.
And
I tried yesterday to put cap,
some kind of caps.
And judiciary just refused.
This flat refused, Mister Chair.
Said no, we, we don't want to
come to the legislature and ask
for money.
The system broke, Mr. Chair.
We, we, and it's not your fault
you're living under the law.
It's not your fault, but it's
the system is broke.
We, we're gonna have, it will
come to a point at this
trajectory.
To where the claims and the
lawsuits are going to be as high
as the state budget one day.
It's that, it's aim in that
direction to me.
So I just, that's the only
point, and I'm sorry to drag it
out.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, Senator Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm going to channel my inner
Senator Woods for a moment if
any of you were here yesterday
and say we have a problem and it
looks like an avalanche. I'll
agree with everything you just
said, um, and I'm reminded of
even in listening to um Senator
Munoz talked about how the
insurance is working in our own
pool. It's kind of reminding me
of what's happened with
hurricanes in Florida, uh, the
fires in California. We're
actually now the insurance
companies are
are coming to all of us across
the country and saying guess
what you're all going to pay for
it. So if I were running an
effective agency that maybe had
the lowest rate of claims.
I would be very unhappy right at
this moment, knowing that I'm
paying for the challenges, let's
say the gaps in all these other
agencies. I understand why it
works that way, but it's
definitely alarming and going
back to what he was saying about
Um, NMSU, Mr. Chair, and how
that money has to come from
somewhere in your question,
where does the money come from?
I'm gonna be bold and say the
money comes from oil and gas.
Um, we would not have this pot
of money to move millions upon
millions of dollars back and
forth between all these agencies
or within agencies and all the
bars and all the exceptions that
people are asking for if we
didn't have an incredible amount
of money at our disposal. So I'm
looking at
We've got a huge problem in a
lot of wayste and something has
to change or our future is gonna
look like what Senator Woods
just described. Um, and I would
question with the 26% increase
potentially with NMSU just off
of those lawsuits or one
lawsuit, I'm not sure what it
was. It sounds to me also like
there's going to be exceptions
and money moving within
departments in the university to
help offset that and
tuition rate.
Increase. It, it'd have to come
with a rate increase, increase
for families that are putting
their children through school
there. And then I have a I know
I'm on my soapbox, but then
looking at your charts here, I
wanna make sure I'm right
because Senator Trujillo, Mr.
Chair, asked about what are
these claim numbers.
I'm a little confused. The
numbers that you went through to
give us the claim number for
each year. That's a rolling
claim number. It's not new claim
numbers for that year. So could
you provide us additional
numbers on these charts and show
us what are the new claims each
year, and is there a dollar
amount earmarked for those
claims. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Harris Senator, yes, we
can provide you those numbers.
Thank you.
So just
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and uh we're all very familiar
in terms of as we move forward,
what uh what this fund does and
more importantly, if you will,
the increased liability that we
continue to deal with.
Or public agencies, so I'm gonna
just shift uh my question a
little bit when it comes to the
preventive measures as we deal
with this. So when we're talking
about training, we're talking
about the other prevented uh.
methods, if you will, to ensure
that uh we're working the
various agencies and we start
talking about harassment, we
start talking about uh other
claims, liabilities that that
move forward. Can you um
elaborate a little bit in terms
of what you're doing to help us
and help our agencies best
prevent, if you will, um, the
increased liability that we
continue to deal with. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos,
thank you for the question. So,
um, as we mentioned, uh, uh,
earlier in the presentation, so,
um, a lot is uh communicating
with the agencies, having the
meetings, doing the preventative
meetings, um, we're working with
our ADR um department and um
having um meetings with the
different agencies and also
informing the agencies and
meeting with them because of, as
I mentioned earlier, um, there
are agencies who uh are not.
aware of their claim statuses
are not aware of the um.
Some of the instances that are
happening within their
departments, so what we're going
to be doing is meeting with the
agencies on a monthly basis. The
agency heads um to inform them
of what um is happening within
their agencies and to talk about
what we can do to help mitigate
some of the specific um reasons
that their particular agency is
having the issues that they are,
because every agency is
different. So corrections is
different from CYFD. UNH is
different from NMSU.
So, um,
Uh, that's the, um, one of the
main things that we're gonna be
doing. The other is, um, as I
mentioned earlier, is our, uh,
attorney case load was 300 per
attorney. That's, as I
mentioned, unmanageable. So, um,
now with the amount of attorneys
that we have in the team that we
have, we can start working with
the individual agencies with
their legal counsel and um and
informing them in um partnering
with them on what we can do to
not only
settle the claims, but um also
fight those um claims that can
be fought because before we have
always just been um
An open checkbook and we are
stopping that. So those are some
of the things that we're doing.
So Mr. Chair and going right
back to what you indicated as
you take a look at the overall
loss of the projection basically
would be, it would take 10
number of dollars to to fight
this claim or it would take 10
number of dollars to settle the
claim. Is, is that still going
to be part of the methodology as
you deal with it, in other
words, cut your losses, uh, as
per each claim as you move
forward. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Campos,
yes, we have an entire team that
looks at each of the individual,
uh, cases and makes that
determination. And, um, um, they
have years of experience in
doing this, so, um, they will
then make a recommendation to
the secretary and, uh, uh,
whether it's not, whether it is
to settle the case in the best
interest of the state, or if it
is to go to trial.
So Mr. Chair, just in closing
kind of like with the NISOs we
dealt with the uh uh.
In in years past and of course
as we continue with the New
Mexico public school uh
insurance authority, we deal
with uh a similar situation.
And unfortunately it has become
a much larger litigious
environment that we're all
dealing with and so I encourage
all of our public agencies, uh,
to truly become more involved in
not only finding out, keeping up
with the transparency in terms
of what it is that we're dealing
with and more importantly, um,
Take those safety measures in
order to try to prevent as many
of these claims as possible. Uh,
it's just a different world that
we live in, but we really need
to prepare for that here at the
legislature. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Trio.
Thank you
I'm sorry to come back again,
Mr. Chairman, just quick, I
meant to ask, um, when you, when
each agency does an audit at the
end of the year, they have to
report how many pending cases
there are and what kind of the
dollar amount is, who reports
that the agency, or is that
reported by GSD or is it
reported by both?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Trujillo, we, we have an audit
report that we submit every
year, and we just submitted that
a month ago, something like
that.
Mr. Chairman, I think it would
be important for us to see what
the kind of analysis of what
they think is still pending,
like we know how much the
settlements are, how many cases
are pending, but we don't have
kind of any idea as to how much
dollars are pending for maybe
the coming year or the coming
couple of years, I, I think it
would be helpful to see that for
this fund that we're working on.
And I will just close, Mister
Chairman, in saying that this is
forensic work.
Right? This is all forensic work
and so thank you Senator Campos
for, you know, like bringing up
how are we doing prevention?
In the CYFD cases, these are
kids who have died.
These are deaths. Like this is
forensic work that we're paying
out as a state and so we've got
to figure out how do we stop
this from happening.
These are people, this is real
life, and I get why judiciary
probably didn't want to set
limits because this is really
tragic stuff. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Very well, thank you. I think we
have completed our agenda, so.
Thank you very much for being
here.
And uh members we started extend
adjourn until this afternoon at
1:30.
Hey.
