a business for legislators that
are either not on a primary
ballot or they may have been
defeated and so therefore
they're not moving forward with
their elections. However, Mr.
Chairman and others, um, you
know, they still represent their
districts up until the time that
their successors are chosen and,
and sworn in. So we just want to
make sure that it's fair to
them, but currently under
current law, um, you know, out
of state travel or other travel
on behalf of their constituents
is not reimbursed unless there
is a 75%, um, 3/4.
Uh, vote from the New Mex from
the Legislative council, uh,
which you and I are a member of,
and that just seems to be kind
of out of whack and, and that's
what the legislation does.
I thought you wanted me to be
quick, Mr. Chairman. You are
Mayor Mc Jesus talking to me,
so.
here.
Um,
I have some great enchiladas
this weekend with anybody in the
room in opposition.
Anybody in support. Questions
from committee members.
Monsieur Mover do pass and
motion for due pass by Senator
Woods, and so a second by.
Senator Lanier.
Calder.
Senator Brant.
Senator Campos, Senator Campos
votes yes. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Yes. Senator Lanier votes yes.
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
votes yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin? Yes, Senator
Deason votes yes. Senator
Trujillo, yes, Senator Trujillo
votes yes. Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes.
Senator Shundo.
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Munoz. Senator Munoz votes yes.
You pass 8 to 0.
Thank you Mr. Chairman Senate
Bill 161. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I'll be very quick on
this one as well, and I
appreciate that general um
Aguilard for being with me
today. He is the general of the
Department of Military Affairs,
essentially Senate Bill 161 uh
fixes a pretty serious problem
we have right now, Mr. Chairman
and members, um, it focuses
simply on enhancing the safety
for minors to participate in the
programs under the Department of
Military Affairs, uh, the bill
mandates comprehensive state and
national criminal background
checks for all.
uh, employees and volunteers who
will supervise or have any
interaction with children, uh,
the key provisions are that
there are mandatory background
checks, conditional employment
status until your background
check comes back clean and use
of that and how the use of the
background check information is
going to be used. Uh, the reason
we want this is because it
enhance the safety to minors,
and standardizes the screening
process, um, provides
provisional hiring flexibility
and it focuses on sensitive
information and how it can be
used. Uh, this is something that
we found to be a pretty serious.
problem. We're fixing it right
now. I'll uh I'll ask the
general to take questions if you
have any, Mr. Chairman.
Generally don't have any other
comics real quick, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I'll
add two more things because
there's a couple other changes
that are in law. One is, um,
there's a change in the statute
portion that allows me to hire
guardsmen, um, for uh state
active duty and so uh I think
the initial change we made a
couple of years ago was, uh, you
know, allowed me to use people
uh money from the general fund
in order to do it. We've added
some language in there that says
other funds available to the
adjutant general because uh
sometimes FEMA provides.
funding, so it'll just gives us
the ability to be more exact in
law about the types of money can
be used, uh, and then the other
thing it does is provide the
opportunity for my, for me to
hire guardsmen and supporting
youth programs whether it's our
summer challenge program or
Guardsmenstate active duty
support or uh or two challenge
programs in Rossville and and
the one that's opening in
Albuquerque. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience and support.
Anybody in opposition?
Forgot about Zoom. I'm gonna
have to remind me.
Nobody.
OK. Questions from committee
members, Senator Woods.
move too fast, Mister Chair.
Hold on one second, I have a
motion for Du Past.
No other questions. Let me ask
you one question.
You mentioned that you're
allowed to use general fund,
only appropriated general fund,
right? Not draw from the
reserves.
Mr. Chair, that is correct. OK.
A motion for due pass in the.
And the second.
When you call the own.
Senator Brent
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
votes yes. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Yes. Lanier votes yes, Senator
Padilla,
Senator Padilla votes yes,
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin? Yes, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, send her to
heal.
Senator Trujillo votes yes.
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Sendo? Yes.
Senator Shendo votes yes.
Senator Munoz. Senator Munoz
votes yes. We have a DuP pass 8
to 0.
Thank you, Chair and members of.
Uh, is Senator.
gorilla here. Oh, there you are.
Come on up.
He's handing out the next
package.
While we're doing that, do
people want the packages handed
out individually or do you want
them in your binders? Maybe just
a quick show of hands.
Mr. Chair, until we
Mm
Get a few more ahead.
This is fine, but
We'd love to have it an hour
before or several hours before
if we could.
But you'll have the package 24
hours before since we listed
them, right? And so they'll be
online. They'll be online, OK,
if you want an email to you, we
can email you.
You can email the package to you
once I would appreciate an
email. OK.
chairman, so
Are you, are you referring to
the, the finance that will be
available 24 hours later,
usually these are in our
binders, right, right, and so
what I'm saying is.
As we go along and we'll have a
few bills instead of digging
through your binders and pulling
them out.
You want them separate, or do
you in any citizen or would sit
when they get a bunch of them,
let's put them in the minors,
you know, binders would be
great, but I also want to be
able to see him a little ahead
of time too, so.
I believe they're available. We
can email them out of Senate
Finance.
If we have the FIRs within 24
hours. Understood. Thank you.
Center Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee Senate Bill 75 is an
ERB agency bill, and that was
seen by investment and pension
oversight during the interim,
the director is here if you have
technical questions, but this is
a technical cleanup bill. It
does 6 things and 5 of those are
simply clarifying language of
what is already done in
practice. The one new piece, the
6th item is an allowance for.
information sharing between
Perra and ERB.
There are folks who have a few
years in one or the other and
don't realize they can combine
those years to meet the
five-year minimum to be vested
and because those two agencies
cannot share information with
one another, um, they have no
way to notify people of the
benefits for which they might be
eligible, so that 6th is the new
item, the rest of them are
clarifying language, and I don't
know, Mister Chair, if you want
me to go through that.
Um, do you want David to explain
anything?
I'm, I'm happy to. He's here if
they ask questions, I can't
answer, but one is a repeal of
gift language.
Because the 2007 Gift Act
supersedes what was in here.
There's a repeal of that
language from the ERB section of
law, um.
The unclaimed member
contributions will remain in the
ERB fund that is current
practice. It's just not listed
in the law, so we're adding
that. The calculation of service
credit. Let's see, that's the
3rd item, I believe, is a
clarification of what
constitutes 5 years to be
vested. It is the last day of
the 60th month, but if your
contract employee, this language
clarifies it's the last day of
the year, 5th year of your.
contract
Um, also clarifying language
around the purchase of service
credit for folks who are
purchasing military service
credit in the ERB, um, to
clarify that it doesn't have to
be purchased in a lump sum and
to allow 90 days instead of 60
days for that purchase.
And the 5th 1 that is language
clarification is disability.
There's a different cola rate
for disability and this language
clarifies that continues after
the age of 60, which again is
current practice.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I believe that uh the
Senator Figueroa explained uh
the contents of the bill and I
have nothing else to add at this
book.
OK. Anybody in the audience in
support.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody on Zoom?
Nobody on Zoom. Questions from
committee members.
This, I, I.
Uh, I wouldn't make the motion
because I'd like to ask one
question, and I know you can't
ask the question and make the
motion.
And, and the question I have is,
is, are we doing any of these
things now.
Are we just cleaning up statues.
Are we doing essentially, uh, I
know this we're moving from 60
to 90 days that might be
something different. Anything
else here that we're doing that.
is terribly different than we're
doing right now, Mister Chair.
Senator, Mr. Chair and Senator,
that's 60 to 90 days and then
the 6th item, which is the
sharing of information that
currently is not allowed between
Perra and ERB, Mr. Chair, so
that is the one thing that is
new, the rest of the items are
current practice, so it's just
cleaning language.
OK, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Let me ask one real
quick question. So if you retire
and you have a disability.
As a teacher, right?
Then you're saying even
retiring, you get, you get a
cola even after they turn 60.
What's the current practice
right now, David, or?
Senator David.
Mr. Chairman, currently, uh,
they maintain that higher
slightly higher level of cost of
living adjustment every year.
So the disabilityOA for this
last year was 2.1% as opposed to
1.68% for the bulk of our
members. So it would say after
65, they would continue to
receive that disability level of
coal is slightly higher amount.
I think we're all after we hit
our 60s have some disability.
Um, and then Senator, you
mentioned contract. That's
because teachers are on a 6 or I
forget how many month contract,
and that's why you're clarifying
the contract language, correct?
Right, some ERB members work by
contract and some don't, so they
needed to clarify what meant 5
years under both systems.
And then correct me if I'm
wrong, but I thought if you were
in Para and went to school.
And got an ERB that you they
could add those years before or
vice versa.
Mr. Chair, that is correct. The
language associated with our
ability to transfer information
to ERBs so that we can identify
those members that may have
fallen through the cracks may
have 6 months of service credit
with ERB or have money sitting
out there.
Let's say they earn that 30
years ago, if we're sending a
letter to the last known
address, more than likely it's
not being received by the
member. So this would allow us
to bounce up our files against
what Pa has in their system and
hopefully identify these
individuals to get them their
money.
OK.
That's it's in line.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So clear up for me if you can,
if, if I retire as a school
teacher.
The ERB
Can I start drawing?
Can I start contributing?
to the parent.
So Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier.
Uh, what, what happens is if you
go back to work, if I start
drawing a pension from ERB and I
go back to work for Perra, I
don't have to make those
non-refundable contributions.
Uh, that would be required. So
yes, you can go back to work for
a pair affiliated employer.
Um
And in that situation, you would
not be responsible for making
your percentage of the employer,
employee contribution. I believe
the employer still has to make a
contribution on on your.
On your behalf and then Mr.
Chair, the last question is if,
if I retire as a school teacher.
Start drawing my retirement.
I get asked to come back and
teach.
When I go back and teach.
Do I keep contributing to the
So Mr. Chair and Senator Lanier,
so in in a situation like that,
you have two options. You could
suspend your retirement and
start contributing again, or you
could come back to work under
one of the return to work
programs where you'd still be
eligible to receive your pension
up to 36 months or one of the
other programs where you're
working in a 0.25 capacity or
earning less than $15,000 per
year.
That's those are those are a
couple of options, or you could
come back and make
non-refundable contributions for
up to 36 months.
OK.
But if I keep drawing my
retirement, can I still teach
and not contribute?
But
So, so Senator, under the
situation where you come back
under the 0.25 capacity or
earning less than 15,000. But if
you come back into the same job
that you previously occupied
after 90 days, you would have to
make those non-refundable
contributions.
OK.
Thanks for clearing that up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Correct me if I'm wrong. It
isn't, wasn't there a return to
work bill last year or year
before.
That didn't require the 0.25
centers, do you know?
Oh
That passed
The, the, there are some under
consideration this year, you're
going to see some, but changing
the 0.25 or the $15,000 limit,
that did not change.
OK.
Senator Steinmo.
Miss Cha unless there's any
other comments you Senator
Campos, OK. Oh, thank you very
much, uh, Mr. Chair. I'll go
ahead and I'll defer it to
Senator Steinborg and I was
going to go ahead and make the
motion again, and I want to
compliment Senator Woods and of
course uh Senator Figueroa for.
Uh following Masons we're, we're
really getting down, if you
will, to the crux of how we
operate here in the Senate. So
thank you. But again, I deferred
to my esteemed colleague Senator
Steinborn for the motion.
Stein I do pass
and motion for a new pass to
have a second by Senator Woods.
Uh, what do you call the room.
Senator Brent
Senator Campos. Senator
Camposia, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalezosia, Senator
Lanier, Senator Lenier votes
yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes yes.
Senator Steinborn, Senator
Steinborn votes yes. Senator
Tobiasin, yes, Tobiasin votes,
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Brent,
Senator Brandt votes yes.
Senator Schendo.
Senator Shindo votes yes,
Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz 110 do pass.
Thank you. Senator, do you ever
get a house, a bill passed that
quickly in the house.
Really.
Welcome to the Senate.
We're gonna start with higher
ed.
Uh, let's see, Madam Secretary,
are you in the room? We're gonna
start with the
Oh no, I'm sorry, we're starting
with Sherry.
like
Sure, do you have a
presentation?
Do we have an electronically to
put it on the screen or no?
Right.
Make sure you hit your bullet
points cause we have.
Mm
people in the room that want to
talk about higher ed.
We went, we're ready.
Uh, chair and distinguished
members of the committee. uh,
thank you for allowing me to be
here today. Um, I'm here to
present um an a concept of
developing in New Mexico online
center, um, before my
presentation, I just wanted to
note that as, as we've developed
this um concept and idea, we met
with a number of the
universities, all of them
individually, collectively. We
also met uh with representatives
from the community.
College associations, uh,
secretary Rodriguez and members
of the LFC.
So as we move to the
presentation, the purpose is to
seek $40 million in funding to
establish the New Mexico Online
Center, um, an innovative
initiative aimed at enhancing
access to quality online
education across our state and
beyond. The vision is really to
create a financially
self-sustaining a very neutral
centralized hub that will
provide a centralized services
to meet the unique needs of
every university, um, to enhance
enrollment retention, uh,
well-being of students and
So graduation rates, uh, what
the vision is, is we're looking
to really foster that
collaboration among New Mexico's
higher education institutions
and maximizing the resources and
expertise that we have across
the state.
A little bit of a background,
um, is our current situation a
problem that we need to, to
solve as New Mexico has
increasing investments in a
higher education, um, but right
now low degree attainment. We
also have a a a looming
enrollment cliff that we need to
address. Um, but with that
looming enrollment cliff, we
also have a population in our
state of just over 2 million
people.
Um, and so with that, we also
have an increased number of
online learners that are
choosing out of state entities
just over 11,000 of those,
right? So essentially what we're
doing is we are exporting uh
revenue and importing debt, uh,
when it comes to that, and we
want to be able to try to change
that narrative.
Uh, the next bullet is we're
growing, uh, the number of out
of state institutions where they
have accessible and engaging
pathways to degree completion,
um, and it's something that we
need to look at and look at
viable programs that'll meet
that need.
Um, we also want to look at the
competitive pressures from out
of state online educational
providers. A lot of times people
refer to Arizona State
University as the institution
that we are continually
competing against, um, but there
are others and I have that uh in
the slides to follow.
And then the, the next point is
that uh we're utilizing online
uh program management companies
which are referred to as OPMs,
and what we wanna do is minimize
the usage of that cause
essentially those are for profit
organizations where we do have
the talent and expertise, um,
amongst our universities to be
able to do this uh internally
within our state, um, which is
part of the online center. Um,
and then lastly, we want to
optimize the state dollars to
ensure return on.
investment and to create a
self-sustaining center, um, so
that, uh, institutions do not
have to keep coming back over
and over again for the online
component of their universities.
The benefits, uh, that we see is
it will attract a significant
number of adult learners, uh,
which there's a huge, there's a
large population in New Mexico,
but even a larger population
across the nation and then uh
further slides I have those
numbers outlined. Uh, we have
established infrastructure that
is cost effective and compete
with all the state providers
because we know how to do it.
Um, it would also allow us to
boost degree attainment.
It would centralized data
analytics for statewide
transparency, uh, and a, and a
really big component to these uh
opiums, um, and as you maximize
the dollars is the marketing
costs, uh, which we'll touch
upon in a, in a few slides. Um,
I also think it's important and
collectively we think this, it's
owning our state together and
driving out the, the state
competitors, and I can't
emphasize enough that, you know,
sitting behind me are a number
of experts um in this room we're
working together and working
collaborative.
ly we can drive out those uh
competitors, um, and then the
last one is creating alternative
revenue streams for our
universities and making sure
that we're rising together.
Some of the core services that
we would look uh to offer is
marketing and recruitment, which
is a large one. And again, these
are all services that don't
necessarily need to be bundled
altogether. They can be
unbundled to serve the needs of
each individual university where
they where they are. Uh, so just
for instance, you know, Eastern
may look at using just
marketing, but they may have a
talented team that can do the
rest of this. I think we also
need to be flexible, um, in
being able to offer those
unbundled services for them.
as well.
Um, the next slide, essentially
what I did, I did with this is
like um.
Itemized essentially what each
of these core services would do
because I think it's really
important to illustrate that at
the top of the funnel for
enrollment is where we need to
maximize our talent and where we
can streamline cost and we can
streamline efficiencies in
addition to the data analytics,
the data reporting, uh, that we
have behind us to ensure that we
are, um, creating intervention
strategies early uh for
retention and persistence
purposes, um, and then
the other piece of it when it
comes to technology, which is on
the the next uh page is really
looking at the well-being of our
students. So as we move into
this collectively and
collaboratively, we need to make
sure that just from the mental
health standpoint or the
behavioral health standpoint
that we are taking care of our
learners, um, right from the
get-go, and I'll, I have a
demonstration of that as well in
this presentation.
Um, the next slide that I have
here is the faculty training.
Um, so during discussions, this
actually came up from UNM where
they, you know, they suggested
it would be really be great if
we could work on a faculty
training center and have that in
one unit versus all of us doing
this independently and
separately.
Um, and then instructional
design and and course review.
Um, moving on to the high impact
model, um, this is where I
outlined just the number of
students in different states
that are around us for the folks
that have some level of, of
college, but never completed
their degree and so if we look
look at Texas alone, there's 4
million of those individuals,
and we want to be able to move
forward collectively to be able
to seek those uh students.
Colorado, Arizona is at a
million.
And New Mexico alone is that
336,336,000.
Um
The other piece on the slide
that I just want to talk a
little bit about is the, the
high impact model look looks at
all of those bullets that you
see there on the left hand side.
One of the things that I think
we really need to look at are
the articulation and transfer uh
agreements within our state. I
think the center could really uh
help with that. And I also look
at the high uh marketing spend.
So when you look at those
universities that are bringing
in a billion dollars a year,
independently, we're not
necessarily going to be
to compete with that, but
collectively, we can compete
with that.
Um, and then the last piece of
that is looking at the open
access and the speed to lead, so
there was a um when the LFC
reported on their analysis for
online education. This actually
came up, um, in the hearing, and
we actually spoke about how
these universities are really
capturing our students because
as a student, um, um, looks for
a different program, it's within
minutes that these universities
are getting back to these
students and so that's similar
to what we would be looking at,
uh, in the center.
as well.
Um, the next one is the
behavioral behaviorally smart uh
chatbot, and this is where the
chatbot actually checks in with
students. We make sure that
we're taking care of our
students, um, and, and we can
see that by their responses and
our students nowadays feel way
more comfortable, uh, texting
with the chatbot than they do
being on the phone with an
advisor and so we're able to
actually pull some data and then
the next slides, essentially
what I did is really kind of
illustrated.
a technology that could be used
in any university to help our
students across our state and
beyond.
Really focus on risk drivers,
which are academics, engagement,
financial, and then also the
well-being. So really again
focusing on uh the mental health
uh component of this. And then
in the next slide, I just gave
you an example of, of what that
looks like because we were able
to help a student who had a
grandmother passed away, we were
able to respond immediately to
that student and get the student
services.
Um, so now for out of state
competition, um, as I said
earlier, we have over 11,000
Mexico students taking out of
state online uh programs, and
namely those are in Arizona and
Utah right now, um, but we also
have other schools that were
competing with because they have
over 200 New Mexico students WGU
and you know, the caveat that I
put with WGU is that is more of
a competency-based university,
uh, ASU Grand Canyon Sno and
then Liberty.
Uh, Grand Canyon, Liberty, uh,
Western Governors, Southern New
Hampshire, Arizona. These next
bullet points I just wanted to
illustrate to everyone what
their spend is and how much
students are searching these
universities for specific
programs and that's what we're
competing with.
Um, the next slide I have uh the
close competitors that we need
to be watching. Most of our
conversations, at least um from
what I've been privy to has been
around Arizona State University,
but there's also another one,
that we need to be watching for,
and that's Texas Tech University
and my colleagues at Eastern
have, uh, pointed out that they
continually watch uh Texas Tech
as well, and I think this is
really a a sleeping giant that's
going to be coming because they
also have an online K through 12
academy. They
have um a number of online
programs that they're moving
forward. So again, it's just
another competitor to, to keep
our eye on. The next bullet is
the B2B partnerships as we build
the center, being able to have
every university have access to
different organizations, whether
it's Fortune 100, uh, Fortune
500 companies, um, because the
smaller universities are not
able to participate in some of
these um different programs such
as guild education. Guild
is a billion dollar organization
and what they do essentially is
they work with a large
universities to be able to offer
different degree programs. So
whether it's Walt Disney,
whether it's Walmart, and we
actually then do not have an
opportunity to participate, so.
In the center, we would actually
building this out ourselves so
that everyone would have an
equal opportunity to participate
in that.
Some institutional differences.
We have to also make sure that
we, we maintain the brand, um,
of each in the uh institution
independently as well. So
looking at a marketing analysis,
making sure we have a program
viability and we're addressing
the, the market, uh, gaps as
well, um, and then looking at,
looking at different, uh, uh,
programs and targeting them, uh,
for the specialized niche um
markets that we have.
And then when we look at the
collaborative marketing
strategies, you know, we can
then do collaborative joint
marketing strategies, whether
that is, uh, you know, a
community college and Highlands
together, um, and again, it's
that collaborative piece I think
where we're actually going to
win, um, in this.
Um, and then on the next slide
for the financial request, I
broke down the percentile of
each bucket area, um, we do have
some uh universities where we do
need to focus on their website
and the security of their
website, um, in addition to the
marketing and the other
components, um, so again, the
request is for 40 million.
Um, I didn't want to leave here
without uh outlining a level of
accountability and some of the
expected um outcomes that we
would have from the center as
well. Uh, the first one is
increasing enrollments by 7 to
15%. The reason there is a range
there is because every
university is different. We need
to do an analysis based on
needs, their current brand, and
where it sits right now in the
viability of their online
programs.
Uh, we also need to look at
eliminating the use of for
profit out of state online
program management entities
because we can do this uh
in-house in our own state.
Um, establishing a cost
efficient center uh through
shared resources, creating a
self-sustaining financial model
for online education for our
state, um, and then lastly
minimizing New Mexico students
taking out of state online
programs again, that's where
we're exporting the revenue and
importing the debt, uh, into our
state.
The last slide uh that I have
before I open it up for
questions is to really give you
an example of a steady state,
and I used Northern as an
example for this.
If, if, if the online component
brings in 1150 students and they
bring the, the tuition revenue
is $8 million and they actually
pay for these because it would
be a um a fee for service model
and they paid for these
services. When you look at an
OPM, at the very minimum, you're
paying a 40% rev share rev share
on that monies and this type of
a, a model where you're keeping
the money in state, the max
would be.
29% for all of that. So again,
these are conservative
enrollment numbers, but it gives
you an idea of the steady state
where we actually become
self-sustaining and financially
stable, so that we're not having
to continually ask for money
over and over and over again to
sustain this.
And with that, um,
Chair, uh, members of the
committee, I stand for
questions.
Questions from committee
members.
The woods.
A mixture, I actually
participated in one of these,
uh, the last day of the year.
I was looking for a
Uh, certificates so that I can
maintain a particular business
license.
And uh
I was able to get online with
Mexico State and
And they're
Online
education and take a couple of
courses.
get my deal done.
So
Uh, pretty good deal, uh, and
we've got so many other
universities out of states doing
this already.
Um
Marketing part of it is is.
Essential the way I see that to
get that word out and the high
quality education is also
essential so that
We can maintain the, the rigor
necessary.
Um
I guess that would be my only
concern.
That I would have with that.
So uh
Mr Ger I just wondered.
Show you my experience. Did you
pass?
be
You said you took it, but he
never let me pass, so.
No, uh uh.
Sherry, when we did this in New
Mexico State. What was your new,
uh, amount of students that you
got in the first year.
the first year we were able to
drive, uh, just a little under
1000 students, um, uh, this year
we are over 3000 students.
In that revenue sharing model on
The last page.
With that pretty much what those
numbers pretty much ring true
for New Mexico State or would
the numbers be different?
Chair, uh, those numbers are a
little bit different. Uh, the
reason for that is we use the
marketing acquisition cost of
$4500. The current marketing
acquisition cost at NMSU is
around $1890.
And what was your net to get the
1st 1000 of students.
Chair, I don't have, yeah, I
don't have that off the top of
my head. I'd have to get that to
you. Well, I know you generated
10.5 million, right?
So, yes, that is correct.
And we pumped in how much the
first year, 7 or 8, it was 10.5
the first year and the second
year was 6.5, and this year we
will make uh 25, a little over
25 million.
So I mean, if we didn't do that,
New Mexico State would have been
in declining population, and
they would have never had any
increase in students, correct?
Chair, that is correct. OK.
And so I will tell you, and this
is my some members of the
committee know and Senator
Steinburn will go to you. My kid
was registered at UNM.
A charter school in UN in UNM
and Gal.
Want to take a psychology
course.
And you and him was $1800 for
that course online.
And they told him, well, you
gotta come to campus and do
student orientation. He said,
well, I've been in this UNM
charter school at the UNM email
and the UNMID and they still got
to go to student orientation and
pay 1800.
He went to NAU and got it for
700.
And so, where do you think he
graduated from?
In the EU.
Because that was the cheapest
route for him to get his degree.
And so you figured that out
pretty much on his own. He
didn't attended to you, but that
was just a rodeo.
So
And ASU has already entered New
Mexico in the K-12 modeling.
They came into Gallup, went to
some private Christian schools
and have gained about, I, I.
Well, my friend's kids went, so
I know of 4 kids who are now
going K through 12 and only 9
through 12.
Going to ASU with a guaranteed
admittance to ASU.
And dual credit.
To get ahead in that model, and
so if we don't start
Looking forward and quit looking
back and maybe not this set of
university presence. There's an
older set that would never
change.
And never had the mindset of
changing students are
fifty-fifty, right? 50% in the
classroom, 50% online.
And so if we don't start
changing that and start doing
that, I mean, so we can already
start cutting MSU's budget by 25
million since we established the
course. I'm looking for reaction
from the president.
Because you have an uptick of
$25 million that you didn't have
prior to, to doing the online
stuff and so it's gonna change
your numbers and
If we don't do it statewide as
an OPM, they're gonna take each
one of the the universities and,
and take 40% of their net
income, so 40% of the 5 million
would have been roughly
2 point, you know, uh 1.9
million roughly.
And so that would have left him
less and now in this modeling,
they'd be generating 5.7 for
themselves, so.
91.
share and good to see you.
Thanks for your presentation.
So, it wasn't said at the
beginning, so I had to look at
the agenda like who was
presenting this, so.
Just
I inimus you sponsoring this
initiative for the whole state
of New Mexico. Would you
explain?
Who's putting this forward and
who's going to be able to
participate in it like somehow
missed that.
Mm
Uh, Senator, uh, NMSU has been
asked to lead this initiative,
uh, Mark Saavedra has been a
part of this, uh, as well, and
the with the fever for service
model, um, this will
how we're looking to do this is
to have anyone who wishes to
participate in this, be able to
participate in this.
OK, so will it be kind of like
The grocery store of education
in a way, and so you have all
the classes, all the offerings,
and people get to choose what
products they want and that may
go to one university or the
other or do they all siloed
programs siloed within this.
Uh, chair, Senator, no, how it
actually works is when you do a
viability study, you actually
look at the whole of the state.
You look at the universities and
what they offer, so you're gonna
have faculty uh expertise in one
area you're gonna have programs
that are um different from
another university and then as
we look out even outside of New
Mexico, you're gonna see
different target populations and
what did the look alike areas
for some of these universities.
that we could pursue as well.
OK, um, Mr. Chair, I, I hear
what you're saying. I'm still
not quite understanding the
business model of a customer,
you know, coming in through the
portal.
How that's working as far as
expertise that may live at New
Mexico Tech or may live at NMSU
offering specific courses so
and and senator, it's, it's not,
um, a, a grocery store, um, it
is, uh, each university will
have accreditation as they have
accreditation right now, so the
students will actually still go
to their universities and so we
are actually doing marketing and
brand strategy for every single
university.
Um, it's not a
Smorgas for, if you will, of
offerings, it really, it will be
aligned to every single
university. Thank you. So is it
so in that way.
And that way, is this really a
plug in to each of the different
7 different constitutional
schools, as opposed to one
clearing house where they all
participate, is that what you're
saying, chair? It will be um in
addition to what each of the
universities currently have. OK.
Thank you for clarifying that.
Um, makes sense that, you know,
looking at the budget, the $40
million and so much of it being
marketing.
I mean
So
That's one time money, right? I
mean, you're gonna spend that
money to acquire students.
But then what about you two? Is
it become a self-sustaining
model because of the revenue
that's coming in.
Uh, chair and senator, yes, so
the whole idea behind that is
you, we have upfront marketing
costs which are more, especially
if in the slide where I
mentioned that we have to
understand what each
university's current brand
positioning is if they have a
very strong brand positioning,
the marketing acquisition costs
will be less and then as they
start driving in revenue, that
will become a self-sustaining
model for that. And so we would
work with every single
university to look at their
target enrollments and really
get an understanding.
understanding of where they
currently are so that uh the
money's actually, uh, it pays
for itself as we drive it
forward and Mr. Chair, ma'am, so
that's one time kind of a, the,
the ask and the kind of
commitment, loose commitment is
this is a one time ask.
Is that correct? the marketing
money.
It's a, it's a 3 year, uh, the
40 million is for 3 years and
then did um.
Was this all modeled out? I
mean, you had data on other
marketing acquisition costs,
customer acquisition costs, is
that
13 million based upon very
specific modeling, marketing
modeling of customer
acquisition, chair, um, and
Senator, yes, uh, right now we
um, there are some mega
universities who are over $7000
in their marketing acquisition
costs. They're currently in our
state, um, in this model, we do
not go above 7000, um, the
average that we believe and what
the model looks at is about
$4500 for marketing acquisition
costs.
Interesting. And, uh, Mr. Chair,
our universities already doing
this? Do they not already have
online teaching or portals that
rather than build something
brand new, which is kind of
sounds like it's brand new,
maybe it's not. Would you
explain that a little more,
chair, uh, and Senator, yes, uh,
most universities have some form
of an online operation already
going, but if we wanna scale and
move this uh together and to
create the cost efficiencies so
that like not every univer
is doing a sites, not every
university is doing the data
analytics and having to pay for
that and started it up
themselves. It's more cost
efficient to actually do it
collaboratively. Thank you. So
Miss Chair, does this involve
then standing up a new
technology platform.
That will be available to each
of these schools and senator,
there are some components of
cloud based um technology
platforms, but every university
just like uh when I spoke about
the accreditation piece,
learning management systems,
those will all still reside
within each university. So
there'll be some cloud-based uh
technologies that people can
purchase, um, that like for ed
sites, for instance, it's per
student. And so the larger
volume that we have, the more
cost benefit.
we have as well.
Mm
OK. Uh, Mr. Chair, final
question, do all the
universities kind of support
this? Is this a request from all
the universities?
Uh, chair and Senator, we have
met with every uh university uh
with Markavedra and in the
beginning, we had a lot of
questions, um, but we've really
kind of come around to look at
uh supporting this to to move
this forward. So at the, at the
very end, and I'll say, you
know, culture each strategy
every day of the week, and we
need to make sure that we can
allow people to kind of speak
their truth and share their
concerns in order for us to move
forward, um, and that, that
happened.
That has happened has happened,
yes, and yes. OK, Mr. Chair, you
know, and I'm a big fan of that
as well. And I think that's what
this whole process is about. So
I just look forward to hearing
from other universities how they
envision this and um but I think
the whole concept is really
smart and um.
You know, the data that you
presented about the market
that's out there that we're
missing is really compelling
and.
Um, so,
Smart to um try to embrace it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Lanier, did
you have a question?
Center, oh, I'm sorry, Senator
Trill and then center Padilla.
Thank you, um, and Mr. Chairman,
I think this is uh
We should have been on this
years ago.
And I think this is an amazing
opportunity, uh, my
granddaughter works at
Starbucks, and um has guaranteed
entrance to ASU as soon as she
graduates from high school and
is probably planning to do that
because she can get a complete,
I mean, they advertise over 140
different bachelor's degrees
that you can get from ASU and
that's anywhere in the country,
so I'm assuming that um if we do
some of the marketing that part
of that will be
reaching out to businesses.
Um, so that we can develop
partnerships with them, that
they can provide those services
to their employees. Would that
be correct? Uh, chair, senator,
yes, so that was part of the
guild education in the business
to business, uh, component in
the slides is to make sure that
we can do that collectively
because not every university has
the funding or the staff and
resources to be able to go and
do that where the center would
be able to do just that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the
last question I have is in
regards to a bill that I carried
a few years ago, um, well,
senior citizens still get to get
$5 of credit for tuition on the
online courses.
Uh, chair, I, you know what, I
can't answer that question at
this time. I'm not familiar with
that.
Be happy to share it. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
We have free college tuition.
Senator Campos, I'm sorry, I
skipped over Senator Campos.
Oh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and the series of
questions that I have, and
again, I appreciate the
opportunity to delve a little
bit more into this, um.
Evolve around about 25 years
ago, uh, Doctor Bruce Hamlet,
who is the secretary for higher
ed myself and a few others.
Traveled the country and there
we saw the Oklahoma one
process we've seen others and
during that time, we also
visited, if you will, uh, with
the college system which
basically was an online system
and at that time they had
400,000 students.
But I'm concerned about as we
move forward, here we go again,
we're gonna be talking about
A system that supposedly is
going to assist our system today
and the first question I have is
this going to go ahead and be
more of a global online uh
center model and the reason I
bring that up because
As the global system continues
to improve, uh, will be
garnering students from all over
the world is this?
Part of the the matrix, or if
you will, the vision as to what
we're going to be building or is
this gonna be separate from what
you're talking about basically
with the hub and spoke model.
Uh, chair, uh, Senator, we would
look to expand this nationally,
um, but I think this is uh
animus you would serve as the
fiscal agent, uh, to this, so it
would be somewhat separate or
not somewhat, it would be
separate from, uh, what, what
NMSU Global is currently doing,
uh, was that your, your
question, Senator? So, so in
essence what you're indicating
is uh New Mexico State's going
to be the fiscal agent for this
model.
And it'll be developed and
housed at New Mexico State. Is
that my understanding, Senator,
no how we will develop this is
work with a number of the folks
sitting behind me that have
expertise, uh, in this as well,
so it'll be a collaborative
approach as as this gets rolled
out. So Mr. Chairman, if you
will please help me to
understand if it's a
collaborative model, where is it
gonna be based?
But I'm not talking about the,
who is going to be the, the
fiscal agent for it. Where is
this going to be based? Because
it will require hardware.
It'll require a base, uh, chair
and senator, most of this would
be an online operation, um, so
we could hire people from
Santa Fe, we can hire people
from Gallup, so there will be
people around the state that
would actually be working on
this, what you're indicating is
you're gonna hire people from
around the state. Where are they
going to be based out of? Are
they going to be based at every
institution in the state,
they'll be based at home.
They'll be based out of state.
How does this, this, this
project, how is this program
gonna be working?
Shari I think what he's
answering you is, if, if I go to
take it online at Northern where
do I, are those people that are
managing the system at Northern
and me applying to Northern or
if I'm applying to Eastern, why
are those people going to be
based in. There's gonna be some
type of server in the system,
and I don't know if that's a
cloud-baser, but I think centers
that the correct way to phrase
that, uh, Senator, and, uh, our
chair and senator, yes, I mean,
it's, it's cloud based and so
like when we look at the call
center approach to this.
For universities that want to
participate in this and move it
forward, they will have their
own individuals. So if it's
Eastern, Eastern would have
people that would do the call
center for them, whether it's
Northern, they would have people
that would answer the phone and
do that as well. But those
people could be based at home.
They could be based um at
Northern, they can be based at
Eastern, and so it really is
going to just depend on
Where the, where the employees
want to, uh, house themselves,
and I think it would be both. It
would be a both and situation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'm
gonna be very brief with the the
the next questions, but as I
look around, I still have a lot
of questions that I hope that uh
members of different
institutions would bring if they
have any questions forward
because I've I've seen these
type of approaches before.
And here we are trying to build
our student population at each
one of our schools.
And within this what we're doing
is yes it's gonna be great for
our students wherever they're
at, wherever they decide to go
to school, they can do that if
you will, through the cloud.
But ultimately it's going to be
what are we going to do with our
infrastructure? What are we
gonna do with our facilities?
How are we going to be handling,
if you will, today's technology.
So the next question I have, how
many interim committees did this
go through?
chair and uh Senator uh interim
committees, we did not work
through interim committees. We
actually worked with Cup, uh, to
meet with each of the
universities. So Mr. Chairman,
if I, if I may, and maybe this
isn't the time, maybe later on
someone representing Cup can
come forward and indicate uh
what that relationship means and
uh what the support is there.
So then going a little bit
further, um, as we deal with AI,
we deal with the build out, if
you will, of what education is
gonna mean in New Mexico in the
future.
If, as an example, we're going
with the cloud.
And we're gonna be offering
these classes across the board.
Where is the articulation?
Where are we gonna be having, if
you will, how all these classes
then as an example, go back to
Eastern. They're gonna be
allowed there for those credit
hours and that's where the
degree is going to be coming
from. So conceptually, does this
also mean that
These classes then can be taken
out of state and eventually be
brought back in through the
cloud.
Through today's uh differences
in in we'll just say the
internet or if you will, today's
technology.
What, what happens with that
particular alignment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator, um, your reference to
the cloud, so every university
has a learning management
system, um, that students
currently use, whether you're
face to face or whether you're
online, that mechanism won't
change.
And so Mr. Chairman, I was using
your term because that's the
term that you were using, so,
uh, moving on then to uh to the
last question that I have and
all this is going to go ahead
and tie together.
As we deal with what the future
of education is going to be.
And as we balance how we're
going to be educating our people
in New Mexico and we continue to
go ahead and see it, a huge
investment thanks to our
chairman and members of the
Senate Finance Committee and the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee and LFC.
What we're doing is we're
looking at infrastructure, we're
looking at buildings.
Then we start tying in, if you
will, to the technology portion
of what it is that we're dealing
with.
How are we going to educate our
students in the future.
Is it gonna be in the classroom,
out in the field is gonna be a
practitioner piece.
Or does it tie in to where as we
move along online education then
becomes the predominant form of
education.
And if that's going to be the
case, this is gonna be a good
time for us to start to
understand that.
Because we're looking at putting
a huge investment.
Into our higher education.
Facilities, programs, and as we
deal with it, we still don't
have a lot of our buildings
filled on campuses, so Mister
Chair, thank you very much for
your tolerance, but as I deal
with this, I continue to see
their new ideas, great ideas,
there are other thoughts and
ideas that are coming forward.
But in all reality, where is the
plan? Where's that strategic
plan for higher education.
And I command our secretary,
Secretary Rodriguez, for
continually.
Bringing this forward because
this is gonna be the essence of
how we're gonna go ahead and
change higher ed as we get
ready, if you will, for the next
world of work.
Prosperity
And confidence in our young
people as they move forward and
what their expectations are
going to be.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you chair and thank
you very much for the
presentation. Um.
So I'm looking at the expected
outcomes slide over here and
along the lines of some of the
questions that Senator Campos
asked. I, I, I see a lot of a
shared model here, um, when you
talk about the call center and
the contact agent, that's
essentially what I do for a
living, but for over 25 weeks.
Longer than that, but um, but
essentially you're, you're,
you're, you're gonna have a call
center that
the call could be from Northern
for Northern New Mexico could be
for eastern, could be for
whatever, uh, we do this all the
time, you splash in front of the
agent what school booth.
The DID is coming from so they
know exactly how to greet the
caller and then they take it
from there because everything
beyond that's going to be
financial aid or it's gonna be
whatever which are standardized
standard operating procedures
and don't really matter what
school they're calling from,
those are gonna be standard
processes. Is that, am I reading
that right, Senator, that is
correct. But then when you have
a model like what you're putting
out here, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
northern New Mexico College and
I see President Balderas here,
um, that's just what that
school's contributing to this
unified.
Process, is that right? chair
and senator, that is an example
of a steady state. So as we move
past the 3 years of this, what
it would look like as an example
so that we could actually, so
that slide in particular what we
were looking to do is to say,
OK, if we're gonna continue
using uh OPMs, if you will, the
for profit, and that 40% is
essentially just for marketing
to do it in state is such at a
reduced cost, and that's with
all of those services.
involved, but the way that
you're properly staff say a call
center to provide services to
all of these, you know, students
and parents and whatever it's
everyone's gonna contribute into
the the the bucket to make sure
that the operation can stand up
for the hours of operation or
whatever. This is a very
efficient way of doing this. I
want to let the committee know.
I think this is, I think it's a
very, very smart idea what you,
what you have going on. However,
I did have a couple of questions
also about this slide. So, so
can you explain to me, uh, Mr.
Chair, and, and uh
Presenter, um.
There's 3 items here, well, 2
items that I'm, I'm kind of
like, why is this? So what is
the term leadership? What does,
what does that mean in the model
for this school, it's 139,000.
And then, um, well, let's just
start with that one,
and senator, we need leadership,
uh, that will be running the
center, if you will, and that
would be a mix of.
Management essentially and
support services that the call
center we call it management and
support or operational
leadership, um, and then the
other one chair, Mr. Chairs, uh,
so I see down there toward the
bottom uh overhead, $254,000. I
thought everything above
overhead was the overhead. Why
is there another overhead line
item specifically called out
that way and Senator, uh, as we
hire different people, so with
NMSU being the fiscal agent or
the HR the legal service, all,
all of.
those components, that's what
the that component, uh, that
bucket is. So that's going to
fall into a team of people to
fund a team of people that
support all of the
entities chair and senator, yes,
and so we're still like the
procurement, all of those
aspects that we would still be
utilizing with an NMSU would
fall under that.
And then that chair the the
just, this is very great
information, by the way, that's
why I had so many questions
about it. So, uh, the, the, the
uh
Net revenue of 5.7, almost 5.8
mil, that goes to the school,
the individual school after the
model has been paid for. They've
paid their portion of the model,
is that right, Chair, Senator,
that is correct.
I, I, I like it. I really think
this is a, a smart way to look
at it and a great way to
provide.
What is going to appear to the
to the user as a massive
organization out here for every
individual user. That's I think
maybe that's what you were
trying to accomplish that is
rather than.
So if you went in and built a
call center just for Northern
New Mexico, you're not going to
get out of the parking lot with
that amount of money. But if you
put it together, I'm sorry, go
ahead, no go ahead, uh, chair
and senator, that's correct. And
I mean, that's where the scale,
the, the scale comes in, and
when we have all these
universities together, we can do
this at such a, a, a significant
price point where we can
actually start competing.
Yeah, I think it's a good move.
Thank you, chair.
I don't see any further
question, Sherry. Thank you for
the presentation.
Senator Shindo, did you have a
question? I'm sorry, wait,
Sherry.
I think you be determined I
think for the presentation just
to kind of follow some of the
questions I've been asked by
committee members. I noticed
that uh
The document over 11,000.
Students are online from, is
that from the state of New
Mexico?
What's the demographic of that
11,000 plus, do we know, uh, and
senator, those are in this
population that we're referring
to is really the adult learner
population, um, and so that is
24 years to 25 years and above.
OK, all right.
And uh it
You know, as we look down to the
future and online and so forth.
I guess one of the question
comes up, you know, like if a
student decides the student
graduates uh this May and
decides to do her, his or her
entire career online.
I never leaving home.
Um,
with the lottery scholarship be
used for that purpose as well.
Chair and senator, it's actually
the opportunity scholarship
could be used, um, not
necessarily the lottery
scholarship
because you know, according to
the laws right now, you have to
directly, matricly into
university. So would that make a
student eligible for the lottery
because they're not stopping
out.
Senator, or, um, chair and
senator, these are the, the
target population that we're
focused on is the adult learner
population, not so much the uh
the 18 or 19 year olds that are
going from high school uh into
this
madam, Mr. Chairman, uh, but
once you open the gate, how are
you gonna close it?
We're going to deny a student. I
mean, you're already talking
about K through 12.
Competition from ASU making a
package for the students, how
are you gonna deny your student
that wants to create a pathway,
you know, chair and senator,
it's, it's not so much denying
them, but the students that
we're gonna be marketing to,
those are actually the adult
learners that will be marketing
to inevitably you will have some
of those learners that will go
from high school here, but
that's not the target
population.
OK. Appreciate that. Thank you.
And then um
I think the opportunity
scholarship you, you, you
addressed that, so.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, that's it.
Mark, you want to add some?
Jumping out of your seat, yeah,
no, thank you, um, Mr. Cha,
Senator Shindo, and lots of good
questions. Um, back to that,
yes, you still have one
scholarship, you have a lottery
qualifying semester, then then
takes you into the opportunities
scholarship just for
clarification, so there's no
confusion there, um, so I just
wanted to clarify that
appreciate that. Thank you.
And I think, you know, they're
gonna, those are natural
targets, the 18 through 24
automatically looking wherever
they're going, right? Cause
right now they're about 50% in
the classroom, 50% online.
Those are natural things that
come to get market share, that's
the, the market you target.
That's why when you're laying
next to your phone at night in
Grand Canyon University comes
up.
They're listening.
So
Thank you.
I'm secretary, you're next.
you're gonna start us off?
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman.
should have in front of you.
packet that looks like this.
Um
And I just want to go over very,
very quickly.
the highlights on the budget
recommendation is adopted by
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Um
So if you could turn to page 6.
You'll see a table
Looks like this.
And it's titled FY 26
higher education general fund
spending summary.
Um
Overall, if you'll take a look
at line.
25
Uh, 25, 26, 27.
You'll see the
LFC recommendation, which was
adopted by HAFC included a $29
million or 3.1 million.
Uh, sorry, 3.1%.
Increase, uh, to instruction in
general.
So that's on line 25.
Um, on RPSPs. This is online 40,
41, and 42.
Uh, the LFC recommended an
additional nearly $5 million or
2.5% um
Over the FY 25 base.
And then for the higher
education department that is
online 50.
Um
The LFC recommendation.
Increased the department by
about $1.4 million. So overall
total higher education.
Expenditures, you can see line
53, the LFC recommendation
increased by 36.3 million or
2.7%.
Over the
prior year, uh, with that, Mr.
Chairman, I'd like to turn it
over to Miss Macias.
Thanks, Connor, uh, Nicole is
DFA analyst. Just a couple of
high points that I'd like to
touch on is for the RPS pieces
for the higher education if you
turn to page 4, to read along
with me. Um, we, the executive
included $8.9 million dollar
increase for three RPSPs at UNM
that included 4 million for the
Office of Substance Abuse
substance use disorder, 2.9
million for quantum computing, 2
million for the School of Public
Health and then
$1.4 million increase overall
for 5 centers of excellence to
increase that amount to $750,000
each. The recommendation also
included for the executive $1.3
million to the Bureau of Geology
at New Mexico Tech for their
aquifer mapping program. This
funding included support for 5
hydrologists.
A data manager GIS system
modeling stuff, software and
data platform maintenance, and
this is tied to the governor's
initiative for the 50-year water
plan, and then if you'll indulge
me a bit to touch on the higher
education department, um, on
page 15, you'll see that higher
education department, um,
general fund high-level
spreadsheet, and there are a
couple of items in the executive
recommendation, we'd like to put
for your consideration, that
includes $2.25 million.
For the technical assistance
centers, the tribal technical
Assistance Centers was created
in hospital 280, created in
2023 $2.5 million for adult
basic education, that's 97 and
then 400,000.
To the Navajo Technical
University for the Center of
Computer Science and then
230,000 recipes allied health
programs, those are two RPSP
programs folded into the higher
education department budget. And
with that, Mr. Chair, concludes
my comments. I'll turn it over
to the secretary.
Thank you, Nicole. Thank you,
Connor. Hello, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Um, I
am Stephanie Rodriguez, and I am
the cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico Higher Education
Department. Thank you for your
time today as I present the
executive recommendation for the
higher education institutions. I
promise I'll make this fast, Mr.
Chair. Overall, as you know,
approximately 13% of the overall
budget for New Mexico is in
higher education. That goes to
the colleges, universities,
special schools, and the
department itself. As
Nicole stated the executive
request before you today is
approximately $1.4 billion with
over $1.2 billion of the
executive requests being
dispersed to our higher
education institutions through
instruction and general funds,
which is the state's higher
education funding formula, also
known as ING, and then the
research and public service
projects, also known as RPSPs.
You will see on the handout from
the department, it looks like
this, we are requesting 2% of
new money to instruction in
general dollars.
In new money to the state's 24
formula funded higher education
institutions, in addition to the
University of New Mexico's
Health Sciences Center.
For research and public service
projects request before you
today, uh, is nearly 135.5
million to research projects,
programs, student services,
quasi-state agencies across New
Mexico, such as the Department
of Agriculture and the Bureau of
Geology and Minerals and are
designated centers of
excellence. Breaking this down
into percentages, we have over
50% going towards health,
healthcare initiatives, mental
and behavioral health services,
nurse expansion and nurse
pathways.
approximately 25% goes towards
quasi-state agencies. Those are
the estate agencies that are
housed at our higher education
institutions that support you as
the legislature and us as the
executive branch of government
for state initiatives and then
over 5% towards education
programs, teacher pathways and
tribal education initiatives and
2% for the centers of
excellence, a small portion of
the total RPS pieces. As a side
note, the legislature and
executive via my agency have
worked hand in hand to
decrease standardized and
streamline the RPSP process. In
the past, when I presented to
you when I was a fresh bright
item and bushy tailed secretary.
We used to present over 160
million in RPSPs to you. So good
work to you and our agency. We
have streamlined that process.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for listening to me today.
Thank you for your time and with
your permission, Mr. Chair, I
know that all 3 associations are
here eagerly ready to present
before you as well on
their priorities that will be
Doctor Garnett Stokes from the
University of New Mexico, Doctor
Becky Rowley from Santa Fe
Community College and Doctor
Monica Torres from Dona Ana
Community College. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I'll defer to you for
next steps.
I think that's it. Questions
from committee members.
Go off easy cause you came this
morning.
That's true. They had made that
Mr. Chair. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
go next corner, who's gonna
bring up the the higher end.
Who's the spokespeople, um.
Mr. Chair, I believe we have all
three associations.
Present, um, so it'll be
Becky Rowley of the Santa Fe
Community College, representing
the uh Mexico Independent
Community Colleges, Doctor
Monica Torres from the branch
colleges and President Garnett
Stokes of the University of New
Mexico.
Uh, representing the council of
university presidents.
Who's gonna start us off, Doctor
Raleigh or?
Madam President.
I
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
honorable members of the Senate
Finance Committee, delighted to
be in front of you this
afternoon. Um, uh, we are here,
uh, representing the three
associations and uh to present
the unified priorities for
higher education, uh, for those
of you who might not have been
here quite as long. There was a
time when each of us brought
forward separate priorities and
a positive change that's taken
place, uh, over the recent past
is that we actually get
together.
And agree upon the things,
recognizing that we are more
similar than different in terms
of the challenges and the
opportunities that we have as
higher education institutions in
New Mexico. So I'll start off,
um, I, uh, am going to Stokes.
I've, uh, present you New
Mexico, but today here uh
representing the council of
university presidents, which,
uh, reflects the four-year
schools, uh, oddly enough, I
began in 2018.
now significantly, the longest
serving president of a four-year
institution in the state of New
Mexico.
Um, many would find that hard to
believe.
Um, I wanted to introduce the
others. Uh, we had two
presidents who began their terms
uh uh in 2023, and I'll ask them
to stand if they are here. uh
Hector Balderas, uh, who is
president at Northern.
Um, and James Johnston, our, uh,
President Chancellor at Eastern
New Mexico, uh, in 2024, we also
had uh two presidents who began
their service, uh, Mayar
Amuzigar from New Mexico Tech,
and uh Neil Wolf, who is our
president at Highlands
University, uh, hired in 2025,
uh, so certainly last but not
least, we have Val Ferme who is
uh the new chancellor at New
Mexico State.
University
and then, um, uh, as an acting
president right now, we have
Jack Crocker who as at Western
New Mexico.
And with that, I'd like to turn
it over to uh our my colleagues
to introduce themselves and
their leaders.
Thank you, Doctor Stokes. Uh, my
name is Becky Rowley. I'm
president of Santa Fe Community
College and the chair of NMICC.
I've been the chair of NMICC for
longer than, you know, we can
probably count, so.
Um, I'm not new, uh, but I would
like to introduce the presidents
in our sector. We are the
independent community colleges
from Central New Mexico
Community College, Tracy
Hartzler.
From San Juan College, Tony
Pendergrass.
From Clovis Community College,
Jonathan Fuentes.
From New Mexico Junior College,
Kathy Mitchell is serving as the
interim.
From Mesa Las Community College,
Allan Moss from Luna Community
College, Carol Linder.
Um, northern New Mexico College
is also part of our sector, uh,
Hector Balderas, um, and Western
is also part of our group too.
They have dual dual enrollment,
I guess, uh, Jack Crocker, um,
from the New Mexico Military
Institute, Boris McBurnett from
Southeastern New Mexico College,
uh, Kevin Beardmore and I like
to turn over to Doctor Torres.
I represent New Mexico
Association of Community
Colleges, the branch campuses.
There are 9 member organizations
from EMU Roswell, there's Sean
Powell.
From NMU Riodoso, there's Ryan
Trosper.
From UNM Taos, there's Mary
Guterres.
Los Alamos, my coslaw.
in Valencia, Sam Dociu.
From UNM Gallup, Sabrina Isau.
And the other two NMSU campuses
at Almogordo is Mark Cal and at
Grants is Marlene Chavez
Toivanen.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, uh, you should have
in front of you a document that
looks like this and so I will
turn it over to uh Doctor
Torres, um, to present.
Uh, to present the next. I want
to talk a little bit about the
impact that the investments from
the legislature have made in the
last number of years, actually
for decades and decades and
generations, the legislature has
made tremendous investments in,
in, um, higher education. In the
last few years, they've made
very, you've made very focused,
very expansive investments in
higher ed, uh, among them the
opportunity scholarship, uh,
nursing, uh, energy, early
childhood education, wrap-around
services, workforce training,
just a tremendous, uh, a
tremendous
This investment um that have uh
that support is provided
significant opportunities for uh
people who live in New Mexico,
um, we've seen that very
specifically in the last few
years, um, by increased academic
enrollment, as, as you all know,
there was a period of about a
decade where we saw declining
enrollment, but, but since the
significant investments, we've
seen 9.7% increase since the
fall of 2021. In addition to
that, by about the same
percentage we've seen increased
enrollment in workforce.
training.
One of the things that I think
is important to think about is,
is actually the word investment.
It's not only um providing
opportunities for uh New
Mexicans it's actually providing
opportunities then that will
have a long term impact. So it's
really important to, to note
that these investments not
aren't just about today, but
they're also about tomorrow. So
with your continued support of
both the lottery scholarship and
the opportunity scholarship. New
Mexico has the 5th lowest level
of student debt.
Their 3rd smallest proportion of
students with debt.
Um, with, with your support of
New Mexico post-secondary
education, New Mexico ranked 7th
in the US and the District of
Columbia in social mobility
index.
What these data suggest is that
students from New Mexico and
elsewhere aren't just able to
access educational
opportunities.
They're able to benefit from
them in ways that don't hobble
them as they head into the
workforce and into their future.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, we would like
to thank both the executive and
the LFC for their very generous
recommendations, but in, in
analyzing all the data, we are
requesting the LFC
recommendation, um, just a
couple of highlights, the LFC
recommendation puts a little bit
more into instruction in
general, uh, 2.5% in formula
funding, uh, $3 million in
non-formula adjustments for
student services and basic
needs.
Uh, 4% for employee compensation
and 3.9 million to assist
institutions in increased
employer costs due to increased
insurance, um, insurance costs,
um, and looking at the
non-recurring requests, um, both
the executive and the LFC fund,
the technology enhancement fund,
uh, building renewal and
replacement fund and also an
equipment renewal and
replacement fund, um, all of
those are differing uh amount.
Both recommendations also fund
cybersecurity at the same amount
and this, this is critical
funding for all of us. We've all
had, um, if we haven't had a
cybersecurity event, we've all
come pretty close to having a
cybersecurity event, and I think
we all agree that it's just a
matter of time, um, but those
are the key differences between
the proposals, um, and as, as I
said, there is a little bit, uh,
we, we come out slightly ahead
in the LFC recommendation and so
that is what.
We're requesting that you adopt.
So we'll move on to to slide 5
and really just for uh for your
reference, um, uh, you, in fact,
many of you have seen the
material that is in the
presentation today. We presented
this in front of the Legislative
Finance Committee on December
11th.
Um, and so I'll go over it very
quickly to leave time for
questions on slide 6, you'll see
that for instruction in general,
we are requesting a 5% increase
in the formula funding and this
total amount is 42.1 million.
Um, we're also requesting some
non-formula adjustments, uh, 4.0
million which will be
distributed across all the
institutions, including NMMI uh
for student services and basic
needs, um, we're requesting.
Also 8 million that would be
distributed similarly, uh, for
faculty supplemental
compensation.
Um, with regard to the study
being conducted with the
National Center for Higher
Education Management Systems. Um
we are requesting that
institutions are held harmless
in the process, um, that the
study included small school
component and that uh and that
that collaboration is encouraged
and so they're ongoing
conversations, uh, with that
study, and we're grateful to be
part of those conversations. On
the next page, um, focused on
compensation, uh, you'll see.
that we're requesting a 4%
increase, uh, minimum of 4%. Um,
we're asking the flexibility uh
to implement an average of 4%,
so that managers and supervisors
are able to uh have some
flexibility in the way in which
they assign uh raises that total
price tag is 46 million. Um,
we're also asking for funding uh
to help uh deal with increased
institutional costs that are due
to state changes.
Uh, in employee benefits, and
this is a ongoing issue for for
our institutions, um, these
mandated employer shares of
insurance benefits, for example.
So we're requesting funding be
provided to help offset those
changes on the, on the next
slide you'll see some
non-recurring requests from uh
our three.
Uh, organizations, uh, 10
million to support programs over
3 to 5 years for dual credit,
uh, up to 100 million with a
minimum of 30 million for
building renewal and
replacement, uh, if you visited
our campuses, you quite aware
of, uh, it's a a lot more fun to
find a new building and a lot
more difficult to maintain the
facilities that we have or we're
constantly dealing with the need
to upgrade and the costs are,
you know.
something that the institutions
really need help with.
Similarly, uh, the next, uh, the
next component is uh 10 million
up to 10 million for equipment
renewal and replacement, um, and
then an ongoing issue, and you
see this on our list every year,
uh, uh, 10 million for campus
safety equipment, uh, including
access can be very important for
our campuses and important to
people who uh ask about security
and safety on our campuses, uh,
continuing on the next slide
with non.
recurring requests, uh, 50
million appropriation to the
technology enhancement fund, uh,
for expenditure through FY 2027,
uh, 10 million toward, um, uh,
with a required institutional
match toward the faculty
endowment, uh, and 11.7 million
in expanded cyber cybersecurity.
I think mentioned previously is
just one important issue this is
for all of us, um, and we'll be
working in conjunction with uh
our department.
of information technology and
higher education.
On the next slide with regard to
financial aid.
Um, uh, we continue to support
the continued funding, um, of
lottery and opportunity. We do
recognize the relationship
between state appropriations and
um and setting tuition and and
fee rates, that's been an
ongoing conversation on our
campuses. Uh, we do, um, uh, uh,
understand the need for a review
of programs, including the
sustainability of these
programs. So that's something
that is on our minds as we
know what's on your minds as
well. And we recognize the needs
of students, um, and, and, and
want to see the allowance of the
exemptions for the at-risk
students, uh, and students with
hardships. So those are things
that, uh, that we, that we
support. So on the next slide,
what you'll see is just a
summary of everything that was
in the previous slides with
regard to the unified priorities
of higher education this year,
um, so just a, just a snapshot
for you. And then with
I want to thank you for your
ongoing support of higher
education in New Mexico and we
are here to answer questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator
Steinburn.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hello,
leadership. Thank you for being
here today. Thank you and thank
you all for coming in today. We
appreciate it.
I just have just a couple of
questions, Mr. Chairman. Really,
it's just about compensation.
Um
First of all, I know that I
think we passed budget language
a few years ago requiring that.
Everybody would be paid a
minimum support staff, a minimum
wage of $15 an hour on up. Is
that a recollection correct and
it is the university doing that
now?
Mm
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, yes, that is true,
and um I think all of us have
implemented those change and,
you know, worked with that,
that, uh, that lower that, that
figure for our uh lowest paid
employees and then work that
big, you know, worked out the
compression issues.
OK. Thank you, Mrs. Cause I
mean, as we do this, you know,
we've got a couple of different
line items here, we say 4%, but
then we say average.
And, you know, that can mean
anything, right? That could mean
it goes to everyone at the top
and the people barely making
ends meet, don't get anything. I
worry about that, um, if we're
going to increase compensation,
we should spread the wealth.
And uh support those, you know,
Lowest paid support staff so
they can make a living, um.
Is that your intention,
Mr. Chair Mr. Chair and uh
Senator, um, I, I recognized for
a long time that that has been
the fear associated with white
institutions would do with the
average, which is why I think
evolve sometimes been given an
across the board, but in fact,
um, in my experience in talking
with other leaders and certainly
in my experience on my own
campus, uh, the concern is often
with the lower paid employees
and the capacity uh to
distribute fund.
that allows us to pay people
competitive salaries, so it
gives us the flexibility to try
to do exactly that, so, uh, Mr.
Chair, you know, I mean, I think
we should be looking at that and
looking at the rising costs of
Mortgages and groceries and
everything else. I thought egg
prices were going down, but now
I'm hearing you can't even get
them, so, you know, you got that
in there too, but um but that's
real, right? And we don't want
our, our workers being homeless
or, you know, struggling to
survive, so.
On the other end of it, I
recognize that we have
competitiveness issues, right,
with salaries, and that's a huge
issue. So you do have to juggle
it. I just don't want us to be
forgetting about the lowest
income people. Um.
Along those lines.
Mr. Chair
This $10 million I'm looking for
it. The um, yes, $10 million for
faculty development, is that
what it is?
that correctly last slide, $10
million for faculty development.
I'm just curious what that
means.
Madam President.
For anybody who can answer that.
Uh, Mr. Care and, uh, Senator, I
believe that's actually $10
million for the faculty
endowment, so I think faculty
development is typo.
It's endowment, um.
Uh, is it Mark, would you like
to,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator.
is the faculty endowment, so
it's, it's a typo.
It's just a choice of words.
We'll leave it to me.
Um,
thanks for the cat.
But that is faculty development,
right?
Of an endowment, right? There
you go.
OK, very good.
Well, it's all good. I'm sure
others will have questions, but
um thanks for all the good work
you do.
We appreciate it. Thank you.
Senator Brent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
you to answer the question, ask
the question too, but you had
mentioned on the end here that
uh about making an investment.
how this is an investment, so,
so I remember I was here when we
passed the whole opportunity
scholarship.
Um, and so I have a few
questions on that investment.
OK, so how much have the
universities raised their
tuition.
Since we put in the opportunity
scholarship.
I think only one university is
raised their tuition that was
Western, I think the rest
remained the same.
Have your graduation rates
increased.
At the universities.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, uh, senator.
Um
You know, looking across all of
uh higher education, um, we have
an accountability report that I
think outlines that for all, for
at least for uh the council of
university presidents. Um, I
know there's been, there has
been a challenge with regard to
graduation rates, um, uh,
following COVID, so that has
created some issues for the
institutions, um, but we do see
our rates going up, going up
from
when they, what they were in
COVID or uh from what they were
before COVID.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and Senator,
uh, we've looked at both, um,
and we haven't quite recovered.
Uh, to my knowledge, we haven't
quite recovered.
Maybe in 20 years we can quit
using that excuse.
Excuse me. So maybe in 20 years
we'll quit using that excuse.
It gets a little old.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, I
understand, uh, the frustration.
We uh I can say that leaders on
our campus have been surprised
by the challenges that we have
faced, um, in recovering, uh,
some really important uh.
Outcomes that we've invested in,
so it has been, it has been an
interesting challenge. I
understand, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate what you're saying.
But um your graduation rate
wasn't that great before COVID
either.
Some of the lowest in the
country.
Mr.
Chair and senator, um, I'd like
an opportunity to examine that
data with you more carefully.
Mm-hmm.
Um
Or are we giving out more 4-year
degrees now.
Than we were before we made this
great huge investment.
My
Oh, see, Mr. Chair, um,
Two things. One, with the
opportunity, I think, I think we
could look at the historical if
we think about the lottery
scholarship, and I don't have
that information with me, but,
but certainly with the
opportunity scholarship, I think
we're just going to start seeing
those gains, uh, given that it's
only been 2 years, I do think
we'll start to see some gains.
I, I know that at Donatta
Community College, we have seen
an increase in the of 7% points
in the last 5 years, we're still
low.
We, we still have a lot of work
to do as a result, but, but if,
if you wouldn't mind, I know
that from the NMSU system,
Doctor Fame has some
observations that you'd like to
make as as somebody coming into
the system.
Mr. Chair, Senator, first of
all, I take what you're saying.
We should be doing better, but
as uh as uh Chancellor Torres
has said the two years of
opportunity scholarship are only
gonna play out in the next 23
years as we see people moving
through the system. So I would
expect to see those numbers to
go up. I also think we need to
do a better job of the kind of
marketing that already is being
done in online and the kind of
support that we see in certain
systems.
So that's why coming together as
a university system will help us
institute best practices. So
I'm, you know, I come from a
different system where
graduation rates for 6 years are
about 71, there are around 52,
53 for the higher colleges in
about 50% across the board. I
would think that we have to take
the accountability of saying
that in 5 years we're going to
be up 5 or 6% at least. That's
something that I believe we can.
So I take to heart what you're
saying. I think it's a well
taken point. We need to work
also with K-12 to ensure that
the preparation of students is a
two-way street, and I think
that's what we're gonna try to
do in the next few years, but I
do think that it's across the
board with the whole education
system. Thank you. Thank you and
I know that you're new.
But that's basically the same
thing I heard 12 years ago.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, I would
like to make a little bit of a
clarification from the community
college perspective, um.
Mm
Our
Rates, um, are, are, are not the
same across colleges for uh for
sure. Um, but I would like to
point out that San Juan College
has increased the number of
grads by, uh, 7.2% over the last
14 years, so that is really
significant. The other thing to
keep in mind is that graduation
rates are are measured in terms
of full-time students who
complete the degree in for us,
it's 3 years. And so, you know,
at least, at least 70% 6 years.
Right, but for us, we have about
70% of our students are part
time and so they are parents,
they are working oftentimes full
time, so it, it, it, it's an
extra challenge. The other thing
is that the opportunity
scholarship is also allowed us
to fund a lot of, uh, short term
for credit certificates that
still give students a
completion, still move them
ahead in the workforce, and
they're actually not intending
to complete, um, an associates.
Thank you, and you can thank
myself and Senator Perle for
that.
We do because that would not be
on there if it wasn't for us
fighting for it on the floor.
And I appreciate that that the
community college is very, very
different.
We give 6 years.
The universities.
To finish getting a four-year
degree.
And you talk about having kids
and going to college.
And when the military did 7
years, was injured.
The disabled veteran when I went
to college with 3 children.
So I know what it's like to go
to college.
Um, and have children as well as
be disabled, as well as work
full time.
Just so we could make ends meet.
And I finished in 4.5 years.
So
Um
We give 6 years and we're still
barely hitting 50%.
I, I think that is not a good
number. I don't think that's um
and I don't think it's improved
under the Opportunity
scholarship, I think we've just
put more money into a program
that's not working.
And we've talked about it for
I've been up here for 13 years,
and we've talked about it for 13
years that I've been here, and I
know they talked about it before
I got here. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and um
thank you for the presentation.
I'm wondering, is on page 11 of
the presentation.
Um
That 10 million or I'm sorry, 50
million for the technology
enhancement fund, is that
Partially going to fund the
chess program or
Mm
You could probably answer that,
President O'Malley, Mr. Chair,
uh, Senator, he'll know the
chest, uh, the chests money uh
comes through the do it process
and it's in, goes through the C2
process and so that is separate.
This is for overall technology
enhancements for all colleges
and universities which really
helps everybody to improve their
infrastructure and, and
We need to improve our
infrastructures.
Oh, it's only for the research
university, sorry, thank, thank
you, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for that. So we still
need to figure out how to fund
that.
Remaining 5.5 to 8.5.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. T and and Senator, I, I
would just follow up and say
that technology enhancement fund
is an opportunity for the
research universities where
we're often we, we are
constantly applying for grants
and are required to have matches
and that technology hands time
has been essential to our
success many times in competing
for federal funding.
Just so you know the, the, the
other colleges that wanted to
enter the chess program did it
on the the chess program did it
on their own. They wanted some
separation, so.
You may have to figure out how
to fund that. Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm
curious with your graduation
rate or lack thereof that the
senator pointed out for all of
us.
What innovations are you looking
at in the education system in
higher ed, so that it's feels
more relevant to especially
younger students. So for
example, I have to um young
boys, not young anymore, but um
they've both graduated high
school in the last few years and
they and their entire friend
group have had lots of
conversations, um, sometimes to
my dismay about not getting a
4-year degree, why it's not
needed, um.
They're living in a world that
we did not grow up in, so my
oldest son taught himself how to
um fix his carburetor by going
on YouTube, right? We never had
that access to information and
learning, so is there talk of
innovation as far as how to get
a degree without maybe taking a
rogue course, a fundamental
class that these kids are going,
well, this doesn't speak to me.
I'm never gonna use this. Why do
I have to take this course. So
what's being done to change
that?
Mr. Chair and Senator, um, uh,
certainly, uh, at the four-year
schools and and certainly at at
my own university, um, there's
been a recognition that um we
have needed to be much more
innovative and much more hands
on in the ways in which we guide
students toward uh toward
graduation, um, and I would say
that we have many, many
different programs.
that are uh that are, you know,
that are taking place at many of
our four-year institutions, but
the ones I know about, of
course, are at my own, and, um,
and I would say that um we've
had interventions that were
intended to um improve the
success of students in courses
that have tended to prevent them
from graduating. We've made
investments in advising that
were intended to help students
get, you know, have a pathway to
graduation, uh, clarity about
what.
What degrees to pursue, um, we
have, um, some, uh, newer work
associated with um connecting
our students, uh, and their
majors to the careers that they
can consider, so there's much
more awareness of, uh, kind of
workforce readiness, um, across
many degrees and our goal is
really to make that uh component
of every, every student's
experience. So
one of our, um, one of our goals
associated is in fact an
educational innovation.
And uh one of the things that we
want to accomplish is to make
sure that every one of our
students has some kind of
experience that actually
prepares them and and uh makes
them career, makes them ready
for whatever comes later. We
recognize that some of our
students are not necessarily
going directly into the
workforce that many of our
students do in fact choose
graduate degrees. Um, but, uh,
we, we want them ready and we
hear that from industry, we hear
that across the state.
Um,
you know, we, uh, are proud that
our goal is advancing New Mexico
and, and so, um, we're
constantly creating programs and
then trying to ramp up.
Um, we've recently in the last
couple of years, joined the
University Innovation Alliance,
um, which is a handful of
universities about 20 across the
country that the very goal is to
graduate students and to make
that degree, um, uh, attractive,
make those degrees attractive
and graduate students so that we
can serve the needs of this
really the country is because
it's a national program, but
we're proud to be part of that
in New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, I'd
just like to add from the
community college perspective
that we have a larger percentage
of our students that are, um,
they are, they are more
interested in going into the
workforce more quickly than
oftentimes the typical 4-year
student. And so we try to create
pathways where students um do
have some sort of work-based
experience at an internship or
something like that, that is
included in, in their
associate's degree. We also have
a lot of short term non-credit
programs that really are
designed with our industry
partners and that really do move
students into a job, um,
sometimes in as soon as 6 weeks,
maybe a little bit longer, but
we, but those are set up with
industry so that students uh are
essentially guaranteed a job and
they go into a really oftentimes
a fairly high paying job with
the possibility of a career
ladder. We also set programs up
though, so that
students can move into credit
programs if they work in an
industry for a while and then
decide, well, I think maybe I
should be the supervisor and
then they do need a little bit
more training to be able to move
up. We, we've designed programs
where they can move back in and
those non-credit programs are
not something that they've
wasted. They'll articulate back
into a credit program so that
they can, they can move up
better.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I would
just, I would just add just a
couple more things, um, but my
colleague said, one is we have
to make sure that also our
instructural technology is
current because um students now,
young students particularly are
interested to using a lot of
technology. In addition to that,
uh, we offer a variety of
support services. All of the
students we're seeing now, every
student we see now who's coming
out of high school experience
COVID and, and so adapting to a
social environment, um, we make
sure that there are support
services for, for them as well.
And then,
there was one other thing I was
gonna say that has left my head.
I would just agree with from,
from the community college
perspective, I would just agree
with, with Doctor Rowley on
things like internships, uh,
embedded certificates, um,
certificates that they can build
onto, onto from 11 thing to
another, um, but, but we know
that we have to be pretty
aggressive in terms of the sorts
of ways we're helping and
supporting students to make
their way through a college
education.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
Um, is there a program or out
strong outreach to the high
schools around the state so that
students really understand that
these are viable solutions that
you all are bringing forward for
them.
Mr. Chair and senator, I would
say that we have seriously
ramped up our connections with
schools, um, across the state
and all of our institutions are
doing that.
Um, one of our challenges in
higher education has been a
tendency to be siloed, so we
have a lot of great programs,
um, what we're beginning to do
is actually pull those together
so that we can, um, I guess
scale up the effectiveness of
the, uh, that, that those
outreach programs and other
types of programs that we have
across this Mr. Chair, um,
Senator, I think there would be
a couple of other things that,
that I would add to that. One is
President
Firmly as he visited the
extension sites and the research
sites for the NMSU system this
summer, you realized that we
were not using um all of those
resources and every, you know,
in counties across the state to
really do recruiting. Um, and so
I think one of the other things
that we'll try to do is work
with the NMSU system, we'll work
with that network of resources
across the, the state to, to do
that, um, and of course we'll
continue to work, I think dual
credit continues to be a very
powerful tool, um, to introduce
students. One of the things that
national
we're recognizing now is that is
that.
We really need to get career
services, um, career exploration
to students at a much earlier
date and so you're seeing
colleges collaborate with high
schools to and, and middle
schools actually to, to get that
career exploration done at an
earlier.
Period.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you as chairman and uh
thank you for.
A presentation of
I'm gonna ask you is um.
With our research programs, uh,
how close do you work with um
Sandia Labs and Los Alamos.
Um, Mr. Chair and, and Senator
Gonzalez, uh, we have a number
of partnerships with the
laboratories, um, and I would
say one of our most recent
successes has been the
collaboration with regard to
quantum.
Uh, uh, the initiative that we
have with Sandia and, and
includes work with um CNM and
others.
Um, so it has been very
important that we build those um
those partnerships, and we've
had a great deal of success with
more to come, I hope.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I think right
there I saw.
One of the big opportunities,
you know.
On the future part and also
exciting for our students.
And uh for example, um,
Just a week ago we have a
presentation from um Sandia.
Which was uh beyond something
that I had never really thought
of.
You know, and uh this is um uh.
The November meeting with the
LLC, we had a presentation from
one of our secretaries of phone
revisiting mining for copper,
molybium, any of the other
extractions that um.
We have worked with for years,
and uh what was really
interesting is um doing this
with solar.
And, and it just fascinating,
you know, and I think that um
these are the kind of things
that we're looking at that um
If we can bring that kind of
excitement, you know, to.
To the new challenging to the
new way of um teaching to the
new way of recruitment, you
know, for students, so it's
really something and um.
Uh, for years, you know, we have
uh,
We have our labs just in our
backyard, you know, and there's
so much there, but that that is
very exciting and uh we'll
continue to be working with
them.
So, um, you know, um.
Again, uh, you know, I applaud
you on that part, but I think we
can expand it a lot more and
also with the research part and
also the outreach.
So, thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Thank you just to kind of wrap
up here.
I think we, I know we fund you
at the 2nd highest level, but we
have the lowest graduation rate.
That may have to change in.
The center Bran's point.
They're on the 6-year program
because they come out of high
school.
And they're not prepared for
college.
And they, and they have to take
2 years or a year 100 level
classes or under.
Get them caught up and and so.
Uh, I mean, this is a broken
system as they come to you, not
really not prepared for college
center Shindo and I were
talking, we both had to take an
SAT and ACT to get into college.
I think they're starting to
bring that back.
Um,
Get their scores up.
Most of those kids are wanting
to take those are leaving out of
state.
We don't require ACT or SAT
anymore to go to college,
correct?
And a 4 year
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm not sure what
the requirements are at all of
the four-year schools and and uh
in our state. You don't know
what's required to get into UNM.
Um, programs can make a
decision. I don't believe that
we are currently requiring the
AC.
But you're not sure?
Um, I, I, I would like to, Mr.
Chair, with your permission, ask
my provost, uh, to comment.
Mr. Chair, New Mexico State does
require an ACT or an SAT.
Mexico State.
You're gonna have to come up and
say your name in front of the
mic, otherwise.
He texted me and saying, what
did he say?
And
my texting skills are not that
good.
They usually translate in a
foreign language.
Mr. Chair, Senators currently
the University of New Mexico
does not require the ACT or SAT
for uh admission. It is an
optional uh uh piece of the
admissions package.
And, and I didn't say who I was
still, so I'm James Holloway,
I'm the provost at UNM.
You know that when that went
away for you and him.
Uh, yes, we stopped requiring
SAT ACT in 20 and for the fall
2020 during uh the COVID
pandemic.
And why haven't you brought it
back?
Um, what we found is that it was
not a particularly predictive of
student success, um and so uh it
in fact represents a barrier for
students who one have to pay to
take it, um, and uh uh to may
not perform well, um, even
though it's not particularly
predictive of success, high
school grades make a much better
predictor for us for our
admissions decisions.
But, but I thought the ACT was
predicament of where the student
is and what level they could
perform at, but their success
rate. Um, Mr. Chairman, that is
the selling point for the
creators of these tests, but uh
that is not what we in fact are
seeing.
So then why does the intimate
you and maybe in this community
needs to answer this question.
Why do they keep it?
Mr. President, I know you're
new, but why, why are you
keeping the ACT or SAT when UNM
is not.
And what do you use it for?
You can take a
Regent Romero's phone to the
podium.
it.
You can take it for backup.
So
Actually, I mean
The official website say that we
do think it's optional, but we
do prefer that students actually
take them. I will say that there
is a movement nationally to
bring back some of these ACTs
and SAT scores, um, again, I
will agree that there is
controversy about this with
regards to the validity of these
scores and that uh high school
GPA tends to be a better
predictive uh of success, so
from that standpoint, the jury
is still out and people are
still going back and forth on
the value of SAT and ACT scores
to be completely frank.
There's one more college
president that's.
in
To give us an answer.
that. I don't know if I was
chomp into that. Neil Wolf, New
Mexico. I was leaning forward,
so I apologize, like raising
your hand at an auction.
Um, in New Mexico Highlands
University does not require uh
the ACT or SAT for admissions
decisions. Uh, we have found
that as an open access
institution, a little bit
different mission than the two
research institutions, that is
not needed for us.
Uh, and, uh, we would prefer
that we do use ACT and SAT for
scholarships, the further
differentiate student applicants
for different scholarships who
may require it, uh, but it's not
something that we're interested
in bringing back for points of
admission.
You know why you're not
interested in bringing back.
Uh, again, uh, data for
institutions like ours find that
uh it doesn't uh necessarily
help in decision making for
admissions purposes. Students
can be just as successful
without the ACT or SAT as they
can uh with it.
OK.
My other word of caution is, you
know, don't credit's great.
Right? But that cuts your time
off in the universities.
You're gonna have students
graduating in a quicker rate,
you should, as we move along. It
happened in my household.
And so you're gonna have those
students, so I mean, you're
gonna have kids for less time
and so you're gonna have less
money in that.
And the declining population.
Are, are you guys preparing for
that?
Mr. Chair, it seems that we are
constantly, um, um,
Trying to look ahead,
recognizing the shifting
demographics and the uh and the
shifts in college going, etc.
Uh, so yes, I would say that
that is something that is
frequently a topic of discussion
in academic affairs.
OK. Thank you guys for your
presentation today.
seen it.
Uh, is seen the president of
Nimir there.
Commandant.
Oh, there he is.
Come up you're the next person
up.
Mhm
We're ready when you are.
And you do not have a handout,
correct?
No, I didn't have a handout for
you.
Yeah
No, no handouts, OK, go ahead.
Good afternoon, Chairman Munoz.
Distinguished members
The Senate Finance Committee.
My name is Boris McBurnett. I'm
the president and superintendent
of New Mexico Military
Institute.
Our focus is on cadets attaining
academic excellence.
Character development.
And physical fitness while
providing them with proactive
leadership opportunities.
In Mexico Military Institute. It
was established in 1891 and
located in Roswell, New Mexico.
There's a prestigious military
boarding school and junior
college, renowned for its
discipline.
And rigorous academic
environment.
And leadership development
programs.
With a strong heritage and
tradition embedded in our
environment.
New Mexico Military Institute
has become a progressive,
preparatory high school and
junior college that employs the
military model to educate and
train its cadets' leadership in
ethical behavior.
As we are forging our own
legacy, New Mexico Military
Institute is unique and its dual
role as a high school and junior
college. Our focus is on cadets
attaining academic excellence,
character development, and
physical fitness, while
providing them with proactive
leadership opportunities.
Our legacy is shaping
well-rounded, disciplined
leaders continuing to make it a
standout institution in American
education.
We could not accomplish our
successes without the support of
the of the New Mexico
legislature and its governance,
in particular, we would like to
extend our heartfelt thanks to
the committee members for not
overlooking us with our very
special education needs as an
institution.
As well as extend our special
thanks to our LFC analysts, HED
secretary and her staff.
And the governor for their input
and guidance.
state of New Mexico military
institute.
I want to provide some
information uh as we go forward
of what New Mexico military
institute.
Has been
And what it is doing in the
future.
Mexico Military Institute is 134
years old.
Our SAT and ACT scores are 9%
above the national average.
For the past decade.
We are the 4-time back to back
regional STEM champions.
One of only 4 military junior
colleges in the United States
commissioning between 30.
5 and
On a low year, it would be 26.
Uh, Army officers per year in
our early commissioning program,
the most in our region.
With the inclusion of our
intermediate preparatory
academy, we now educate students
between 6th and 8th grade.
Our overall enrollment has
increased by just over 5%.
And we have increased our
student enrollment.
In New Mexico.
From 29%.
To 48%.
For the 2024, 2025 academic
year.
And we anticipate an increase to
over 50%.
In the upcoming academic year.
We have between 25 and 29%
females in the core.
We represent our student body
represents 38 states.
And 25 different foreign
countries just to kind of center
on return on investment.
This is what other people have
been saying about us.
For 2024, we have been ranked.
The number one best college by
stacker.
Intelligent.com, academic
influence and college evaluator.
Number 2, best college by
College Factual.
Number 2, best salary potential
by pay scale.
Number 2 most popular by
Research.com.
Number 2, most influential by
academic influence.
And the 3rd best college by
niche.
Our challenges are centered
around.
Online versus the level of
NMMI
Academic
And
Sports,
And things of that nature that
combine to make a total cadet.
Our academic rigor.
It's high, and one of the things
that I'm looking at uh for
future growth.
Is the path.
Or New Mexican student success
within
That genre.
We also have to work on who is
the right type of student to
attend New Mexico Military
Institute.
With our
Uh, small amount of student body
compared to other schools.
So it takes a special type of
individual and that is something
that we're redoubling our
efforts to find as we work
toward making New Mexico
military institute, the school,
uh.
That it should continue to be in
the future.
And with that
I'll stand for questions.
Thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
Inner woods.
Uh, this chair.
to
introduce a bill.
And has to do with contract.
students.
That have contracted into the
Military
To, to go into ROTC programs.
With their nurse state
universities to get them.
Scholarships are in state
tuition at least.
I'd like to hear your feelings
on that, sir, if you, if you
have a particular feeling.
Uh, chairman.
Senator
I, I think that uh you would
have to explain to me in more
context, what it is that you're
seeking to do.
Because
Are you saying that you want to
give scholarships to people who
have been prior enlisted, and
they are coming back to work on
early commissioning program or
You're working to just provide
them a pathway to education in
the future.
Because I'm, I'm not quite clear
what it is that you're asking me
for, what, what,
uh, Mr. Chair, the way I
understand it is.
It would be those that have
agreed.
To, to serve in the military in
a future date.
Uh, that may be out of state
students.
But, but are wanting to get.
Some degree of training.
Sure, um.
Now before they enter into
their, they've got a contract to
enter into, but they haven't.
Exercise that contract yet.
Or maybe that's not the way it's
right, so, uh, thank you Mr.
Chair.
Senator, so I think what you're
describing.
Is uh
a student who has enlisted.
In high school range.
And they're coming back to
actually earn a commission.
This is something, this sounds
familiar to me because this is
something that I did.
When I was in college, I
enlisted and I became a, a
private and I worked for a
couple of years until I
contracted to become an ROTC
cadet. Once I did that, then I
could earn a scholarship and
they started paying me and then
I went on to be commissioned and
go on to serve in the Army
reserve. So I think if that's
what you're discussing, this is
something that already occurs.
OK, uh, Mr. Chair, could I
to Senator Tobiasin, she's got a
feather comment on that.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
Senator Woods, general, um,
We're talking to the same
person. I know that for sure.
There, there is legislation
around the country and several
other states that let's say,
Senator Woods moves to our
state, has a child who wants to
go to UNM, but at the moment
they'd be charged out of state
tuition and that that child
says, well, I actually want to
sign a contract. I want to go
into the military, so I'm gonna
sign a contract.
With the ROTC program, but I
don't want to pay out of state
tuition. So what we're
suggesting is that that
individual gets in-state tuition
from day one.
Chairman, Senator, uh, uh, that
explains it to me a little
clearer. So really what you're
asking for is an in-state
tuition waiver.
For a student of a service
member who is transient or
moving.
And now they reside in New
Mexico. Well, and Mr. Chair,
they don't necessarily have to
be the child of a service
member. It
The assumption is that that
would be a higher percentage of,
of the students doing that for
sure, but any student who came
to New Mexico, um, and we did
hear people with higher ed talk
about declining numbers and all
the challenges that they have
and you've even mentioned
challenges and changing your
curriculum to adapt to the
online need. So this is a way to
help attract more students,
especially who want to go into
an ROTC program where they just
don't have that financial.
b ur den and we know if they
were in state already, if they
were a resident, they wouldn't
be paying to go to college here.
Yes, uh.
Chair, Senator Tobiasson. I'm
all for that.
I just think that we need to
work through what the specifics
are.
That we're saying.
Because at this point, it's kind
of still murky for me, and we
still have to determine who it
is that's benefiting from this.
Because as we talk about
declining numbers in colleges,
there are several factors.
That work into that because
One of the things that I haven't
heard us discuss here is the
changing of the generations and
what the expectation is by a
generation as to what they think
school looks like for them.
Because we are here talking
through
The expectation of what school
was to you.
And that's not the same thing as
what students see now, because
what's going on here, especially
in
The state of New Mexico.
is in certain areas here, you've
got a lot of students who are
looking at trying to get
quick oil and gas money.
So they come in and they take a
course, or they take a course or
two, and then that company says,
oh, I'll hire you, and then
they're gone. So then they're
affecting that rate of
graduation percentage that you
guys are talking about here.
And you're like, where, where is
that student going?
So, so being a person who has
just come into the state in
June.
July.
One of the things that I've been
looking at here is
How do we effectively
Work on
The product that we receive.
Because where we are right now
is
We don't have to talk about what
K through 12 education is here.
But one of the things that
started at New Mexico Military
Institute before I actually got
here was the starting of the
intermediate preparatory
Academy.
And that was done for a reason.
Because
We're talking about how many
students come into the school
and are they Mexican and all of
that? That's, that's a question.
But that's not really the right
question.
The right question is how many
of them are able to be
successful going through our
programs. And that's the
question that New Mexico
military institute asked itself.
And they said, well,
How can we offset that?
So what we wound up doing was
starting a middle school to say,
hey, we're gonna take these
students and start to mold them.
Into the educational rigor that
we need for them to have to be
successful in our school.
Because
What we were bringing into the
school, the students were
turning around and leaving, and
yes, every year we can say we
took a lot of students, but how
many of them
Had the education to be able to
do the follow-through to make it
through that program.
Not many.
So that's one of the things that
we're working on on our end to
say, how can we help assist
because
We aren't just beholden to New
Mexico.
What we have to do is we provide
not only
The amount of students that we
provide in the early
commissioning program, but we
also work with all of the
service academies.
And being able to send academy
preps to their school.
And they send them to us for a
reason, because our academic
rigor is really high at our
school.
So they will send students who
Didn't quite necessarily make it
at
Uh, the Air Force Academy or the
Naval Academy and send them back
to us, have them work with us
for a year in our science and
math programs, and then we send
them back.
So that's another indicator of
that might not necessarily show
up on our graduation rate for
junior college because they're
not there to graduate. They are
there to participate in that
program and then we send them
back.
So the other thing that affects
our graduation rate would also
be
Our athletic programs because
our students, some of them come
in.
And
They are
Probably
Let's say not wanting to be
there.
But they, they didn't get an
offer from those other schools
that they wanted to go to, so
they wound up with us. So
they'll go through that season
with us and then when those
schools come back and say, hey,
you know, we think we're
interested in you now.
They're gone. So that also
affects our graduation rate for
junior college.
So I just wanted to point those
things out as we're talking
about factors that lead to
situations of
Where the state of New Mexico
education is because that
affects
All of us in this room.
And in order for us to get
there, there are several other
things that have to happen.
To work together to make those
things happen.
So thank you for that
explanation, Mr. Chair. Can you
silo out each type of student
based on what you just explained
because I would think internally
for your purposes, but
externally for our purposes,
that would be fascinating to
know how many of those athletes
transferred out through a portal
because of athletic scholarships
and opportunities at larger
schools, etc. like, do you have
all that?
I can get that. I don't have it
here with me today.
That's, that's fine. I just
think that would be Senator.
I don't have it with me today.
I, I just know that from my time
I ate.
Months of being on the ground.
These are things that I'm
looking at to see how effective
our school is and where our
school is going in the future
because one of the other factors
in everything that we do is
We are, and, and you've been
talking about this a little
already.
We have to be more agile with
our strategic planning.
So right now, we're in the
middle of a new venture in
strategic planning process at
our school because one thing is
we can't have a decade-long
strategic plan because things
change really quickly.
So we are looking to move that
into a five-year realm so that
we can be agile and make the
changes because the, the things
that I'm talking about with
generations and things of that
nature, we have to be able to
move and you're gonna have new
factors that factor into what
education looks like at all of
the schools that wasn't a factor
5 years ago, like,
AI
And how do you, uh, combat that
or work with that with students
who are getting their papers
done by that.
Mo
As you talk about
Students transferring into
schools, grade inflation.
Because that's the real thing.
So if we, if we're building
students off of grade inflation,
then how successful are they
gonna be at the next level?
So all of these things, but yes,
for your initial question, I can
go back and get data for you for
that. Thank you Mr. Chair, I
mean, you're speaking my
language now, especially the
strategic plan aspect of that,
and I don't know if you were in
the room when I did ask, um, the
prior panel, what type of
innovations are they looking at?
And I use my own children as, as
an example in their friend
group, which is they're in their
early twenties and a lot of them
don't see the value in upper
education. They're bored with
the portunities.
um in the classes and
They're saying, gosh, I can go
to YouTube. I can go to chat GTP
um.
Chat GPT, yeah, I said that
right.
Um, but I can get, I can access
information like that where you
and I, none of us in this room
could do that when we were their
age. So we are looking at it, I
think from a little bit of an
antiquated perspective and the
ability to innovate and take
action quicker.
I think is essential to us
getting to the bottom of how do
we help ready more students for
the realities of the workforce.
So I appreciate the action that
you're taking, for sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, Senator Gonzalez, you have a
question.
Oh
I, I think they kind of went
down the wrong go to answer that
question, that's an ROTC
question, not anemi question,
but I think you did your best,
but I do agree with you, and I
think that's a conversation that
we've been having, right? Kids
learn differently. Senator
Shindo and I just had that
conversation a few minutes ago.
Those COVID kids are now
They were beginning in high
school, now they're seniors,
right? And it's fifty-fifty
learning, 50% in the classroom,
college students are accessing
it that way, but I don't think
we've caught up with the times
about how kids really learn. I
think, I don't know how you I I
went to Nimi, I don't know how
you do modeling toimi for an
online school and me. It it's,
it's almost impossible to do
that. So share.
That is not something that we
want to do.
Uh, because of the type of
education that we provide. And
one thing I wanted to say to the
committee is, yes, I am before
you, I am a general in the army.
But I am also a certified
teacher.
I'm, I've been a principal, I've
been a central office employee
and I am a certified
superintendent in another state.
So I understand the rigors of
education and what's needed to
be provided for what's going
forward.
So I, I think that.
Uh, we are definitely taking
those things into consideration
at New Mexico Military
Institute.
Yeah.
OK.
Anything else you'd like to add?
No, sir. Uh, I just want to
thank you and the committee for
taking the time to listen to us
today.
OK. Thank you. Thanks for your
time.
Uh, let's see.
Go for the blind.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
committee members. My name is
Heather Miller. I'm the
superintendent for the school
for the blind and visually
impaired.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak today and I want to say
thank you too for the support
we've always received over the
years from the state of New
Mexico.
NMSBBI was opened in 1903.
To serve our kiddos around the
state with blindness and visual
impairments. Last school year,
we were able to reach 2,239
kiddos with 1,649 of those being
through direct services. We
offer a variety of programming,
our birth to 3 department is
statewide. They carry an average
caseload of 300 students, and we
have one of the um best
screening programs in the
country for early intervention
services and identifying the
kiddos who need them.
Our outreach department works
with school districts.
To help them complete
evaluations that need to be
done, do direct services, and we
partner with the NMSU.
But we are partners with NMSU,
um, to do a certification
program for teachers of students
with visual impairments. It's 1
of 30 in the country.
And our outreach department
provides mentors to the folks
who are in that program, so that
they have the support of an
experienced TBI throughout the
process of earning their
certification.
We also host low vision clinics
around the state. We offer
approximately 12 a year. That
provides an opportunity for
parents to bring their children
in and receive a free
appointment with an
ophthalmologist and receive an
updated vision report on their
child.
Ours is the technology
department.
Provides we we lend out
equipment, we provide trainings
on this technology and we will
go to any school district or
student who requested to help
them determine what technology
should be implemented and train
them on how to use it.
Our instructional resource
center.
Provide specialized
instructional materials designed
specifically for students with
visual impairment, and we
provide those to any kiddo or
school district around the state
who requires them. It also
houses our braille production.
And so school districts are able
to send us materials and we
produce them in Braille and and
send them back, or we can
produce them in large print as
well for students who need that
special, um, like a higher size
18 or 20 print.
Our early childhood program is
in Albuquerque. We serve
students ages 3 to 6 who have a
diagnosed visual impairment that
adversely impacts their ability
to be successful in other
preschool programming and so we
can provide those early
intervention services to prepare
them for their other school
settings.
Our residential campus in
Almogordo serves day students
from around the local area
within 50 miles and then
students around the state spend
the week with us and go home on
the weekends to their families.
We there focus on teaching the
core curriculum in alignment
with the expanded core
curriculum was a set of skills
designed for students who with
their because their visual
impairment interferes with their
ability to learn skills through
um the use of their vision the
same way that their sighted
peers do.
This past year, we had, we
worked together with a former
superintendent and some of our
current staff.
To have the braille standards
passed as a rule in the state of
New Mexico. Those are brill,
alignment to the Common Core
English language arts standards.
They also produced a companion
guide, which helps provide
teaching strategies to implement
Braille learning and raille
teaching, so that Braille is
more accessible to all of our
kiddos around the state who need
it.
We are part of multiple ongoing
research projects in the field
of vision loss, and we
participate in research as far
as um Russia, so we do seek it
out internationally as well.
We also regularly provide
presentations at conferences and
are currently working on a
proposal to present to the
International Vision Conference
in Italy. So we are striving to
reach kiddos around.
The world versus um just our
students here in New Mexico. We
want to be able to be a voice in
the field of vision impairment
for all of our kiddos.
We also produce trainings and
partner with the American
Printing House for the blind to
give trainings to teachers on
focused areas that we have done
research on.
I did provide you two handouts
today. One is our annual report
just to give you an update on
how things are, and the other
one gives you a little bit of
information about some of our
financials.
And I, we do ask today that you
consider adopting the LFC
recommendation for our budget,
and I'm happy to answer any
questions.
questions from center trail.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Um, I
meant to ask this, um, earlier,
but
Um, the 3 schools, uh, the
military school, the school for
the blind and the School for the
Deaf.
I know my predecessor had
indicated that we did not last
year include the money for pay
raises, and I just wanna make
sure, are we gonna
Yeah
add that in. It was, it was a,
it was a shortfall, and I think
it was reported in December at
the meeting. I want to make sure
that we're gonna include that in
because those pay raises for
teachers usually goes into the
PED budget.
And these would be exempt from
PED's budget.
Uh, I don't know, maybe you know
the answer while I look at, do
you know the answer to that
since you're sitting right
there.
Secretary,
And everybody jump up Mr.
Chairman, um,
Mr. Chairman, members, so the
way special schools comp is
generally done. It's the back of
the bill. It's a section 8 item.
Um
You'll see a detail of that in
your volume 3.
What we had historically
such a large percentage of their
transfers from the land grant
permanent fund. They didn't
always receive 100% of their
compensation, uh, from the
general fund and I believe
Senator, that's the issue you're
addressing. So this year, that
percentage has been changed to
100% for the special schools. So
they will get all the base
compensation, that 4%.
We'll get 100% of their need.
Um, is built in the LFC wreck as
it is.
One wrinkle.
If additional legislation is
pursued to say increase uh
teacher pay on the public ed
side that doesn't always
automatically include the
special schools, so they should
be considered uh when any of
those kind of recommendations
are being made.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, so.
Um
How do we do that? Do we like
look for bills that are coming
through and then amended in or
is that?
I'm a little concerned about
that.
Right now, Mr. Chairman, um, and
senator.
I, I don't think there are
additional uh bills right now.
It's something that
Uh, staff ought to be flagging
in the FIR process though,
absolutely.
All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. And um my last
question in regards to that is
I understood that there was a
shortfall last year. I'm gonna
do anything to make that up.
Um
Mr. Chair and senator.
Think where we're at this year,
all of the special schools have
positive fund balances, and it
is made up on the go forward.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate it.
Thank you, I don't have any
other further questions, so.
I'll send for the sorry.
and I'll just be real quick. So
the additional distribution, um,
just hang on for one sec. The
additional distribution we did,
uh, with was called the Early
Childhood Education, you know,
for the, but that there was 13
or so, or was it 16 or 17% of
that 1%.
Goes to these schools as well,
is that correct? So there was an
additional distribution that way
as well.
Um, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Pavia.
Need to check with uh
Sonny Lou would probably be our
guy.
Because the math was supposed
to, sorry to interrupt, the
chair of the math was supposed
to flow with what the
Reginal distribution of the 5%.
Uh, called for.
And
Mr. Chairman Senator, I'm happy
to follow up. I do not know the
answer to that. I'd like that
information. Thank you. OK.
It's just some members of
Senator on page 113 of volume 3,
they still ended up with it.
Cash balance of 1.6 million so
man's ability to do that, so.
Thank you.
school for the day.
We have a handout?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
I'm fully aware that I'm last to
go on the agenda today, so I'll
keep it short. Keep things
moving here.
Some of you might know that a
deaf man named Lars Larsen
founded our school in 1885.
In '87, he faced the territorial
legislature to request funding
for the school. And so NMSD is
the first publicly funded school
in the state of New Mexico.
We're very proud of our long
history.
And really thrilled to be here
today to continue his legacy.
We do wonderful things at our
school enrollment numbers are
up.
We've actually had 125% increase
in enrollment over the last 10
years.
At our preschool in Albuquerque,
specifically.
We have about 240% increase.
Really, we went from 20 students
to almost 50 students now.
In our outreach and early
intervention departments?
We have recovered our pre-COVID
numbers.
And that is without.
Las Cruces, because Las Cruces,
we are still under our typical.
Uh, service numbers.
The big reason for that is that
during the pandemic,
A lot of babies were born in El
Paso in the Las Cruces area,
because they could get services
in that area a little bit
easier. And so they don't have
newborn hearing screening
reports.
Uh, that they have to give to
New Mexico. And so a lot of
babies in that area in the south
are kind of falling through the
cracks, but we're working on it.
We're giving a big focus to make
sure we're providing services
when we do find those students,
or those babies.
Really related to that, our one
request, RSPS request is for
400,000 for statewide
audiologist.
And we are never satisfied.
We
Have a huge discrepancy between
academic achievement in terms of
reading scores, math scores
between children who have had
access to language and
communication from birth
compared to those who have not
had that access. You see a huge
divide there and so there's
children with access to language
and communication, they develop
on the exact same trajectory as
their hearing peers, and the
students who do not have access
to language and communication
take a very long time and really
it's much slower, and they, they
see the big impact at, at, at,
um,
Ending their reading abilities
at about a 3rd or 4th grade
level. We want that audiologist
because they could do the
diagnostic testing throughout
the state. Many rural areas and
families have a hard time
actually going to Albuquerque
for their diagnostic testing.
And so
We've had great success in the
Gallup area.
And we have done, we diagnosed
several children using a remote
audiologist or tele audiologists
center there. And now the babies
are getting services from 2
weeks old, and that is exactly
what we want to see. It makes a
huge impact on their ability to
continue and getting a good
education. So it's something
we're really proud of and we
want to continue. There's a
$140,000 statewide ideology
including benefits. So it's a
small ask for a great return.
And so funding, you know,
everybody says travel is up,
travel costs, the cost of
fixing. We just had an elevator
that needed to be fixed, the
just the, just the panel, just
the panel alone was $7000 to
fix. And so these little things
do add up, everything's up right
now.
Risk insurance for us is going
to be up 16%, um, NIMSA is up
10% coming next year, so
We are also asking that uh we
not be forgotten, and I suppose
the other uh state special
schools would also ask, um, that
we're not forgotten in those big
bills. So, you know, whether or
not the bills actually pass.
Um, for example,
The climate bill?
Talked about providing funding.
And access to funding for
schools to be able to receive
funding for different energy
related initiatives, and I'm not
sure that NMSD or NMSBVI or the
other schools would qualify for
that funding because we're kind
of missed or uh there's a bit of
a gap between PED because we're
not under PED but also we're not
a college or a university. And
so oftentimes we're
unintentionally missed, and so
we just ask that if there is,
um, you know, if it says schools
can request grant funding that
you include schools and state
special.
schools.
On any of those bills.
With that.
We respectfully request the LFC
budget approved.
Recommendation. And so thank you
for your ongoing support. We
truly couldn't be where we are
without you.
Thank you. Uh, we'll go ahead,
uh.
Any questions from the committee
members.
I don't see any, so thank you
for the presentation.
and uh
I think that concludes our
I believe that's it, so.
For committee members, so we
have a dinner at 6 at the
ballroom.
Tonight, yeah, reminder, yep, so
maybe dinner so uh.
a reminder, so we'll see down
there, you know.
In a few minutes. I think the
reception started at 5, I
believe, dinner at 6.
