He was an all.
This.
You have a choice.
The members of.
Working office
Thirty eight rigs and the.
Senator.
When.
The.
All of
their.
Comment on the bill at the.
S.
S.
You have to use the.
Mr chair yes.
Hello of.
We have.
Mediators of Bill.
Manages the bill or are you
happy with how I dress it last
than we estimate.
Okay.
Point one version.
We need your expertise on.
The and so and Rikki.
Can you tell us House Bill Page.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thanks for
having me I I have I have spoken
with senators who lived through
the open this morning to
articulate the.
the concerns we have in the
the language about the
application of the minimum
fifteen before any other
legislatively approved increase.
And
so the recommendation is rooted
in a strategy that moves the
minimum pay rate for state
workers to fifteen dollars an
hour well addressing compaction
the analogy I've been using is
imagine.
Follow state workers
On the end of a rope standing in
front of the line that marks
fifteen dollars an hour.
And at the end of the room for
your workers who are now at the
lowest possible rate rate which
is eleven fifty.
What our strategy does is it
pulls everyone over that line
okay.
In an organized way that brings
those workers from eleven fifty
to fifteen dollars an hour Paul
moving everybody to address
compaction.
And that's being done with two
things the first is we will bill
rate now relative to the mid
point of their Hey man I'm in
what P. band there in.
So if you are workers are making
far less than the middle of
their pay band then we give them
a higher increase then if you
have workers at the very low pay
bands then they get a higher
increase and everyone gets an
increase based on those two
measures.
So the language that's being
added in this section we're
essentially if the executive
Rechlin which is enacted.
What it would require is we take
those workers making less than
fifteen and we bring them to
fifteen.
Then we would apply those two
strategies to them and depending
on where they are based on
cooperation so and rate than
they could receive as much as an
additional thirty thirty five
percent increase on top of that
fifteen dollars an hour because
now they be at fifteen they
would have a new computational
but they would still be in the
low rate and so they could
receive upwards of fifteen plus
a thirty three percent increase
perhaps even more if that in
fact.
Take place in that order.
And so this is not some could
you move somebody was making
eleven fifty move to fifteen and
then they could make upwards of
eighteen or nineteen dollars an
hour and that is in production.
What complicates things then is
by taking them to fifteen and
then to seventeen eighteen or
nineteen after that they could
very well then begin to make
more than their supervisors so
then we have to move the
supervisor an additional
percentage if we move them too
close to the director then we
have to move the directors
certain percentage so what our
plan is done is break you the
compaction issue Paul bringing
everybody over that fifteen
dollar an hour line.
If we have to bring them to
fifteen first and then apply
this two pronged approach it
does move them a second time by
upwards of twenty five or thirty
percent if they're in the lowest
premium and that would then
create a secondary compaction
issues that we we we can cost
estimate at this point so that
Mr Chairman is is the root issue
for our plan to address
compensation for classified
workers at state agencies.
Senator do you have any comments
about your your
thank you I'd like to also hear
from
marks a visitor who also has the
the president's have a
university presidents have a
comment as well.
Mr president that's okay thank
you.
Mr chairman Mr chairman to carry
marks Senator the council
of presidents I just want to
to
go with the directors or certain
officers Senator everybody in
terms of the hired perspective
we grew the mini does address
compaction also the word
averages and we met with a lot
of the about is it's important
keep average in the bill for
higher ed as because then that
way we can address those lower
tier employees once you take the
word average out hamstrings as
we're locked in it's harder to
do that we don't have that
flexibility so we read it and I
met with the presence of the
that we do have our word that we
do have plans that will address
those lower territories first
step the concern of higher level
employees so that Mr Chairman
administrators wouldn't take the
sponsor thank you Mr Senator for
his work thank you Mr chairman
members committee.
Etcetera any comments on your
substance.
The issues that the subs to will
create for.
For the compaction in thank you
Mr chair I do realize that I I
asked myself how can it be that
somebody works at a job with the
state for yesterday the
testimony was twenty years and
it's eleven dollars an hour and
the reason that happens is when
we just send the money and let
it be allocated.
At at the entities discretion
that can happen because people
could usually address compaction
at the higher levels and the
lower levels paid employees
don't object and that is why I
wanted to do what my bill does I
take the word of the university
presidents I take the word of
acting director Serna that they
will address it and they will
not leave.
The lower paid employees out
we're give them less than they
deserve they will be making at
least fifteen dollars an hour so
with that I will accept I will
take out the.
Subsection C. and accept the
amendment to the bill which is
point two two two two five eight
five two you're withdrawing your
amendment.
And then we'll move to the
Emirates so why would I need
what I need someone to introduce
point.
To the point to.
So we need to go back to the
mill rate would drop to address
amendments when you go back to
the bill and have a motion to.
amend the bill on point two for
discussion with the station the
motion by Senator Steinborn a
second by Senator Padilla.
the objection to the motion so
we are on the point two version
which cleans up the issue
question on the amendment.
Thank you.
Senator thank you for the
amendment and
thank you for raising all the
issues and thank you for
fighting for fifteen to fifteen
dollars an hour for for workers
you really move the needle on
this issue that's huge for
people so thank you.
Thank.
Any other questions on the
amendment Senator Padilla Mr
Chairman I just wanna make sure
we're clear we're not voting on
the member voting on we're four
debating a substitute no not an
amendment we aren't on a
substitute with the point two
two two five eight five point
two so that is a substitute that
were on that addresses the
compaction issue the war over
the line in get more Marty equal
did not.
Housing so Mister chairman has
the same question I asked before
which is around the budget so
we're we're we're we're this is
set.
With in house bill two all this
is appropriated in house bill to
just what I needed to know okay
thank you.
And what.
Consider the fifteen dollar
range.
What is the estimated.
Raise we're gonna give these
workers.
Do you want to ask Mr chairman
and senator.
The minister chair for him.
Mr chair Senator this bill does
not have language about the race
that will be determined by your
committee all this this is a
very small simple bill that just
requires that no state employee
be paid less than fifteen
dollars an hour the decision
about.
About the average reasons is
something that your committee
has to be what this bill does is
it gives discretion.
Or at limits discretion in the
sense that everybody has to be
paid no less than fifteen
dollars an hour so that's really
the question is beyond the scope
of the of this amendment and
something that you have to
address.
So Mr chairman and senator.
Consider this bill.
How much does it raise.
The state employees we're
talking about a pretty
substantial raise here.
So
I know we could break it down to
to any piece of this.
But if I'm going to go out in
the public and say I gave the
state employees are raised.
I would like to know what that
raises.
The percent of some current.
Thank you.
Mr chair I think that that is an
excellent question right now
there is a proposal and
executive proposal that I'll
turn to acting director Serna so
that he can explain the proposal
however my understanding is that
is not what's before us today
but it's something that you must
address.
Thank you Mr chair
For possible markers in the
sixty six state agencies we have
about about twelve hundred
workers presently that are
making less than fifteen dollars
an hour.
And they're currently ranges
between eleven fifty which is
the state minimum wage to
fourteen dollars and ninety nine
cents.
And so for the lowest paid
workers those currently at the
state's minimum pay rate that
would be a three dollar and
fifty cents on our increase for
about a thirty percent increase
and so as you can imagine the
increase is larger for those
that are being paid.
The lowest possible minimum wage
so our strategy has been that
rather than just get everyone to
fifteen and follow a compaction
strategy is pool everyone along
together.
The increase for those at eleven
fifty is larger shortly which is
needed to get them that three
fifty but then it gets smaller
the further up the pay scale you
get.
What is that Midland we we have
a you have a set of workers
right now growing.
eleven fifty.
What is the mid line of that
that block that you keep talking
about sure.
So Mr chair Senator you mean the
mid pay for that because it will
be thirty Senator so we have
presently of those twelve
hundred workers are are located
come in four different pay bands
within the general cost by
celery schedule the lowest pay
band still on record dips as a
minimum pay rate to the federal
minimum wage below eight dollars
an hour so the lowest pay band I
believe the mid range is
somewhere in the space of nine
dollars an hour so it was very
but they exist in four separate
P. bands currently.
And I can look it up Senator Mr
chair just to show.
assume Mr chair we're going
through all that happens to hear
this thank you Mr so thank you
to so I'm assuming we're going
to set a
We've got all these pay bands so
we're just going to excel at all
those under fifteen with this
bill.
Mr chair Senator that's correct
so the the strategy for
competitiveness looking forward
is after the implementation yeah
just those pay schedules so that
now even when we just posted
position the minimum pay rates
are reflective of the new
minimum pay for state government
as opposed to what we really
will pay and assume that's going
to be at the bottom of the pay
scale and the the mid way will
be what what is generally top to
bottom of the pay scale what is
what is that general amount top
to bottom sure some Senator Mr
chair Senator so that that'll
range in the space of all twenty
seven percent right so we can go
from low to high in in about
twenty seven percent so you're
absolutely right what we'll do
is we'll adjusted there's no
point in in having a minimum pay
rate on record that the state is
not going to pay if this bill is
an act so we would make those
changes to those pay schedules
which would then have the future
impact for workers that would
come in afterwards.
This bill doesn't address any
anything but the minimal that's
all it addresses.
So
Mr chair Senator that's exactly
right that's what we the the.
The provision C. that's what we
got rid of.
Okay thank you Mr chair.
Thank you any other questions on
the.
Etcetera etcetera so we know.
Inflation's of roughly seven
percent or eleven percent you
know gas is double what it cost.
A year ago.
We know we're about to go toward
Russia in gas and oil is going
to go through the rough.
We're gonna have some staged
event over there that's going to
cause inflation in cost of goods
to go up we know we have supply
chain issues we know that.
The twenty twenty four comment
everything was running smoothly
and now here limited to toilet
paper and so people and I've
seen this.
The new salary basically pretty
much at fifteen.
Maybe even higher in some places
I've seen it at eighteen dollars
an hour in Cortez with a three
thousand dollar signing bonus I
mean we don't we can't even hire
people in ward in our business
at fifteen they just they don't
even sweep the sidewalks are I
we for for fifteen is there a
better budget out there and
that's the problem is we have
thank you much budget on the
lower end and instead of giving
people in the work site in and
so we have to address this
issue.
And we have the money now to do
it but we want to make sure that
we do it correctly because we
need to address compaction and
we need to address the issues
on.
Hiring engineers lawyers and
other limited salaries at the
higher payment in the state that
we have to do that next year
figure out how to do that
because as a young kid.
Coming out of college may want
to go state work for experience
but when you need a water
engineer that can go in the open
market and make a hundred twenty
thousand a year and are starting
the sixty seven thousand correct
me if I'm wrong we're not in the
game and we said here's
legislators and state why isn't
this money move why would not
fixing the water issues in New
Mexico why are we not fixing
major issues in New Mexico and
agencies and EMNRD is vitamin
department because we don't have
that capability to hire those
people that.
In that range to get those jobs
filled well this is a start next
year United Rick you're gonna
fix the hiring compaction issue
so we can get those engineers
and stuff in every agency so we
can move some of this money out
has two point five billion in
capital sitting there.
when we have three hundred
eighty million and water
projects sitting there there's
money sitting everywhere that we
don't have the staff in agencies
and departments the lawyers
engineers whatever it is in that
clip and that payment to get
these done in agencies are
strung out and not an accomplish
that but bringing these people
up just to make.
a livable wage which is now
fifteen I can argue that maybe
even higher now it is very
critical and important the house
only wanted to go to thirteen
eighty five they both the
fifteen dollar in in house bill
two because the Senate was
pushing the fifteen dollar and
so
It's the natural trend in the
economy.
And so I don't know we're going
to so we're voting Senator
Rodriguez thank you Mr chairman
and I didn't to immediately up
was ready to vote because I just
had a little comment thank you I
just want to say thank you again
to us Senator Sedillo Lopez and
too risky for your hard work not
it's evident that that you're
Department Ricky has been on top
of this for a good while now so
we should see some changes some
positive changes but all that
being said let me just say that
I don't think anyone can deny
that.
Through Senator Sedillo Lopez
truly we are going to finally
see some changes because she has
been you have been Senator in
the very forefront of this
effort I remember several years
ago in fact he came to me on the
Senate floor news that is there
any way we can do fifteen
dollars an hour in this budget
as house bill two was getting
ready to be voted on the floor
at that time so you've been
working on this for a long time
thank you very much we employees
and we are indebted to you for
your tireless efforts thank you
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you Mr chair
thank you center the biggest.
Of course.
We're clear what we're doing
we're not being a substitute.
And we're gonna go back to the
bill and pass the bill as a
simply perfect have a motion
from Senator Rodriguez second by
Senator Hemphill any objection
to the substitute.
And now we're on the substitute
bill any questions on the
substitute bill.
Mr chair.
Senator shares for center what.
thank you Mr is not necessarily
a question it's just a statement
we know that minimum wage out
there to fifteen dollars an hour
already today right now.
I've always thought having a
loft telling people to do this
was.
Insane.
But I also know that the there's
businesses all over the place
that we're now we're going to be
competing with because you have
much better benefits and the
same pay.
It used to be.
Until we lost our money that you
got a great retirement from
government.
But not necessarily great pay it
was okay fate was okay working
conditions a lot of days off.
Out there you may have to work
more days we have to work in bad
weather whatever.
But they do have the budget to
get paid more but now we're
going to pay more and get
benefits.
And so everybody outside that
window now's not gonna be able
to hire anybody.
And so this is counterproductive
to the to the economy in
general.
Yeah we're you know that that
the people paying fifteen.
Out there in here.
I don't think that it's useful
for our economy.
And I've tried to say this
before but it just doesn't seem
to make any sense to anybody
it's not the dollar amount that
matters it's what can you I with
that dollar that matters.
If we were making one dollar a
day.
We still lived comfortably like
we do right now.
The one dollar for dollar to
make any difference now.
If you can live comfortably on
one dollar can you move it to
two dollars but your but your
standard of living doesn't move.
You've gained nothing if you
move it to a thousand dollars
but your standard of living
hasn't moved you've gained
nothing and that's all minimum
wages effort to for anybody.
It doesn't change the buying
power the price of everything
goes up to meet the cost of
labor.
You don't get to buy anything
new or better.
Based on the minimum wage.
If you were more productive to
society to society then society
will pay you more and now will
your standard of living
increases.
That's how we make things
better.
We help people be more
productive.
We ought to teach people read.
We don't do that either.
Well percent reading proficiency
or whatever was.
That's how you make life better
for people we don't mandate that
you pay the more and then raise
the prices so they can't buy
anymore.
I know this is going to pass I
know people got the money does
matter it doesn't matter if you
can't buy anymore.
I know you're going to say that
I know Twitter already went
crazy thank you Mr.
Thank you etcetera etcetera
what.
Thank you Mr chair a I just want
to make note if if money
calculators right.
The a yes vote on this bill.
Will be a fifty two million
dollar project.
Twelve hundred employees.
But if one make note of that.
I don't know if you're scoring
that right at the bottom in.
Not a fifty two million just to
get to the fifteen that includes
a seven percent across the board
for all state employees and so
it's not the fifty two million
to get to fifteen it's the fifty
it's a.
Correct me you know the number
eighty off topics.
Sure.
It's a seven percent across the
board for everybody else.
And this is education this is
janitors this is PED money this
is higher and money this is
across the board everywhere not
just to get to the fifteen
Ricky.
Mr chair Senator
that's correct if if you look at
the.
For the general salary workers
and go exact and other state
police and other targeted that
includes the fifteen on the move
for others and those those cost
estimates on House
Appropriations side the LFC
right for example was fifty
three million but that includes
the fifteen in moving everybody
so that everybody gets that
anymore and then on the
executive for those same groups
it was fifty four so that number
represents not just getting
everyone to fifteen but the act
of bringing everybody with them
at the same time Senator so the
minimum to fifteen is very very
affordable the more cost reports
as the compaction.
Close.
And I don't think we've given
our pay right our employees a
pay raise in.
Four of five years because we
went in the special session we
had booked a prior winning the
special session and took it away
we went in the special session
to get away and so I don't think
we've ever gotten there but the
more concerning thing about this
is is that we are picking up a
portion of their health care.
And when the state quit picking
that up there's eighteen million
and this house bill two that
picks up state employees and a
bunch of cities and counties
health care costs for two years
and if health care costs rise
six percent a year.
When these employees have a day
of reckoning.
Health care costs come true and
if it's a three year averages
six percent so that's eighteen
percent increase in just their
health care in my United may pay
that every day and make the
adjustments were picking that up
in some day to day reckoning is
gonna hurt those people and
you're going to see mask people
leave the state because we
subsidize the employment to
cities counties your city your
county your cities or counties
are all subsidized by the state
in their health care and when
that happens and we cut that off
they're gonna going to sticker
shock and then there's gonna be
some real day of reckoning.
We don't want coming from this
decision though.
What is simply said it was a
twenty one dollar raise because.
You you got one point four.
So that's that's where I came up
with the one twelve hundred
people so thank what we're
talking the same language Mr
thank you thank you so much to
do passed motion.
Senator Rodriguez made the new
passed motions maverick Senator
Hemphill second that
we call the roll.
Senator Burt.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond.
Senator Diamond knows Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator fifty eight
yes Senator here no Senator
share no Senator Steinborn.
The.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods snow Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
senator Munoz yes you have eight
yes and three no.
Okay I'm going to explain your
vote for **** the opportunity I
just want to be clear
the state government is not the
private sector and so when we
say the private sector of the
market for oil terminals ways
they don't because it's actually
set by the state.
Which is just so and so what
we've heard from agency after
agency is that they have had to
shift more money to contract
services to get the people they
need so actually this is a
crucial thing to help respond to
the market help keep state
employees
and Furthermore just a value
work of people who just like us
people say what do you do this
job it's crazy you know you
don't get paid or whatever
because we value public service
we value working for a public
institution and will you know I
think a lot of public workers
value maybe the stability of
that.
And they'll do it for decades
for that stability even though
right now as we heard we have
over a thousand people making
less than that so as one half of
those comments on why this
important thing to do and
I appreciate that thank you Mr
comp thank you very much Mr
chairman Justin privative and I
want to go and thank the sponsor
and of course Mr sentiment sent
as we move forward and and and
the reason for that because I've
had several meetings with him
and as we deal with compaction
the other issues he's he's
really breaking down explanation
and helping us I just finished a
presenting as B. two oh two and
that was on compensation for
elected officials and a lot of
the same issues are being raised
there as well so as we do go
forward I know this is going to
be an important topic and again
part of that is that assurances
that as we deal with technology
as we deal with elevating if you
will our public employees the
whole key is that we really
value them and of course under
your leadership and I appreciate
that thank you very much for
thank you very much Sanchez
thank you Senators thank thank
you record thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee could you make sure
that you have Ricky have is
number so when you go to the
next committee or the for the
wrecking ball to.
Do you want to set up their what
we do this next bill on will
should be pretty quick and in my
main.
Reason for having this bill is
if we get the situation in the
house we have something laying
there on the floor that we can
move rather quickly the only
difference Senator Padilla
between so members know between
this bill.
And Senator Sedillo Lopez is a
track exactly the same except
there's a two percent increase
on CTE interpret anyone explain
Senate bill one twenty five it
was essentially it's
Fifteen dollar minimum for all
state employees based on what
the chair just said in the
tracks directly with the just
be.
That was seven.
And that we don't have any
substitute for seven years we
don't have any amendments to
this one at all.
And
The appropriation is already
been worked out in the current
version of the budget.
Thank you it does address a
compaction also this person Sen.
Thank you and and
We're gonna go to the audience
and I don't know if they're in
the room or on the zoom but I
have a Nick.
Sign is saying is is.
With this in the New Mexico.
Steve so it is Mr chairman.
Hello yeah go ahead.
Yes.
Good.
Mr chair and members of the
board see see see on the Mexico
government relations records and
on behalf of our members.
For additional in the New Mexico
search the pride of all.
Fifty.
For all school.
Perhaps
this is what was.
hello the.
Thank you logopedia.
Mr chair members of the
communications workers of
America we also like to send in
support and anything to sponsors
this is all drugs I do to make
sure workers across the state.
Earn a living wage went to
public service thank you.
No relations to term.
anybody in support in the
audience anybody against the
back on the bill Senator.
The.
We're not gonna spend all the
time thank you Mr chairman
Senator so I'm just trying to
compare the two bills one twenty
five of the one we just passed
and the difference in seeing is
in the one which is passes the
Here says every state employee.
And then the one we just pass
have to that licensed and non
licensed employee.
And charter schools so I'm
wondering Mr chair and then your
bill references section article
twelve which I think are the
constitutional schools higher
education schools this is the
one we just pass includes.
Well every school districts and
prefer forget you might say that
the beginning so yours just
deals with higher education is
that it and when we just
passively it's all K. through
twelve schools as well no it
deals with Adrian.
Yes Senate bill one twenty five
so he deals with state employees
it does not have a public school
provision for a higher rate
provision at this time.
And it has a two percent that's
if you want to do.
We're just laying this on the
table downstairs just in case
the bill of the bill gets and
that.
Okay.
Okay so it's a little this there
are I guess.
Well so okay.
And this is but we don't have do
we have when I don't have the
member Michael final but do you
want to do that today Mr
Chairman.
Center so.
I have an amendment that would
track to center city as bill but
in the last Senator deals build
gets in trouble or gets jumped
in some way shape or form I want
to have another building there
that we can demand and sent over
just in case they change it back
the way it should be
is just a safety net.
You want amendment on I'm gonna
put the movie on.
And I'll try to Senator the of
the.
What amendment on.
We have an amendment center with
me but I I know the internet has
given to you right now.
The amendment will track exactly
to what we just passed out with
Senator studios Bill plus the
two percent and CPI increase.
And most motion moon amendment
for discussion purposes
questions on them and this is Mr
I think we intended to.
The current to clarify this for
any questions is that this
apparently Traxxas senator Munoz
Representative to to be exactly
like Senator Sedillo Lopez is
bills except for this one does
that on the two two and a half
is a two percent or two of them
that are to percent to percent
consumer price index amount to
that's the only difference
between this and senator to DO
Lopez my understanding.
That's correct with the
amendment thank you once the
amendments put.
Questions on the amendment move
the amendment in a moment.
Transaction purposes okay a
motion to drop them in.
The motion by Senator Padilla
second by Senator Rodriguez any
objections the amendment.
We're back on the bill thank you
Senator Steinborn on the bill.
Thank you madam chair I I wonder
if Mr well.
The two percent I do think info
just.
Wonder why we would have to
built to do the same thing.
Well not exactly.
Yes.
Well except for the two percent.
But for if thank you for
Other questions on the bill that
we call the roll.
Senator no.
Senator Burt no Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes nine yes
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales is X..
Senator Hemphill.
Senator yes Senator Padilla.
Yes Senator Padilla yes senator
here.
Senator share no Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Senator with no Senator
Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes I need to ask
a question we have a motion.
We're gonna go back for one
second so I need to pass motion.
On Senate bill one twenty five
as amended.
Senator and.
You're going to vote this to
both.
a motion.
Any objections to that motion
for the vote.
The nuns thank you so.
The.
We're going to move into the
subcommittee hearing just think
about it.
About a ten minute break we'll
be back right at four o'clock.
We're gonna tomorrow we're gonna
move some built quite a few big
built around and so we have some
hold harmless bills the one that
you're hearing about the cost
Carlsbad issue level this bill
about the Gallup.
and small communities.
And so and we have one other
bill.
Senate bill one fifty five which
is the first one that we're
gonna I move so adult time for
tomorrow.
okay we're gonna we're gonna
come back at.
Four forty five.
Three five forty five.
The time is it.
Ten minutes before the.
Four forty five give staff and.
We now are there to get some
printing and stuff done.
Four forty five.
After missing the ready when
we've done so so we're joined
from committee so give us five
minutes and then just everybody
thank you so we can figure out
exactly what they're telling me
no and they're telling me just.
My wife.
Yeah so.
For.
We're going how's everything
going.
We'll be back at four fifteen.
