This compilation of of
legislation that has been worked
on by this committee and is in
your budget serving in this bill
is part of that budget or that
we've isolated and begin to
expand upon the various phones
created the very uses of those
funds since we presented to you
together as a as a joint
committee we've also heard a
number of house bill's which
when they've been successful in
our committee we rolled into
this including prime for chop
shop fleeing a law enforcement
officer in other terms so this
is a response to the crime
problems in Albuquerque it's a
start admittedly it's limited by
what we can do in thirty days
and our limitations is the
legislature who could only bring
matters that are subject to a an
administrative executive a
message for.
Appropriation bill so share with
us will stand for questions.
Your Senator.
Those people in the audience are
then support.
Would
you have anybody on zoom.
Work there making copies of the
bill.
You may want to go a little bit
more detail about the subs to
what we're would you like to
read the title you I think you
just for us to read the title on
the floor Mr anybody want
substance and finance will about
fluff which okay so we can go
through the various crimes that
have been added and hands in the
last two of bills heard before
the Senate Judiciary Committee
principally one is fleeing and
evading officers we've created
felony offenses for somebody who
cause bodily injury as a result
of fleeing and evading an
officer we've got a chop shop
prime at the request largely the
City of Albuquerque we've added
additional funding for GPS
monitoring twenty four hours
twenty four seven as you all
heard in the committee the other
day until the last few months we
were monitoring those other than
on weekends and after hours and
so we've added a new judge to
the second judicial district
Albuquerque were of course many
the problems of backlog cases is
occurring we have since we spoke
with you last also added
programs with regard to the
brandishing and use of a firearm
in the commission of a felony or
a felon in possession of a
firearm we enhance those
penalties on the graduated
penalty system so they've gone
from what might have been a
third degree felony or for three
phone it to a third degree
felony towards greater
opportunity for the judiciary
the sentence individuals to
longer sentences for crimes
involving the use of a firearm
in a drug transaction or an
aggravated assault or burglary
so much Mr Chairman those are
again drugs of some of the
executive messages some of the
appropriations that came out of
this committee and the good
suggestions that we receive from
you in our joint hearing so I
trust that Senate Mr chairman
it's a long bill on prepared to
discuss any parts of it your
staff my staff has been working
as you know for several weeks
now trying to consolidate both
the efforts in this committee
and the Judiciary the session
thank.
Hello Representative Lundstrom.
Ellen you want to speak to the
FAA are on the bill.
Mr chair and members of the
committee Ellen even LFC fiscal
analyst we don't have an updated
FIR for the bill at this time we
have a job to the point four
variation.
Although I think there are some
significant differences as well
so generally.
With some very preliminary
calculations it does look like
this have a significantly lower
fiscal impact than I had noted
in that draft.
And I think would be looking
when it comes adding new crimes
and changing penalties
specifically changing penalties
for crimes that already have
long sentences you don't see
those fiscal impacts within the
next couple of years you're
looking much further out because
if you think about it somebody
who is spending ten years in
prison instead of eight you
don't really see that additional
cost until you're not.
So when we we pull all the way
out to look around.
FY thirty five is when we would
potentially see costs start to
Madam see the entire full cost
and that looks like about
between eight million and twelve
million dollars very very
roughly.
And in terms of the new crew.
New crime components there
actually.
I'm not both the largest part of
this so I just part well it
depends the largest part of this
is the assumption that we make
in FIR is that grant programs
will be continuing so that we
have nonrecurring appropriations
for grant programs it still
creates an expectation of the
program will continue.
And so that adds significant
impact to this if we're looking
at just the new prime components
specifically we're looking at a
cost of between.
Two point seven and again very
roughly about six point nine
million dollars and again that's
not fully realized until FY
thirty five in the next few
years because most of these
provisions are covered by house
bill two police in terms of the
GNU grant programs and other
things like that we're looking
at a cost of closer to you know
not nothing in FY twenty two
about five hundred thousand
dollars to five fifty thousand
dollars in twenty three two
point forty two point six and
twenty four and two point six to
three in twenty five I'm happy
to answer any additional
questions you have then again
would like to emphasize that
this these are rough estimates
as I did not have very much time
between us receiving the point
six version of the bill and this
hearing to run them so I
apologize if there any
inaccuracy that I will
absolutely correct and as
quickly as possible if there
are.
Thank you they're they're
handing out a copy of the
service to build Senator
Bondeson LFC we did and a new
rack up on your bill and in.
Members you can look those
differences Senator mantas if
you want to highlight any
differences are you think that's
picked up in Senate Judiciary
verses the Senate version Senate
finance and judiciary version we
heard on the floor if you want
to highlight those and then go
to questions from great so
Mister chairman some of these I
think I went through very
quickly a bit ago but I can go
back in the lower details of we
look at your analysis on the the
three summer you'll see the
reference to HB sixty nine a
that's the chop shop the
referred to earlier this creates
the crime of operating a chop
shop makes a third degree felony
shop shopping somebody who takes
in stolen cars and reconfigures
among this is the nicest way I
can say of the
that you'll see reference to
Senate bill thirty four we've
already heard Senate bill thirty
four year old will be remembered
fondly that had for five
amendment on the floor this was
the Senator requests the threat
using a threat to the
threatening of of school or
other facility with the gun so
we roll that into this bill
again to being part of the
omnibus you'll see references
that is Senate bill thirty four
in terms of placing Judiciary
there the below that you'll see
the references to Senate bill
two thirty one the committee
substitute this is please the
special training I'm assuming Mr
chairman you all heard the
discussion about all this when
you put together your budget
because all these of those
budget appropriations that were
an important you Mr chairman and
you're turning a law enforcement
recruitment retention and
increased death benefits and
please training and recruitment
and training funds that are
established
and you'll see references to
those in the bottom of your
first page the expansion the
crime reduction requests and the
law enforcement recruitment and
training and in each of these
cases I appreciate when it's
affable you all have made
references in this two other
bills that are part of the
omnibus.
We talked of before previously
we had a joint meeting about the
law enforcement training and
certification your seed again
that's rolled into the bills as
well as the funding for that and
the creation of the stands and
trains Council the certification
board again Mr chairman I'm I'm
not gonna read through what you
all have in front of you but
again you've heard all these
because they're in your budget
of and so these are not changes
and I'm trying to highlight the
changes that inmates since we
then after the budget for these
funds.
Law enforcement databases
intended to keep track of law
enforcement officers and
particularly those who have
problems with the excessive use
of force in trying to ensure
that those officers to the
receive the training or or
discouraged from continuing in
their in their profession.
Mr chairman the bottom of the
second page something important
to you I point that out the
increase in survivors benefits
in the tragic loss the law
enforcement officers the
benefits of their family being
increased.
H. three are referred already
previously to the creation of a
new judgeship in the second you
all had already funded new
judgeships for the fifth
district in Chavez immediately
counties in the thirteenth Santa
Valencia in civil but as I
pointed out we have added as a
new judge for Bernalillo county
again to trying to address the
backlog of some of the detention
hearing proceedings and to
assure that that that gets a
little more uniform and perhaps
efficient and it's in this
process we've a into you'll see
the reference below that AOC pre
trial services we talked about
the use of GPS monitoring and
I've referred to that earlier
that we would like to be able to
offer this GPS monitoring
statewide and do so on a twenty
four seven basis Albuquerque's
adopted this we're we want to
take it statewide.
And the then below that you'll
see a reference to the crime
reduction requests we talked
about that the crisis
intervention teams I think we've
covered that and that the O. H.
violence intervention program
all these are grant funded
program some other new programs
with new phones all intended to
try and address crime in the
front and rather than waiting to
the crime's been committed and
lock people up the goal here is
to try and offer alternatives to
sentencing and alternatives
through drug treatment mental
health and other programs that
we believe we're going to have
better benefits and more
consistent with the conclusions
of your LFC a study and analysis
of the true accountability got
what's what's referred to in
that report is an accountability
gap.
You asked about the fiscal
impact and I don't believe that
anything that has to change in
the bill by the new bills that
we have heard the last few days
from Senate Judiciary are going
to have a fiscal impact although
I guess the minimus reference
would be the fact that we are
adding years to sentencing of
the there's a fiscal impact
associated with that although I
have to tell you that although
the the publicity in the
politics would suggest that we
want to enhance penalties for
second for for example for
second degree murder or for
fleeing an officer any the other
crime enhancements we're putting
in here when I've asked how many
of those offenses we have
records of what the data shows
for how many of these occur
nobody can give us an answer to
that the other thing I'll tell
you is that in the last three
years we've already twice
increase the penalties for some
of these crimes and others we
just did it two years ago and we
did it two years before that.
And when I ask questions about
what the response has been to
the increase of those enhanced
penalties and over so we've seen
a corresponding decrease in
crime in any will measureable
important nobody can say yes or
no so the the initiative of the
executive orders come back a
third time in three years
increase some of these penalties
we've tried to find a good
compromise and we increase some
of those penalties in some
places but we've been pretty
resistant to most of those
because there's no data to
support them as a troop of
deterrent to crime other than
the fact that the people who
were charged and convicted in
prison but we think the number
of those cases the minutes
that's not a problem in
Albuquerque or statewide from.
so I think that that.
Goes through.
Most of the programs and the
renewable slip rolled into this.
And just jump ahead you'll see
at the very bottom their
references to the Albuquerque
police command center public
communications.
And.
Mr chairman I think that I've
gone through it quickly there's
a lot in here have an answer any
questions or talk more about it.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you
It's been.
Sir Senator thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Some awful lot here that we're
just gonna look at like right
now this is an awful lot of
stuff and I appreciate the
summary over here but
here we go again you know
rushing to get something done in
fifteen seconds not to be
disrespectful to you Mr chairman
us about this
I mean there's an awful lot
you're trying to do here
I'm very concerned.
What is this going to get us I
said this to you the other day
on the floor you might recall
R. do we have some measures
already built around what we
should be looking at as a result
of this huge package do we have
a plan on implementation
timelines do we know what this
is going to do.
So Senator when you ask the
question the other day I
appreciated in our community
friends us and as you and I
discussed as a business person
you're going to look at a short
term and long term perspective
to current and so your question
was are we going to be able to
show measureable results in the
honest answer is probably not in
in the early days but no
different than your support for
early childhood education we
were and when we see those
measurable results to some of
these issues no some of them
will have a very clear and
immediate measurable results so
for example when we look at the
creation of a new judgeship in
the second district and trying
to move some of these cases that
are delayed for detention cases
when we add acco bracelet
monitoring twenty four hours
seven days a week a statewide
those are going to have
immediate effect and and that
purpose already been established
Bernalillo county so expanding
it statewide should not be
complicated the Chief Justice
got it done in three months so
that's the short term
perspective a long term
perspective is violence
prevention grants of law
enforcement training the law
enforcement retention
and those those are gonna take a
great deal of time you've seen
the governor you say in the the
more about what we're trying for
a very long time to try and fill
vacancies in law enforcement
they have been successful but we
have to be with you we have to
find a way to make that happen
and there's no there should be
no doubt in your mind adding law
enforcement officers to the to
the statewide forces should have
measureable difference now
material tell you what the
difference is going to be I
can't and I can I would agree
with that of all of these things
in here I'm not gonna be able to
show you a corresponding
decrease in crime for any one of
these things but I can tell you
is they represent the best
analysis of your own LFC staff
they represent the the best
study and analysis of what's
going on now what's going wrong
and we're trying to put money in
places to fix where we think the
dysfunction in the system is the
the converse to that is perhaps
the executives approach which is
to increase penalty.
These and years in prison for
various crimes and I'll just
tell you there seems to be
almost no support for that
approach to criminal justice.
Safety.
So Mr Chairman the one thing I
don't see here on the overall
document is what's the total
cost of this.
Senator normally when we look at
a at a bill Wheatley is no fire
with that it gives us a whole
lot out of you know pluses
minuses the whole thing and do
we know what that is center when
we did house bill two there is a
section in there and crime we
appropriated about two hundred
one million in the same package
this interview has various one
of the total cost of the
parking's that are included in
this bill.
And in planning for the strong
willing to sell I can get
someone to run off with those
two hundred one million the
gentleman throughout this is
that going to cover you.
Right.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
The in terms of the
operations are the provisions of
Senate bill two thirty one that
are directly tied to the budget
there's a pretty minimal
additional fiscal impact it's
looking around.
about three hundred to five
hundred thousand dollars in the
next couple of years probably
lower it's probably around just
the cost of the additional
judgeship that's not funded in
the current version of the GA
when you're discussing the
addition of the new crimes and
penalties that may have a larger
larger impact but again that's
going to be in out years and as
well with those nonrecurring
appropriations that we consider
as recurring once we run out of
funding for them that will
that'll have an impact as well
again pushed out into future
years I mean I don't think we're
going to see.
Much significant until the I
mean we're we're gonna see costs
and.
Maybe it thank you know a couple
million dollars
but that's a shame mostly
because of the potential the
crime reduction requests to
extend anyway I feel like I'm
giving an overly complicated
answer so I'll just.
Summarize it as for the
components that are directly
tied to house bill two there are
no only minimal fiscal impacts
expected in the next year for
the components so it is a prime
to the bit more complicated.
They're pretty I I'll go over
some of these it increases the
social worker maybe more health
questions workforce in down at
fifty million.
Evidence evidence based trauma
response behavioral health
welfare capacity twenty million.
And in MCD and reinvestment
evidence based programs two
point one compensation increase
for officers of four point two.
increase state police officers
eight million I'm a try to grab
some highlights here
statewide criminal justice data
sharing change about three
hundred.
Transaction and grant programs
two million.
Let's see address victim and
community needs increasing
sexual fall programming.
you agree employment
partnerships for training Mexico
Alliance programs just maybe
that would be the right one but
there's about two hundred one
million in total that that we
put together
For officer retention we put I
think another thirty million
recruitment and retention I
think there's thirty million
inside there somewhere.
And so
it's a wide variety of I think
the angle monetary is in there
for for statewide so they can
begin that twenty four hour
ankle monitoring is in there
maybe the judicial our budget
there's just a lot of money to
go over two hundred one million
in total fact.
Thanks in this county.
Thank you want to send the paper
down we'll take a look at it Mr
Chairman so we're cover then I
guess Mr incentive Amanda you
know I I appreciate and
understand your hesitation and I
regret it that Mr chairman I
don't hesitate helping you get
this done and the prime package
passed so make sure that what
which is awful lot of stuff here
and I want to make sure you can
we have given you the money to
get it done Luna Preciado the
and I think it's regrettable
that we find ourselves here with
forty eight hours.
This is not the way to do it but
remembering again in a thirty
day session we were left with
the messages that we receive
from the executive at
appropriations bills it was a
matter for all of that to take
in some of the language frankly
the governor did authorizing
executive messages and expand on
that someone so for example the
executive was of very determined
to be looking at pre trial
detention with presumptions of
incarceration for various crimes
as you know senator that fell
off of the truck very early in
the session in multiple
committees in multiple ways but
we but we didn't want to just
acknowledge that there was a
problem and then say that we
rejected the governor solution
we want to have a solution of
our own and so we're we're
trying to do a lot in thirty
days and I would like to have a
lot more time to do so Mr
chairman and and I think you've
done a fantastic job by the way
I think this is very good based
on you know what I can read in
five minutes so
in the chair and the ranking
member on the way if you ask me
to be incredibly quick and we
were supposed to talk at all but
I'm sorry I just have some
questions Mr chairman with
respect to you I just want to
know if it's alright with you we
go to the law enforcement
protection fund distributions
and for survivors benefits
section.
So the state police officers
said that so ciation to come to
the chair and I think others I I
you know I spoke to him as well
I think this is great that
you're taking the budget from
two fifty to one million I think
that's a that's that's about
expanding that's a great move
there
the one question that the
officer the police on state
police officers ation have worse
what about the children that
might not be the the the current
marriage for the current
So there may be other biological
children to the police state
police officer I had an
amendment ready to go on this I
had we had the state police
officers association come and
meet with a lot of people I
apologize I'm hoping that with
you wasn't my initiative so I
don't I don't other than that
with but I know that they
definitely met with the chair
and others is that is that
somewhere in the bill as well I
can't find a very quickly you
want to draw attention to all
the work chairman center it's
not but it wouldn't be matters
that you're discussing or
matters of probate law in other
words the rate of a little child
of a former marriage or the
biological or adopted child the
right to and heard benefits of
any type of a death benefit are
all set forth in a probate law
so it depends on a number of
things that individually will
how many children are allowed
at cetera so the all of that
would not be in this bill we
would leave that to the the
typical inheritance if you will
or yes the C. of of within
individual you are anybody all.
Okay have you considered if you
have a life insurance policy and
if you don't have a will the
disbursement of those proceeds
takes place outside of the
anything that you may
understandable even if it's
placed in an automated process
under state law of that money
gets distributed the same would
apply here to a death benefit to
a spouse or two children so out
of respect to the state police
officers I I really would like
someone to communicate that them
when they came forward and try
to get that done we did work
with a house member that does a
lot of work in probate law and
he did help us get the look to
the and an amendment put
together I think it was on
Senate bill three
but the and but if you're saying
that doesn't belong here I not
much willing so I will work with
you if anybody wants to work on
that we'll do that in the
future.
Mr chairman I'm sorry that's a
the the staff has alerted me to
this the applicability which
you'll find on page five
meaning on the lines one through
fourteen and you'll see the the
sufficiency which again mirrors
yes to see lows in New Mexico
with so the benefits are paid
first to the surviving spouse of
those bounced into the infrared
assures the children however
many children divide that number
of and then of those originally
goes back up the chain to the
parents of the law enforcement
officers so that that that the
chain is specified here and I'll
just tell you that's consistent
with somebody who dies what we
say intestate and those without
a will.
So service chairman of.
In this case then you'd have to
go to probate court and if you
were a child that was outside of
the current marriage or.
Mmhm Mr Chairman so no the of
the if you look at the benefits
here it says to surviving
children so it doesn't matter
whether their children under
current marriage or not okay
so if you're in the second or
third merger would involve all
children from whatever is that
maybe that they're all going to
take an appointment will see
their pro rata shares so if I've
been through three marriages and
had two children with each one
of all six kids are going to
assure equally regardless of
whether you're married in a
relationship with two kids in
your current marriage the the
other children are going to
share the same in the same
amount of and thank you and then
just as a as an overall than
just completely different
subject kind of back to
originally started with is there
any money anywhere in the fourth
and the desire of the of the
appropriation of somewhere in
this she I was just given all
this a little while ago
That will develop some metrics
around what's happening in
regions of the state cities
counties is there something
that's going to tell us are we
really making a dent on this and
I will see the newspaper
obviously or maybe we won't see
in the paper but is there going
to be something that's going to
give us some direction on where
we're going with this what we
need to do more of or less of
our what we need to stop doing
and doing more of something else
or.
It's a good question again
center so you've you've probably
heard some of the remarks I made
because the focus is often times
in Albuquerque and then the
response to what's going on in
Albuquerque has passed a law in
the law I like to use this the
statistics to demonstrate or
illustrate that sometimes we
don't need a new law so for
example you've heard me point
out the fact that Albuquerque
had a hundred seventeen murders
last year they've cleared about
thirty five of them another
thirty five of them they made
arrests of individuals Los
crucis granted were fit the
population but pro Ratta the
murder right now workers twice
Los crucis we had nine murders
all of them have been cleared do
you need a law to tell
Albuquerque to clear their cases
the chairman sometimes a little
more bluntly than I will say
what also caught him Mrs people
need to do their job so the
question is do you do need a
state law to explain why you're
getting murders cleared in Los
crucis and not getting cleared
in Albuquerque probably not the
you're you're right to ask the
question are we going to be
studying the data and I'll just
tell you done already your LFC
report and analysis point out
where the problems are we we can
easily identify where the
problems are because we have the
data we just have to learn to
apply the data and use it to do
what you're talking about which
is use what works and I think
this bill does a lot of.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
your work on this I'm not gonna
ask you these on the floor I
want to get it out before we
went down there so we got only
some that's what I hear some
people in the office I want to
go drinking or something after
if.
Your you're welcome if you
hadn't kept this for hours you
know we you'd be drinking right
now Sir.
His water is what we're talking
about yes it's always talk about
that's not what he was talking.
Senator Padilla let me remind
you one thing bringing the death
benefit ten million dollars I
think brings it to the highest
in the nation for the death
benefit for the officers and and
I think that's very important
that they serve and protect and
they really do.
We should be proud that there's
times when you have a question
for into discussions.
Your reference
we have a cleanup amendment I
think they're working on too so
thanks grandma where percent of
time with their men thank you Mr
chairman.
So we are college we heard this
bill on the on the floor it's
changed since then today
This is being solved as a crime
bill this is a bill that
combines.
Some of the Legislative best
efforts to move the needle on
reducing crime.
I think there's an element of
that.
Based on those with the room the
room the other day felt was
lacking in the bill and that is
funding to get to really the
probably the largest root cause
of crime in the state now
substance abuse.
And sometimes substance abuse
with the dual diagnosis often.
And I think make no mistake this
bill.
includes House Bill.
That puts a little bit of money
towards that in a phone call
the.
And I think you.
Aminu Masari very good Mr sorry
about that I move some of the
amendment.
Two two two seven six one point
three that's in front of you.
For discuss.
Your second second part is I.
Okay so we this this bill
includes a little bit of money
for treatment but it's it's
peanuts it's it's like a hundred
thousand dollars in the
Crime reduction grants which is
in the sentencing commission
this is from I think house bill
seventy four eighty four.
What we really need colleagues
is we need increase sustained
recurring funding for substance
abuse that levels to the size of
the challenge we have in the
state according to an LFC report
I've done a lot of research on
this last few days LFC send
reports LFC recently did a
report that said there's
approximately a hundred thirty
four thousand New Mexicans
there's a gap of a hundred
thirty four thousand New
Mexicans without access to
treatment right now that that's
their work gap.
So.
You know whether it's alcoholism
which is some of the highest
rates in the country and.
You know the the chairs district
or opioids in some parts of the
district or math it's it's is
really something that all of New
Mexico needs there's a whole
range of services all state Mr
chair we have one zoom the head
doctor nailed on the head of the
behavioral services division for
the state of New Mexico who can
talk about how these funds can
be used but anyway we had that
what the amendment does Mr chair
is it is it designates ten
percent of the excise tax for
cannabis.
To.
I'm creating a new substance
abuse treatment fund and this is
something develop several years
ago I pre filed this bill this
is not a new idea of this talk
to the Sanchez I would hope they
would have incorporated in their
package
their choice not to in our
choice to us to do something
bold to make this to really move
the needle on crime in the
state.
But it would create the
substance abuse treatment fund
and the beautiful thing about
being the Human Services
department is that they can then
leverage Medicaid match is.
And so this money that will
generate will actually turn into
millions of dollars statewide
recurring money so even when our
Revenue step which they will
def.
we're going to have recurring
funding to be able to grow
capacity and up and I want to
say we have a really important
parallel with alcohol we charge
in the state of New Mexico
liquor excise tax.
Actually forty one forty two
percent of that tax goes towards
DWI treatment fund it goes
around the state so several
states have have designated use
of the cannabis taxes to go
towards treatment organs one
that comes to mind in fact they
went back to the voters this
last year and even increase it
because it's working well and
they realize it's a good idea
so.
We're the finance committee.
Totally in our in our round two
to make this commitment and
I think we can then feel really
good that we're going to move
the needle on crime in the state
by getting at the root causes so
that Mr chair happy to stand for
questions.
Want to respond Mr chairman I
really appreciate Senator
Steinborn begin the conversation
by talking a root cause of the
number you brought this up in
our joint meeting rightfully so
that is the place where we
should begin with with a lot of
these issues and I commend you
on that the reason of course
this probably is not included as
part of the effort in this city
they session is you're creating
a new fund as those of us that
serve on the committees
committee would have appreciated
that this would have required a
message from the executive to do
that is it it would have
required that executive message
or some other form of basis on
which it would be deemed your
mate and I suspect that it was
not introduced by you for that
reason I imagine you probably
would have done that or we did
do so you can get by the
committee's committee so.
Mr Chairman it's a rightful
approach I would normally
support I would caution you
about doing things like setting
aside a fixed ten percent of net
proceeds from the cannabis
excise tax I think my general
impression this committee and I
agree with you is it's it's if
you should be very cautious when
you set aside a fixed amount
from any fund because it limits
your appropriating authority but
I think the the fundamental
issue here is that you're
creating a new fund and I've
been told that the the
administration of fund this
would be your amendment would be
treated as an appropriation is
what your staff I believe is
advised me and we would be able
to do at this stage of the of
the session.
So I have to consider the no
welcome amendment.
Mr chair
we we do appropriating here so
that's what we do.
And I think this bill this bill
is doing all kinds of new things
I'm not even aware of that we're
probably done earlier today that
might even be spending money.
And so we got to start somewhere
when you look at the amount of
money we spend as a state on
treatment which is frankly over
a hundred million a year and the
unmet need and the growth in
this even when I'm proposing and
I is a drop in the bucket for
the needs of the state so you
know the fact is is I proposes
three four years ago and the
bill cannabis building paths I
wanted to do this amendment
special session we did and they
said don't do it let's do it
next year we'll have my programs
and so there are people who.
Simply don't prioritize this
idea we have the opportunity to
do so so I would just urge you
to kind of reject those
arguments where the finance
committee and I'll just leave it
at that Mr respect everyone's
any other questions on the
amendment.
It's a pleasure to committee on
the amendment.
a motion for the.
Past second second from Senator
Campos.
we call the roll.
Campos yes.
Yeah.
Both yes.
Yes.
Yeah yes.
Senator.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
I don't think we're gonna win
this one yes.
Sen Burke at the vote on the
amendment I don't know if you
have it we need to.
For me Mr president mentioned Mr
chairman I don't have a copy the
amendment so it's it's hard for
me I'm gonna have to vote no.
Eight nine nine.
And one amendments on we do
Senator need to have another
amendment for language could do
is to thank you for the vote
over again I'd support the
committees decision the the
second amendment is a claim it's
amendment info you should have
this is eight eleven point one
an amendment on page seventy
one.
You see reference to that.
my understanding is that this
amendment is required because of
language in the budget the right
to correspond with the reference
to this bill in the budget
itself that there's a
correlation between the two from
I believe that's the only reason
for this needed amendment.
Pro center
Yes is this the amendment yeah
eleven point one.
and passing out amendment and
motion with the right solution.
Yes Mr chairman
The.
House Bill to hasn't
appropriation of two hundred
thousand dollars contingent upon
the legislation expanding the
allowable uses of the law
enforcement action fund.
And Ellen great Mr chair members
of the committee I believe
actually we are looking if we're
looking at the amendment to just
on page seventy one line seven
straight thirty two through that
simply to remove the
effective date for sections
thirty two and thirty three.
Thirty two and thirty three
amend the purposes the allowable
uses of the crime reduction
grant grants under the
protection grant act house bill
two has two million dollars for
FY twenty three contingent on
those funds
having their I I'm sorry
contingent on legislation that
expands the allowable uses of
those requests so there is an
appropriation for FY twenty
three it's contingent on the
expansion the expansion as it
was written didn't take effect
until FY twenty four I'm not
certain if that one of the many
maybe the contingency fail or
not but it was not the intent
when drafting the bill to to it
with the intent to have that two
hundred two million dollars be
able to be used for these
expanded purposes.
Thank can I have a motion for
I'm sorry I missed this have a
motion for to some of the
amendment for discussion for a
motion by CENTCOM Sinden's
almost second by Senator
Rodriguez we've already
explained the motion any
questions on the I'm sorry any
questions on the amendment.
I see none of the motion for do
passed by Senator Padilla
I'll second the motion.
Any objection to the motion
senator Byrd.
Help you heard Ellen
in understand any questions on
the amendment Senator Burt.
No I I appreciate Allen's
explanation
at this point I will vote yes.
Appropriation.
So Senator Burt minus any
objection to the motion show
everybody voting.
From when we because there's
some concern about the amendment
put on by Senator Steinborn that
makes the.
Build subject to veto but I
would let him express our
concern is that so what you're
trying to indicate members
coming from Philip.
I can speak.
But I can speak to her just
briefly some my understanding
that Senator Steinborn this
Amendment would making
appropriation
which my understanding is that
that would make the entire
bill subject to a line item
veto.
And so the the mayor may not be
desirable constant consequence
are intended consequence but
That is that is the concern that
I would point out to the to the
committee.
Senator Ortiz thank you Mr
chairman and thank you Senator
amount is an Allen of course
John for your work but with
respect to the appropriation The
appropriation as the as it is on
here basically is ninety media
appropriation that would affect
the general fund or any revenues
currently for even recently but
it merely would affect
predictive forecast revenues
that would be coming in by
virtue of the excise tax on
cannabis whenever that comes in
and so it's not appropriation
that would have that impact now
so I'm not sure how truly how
that would have the how that
would be seen as a current
appropriation usually
appropriations that we see
impact our for the current
expenditures of the REC that the
general fund but I'll leave it
at that Mr chairman thank you Mr
chairman thank you out of I
think John's exclamation is want
to make this appropriations bill
then you make it expand all to
line item veto by the governor
in the strike in any area in any
section Senator Steinborn I know
your question you will on the
rest that Mr chairman hi and
because I think I think it's
actually the most of one of the
most important parts of the bill
frankly so having said that.
Apparently this up which with
the amendment which was designed
to track with your news up
there's a drafting problems so
we can actually have to pull the
amendment.
And then wait on the new members
come down.
So I love that but it happens is
that are the session so that's
the story Mr us bottom line is
the amendment doesn't track so
we need to get a new amendment
and.
We absolutely have to pull the
amendment off the bill we get
anyone.
Which we're tracking Legislative
Council right now but the member
doesn't track so.
Senator Steinborn the motion to
remove them and I will miss
chair and in which you allow us
respectfully the time to fix
this real quick we do that.
Steinborn I I mean we got to get
back to the floor.
Can you do this and on the floor
amendment.
I can Mr chair but
We can also fix it on the floor
but that would really be the
appropriate thing to do yeah I I
think it's this bill tonight
thank you.
The time we get the equipment
and.
And I will make is command lead
level.
Well thank you for everything
you do Mr it's your call would
be a way to fix it real quick
consent maybe minor
just to the spirit of what the
committee did and I but.
The be my preference.
scrambling let's remove the
amendment.
It's improvement so
Remove the amendment make a
motion remove the amendment by
Senator Steinborn have a second
second second by Senator share
any objection the removing the
amendment I object.
Campos objects removing the
amendment.
Mr Chairman make sure I
understand a little bit vague on
this so Senator you indicated
that your amendment that is
there is of the drafting problem
okay and what is it that doesn't
tracked me Madam Mr chair
Senator currently one the lines
don't don't doesn't add up
doesn't track exactly maybe more
than that all the one all the
lines so is really I mean this
ammendment out here an hour ago
they were specifically asked to
track track it with the Senate
Judiciary Committee says to pass
today it happens here at the end
of the session
so they're they've got a new
amendment being proof right now
so what time frame Senators
family it's good question there
they said they're backed up with
the they told them up but I mean
I think that think it's
certainly rostrum if we ask him
to so I think probably within a
few minutes we could have a
correction but I don't speak for
them.
Center I think we need to get
back to the form vote.
Also point your amendment on the
floor all all make that
commitment to you.
The scene the vote in the Senate
finance so
thank you may have support on
the floor Senator Steinborn I
think we got to get back
leadership called me back I need
to go to conference committee I
think to still connect
so I guess what's the pleasure
of the committee.
Quickly.
This.
This is both they'll to crime
bill to.
Make a dent on crime right Mr
chair and I am trying to best
not to be cynical you prepare I
would think that if you Senator.
All right.
On this from this a.
Read chief that we got.
It says in the regional vero for
second degree felony.
For felony to possess a firearm
with the penalty up to nine
years but the Senate Judiciary
substitution it's a third degree
felony what the penalty up to
six years not so much to me
we're going the opposite
direction from getting tough.
So Mister chairman Senator you
have to know where we're at
today we're at today it's a
fourth degree felony or third
degree felony I think it's three
years whatever whatever the
categories and third ranked
third degree it's internet
felony now in the penalties
three years so we're taking it
to six years so we're going to
in the direction that you would
like to see I think by make it
tough on crime but we're not
taking it all the way to the
second degree felony which would
mean nine years and and this is
the area I tell you before we've
we've continuously increase
these penalties the this will be
the third time in three years so
we keep doing this because of
course it's sexy politics to say
we're going to get tough on
crime by increasing the the
penalties but I ask you to
consider a couple of things one
is I've always ask the question
how many judges find themselves
in a situation where they would
want to add more years to the
penalty and unable to do so
because of our law that would be
a question you want to know the
answer to we don't find any of
those we don't with the judges
are usually awarding or sorry
imposing some of the lower end
of the sentences or the the
minimums that is not the maximum
so it would make sense to be
increasing the penalties of the
judges were bumping up against
the ceiling but they're not and
so we to to back to the point I
made earlier as we've done this
repeatedly we do this we've done
this the twice before the last
two years and we're just not
seeing any a corresponding
decrease but but I did not want
to outright reject the
administration's request to take
the second degree felony so we
we effectively settlement is in
the middle between three years
three years and nine years.
Way that read here it it sounded
as if we were getting the other
direction so thanks for that X.
we're not doing any of this and
we're not going backwards and
the other thing I've got some
concern about is a database for
sharing information those that
database in.
Use right now.
Mister chairman Senator believe
we have anything like that in
place at all to make note of
anything like that I think this
is and you preacher so the goal
here of course is to try and be
able to track law enforcement
officers for purposes of
employment and so we're looking
at law enforcement academy
training and frankly we're
looking for officers who have
bad history with the department
the other trying to keep that
database for purposes of future
employment.
The.
How common is that do.
That that is the.
Sound real good to me for some
reason of.
Anybody can be accused of
something so this is something
that is proven.
This is a a charge that is
proven.
I guess these guys it's not the
acquisition optimization it is.
something that is proving that
is.
So someone.
Is it the out for someone and
they make the acquisition that
that that they did something
terrible and all of sudden it's
in a written record some were
and then it's in a database in
this follow someone for a long
long time so.
You know we're all about giving
everybody a fair chance in this
world so explain that make sure
that relieve my mind of that
scare.
Reasons Mr chairman and senator
was the database.
Most of almost all the items on
the database our factual of
factual facts
the hiring the to a the hiring
of an officer the termination of
an officer a criminal conviction
of an officer for on duty
conduct a civil judgment that's
been entered against an officer
for on duty conduct
and
written separation agreements
where
it.
For instance an office there may
be disciplinary proceedings
pending against an officer and
the officer may make.
Sort of a counterclaim
claiming retaliation or
something like that and in those
kinds of situations the officer
in the agency will sometimes
make an agreement to both
dropped the discipline so that
it's never educated and drop
whatever complaint the officer
wrote so it's never need to get
it those agreements are there
already they could not allowed
to be secret
so that is the one thing that I
think is closest to the type of
thing that
you expressed a concern about
and there there is a provision
in here the specifically states
that
The database shall distinguish
between those clearly factual
things where there's been a
determination made
either by a court for but will.
The court on the one hand and
distinguish those from these
other things where nothing's
been proven for your for your
concern so
The.
Requirements in here of the
agencies so consult the database
when they hire an officer they
don't require the if the the HSD
to disqualify officers who have
any the particular thing it in
the database that uses facial
consult the database and taken
into account and so
In the course of.
Putting this together we did
hear from
Law enforcement interests who
liked this database they wanted
because as this as things are
now
Agencies don't have a good way
to know whether an applicant has
just been fired or resigned amid
controversy in another
jurisdiction and then comes and
gets hired in another
jurisdiction that has no idea
and so.
Those address your concerns and
if there is any other that
that's.
Twenty two.
The committee that.
I don't know that the.
It seems to me that.
Should go in and check it does
for references.
And I would think law
enforcement is a pretty tech
community.
That people would talk when
chief to another tree.
And the.
This database like this.
I don't know that I have I just
have a problem with the deal in
that.
We could really ruin someone's
life.
With something like this.
Shorten thank you career way
from someone.
And I understand what you're
trying to get at but.
I just I just.
I think on that one twin I'm
gonna have to not vote for the
bill.
This will certainly take one
last stab at you if you look at
page ten of the bill this is
section seven which relates to
the database referring to so
first of all I think the the
point that that may help you
with the idea is the database is
created by the secretary of
public safety right so that's
the it's the department itself
it's creating the database
number one if you look at that
and subsection a the purpose of
the debate databases to keep
track of instances of excessive
use of force really the law
enforcement is already being
done as part in Albuquerque was
part of the department of
justice oversight and and then
if you look at subparagraph B.
it says the data ratio including
track and equipment and
indicates there too you'll see
terminations resignations and
the certifications Senator you
know I I don't think that you're
gonna ruin anybody's life by
tracking their do certifications
of their decertified other
terminator they resigned on
knowing that information from
one law enforcement agency would
seem to be useful here in our
state it goes on to say criminal
convictions that's going to be a
public record anyway but one
agency or having a database to
know whether officers had a
criminal conviction with matter
especially as you'll know there
it's for on duty conduct or for
civil judgments for improper use
of force so all of these
categories of things were track
and you're not somebody is a bad
actor who gets into debt who's
got financial problems or those
things with which would ruin
their life this is about
tracking law enforcement
officers who on the job the use
their office through an
excessive use of force and and
that's going to be valuable to
other law enforcement agencies
when they're hiring decided to
hire retain and officer that's
that's what I'm asking though
Senator is this proven stuff in.
Is it if someone accusing
something on someone.
Or is it proven fact
some kind of procedure some kind
of internal procedures I watch
too much TV.
But.
That you get you get what I'm
saying.
It is not not just saying well
there was a guy roughed up in
this that was around.
So he had to be the bad actor.
Because this guy over there said
so.
Will you tell me that's not the
way it is.
I'll take you word will
appreciate that would let me
make sure that my words backed
up by the language of the bill
Senator so again if you look at
subsection be the tracking as of
the termination or resignation
or decertification that's not
going to be the result of a
rumor and allegation or
accusation a termination or
resignation a decertification is
going to be the result of a
process of the officer would
receive due process before
they're terminated before their
decertified and of course if
they resign will that we can be
ready for whatever it may be you
can take that for what it is a
criminal conviction of course
that's going to require that
individual be charged in the
given the due process and right
to a trial so again it's not
going to be an allegation or
rumors or hearsay to be a
criminal conviction the same
thing and again it's for on duty
conduct same thing with the
civil judgment again that's
going to require a court
proceedings and the judge or
jury to decide the officer
somehow it was improper in their
use of force and so to your
point these are not going to be
matters that are just based on
allegations or or vendettas or
anything of that kind it's going
to require due process criminal
process or civil process.
Okay.
Okay.
You got me.
Yeah.
Sure.
Thank you madam chairman and
senator for that to follow up
Senator Woods wouldn't when I
was reading that same language I
thought you know what's the
truth or consequences hired a an
officer who have been for bit
used excessive force and and and
perhaps someone's passed away
and then we come to find out
after the fact that he had been
discharged fired from you know
countless agencies before that
it's only fair for them to see
that not on the front end so
that the the all of that can be
prevented Senator I'm not going
to go into all the reasons why
support this and I think you and
and our chairman for bringing
this forward it's really the
first we've seen of any kind of
crime bills come together I
think you have collectively put
the best of what we had out
there no absolutely happily
support this I did have a
question and then our chairman
stepped away incentives to this
time for just on the process
here if I if I understood our
chairman correctly by putting
additional amendments in here
that may create a fund I'm
concerned that you made a
comment right at the end of
perhaps with the any of this
language could be jeopardized
and if you could just explain
the process of why doing so may
allow the governor to come in
and and maybe start from the
language that we wanted her so
so badly so anytime you making
appropriation and distribution
and it becomes a general fund
appropriation that and so then
is subject to line item veto by
the by the executive so I wonder
if one option instead of instead
of doing on this bill is if we
visited with Senator Steinborn
because I I like the idea of
using drug money to treat drug
problems and drug addictions I
think that's great but is it an
option to perhaps maybe maybe
move some of that into tax or
tax bill or something else in
page this bill state is full and
likely to be signed by the
governor and and put to work in
New Mexico since possible.
having that discussion currently
presenters will go if he's
agreeable I think that perhaps
we should just kind of.
I'm I'm I'm excited as all of us
are helps understand board but
as soon as you said that after
we have voted on the amendment
makes me very nervous that this
bill then you know that is is in
jeopardy and and and this is
such a priority we've been
advertising agency throughout
Mexico that we're coming to us
together as a legislator to
address crime this is our only
hope with three days left in the
session and so I just wanted to
put that out there before we
just rush something through here
today really three days.
Give me a little optimism there.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you good for maybe Senator I
think what we're gonna do is
just take a yes thank you
Senator Padilla well we're
waiting for is it just a quick
one so Senator did you have you
had conversation I'm I'm kind of
a silly question I'm sure but
have you had conversations with
the governor's office and all
our staff and they feel pretty
good about what you're trying to
do here going to be we've had a
lot of discussions with the
governor's staff on the issue
your question is do they feel
good about it they're getting
some of the things they want and
they're not getting some of
things I want to be very candid
with you so for example
on the crime of second degree
murder the governor has asked
for elimination of the statue
limitations right now we have a
period of time after which you
cannot be charged and we've
eliminated that it's her and her
requested her suggestion so but
in that same bill she would take
some of the criminal penalties
up again for additional years
and as I pointed out before we
saw a great deal of this with
Senator with the governor
Martinez you recall the popular
thing to always try and push
increases in penalties in we
were generally resistive to a
lot of that because there's just
no indication that a criminal
who's about to commit a second
degree murder says well I'll do
it if it's fifteen years when I
was eighteen years now that's
going to be too much and that's
the end result of what the
suggestion is here it is and
there's just no there's nothing
to suggest that anybody makes a
decision in the commission of a
crime like a second rumored are
based on a three year difference
in the penalties between fifteen
and eighteen years of there
there's nothing to support that
other than the fact that as I
said earlier it's sexy.
So madam chair and senator site
yet again I I'm kind of with
Senator Diamond on this one I
you know I I definitely want to
do what Senator Steinborn is
proposing here but I don't I
don't want to subject the bill
to all sorts of line items and.
That's why I asked you know if
you what the indication they've
given you if it if at all and
that's not why we should make a
decision here but I just wanted
to know if you have any
it indicates one or the other.
I have a lot of confidence in
the governor in the and would be
very proud to sign this bill
would feel like it's a
collaboration because it has a
lot of input from the governor's
well I'm I'm watching I have a
different vantage point than you
do I'm watching the subcommittee
meeting of the hallway over here
which is trying very hard I
think to try to dress Center
sign boards good idea maybe in
the context of another bill you
have in this committee and also
I have to defer to this
committee I don't know the
answer to whether Senators time
words amendment makes the
somehow an appropriation bill
subject to a different level of
of the to authority I don't know
the answer that that that's the
expertise enjoyed by this
committee that I don't have so
Mr madam chair and senator so
then if left alone without that
amendment is there the ability
to the governor to grab again
just process I don't know the
stuff as well as you do is is
there the governor has the
ability to just go through the
seventy or somewhat pages we
were just to the I like that
line I'm gonna.
My understanding Senator again
different to this committee and
its experience in the
appropriation process but my
understanding is no that's the
governor would not have that
authority absence of an
appropriation bill I think it
might be important for the chair
to hear what we just talked
about that and in brief that
about that.
Heard pleaded okay so we're
working on something that we
think we can fix aware and makes
it on strike will in changes
that to distribution and then
and we can fix that I think
chairman committee with that
amendment.
we talked about another tax
package then it makes that
subject to strike down the tax
package and so
there on the back of the
amendment in the Dawn is working
on currently.
Not have the members to.
On page two.
and we look at the first send
send Shelby's Mr to the fund.
And the money is appropriated I
think we're going to strike the
language the money is
appropriated and it's distribute
to the fund.
And then to the Department will
strike that language and then
statewide substance and they're
working on that and that fixes
the problem whether the bill is.
We don't.
Line item prefer not John do you
agree we.
I've been told sorry as a
prosecutor can we not build
anything to world again I'm just
going to step out so.
Mr Chairman told
Different things on that and
I've not had the time since
receiving Senator Steinborn is
amendment to go and
find a conclusive answer to
that.
Three what we're looking at now
for discussion is just a change
one word the word appropriated
to distributed or distribution.
Which yeah I mean it's a I think
that meets the same intent to
distribute funding out of state
cannabis taxes we're going to
have so yes I think that's a
good idea.
If we can be done.
Thanks for the memories and now
because that makes it be good if
we are yes members can't get
back from this is a question for
having really let me check if
you give me a second to see what
we can do here.
Tell me because nobody else is
here for the committee to post
etcetera etcetera Hample fear to
troops would increase in center
Woods Mr chair.
Because the.
Whether.
I will stay here until.
They work something out there in
a few minutes so that Juan.
Wait a.
We just.
Please.
This.
This is.
Taxes.
This is.
Access
to.
Senator.
We appreciate.
The audience to the audience we
appreciate your patience and for
bearing with us but we're trying
to fix a very important
situation both ways to.
Look at this crime bill at the
same time provides some
substance abuse funding.
For purpose.
She.
My bill.
That's.
They really need to be in the
house bill but I can't.
I see that it is certainly one
yep and my bill is being heard
in their.
I can't be there to to presented
to do anything.
The.
I guess we're we're in an
unofficial recess right.
Yeah just give us a few moments
we shouldn't be much longer.
Texas.
There's.
This.
The.
Yeah.
Right so.
There.
Hey.
Just.
Hello John.
The
question is whether I.
The total.
The.
There.
Going forward.
More.
For we.
For the.
Mr.
There.
