This man is was sent to us we
should all have in our email
since last night for major in so
it's we've seen it thank you.
Thank you explain amendment of
course Mr sent Mr chairman
Senators so what this amendment
does is it strikes the probation
and it repurposes one of them
from a different Fund so instead
of it coming from the general
fund it's actually gonna come
from the.
Residents in the consumer
settlement fund from the Office
of the Attorney General itself.
Currently in house bill two as.
You also earlier today there's
already language for one million
dollars in there for them to
hires experts related to this
topic and there's also money
within junior bill so in total
the amount of funding that's
available for the purposes of
completing this bill is actually
two million and one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars so it's
more than what
was being appropriated that we
stroke just straight down the
other change here is we're
giving an extra year on the
sunset of the grant program so
from Judiciary it came over and
had a sense that a one year to
administer the grants we added
an extra year so this way the
Attorney General has enough time
to hire the staff to be able to
run the program and then
establish that network across
the state.
And the last thing is it also
added language that within the
Attorney General is pursuing any
of these cases they do need to
get consent from the Indian
nation tribe or pueblo in order
to respect their sovereignty.
Thank.
and comments on amendment the
friendly amendment Mr chair
members of the committee
questions on the amendment.
No question Senator share.
Then the next Mr.
Resolution thank you Mr.
Mr chair Senator.
so for this really does make it
two million dollars somewhere.
So one from general fund and one
from the whatever so Mister
chairman Senator share currently
house bill two there is a
million dollars appropriation to
the attorney general's office
for the purposes of this bill
it's not it doesn't have
contingency language but it's
meant for this and it's coming
not from the general fund it's
also coming from the consumer
settlement fund so we're pulling
all the money from that existing
frontier not the general fund.
And how much is in junior I
think that was is next and
engineer there's a hundred and
fifty thousand.
Okay right from our side and
then there's and I'm not here
but who knows but yes it so
we're we're also making it a two
year.
Program so we can get it up and
running so Mister chair what
happens at the end of two years.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator share we're
not sure yet because this is
done being newly created we're
hoping that most of the funds to
get expended especially with the
requests that the tribe can come
and work together with the
attorney general's office to the
V. eight some of these numbers
and bring them down so it's your
guess is probably is as good as
mine as far as what's going to
happen but we need to start
somewhere.
So this is like seed money for
the program.
And then the last question Mr
chair Senator so consent with
the a nation tribe or pueblo.
Since we put no listen isn't
there that that that they have
to have separate contract with
each.
Or is it if you want to help
consent Mr chair members of the
committee senator share the
sovereignty issue making it
mandatory would not be something
we want to imply with the tribes
nations or pueblos but that
there are certain agencies with
in each tribe nation our Pueblo
that are set up differently so
it allows some flexibility
depending on how they want to
approach this particular issue
on their part with the state.
Okay Mr chair then.
This is the is the tribe nation
or pueblo then get to tell the
Attorney General to.
Mr chair members of the
committee and senator share I
don't think it's about telling
either side what to do but that
they collaborate together on
moving forward to tackle the
issue.
All right thank you senator
thank you Mr.
The chairman.
Thank you have a question I was
just going to come in and just
say that it's just bring things
in line with what's already
there and house bill two and the
streams like streamlines the
process I don't have to
questions that nobody else does
some of the to pass on the
amendment for the bill.
We have a motion by Senator
Rodriguez.
For.
Any objection to amendment.
We're.
No.
We're back on the bill question.
I have some kind of job.
I know.
Hello people go missing all the
time the certain areas of the
number one reason that are
missing.
Your call to.
Tribal and the first letter.
And they want to turn general
investigate how do you have the
authority and tribal trust.
Mr chairman members members of
the committee in terms of tribal
a lot of what we're doing here
is actually already established
under Supreme Court precedent
and so even on lands that is
owned by of the sovereign tribes
within the state of New Mexico
for crimes between and I'm gonna
use the nomenclature of the of
the opinions of the federal case
law of a non Indian against a
non Indian the state of New
Mexico Ortiz has jurisdiction to
prosecute those cases that
status quo is maintained under
this bill because the the under
federal law has the supremacy
clause and that is the the law
of the land for crimes that are
committed by a non Indian
against an Indian and where the
state of New Mexico has
jurisdiction of the state of New
Mexico does have jurisdiction a
regarding the the specific part
of part of that question Mr
chairman regarding you know how
does consent played in in into
this equation which is how I
understood your question a
socially the state of New Mexico
as a sovereign will always have
the power under under this
president to investigate cases
were has jurisdiction however in
terms of Attorney General
involvement there needs to be
concerns an interplay and
cooperation between these
different entities that are at
an intersection it's like a
traffic jam or something where
you have an intersection with
cars moving through that
intersection what this bill does
is it streamline the process of
making that determination of
jurisdiction so that you avoid
what's known and and the
literature of the task force
report and more generally in
this issue of the ring of
referrals were basically a
relative of a crime victim goes
to one government agency whether
it's tribal federal or state
seeking information regarding a
lost or deceased family member
and the refer to a different
agency that could potentially
have some sort of review over
that process and then they get
referred to another agency that
potentially has review over the
process and so that the hope it
can intent of this bill.
and as an active in the state of
Montana is to ensure that at
least where the state has
jurisdiction there is one agency
that they can get answers to
where there cannot be an
additional referrals and answer
must be provided for those
families I am for the relatives
regarding status of those cases.
The.
This could find no.
Try to get a hold of somebody.
The general medication Gallup
chairman I'd.
It seems that there is a door
for the number.
Out of but only the budget how
to prosecute four.
Twenty general have an attorney
that has contract practice in
tribal court as a prosecutor.
Mr okay.
The gentleman was of the
committee of Senator Muth.
In that sense that's why we
don't really can can really put
down put our finger on what who
is actually has to be hired in
these positions because there
are gaps in there on both sides
on our end and on the tribes in
so hopefully that this there's
flexibility in here to say okay
well where do we need an exact
person do we need somebody that
needs to practice tribal law
from the tribe's side or do we
need somebody from our side that
has that capability and capacity
Mr chairman and reference that
particular question that goes to
the heart of of the problem
really because you have all this
process over the past hundred
years where depending on your
status as a as a person whether
you are Indian or non Indian and
then depending on the status of
the location where some material
element of the crime was
committed it could fall in one
of three different
jurisdictional the areas for
potential review investigation
and prosecution and so what this
bill does is there's will
actually be effective
coordination at the state level
of reaching a determination
answers for survivors of this
crime as to what then you has
the jurisdiction to push these
cases four verses what a lot of
families are experiencing now
from the point of the of the
task force of not getting
answers not getting a sufficient
answers regarding what's going
on.
You Mr chair members of the
committee to answer your
question about tribal court
practice I I mean I think that
that that's a really see the an
issue and something to be
considered not only by the
attorney general's office but
also throughout New Mexico
because of all the tribal land
that is involved here from the
pueblos to the Apache tribes and
Navajo Nation and in my years of
experience practicing not only
in state court but also in
tribal court if there was a
situation where the tribe would
require the attorney general's
office to become licensed with
that particular jurisdiction
that can happen usually
typically you pay a fee and you
you know take that the the thing
and you're authorized to
practice there are the only two
exceptions that were I would see
that it may take a while to be
able to come practice in in to
be to practice in certain
jurisdictions as Navajo Nation
and hickory Apache nation
because they have a tribal bar
exam that'll only offered twice
per year but even then you know
if you're licensed in other
jurisdictions they may be able
to allow you to come in and
practice specially for certain
purposes and like I said if if
that were a requirement there
are certain certainly things
that the Attorney General or
other members of their staff can
can work out to try to fulfill
those requirements or even to
you know when we're talking
about consent of the tribes I
think the as Mr provides go said
the purpose and intent of that
particular clause right now at
least the way that I interpreted
it was that we needed to leave
the option open for New Mexico
tribes to be able to have that
sort of Cecil and confirmation
that this is something that they
would want the Attorney General
to come in and do it's not you
know sort of a blanket grant
that if the Attorney General
makes the decision to go in and
investigate he's here she is
going to do that but more of
we're gonna work with you and
collaboration and we just want
you to know that this is a open
and.
Available to you thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
and what the family members all
right.
On that missing for and there is
about five whatever you wanna
call it right now to match with
the
term.
If they want to investigations.
And so then we started to turn
down by today we provide
evidence that I just don't know
how that's going to work but I'm
aware but the structure.
Just need to be cleared.
General fund evidence and said
okay this is the the person who
did it.
For all the family.
Except the tribal.
And
we're not non native for the
evidence was found on the
reservation but the crime was
committed on the reservation and
so that's where.
Questions that we have a new
forecast you know I think this
this is a big issue not for.
For a lot of maintenance that
disappear.
And so I have something happens
in Albuquerque there's a lot of
these Albuquerque is here and so
who has a prosecuted for a year
or if you find evidence on
tribal lands to submit that and
it's
that's going to be a big
question because
I travel often quarter possibly
because the loft because the
incident happened
that's a lot of my questions are
just as we go through this
understand setting it up for but
then to resolve some of the
cases there has to be
prosecuted Authority or
something I do not miss more
nonstop property.
Mr chair members of the
committee and that's why Senate
bill thirteen also complements
this is to bring all those
entities together so that they
can collaborate on it on with
the New Mexico data that
along with this bill.
In center but data will not try
the prosecutor.
According this question my
question mark.
And so I know this is a result
of that some question in my mind
because.
It was all.
We have to find them
I don't want prosecutorial.
Ask you to you know that's.
You can be discovered evidence
evidence is not admissible and
from the big question because of
the water founded and founded in
that's a good question for.
That's something everybody to
try to think about how to.
One more question under.
All the ready for to pass as
amended to a motion by setting
off for the past.
Motions and the emotions I would
call.
Thank you for.
Thank you very yes Senator
problem yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla yes thank you for the a
test centre share.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Steinborn
yes Senator Woods.
Senator with yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz.
Yes yes yes you have ten yes and
one.
Thanks center you have to pass
graduation thank you senator
thank you Mr chairman chair
members of the committee.
Senator comics which I don't
have here I don't know if I have
the updated list are you here on
Senate house bill eight house
bill eight I'll be fine good
take your seat in terms of bill
center.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee house bill eight
creates a land grants to fund
the there has been of.
An appropriation house bill two
for two million dollars that
would cover this I it's the
language that we would like to
have passed the bill Mr chair
members of the committee creates
a guaranteed revenue stream for
land grants that are political
subdivisions of the state.
It does this by taking five
hundred.
Point oh five percent of the
state's annual gross receipts
tax calculated after
distribution to municipalities
and counties for the offset for
food deduction and health care
practitioner services deduction
and placing it into a fund
managed by the state treasure.
Since the fund is tied to G. R.
T. the amount allocated each
year will fluctuate with the
state's economy estimated
projections for the fund based
on recent years would be
approximately one point five
million.
Money in the fund will be
divided by the number of
eligible land grants each year
and distributed to those land
grants on a sliding scale based
on their annual revenues for the
previous year as reported to the
state auditor's office.
To be eligible for the land
grant for the to be eligible the
land grant must be number one a
political subdivision of the
state number two in compliance
with the annual financial
reporting requirements under the
state's audit act and three in
compliance with any statutory
requirements found in chapter
forty nine of the New Mexico
statutes.
Every year the office of the
state auditor will provide a
list of land grants that are
compliant the council will then
verify.
Currently there are twenty five
land grants that are political
subdivisions.
And there are out of
approximately thirty five so
thirty five land grants there
are but only twenty I have
complied with the statutes at
the current projected amount to
one point five.
A full distribution would be
sixty thousand dollars.
And it could be adjusted to
forty five thousand dollars
thirty thousand or fifteen
thousand based on the revenues
so we are not providing a great
deal of money to land grants but
small amounts these local
grants would be that the lower
the land grants sorry would
utilize the funds that they
receive to cover general
operating expenses provide
community services maintain
community facilities and
infrastructure and managing
protect their natural resources
land grants are usually managed
by the volunteers this bill is
brought forward by
Representative McQueen and
speaker egolf and on our side
myself and senator Linda Lopez
and I stand for questions.
Representative Lara but the
audience for we are going to put
the timer up so we can.
Get out of here by six o'clock.
Two months later I have a list
of the.
The money expert witnesses
archer archer let the the
director of the land grant
council if you have any
questions I know that in the
last committee we had a lot of
land grants you might limited I
don't know if they know we're
having this hearing.
Our general you're the expert
witness you we want anything
that at.
Any that it thank you Mr
chairman of the committee I
think the quantity a great job
of integrating with the bill
doesn't help finance committees
tremendously will be taking
change for them to be able to
provide more services and better
manage the natural resources
that we currently manage and we
do have a five and grants that
are here with us today to find
common.
Thank you Andrea the are you
there.
Yes.
After
we got to go ahead.
Okay my name is.
I am the president of the New
Mexico Landrat this.
And also the president of the
latter and thank you for the
opportunity to speak today I
want to say that I am
completely one hundred percent
support this bill.
Not so like a lot of money to
some people but we can get from
the state will help us
tremendously to continue
providing services to our
communities and it's not just
errors that we provide for we
find for anyone who lives within
our community I just got done
today giving the fire would to a
Google phone is really needed
some so those are some of the
things we do with this one we
will be able to also choose to
hire some people so we can
provide jobs for community
members
this.
Game changer for us if we can
get this assistance white only
us we support this bill and help
us continue to do positive
things for our community thank
you.
Thank you next we have Andrew I
good to others.
Yes the president of the I think
in Land Grant and now also.
The board member
city more member of the G. Lana.
Was your favorite this still we
just we just ask that you
strongly consider supporting
additional on the services that
we provide to our.
Communities are all volunteer on
a volunteer basis when we have
something going on me trying to.
We get some ingenuity together
and we improvise and we make
things happen hall on on on free
labor we're asking people
volunteer their services to keep
our communities to provide
services to our people within
our communities and in we also
serve protect our natural
resources oh sorry no strongly
As for this thank you.
Thank you Vanessa Travis.
Yes we have.
Mr chairman and members I thank
you for allowing me to speak in
support of house bill eight as
an accident I think in Land
Grant I have seen online
passwords try to improve the
quality of life of the residents
of our community for both errors
and non annex.
We all depend on the services
offered to us at the only
community building in our
communities from internet access
to the station a community park
if it weren't for Land Grant
would not have access to basic
services.
All that they have provided for
us as residents is on a total
volunteer basis with less than a
five hundred dollar monthly
budget this budget barely
allowed practically EDOs the
building more.
I ask that you please consider
supporting this important
legislation so that they can
continue to help us all to have
access to our community building
and expanding services are
residents I thank you for all of
your hard work in service
areas legislative session and I
ask for gloves on everyone thank
you.
Thank you letter Martinez.
Are you there Leonard steeple
lock of.
There is
Hello the very yeah we have an.
Yeah we do.
This is.
It was.
The current.
He's urging.
Passes the house.
Local news.
You are thank to be successful
we are.
Of the board of trustees members
of Mr members do voluntary work
all of our certified technicians
we're organized for fundraising
to raise money all right for the
economy of Iraq is usually five
thousand to six thousand a year
if we're not we've property
taxes of four thousand.
The time of the land for does a
lot of travel which is usually
sixty miles.
One
way
to address important issues
concerning on where we are and
we need to pass so please passes
and staff the state but there's.
Thank you anybody in the
audience and support anybody in
opposition we're on the bill
questions on the bill Senator
Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have one of.
The Mr chairman and senator so.
Of the twenty five and it says
so possible thirty five for
more.
the nexus of about a hundred and
fifty that our phone.
So by having this so.
You could probably see where
more more of a might get updated
and become political
subdivisions no.
Mr chair I had the opportunity
and members of the committee I
had the opportunity to care the
land grants interim committee on
and off for a couple years and
one of the things I found is
that
the of the thirty five land
grants the ten that are not
recognized do not want to go
through all the requirements
that are set up by statute took
to formally organized so that's
ten of the thirty five and then
the rest of the hundred fifty
don't have enough members who
will step forward to actually
take on leadership Mr chair
Senator.
Right very well thank you.
Senator Woods.
Mr chairman and senator.
Is there a a sunset on this
Mr chair Senator from what.
I would have to look at I don't
want to miss speak here Senator
Stefanics yes that there is no
sense in on on this piece of
legislation okay and and the.
Other problem.
As it is with some other bills
that have come through here.
Is that by.
Tagging.
A a.
Group of money.
You are dictating to a future
legislature.
What to do and I don't agree
with that it says that there's
two million and house bill two.
you know it's coming through
being appropriated and I think
that's more of the correct way
of doing it myself so that's all
I have thank you very much to
bring in the bill thank you Mr
thank you any other questions on
the bill I have I have the same
questions I mean this year marks
money it doesn't appropriate out
of the general fund and it's
earmarking to direct your mark
and without future
appropriations and so when you
do that out of the G. R. T.
gross receipts tax revenue it
could be very volatile into the
funding source and so just so
the those land grants no I mean
this the funding sources very
volatile and the director mark
is very rare on legislation in
probably should it struck that
so we could appropriated
correctly but in market is
something we should never do
with this so it's a little bit
late we may talk about
affirmative will talk to the
sponsor and the sponsored on.
I know you're not the sponsor
but I do know Mr chair I'm I
would be open to having this I
would lay on the table until we
have that conversation
it does indicate that because
it's Boller tile the funds could
go down in future years so
Representative McQueen tried
this bill in past years
resurrected it and it move
rather quickly so I'm totally
open to whatever the pleasure
the committee is.
I think we should talk to the
sponsor of the bill and then if
we want to do that then you can
put that amendment down on the
floor because it's it's final
place for goes anywhere I need
to do something without the
sponsor being here.
And so but I mean just so the
land grants clearly understand
me there could be signing one
year the volatility or downturns
in the economy could not funded
the next year and then we in the
position.
of there's no money so.
You hate to do that when they're
planning for its repairs are or
whatever they need to do without
starting money one year and then
not have any in the next year so
that's my only question what's a
pleasure the committee.
Us significant in the past by
center Gonzales second by
Senator Padilla that we call the
roll.
Senator.
Thank you for no Senator Campos
this Senator Campos yes Senator
excuse Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes.
Yes yes yes.
Fifty eight yes here.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn yeah.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods so Senator would know
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes Senator then
yes yes yes seven yes three no
and one X..
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members are to you want to call
the Sanchez or do you want us to
call the Sanchez all talk to the
sponsor this evening and maybe
talk about the sense that just
in case.
That may be a better way okay
thank you very much thank you.
I think everybody's got the
email right there was two males
that went out.
From the making copies Adrian.
So there is an email sent out by
John Clark saying that they
wanted the language change and
Denny Slagle who is from the
consecutive.
Just left the office
and so you should have the
they're handing out the NEC
Miller John.
Here
They were just here.
Thank yeah they discriminate
ghost.
So in the email you'll see what
the exact recommendation is for
house bill two they're saying
that they want to remove it from
the constraints on us the STV
severance tax act fund that is
still in drafting that will
probably do Monday or Tuesday
and that they are requesting
that the amendments to meet at
this time they're not requesting
amendments to house bill two.
Mr Chairman have a question just
for clarification
There was another message sent
earlier and Senator Steinborn
had Representative that to us
there seems to be some confusion
on on and on the lack of
cooperation between the
amendments because senators time
were you reading amendment are
text early or information to you
where the department of economic
development for the governor was
requesting that this amendment
absolutely be be put in because
the governor wanted to have that
language stricken so can you
explain that to us and then.
Senator Steinborn there's a
priority mail to this they're
gonna go print.
In that John Clark send email
prior to this email saying
something completely different
and then the exact.
Send an email after that saying
that they're not rich John was
wrong and that this is the
correct email so they're going
to print that.
And so unless it's in black and
white and it's in going to be in
front of us I don't want to
discuss with somebody tax got
text on their phone if what the
questions are asked subject
specifically to put it in
writing so everybody would have
it and everybody can read it
clearly.
So they're going to bring that
other one out.
And then we're going to come in
tomorrow at eight AM and you
house bill two.
Mr chair.
I would just say
I intend to try to change it
regardless and I can talk about
that now I can talk about it
tomorrow whatever you prefer I I
understand.
Any you want to explain
something real quickly about the
email chain that that so we
know.
So we're clear.
Thank god.
so on the issue of the economy
yes yes so we we have already
submitted through the STBs to
change the geographic
constraints at this time we're
not necessarily seeking
amendment but I have been
talking Center sideboard and
looking into potentially
changing that down the road or
through the governor's action
but at this time and the
services and and.
The.
Thank you being that the Mr
chairman so I I just think it's
it's clear that we want
consistency probably they want
consistency we can fix it here
and I appreciate you know the
second probably wanted this move
budget process I just think we
should do our work here and fix
it and.
I think it's kind of there
that's intent so Senator
Steinborn if you read the read
the note thank you secretary
says they're going to fix it in
STBs that's where the fix will
take place.
And so.
If you want to.
That's that's your prerogative
to make an amendment I'm just
I'm just making clearly aware of
the email that the emails from
and what the executive want so
there's no question about who
said what and who's saying what
it's all in black and white in
front of us Mister Schlegel
testified to what the exact
wants and how they're gonna
handle it and so with that.
I mean use your product if you
want to have minutes tomorrow.
Mr I in this state with fifty
million dollar project that's
funded through different ways so
even now there's just TV and
there's general fund we should
look at that as two different
projects one project with chosen
to fund two different ways so.
We should get the language
consistent.
Thank you it's eighty million
dollar project forty million
dollars Senator Steinborn it's
twenty in general fund and
twenty eight capital not fifty
investors and other ten had
somewhere that we don't know
about so we'll come in tomorrow
morning at eight your they're
handing you the other email if
you look at the timelines of of
what happened from the email
then you know you'll understand
the.
Question decisions of the exact
so that you'll know that.
Thank Roger and I think we have
Sierra.
The Mr Chairman.
Home and how long do you think
you're this legislation is going
to.
Questions.
Thank you.
It will be quick this is the
fourth.
For more common help a longer
piece of legislation and take.
To
the right center.
So if you this sounds familiar
it's because this is the.
Third or fourth year worked on
this this bill got to the Senate
floor the last year thirty seven
enough and.
Went to the house got on with
last Friday night.
He ran out of time because in
seventy five bills only twenty
five percent through.
Interested in this because of
reddit future table trust
reported said that quote New
Mexico lacks a well designed
plans for regular evaluation of
tax incentives.
And of course we have a
executive order but we're one of
the few states that.
To put this in the in statute.
that we they prepare enter a
point but it really doesn't tell
us much
The only consists of a few
paragraphs of discussion more
information that the doesn't
give us a real.
economic analysis this bill
corrects that still also
correct.
Thank you.
we don't require is these
reports and by that you.
Some of the state or local
governments going to provide
incentives there needs to be
some kind of clarity as to what
we expect.
But we are we getting our
money's worth we don't know we
got a one billion dollars in tax
incentives that we don't know
whether we're getting our
money's worth.
So.
Mr chair and members accounts of
this bill require companies
profiting from tax funded
support to give back some
details.
The tax incentives would be
required.
The tax incentive recipients
would be required to our
research report the number of
jobs created in wages pain also
you know they.
Like I said before they don't
really give us enough
information to do it.
A the.
The details of the.
Information that doesn't answer
questions which is a program
reaching targeted recipients
this the program feasibility or
management problems and emerge
as a pin and tenants side
effects do outcomes offered.
different across approaches
different approaches in New
Mexico that's one of the fiscal
and economic aspects we don't
know any of that and I could go
on and on.
So this.
The November the eleventh of
twenty twenty did a
okay Senator had a toilet said
the the New Mexico is one
billion annual tax breaks needs
justification economists working
for the LFC say in some cases
the state doesn't require
sufficient reporting from the
lucky recipients moreover the
economists say the annual tax
report issued by the executive
branch is generally
insufficient.
I whether we're getting our
money's worth then and then two
months later they did another.
Torio.
For the mentioned my bill.
My number is again so that was
something that the.
That we should do.
I had a
Expert witness with me this
morning but
He's left the building.
So I tried to contact them and
think we were going to see Dawn
Iglesias is here because she was
in the LFC working with John
Clark who work a lot to do
played a big part in writing
this bill in fact.
I when I approached him about
it.
Several years ago it just so
happened that he was the.
Going to Washington DC for a
conference on this very subject
to use very economic development
is very much behind this program
and the.
I appreciate your.
The only.
For whatever reason the film
production cricket so robust.
Our evaluation else's.
So we're hoping to get something
like this for the rest.
other tax credits.
want to mention that one of the.
One of the problems that came up
in the past was.
Confidentiality.
some folks are worried about
this.
The information is confidential
information getting out but I
can assure you they worked very
hard to establish a balance
between confidentiality and and
at the same time giving our.
People state police enough
information to make a the very
deep dive into and and not in
the analyzing these incentives.
So
That that's about it and again
this is something the.
The LFC supports as well as
economic development department
and I
Feature a.
Appreciate your.
On the funding this agent in
time to help me get it through
the through the house.
Then for questions thank you
Senate you have an appropriation
on yes well last year you cut it
out there's no sense in doing
this if we don't get
appropriation would it is kids
now because it with it I know it
sounds like a lot of money but
would be picked it's not a lot
of money when you consider would
be giving out a billion dollars
in tax incentives last year we
had a figure of a hundred ninety
four thousand this year the info
over three hundred but John
Clark told me the other day.
That that's on the high side and
if you don't want to like to
make a proposition to utilize
the proposition including.
Senator so my ex witness don
said last year we again just for
your information we gave money
to TRD to do this but the bill
that passed so they still got
the money.
And they didn't do it so this
it's news to me.
They gave the money to to House
Bill to we appropriated taxation
revenue two hundred thousand to
do this bill that was your
request last year I believe that
the full motion on the hundred
ninety nine thousand.
Well.
Verification on that Mr chair
for the last year and LFC
recommendation the LFC
recommendation just went ahead
in the recommendations for house
bill to the forty back to the
house of the recommendation
included.
Thousand dollars TRD the purpose
of having their contracts by two
hundred thousand dollars well
for them to be able to afford to
do taxation
economic development incentives
analysis that was involved in
one of the document for last
year to say two hundred thousand
four here the for that purpose
it was not contingent on the
bill however that additional
money state in house bill two
after it with through the house
and the Senate and was passed
yeah because it was not
contingent on the passage of
this bill it was two hundred
thousand additional funding just
TRD
but.
Yes procreation Westrick last.
Hundred thousand had already
been given to the department for
the general purpose.
and so that is.
They're at two years now and
there.
Senator we we have an amendment
district appropriation because
was appropriated last year
movie who's news to the.
Economic development is left
categories my understanding
their understanding is there
wasn't any money available.
As it.
But it's good just glad to hear
that the money was appropriated
last year for this.
About contingency language in
the bill.
When I finished it is still have
the money.
So if you want to strip
Appropriation that's fine
although we need the.
Hundred and sixty nine thousand
for to it.
Full time employees.
One and one of the economic
development one LFC.
Center the the this only
appropriates thirty your bills
currently as it sits in here it
is asking for three hundred
forty two thousand four
analytics software nothing for
FTEs.
In the
The the fire are.
Move.
That was the.
We did on February the fourth.
We.
Interview look on page six
section three.
Opening three hundred forty two
million three hundred forty two
thousand to TRD for the
expenditures to valuate tax
expenditures and economic
developments is sent there's
nothing in the.
And I require.
There is.
We'll go implications.
Well except.
This move around and you know
worry about getting money into
it even the gives.
Next year given doing your money
on my doing money to it.
Enter the preparation is there
it from last year and I'm
correct the last year your
request was a hundred and ninety
five it's three forty two this
year and so the appropriation
the money's there from last.
He passed the bill and agency
will still have to comply with
the language and the money will
be there and there's no way he's
it's analytics software that
your question Florentia already
has ability to we have an
amendment to strip their
preparation.
In some.
Okay.
That's a friendly amendment.
Then it for discussion.
Passage of thank you.
The.
Fund.
I feel like we've discussed the
amendment I would move to pass
an amendment.
Let him not wanting to get a
copy and images so you know and
all of the district
appropriation thank.
We have a motion for do pass on
the amendment.
That was the past Senator
Padilla second from Senate here
are back on the bill any
question on the bill.
I would just have to pass some
Senator Padilla second from
Senator Rodriguez.
Way caller.
Thank you for.
No Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond is
excuse Senator Gonzales yes.
Your twenty dollars yes.
Hemphill yes.
yes thank you for the yes
Senator Padilla yes senator
here.
Yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you thank you and yes it
would.
Senator Woods yes Senator Regan
yes.
Rodriguez yes and senator Munoz
yes thank you yes that is.
Nine yes one no and one excuse.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the finance committee
thank you.
They were done for the evening.
Not.
