Rather complex one.
It relates to health care health
and Human Services and Medicaid
now this is actually the longest
one in the book and it goes into
a pretty significant details in
the chart about all the
recommendations which is what is
in House Bill to AJ of C. and
these are things that you may
want to make a decision about
and then starting on page
Forty eight it talks about
Medicaid it was based on the
Medicaid briefing that was done
for us and begin just begin the
session and the next page forty
nine is a town of fourteen so
that's like the granddaddy of
them all that's the the biggest
one in here by contrast if you
look at page five.
It's just a very short.
About the status of quality
about capital outlay water
projects so the idea here is
that we want to give you what
happened at the hearing what
issues were raised by Senate
finance committee members and
what the HFC action has been
taken in house bill two so as a
reference document that you
might find helpful also we put
at your seat a
Examples of some budget briefs
the bill breaks that we did.
And the one for Senate bill two
oh three is a very detailed one
that is different and more
extensive than the FIR.
One thing not all of our
analyses have but on three until
three it's got color on it it's
got green and okay.
I'm two oh three there is an
alert alert means that there's
something that we see think the
committee may want to really
focus in on in other words this
particular bill says that you
know that it allows them to not
stick with the appropriation
that's in the appropriation bill
maybe they could go over it and
if they go over it well the
alternative would be rather than
coming up the plan to deal with
it they cut provider rates if
approved by the feds so anyway
we thought that would be
something that you would want to
know and another thing on there
is that it requires a D. O. H.
do a rate study every two years
the feds require foreign pay
fifty percent of the right study
every three years but that would
have to be paid a hundred
percent by the general fund so
that's the kind of thing we
would put in the alert section
and if there's nothing really
that needs to be brought
especially as an alert to you
it's a blank.
If you look under the brief
summary of the bill the FIR has
like a couple sentences about
what the bill does we went a
little bit deeper and talked
about more about exactly what
the bill does it refer to page
and line numbers for the bill
because it's a high of high
interest to the committee and
it's got some pretty specific
sub substantive provisions we
also always want to explain what
a committee substitute does on
the bottom of page one or what
an amendment does so you know
about that and then it has the
fiscal impact of course and then
questions that you may want to
raise to find information there
are some others I put a sample
on there I think it's three
twenty six on your Pyle it's
like an analysis that is have a
page our goal is to keep these
as short as possible and provide
the help that you need if
there's a bill that's in Senate
finance that you would really
like to see our pre fund I just
let me know if it's done printed
out for you right on the spot if
it's not we'll give it priority
and get it done as soon as
possible okay Mister chairman
members thank you very much.
We'll do that.
Like the.
For.
We have.
One four three.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee good afternoon I'm
Representative Pamela Herndon
and today I'm bringing before
you house bill nine and house
bill nine is a.
A gun storage safety act that is
focused on keeping children safe
as a child prevention act so
it's also known as a cap
legislation so with respect to
this legislation it is also
euphemistically known and as the
Benny Hargrove gun safety a bill
just to give you some context
Benny Hargrove was a thirteen
year old boy who was at school
at Washington middle school on
August twenty first of twenty
twenty one when he was shot six
times on the playground of
Washington middle school.
That has never.
been a time that's more
important than now for us to
look at taking action to prevent
gun violence at our schools and
keeping common sense policies
about gun safety storage so they
remember Benny was not involved
in a disagreement with anyone at
the time he was shot he was not
believe anyone instead he was
trying to mediate an altercation
between two of his classmates
many died on that unfaithful
afternoon on Friday August
thirteenth because one of the
students who was involved in
that altercation that Benny was
trying to mediate.
That student had access to his
father's gun Benny would be
alive today if that gun had been
stored safely and had not been
assessable of a child who took
the gun.
So today I'm asking you to look
at the fact that the statistics
so so in in the state of New
Mexico the most children are
dying at the hands of gun
violence either by suicide or
because of homicide and they
should not have access to
firearms in those instances
we're asking for a piece of
legislation house bill nine that
will keep our children safe and
so I know that there's been
statistics that have been put
out.
That have stated that is stated
that all my gosh let's let's
look at what incarceration rates
are going to look like if this
piece of legislation is inactive
but I'm before you today to tell
you that I'm expecting this
piece of legislation to serve as
a deterrent for people who are
not keeping their guns safely
stored to actually keep them
stored safely and I'm asking you
each and everyone of you to vote
in favor of this piece of
legislation let's protect our
children thank you Mr chair
members of the committee.
You have a copy you want to go
over the contract I will miss
you too.
There by those are Senate
judiciary amendments in contexts
are pretty short could you get a
copy sale would you give for
your copy of the check property
the thought they delivered copy
but.
Thank you checked clean coffee.
So with respect to the with
respect to the amendments one of
the.
The first item that we're
looking at.
Is the well first of all let me
say Mr chair members of the
committee that these amendments
that were made to this to house
bill nine amendments that
cleared and made clear an inmate
clearer and I the objective of
the bill and the application of
the bill so the first item was
with respect thank you the first
item was with respect to of the
insertion on page on page two I
would like to take you there and
it's online twenty two.
We right we clarified that it's
under part C. is under C. one
are you able to see that well
designed to have the right okay
maybe I don't have the right
doctor.
Contacted involved will have the
money.
Are you looking at at.
Limit This directly to sections
maybe that would be helpful to
for items the one are you saying
that when.
Okay under item C. one.
What happened there was we made
the sentence clearer in terms of
what happens when a person does
not violate this piece of
legislation so it was it was of
the statement was made clear
that out either.
The firearm was kept in a locked
container securely stored was
kept in the location that was
reasonable for that a person
that a reasonable person would
believe was a secure
location of that could not be
obtained or accessed by the
minor so all it did was to
clarify exactly what had
happened what would happen there
it was a matter of moving one of
one word to make that
clarification a lot better the
next item that I I Mr your
attention to will be.
Would be the item on item do on
that same page if you look at
that we have taken that item out
completely so we have a of a
good conversation about firearm
safety training and within that
budget even be included in here
and so it was determined that we
did not need to have that
firearm safety training as the
issue telling the judge what to
do if these matters came before
the court so what we did was we
remove that item and the best
clarifies it a little bit better
in terms of what is happening
with respect to the application
of this up of this legislation
the next thing that I draw your
attention to is with respect to
the of E. in in the document
those that section was
completely removed it wasn't
necessary to talk about an
individual would have the option
of not only use in this piece of
legislation of this bill but any
of the bill for purposes that
they wanted to bring civil
charges in a particular item
that's already given with the
state and look at that so we
absolutely remove that the next
item that I bring your attention
to is the definition of the word
Of the word brand this which is
the included under section after
and so within this document
itself there two ways in which a
person may violate the the
provisions of this legislation
one is of course if the bill if
the if a minor was to display
our brand this the fire arm in a
threatening manner.
So what does brand this mean we
wanted to make sure that every
single person who reads this
piece of legislation would know
the meaning of Brandis so we
absolutely put in a a definition
of the word Brandis the other
item that we removed is item
three Mr chair members of the
committee address your attention
there we described and that
defined the word minor and minor
is a person who is under the age
of eighteen and so that was
clearly understood the
individuals that we were
focusing on who should not have
access to a firearm and Mr chair
members of the committee that
explains the amendments in
contacts let me help you out we
missed a little bit
and section two one which is now
section two of fire non means
and economic that only not
designed really converted expel
project out and they struck
frame of any such weapons and
then on page three
it was close proximity of a
person and extract that and said
the person's immediate control.
The only two that you may have
missed in context we're going to
go to the audience now will take
about this because of time frame
in who who's from a long ways
away.
In support.
Nobody.
We have one or two people in
support.
Thank okay any other zoom in
support.
Energy.
Yep.
State senator Munoz members of
the committee I I rise in
support for this bill I have to
out it's sent
passage in the course of the
session I'm a retired injury
update Milledge is that work for
ten years with the New Mexico
department of health and I'm
here also with New Mexicans to
prevent gun violence.
What I just what I see in this
law is Senators stab wishes to
do you for firearm owners to
meet the standard that on
authorise minor children will
not have access to firearms this
is the standard that we often
hear that responsible gun owners
understand and that they store
their guns safely as I see you
and this is built by codifying
this practice in the statute we
inform all gun owners of that
standard and we can hold all
firearm owners accountable to it
in effect we no longer have the
safest have safe storage as a
voluntary practice and it is for
this reason and so many others
that have been cited that I urge
you to vote yes on this bill
thank you.
In opposition and maybe we have.
Hey can you get to so come on up
on their those two we have
coming soon.
Officers.
Here or you need to come to that
Mike and push the button and
well the one minute.
Hi Mr chairman committee members
sorry I'm not frequently in this
committee terror mission
representative of the national
rifle association were in
opposition to house bill nine
generally our legal system does
not punish someone for the
criminal acts of another but
that is what house bill nine
would do firearm safety is
something that is achieved
through education not punitive
law the provisions of house bill
nine would only take effect
after an accident or crime is
happen involving a minor
accessing a firearm.
there's no community outreach
component or educational
component to house bill nine
another aspect is that New
Mexico law does not prohibit
minors from owning or possessing
firearms so there's a question
about whether liability would
transfer to the parents of the
minor when the miners actually
the owner of a firearm and a
crime or an accident occurs
the bill lacks adequate
exemptions for authorized access
to firearms for for minors for
common activities such as
hunting sport shooting and other
lawful purposes and lastly New
Mexico already has a child abuse
child abandonment statute that
can hold parents or guardians
accountable when a child is
placed in a dangerous situation
or situation that endangers his
or her life or health
prosecutors already have the
tools to hold parents
accountable in those situations
so for those reasons we oppose
house bill nine thank you for
your time.
Members of the committee Mr
Chairman my name is Joe
Culbertson.
And I'm representing New Mexico
cattle growers association
today.
first off I believe this.
This bill is like many of the
other bills is unenforceable.
You even the sponsor I agree
with our.
There's not in the room anybody
going around knocking in doors
going see if you got locked up.
So so that's that's that's an
issue it's it's enforceable
after the fact that used.
In a crime but it's not
enforceable.
Beforehand.
The other thing is.
Most people I know in the state
of New Mexico on weapons.
In this state.
Like to keep at least one
firearm.
Handy in case of a self defense.
Now there's wording then said if
it's placed in a reserve rate a
place where it's reasonably
expect it wouldn't get to
something like that
I think that's really
questionable language to begin
with.
What what is reasonable to you
and me to do things.
And
So I think.
This was heard in the committee
the other day
people it out right said they
will not lock up all of their
guns are going to keep at least
one.
For self defense.
So I think this is very
unenforceable this legislation
and it's another piece of
legislation that targets law
abiding citizens thank you.
Thank you go to one percent zoom
they got one minute.
Thank you Mr chairman of may
need us here around a nonprofit
for several years focused on
school violence prevention
response equipment and charter
schools are law enforcement
agencies sent my professional
opinion this bill is a feel good
do nothing that wouldn't of
state Benny normal it save other
lives in the future as the
primary is not oppose it aside
from that the fact is because
this APS and the is office using
the cover of this bill to Dodge
their share public
responsibility for what happened
which I find discussed in.
Your Google solutions that
support all day not happily work
with the sponsor on and most
importantly would actually save
kids Benny's killer brought a
farm to school days before the
shooting students told staff in
a farming camping the staff did
nothing and never intervene the
final argument involving him and
his killer APS allowed the
murder to happen through their
indolence or in curiosity
mandate developing fund training
for teachers administrators put
intelligence collection
preppers funds from programs and
plans in place take one of the
students seriously all of this
can be accomplished
legislatively and schools will
follow the law more readily than
negligent parents well.
Also clear the parents were
threats Psy.D again at one
minute limit.
In that case thank you Mr thank.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Steinborn Senator
Padilla thank you Mr.
Well thank you for bringing this
bill forward Representative in a
been working on for several
years now and you know we have
some really steamed attorneys in
the room so I'm not an attorney
but to me first of all I think
it's it's a very tightly written
draft now that I think draft
very closely with what is common
negligence and law.
In in law basically law if you
don't lock up a dog that you
know to be deadly and then the
tax somebody and you had a fence
up and you could be criminally
negligent if that's not hurt
someone if a reasonable person
the reasonable person standard
should have been expected if
they knowingly knew that dog was
dangerous I then you will not be
held.
liable so I just think this is
just.
An extension of what is already
lost in the into an item that we
know to be deadly.
And
So I just think it's a very well
written bill and effects of
common sense required precaution
I think if you own if you have a
kid.
You have a kid then
you need to keep that to do on
Basically on see I.
That a person does not violate
this section.
If a child has a minor change so
economic by the legal entry to
the person's property and I
guess I just wonder legally if a
child enters their parents
bedroom for the what what is the
legal if you know what is the
legal threshold of crossing
someone's a minor crossing
someone's property legally could
that be a family member or would
that have to be.
Next door neighbors dina.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Steinborn
thank you for that question with
respect to this provision under
section C. five saying that
Some did not violate any aspect
of this legislation buy it if
they obtain a firearm by illegal
entry to the person's property
off far too often firearms a
stolen for car from cars we
don't want to say that a person
can be liable if a car if the
farm is still in power a car if
your house is broken into and
the fire on the stolen we would
you would not be held
responsible for that if you go
into your parents room well
that's not illegal entry of a
person's property you live in
the home so if you're Senator
child goes in there is that
illegal into the answer is no
but what does happen Senator
Steinborn members of the
committee's chairman is that a
parent knows that their child is
very adventurous that they know
that those firearms to be kept
in them were safe location when
they are not in the same places
right thank you Mr chair
representative so I yeah I
appreciate that I just I just
wanna make sure that illegal
entry doesn't conflict with the
other sections of the bill I
would imagine it would but but
that's the only question I had
so I have thank you Mr India.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I attempted
something similar to this a
couple of years ago so I'm so
glad that you took this on I
know this is something you
worked very hard on so thank you
for your work on this I think
it's a very well crafted piece
of legislation I also think it's
just simple common sense in a
lot of ways we we need to you
common sense things up here
that'll make huge differences in
this is one of them
So Mister chair and
representative the only question
I had on the that meant the
document with the amendments in
context is on page four in
Not quite sure what number that
is put out this is the term
intent to intimidate or injure
the sets defined somewhere else
in law because I didn't see a
definition of that that term
anywhere in the bill or maybe I
just didn't find it fast enough.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator Senator
Padilla it I think you may be
reading the definition of brand
this I am and it says to display
our make a fire known to another
person well the fire arm is
present on the person of the
minor with the intent to
intimidate or into a person so
let me go back let me just take
you back to the beginning of the
bill and if I take you back to
the beginning of the bill there
are two standards that are
placed in this bill one if the
child access is a fire arm and
they display it our brand is it
and so the definition Brandis
was presented but they don't
cause any great bodily harm if
they do not and they do not kill
anybody or cause anyone to lose
their life then there that talks
about one set of penalties and
so the reason for that
definition was to explain what
Brandis means so if you if you
walk out if the child has access
to the farm walks into a an
apartment complex or someplace
else and they intend to cause
mayhem are or this a disjointed
actions but the but they don't
because anything that that
results in death or great bodily
harm then the lesser penalty
that's described in the would be
applicable and I just for this
reason Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Padilla I draw
your attention to the to the
commercial that you've seen many
times of the child who walks
around on the third floor of the
apartment with a with a gun that
they are pointing in every
single direction and doing
things that they should not be
doing but they had access to the
fire on that child should not
have had access.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess
I'm still then maybe with that
description and in response
thank you still trying to figure
out like.
I did we properly define that
did redefine the definition of
brandish which I'm I'm concerned
about that concern but I want to
make sure the word intent.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Padilla I have
my experts attorney the former
U. S. attorney for the state of
New Mexico a Daymon.
This year and he can actually
provide you with more
explanation to police about
this.
Chairman when you all Senators
Senator Padilla
This this is one of the
amendments that occurred in the
Judiciary Committee and it's my
understanding that this
definition was pulled Senator
Daniel A. Ivey Soto from case
law and insert so then we do
have a definition somewhere on
that's my understand tent and to
intimidate or injured so then
the only war that I guess I'm
worried about not for concentric
students the word intent that is
to find somewhere else.
yes
Senator I would
Mr chairman when you know
senators serve Padilla
yes intent is to provide and I
would also say that it's defined
in jury instructions
I would believe so because it's
it's a mantra qualification.
Thank you.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative current and
this nice gentleman for being
with us today and for this very
worked just Latium Preciado your
efforts I just have one quick
question as I'm looking through
the FY are and I'm sure that you
have a mall this over but help
me understand on them it says
that there's no crime if a
firearm is kept in a locked
container and is current is
securely stored in a location a
reasonable person would believe
to any goes on or not the only
question that I have is
container defined any work I
haven't seen it only because is
it conceivable that a person can
have a gun in a jar one of those
jars that you close up with the
little metal thing they come of
the store and you just lock it
up with a lock is it possible
for that or is that a container
storage for guns thank you so
Mister chair members of the
committee Senator Rodriguez.
We thought a lot about what does
a lot contain a meeting and we
were very very cognisant of the
fact that New Mexico has a
population this economically
diverse and so we did not
specifically defined what a lot
contained a was on purpose for a
lot container for someone who is
very wealthy might be one of
those five thousand dollars then
safety law a gun safety storage
areas but for someone who is not
as a wealthy it may be locked in
the done in grandma's cosmetic
case and taken the key and
putting it around their neck in
keeping the key with them it
could be putting it in that last
are with the seal on it and law
so we were very very cognisant
of the differences in this state
economic viability and what
would be considered a lot
container in those instances
thank you very much for that
explanation that's all I have
Mister chairman Senator.
Thank you madam.
Mr chair.
With our.
So I have a a couple of.
Concerns here.
We talk about dogs versus guns.
Dogs can act on their own folks
can get out offenses even if
it's locked up but but they act
on our own guns don't.
Gone sit right there until
somebody touches it does
something with it it's never
going to move dog will.
I had a significant fight with
the dog wants actually had to
bite the dog to get it off a
little Maggie.
Because I hit it get the.
Elected on the backs indicated
let go back to six.
So I think there's a difference
there.
But I'm also concerned about a
couple other things here.
As a once upon a time twelve
year old.
I am pretty sure that any twelve
year old in America that's
paying any attention at all the
parents knew exactly where the
keys are to the gun safe.
Just because they live in the
house and the pay attention.
So it is the law is the is the
is the fire arm secure if it's
locked.
The twelve year old bill still
for the keys are.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative this
year if your child knows where
the key is and how to get into
that it is not securely store
your responsibility with that
fire on is to make sure that is
securely stored so you take the
keys with you you don't leave
them where it where you're
twelve year old are any other
minor can access that far on
when you are not around.
So so I think that's an issue so
I have to carry key to gun safe
with me all the time on the
radio what I'm doing.
When I was twelve years old we
have a gun safe the rifle rack.
The local.
Rifle signup in rifle rectus
still sitting on the bottom.
None of the spectrum.
Out dad's permission.
I think that's a big part of the
problem here.
Is what we've done is we've
taken away the the person.
Who's most likely to enforce
something so there's not
negligent use.
We've removed that for most of
our families in New Mexico.
Through a variety of social do
gooder issues I mean they're
all.
All of.
They were they all had into a
positive intent but but but the
result is that we've taken that
away.
And so what we don't have now is
any kind of gun safety.
In the house we were all for
that matter.
I don't think you can walk up of
a gun where twelve year old
specially twelve year old boy
like little bill.
Don't know where it is or how to
get to.
Because he pays attention.
What is you know what's going
on.
I don't think you can.
You know I have this book was my
father's book will bookstores
I've got a lot of books.
It's called letters from New
Mexico.
It's it's written by Ruth
Kessler rice.
Ruth Kessler rice.
Went to the Ross will teacher
school.
I have the picture book your so
if you want to look it up you
know I may get some of the facts
wrong but basically she went to
the Russell teacher school and.
Then people from around that
part of the state came to hire
teachers.
I don't remember which town it
was it may have been Honda but
again I can't remember.
They came they checked can you
read can you write can you do
maths okay as a teacher and then
they brought a rifle pistol and
shotgun could you use the host
three things.
And she could.
It's so she got the job.
This is a rural area.
Rifle pistol and shotgun had
value.
The rifle was mostly used for
hunting okay Hey there's a dear
little community could certainly
use some food let's shoot the
deer and they would say Hey
little billing issue to dear.
Okay and so the fourteen year
old to go out there to to do.
There's a snake.
That's a shot gun.
This may cause dangerous Senator
ugly.
The pistols almost never used
because the pistol was just in
case somebody strange came into
the classroom one room class one
room school.
With the pistol was for.
That was common in New Mexico.
We used to have actual gun
safety classes in high schools
until the mid sixties or so
maybe the last.
It Farmington high school there
was a rifle range.
And they had twenty two caliber
rifles they were single act as
this single shot bolt action
okay but the whole idea was gun
safety.
So don't pointed at anything you
don't want to destroy every guns
loaded okay all the time with
the you know it's not our okay.
But also can you hit with the
shooting at.
Was that was like the E. class.
We got a shot.
When I went Farmington high
school there were probably two
or three or five hundred guns I
don't know on campus every day a
lot of.
Then you can see almost every
one of them in the back window
of the pick up truck those you
couldn't see we're in the glove
compartment or under the sea.
We get shot.
We locked our truck either.
It's not the gun.
Something else changed the same
guns that I handled
probably from age five or six I
don't remember I have that
little twenty two pistol it was
my father's that I shot he had
to help me hold it because I was
so small it was heavy.
Today if.
Like that the please nothing
okay but for a five year old was
heavy so it helped me hold but
he also taught me about gun
safety not a point the thing
anybody.
It was a big deal.
Very big deal to my father.
Walked out in people didn't get
shot.
So what changed.
Well the mentality of people
change not the gun itself.
Looking up the gun doesn't
change that mentality at all.
What we've done is we've made
people crazy.
I think we've made them crazy
for a variety of reasons which I
won't get into now.
The locking up the gun doesn't
stop little bill from getting
the twelve year old bill from
getting back on.
If you want to.
He knew where it was before it
wasn't locked he didn't touch.
If it's locked.
He's still not going to touch it
if that system touch.
That's not there.
Who knows what he'll do with it.
I think these things really are.
I I understand intentioned I'm
not questioning the intentions
good idea best of intentions I
don't think it does anything I
don't think it gets where we
want to go.
I think we would be much better
off if we talked on safety in
school.
Thank you would know what it
does they would know what it
really does is supposed to watch
it on TV or video games.
They would not.
I'm not going out of my way to
advocate for that right now.
But I don't think this
accomplishes the the the the
stated mission.
The stated mission is to keep
guns out of out of kids hands.
Okay I certainly don't want kids
wander around waving guns at me.
When we wandered right away for
infants.
Ordering the lock up a gun.
I don't think does that.
I just don't see how that works.
If it works.
Then we need to put an
appropriation on this Mr chair.
So at least there's a a tax
break or maybe a voucher.
For people to buy.
Gun safes for our many weapons
they have.
Sometimes it's a little box I
have one of those.
Locked up money does that okay
open it up to.
I have grandkids at my house.
I don't want to touch on the
gun.
But some people have a lot more
guns.
We're gonna do this then I
believe we have an obligation to
not have this yet one more
unfunded burden on a family.
But I still don't even think
that we're.
My grandkids know without boxes
because they pay attention what
they don't know is the code to
get in it because I've never
opened it near them ever.
But I also know there's a lot of
other things that that could
happen here.
So.
There are there are going safety
classes there are Lujan classes
for youth.
So in this case I say yep.
Little bill.
Here's the rifle go to the
hundred class AA you have my
permission to carry the rifle.
Is that a violation of this.
Because he clearly has
permission from that to carry
that rifle.
If that is doing his job
properly he's not carrying it
down the middle of the of the
school yard.
But that happens.
Parents.
Take their kids to these guys.
Kids used the rifle.
The figure out how it works they
know what it does because they
this life is not a video game
where somebody gets up later
after it's done.
The hunt.
What a kid hunters in fact one
of the kids that kind of freaks
me out.
Who is related to one of the
senators here.
She clearly.
US army infantryman.
I know how these things work I
do have a work before I was in
the army.
With this girl.
She can shoot a lot further than
I could ever shoot accurately.
Okay and she's not eighteen.
Hopefully we could hear some
stories about that.
But I don't think this want to
go at all even if we bought a
gun safe for everybody in New
Mexico doesn't get we want to
go.
If I locked it up.
So there was a bill the other
day Senator bills bill said Hey
you know if you conceal carry
you go into a restaurant that
serves alcohol you didn't know
okay so what do you do with the
gun now so his bill was okay as
long as you're not drinking.
When
you're carrying it right now
it's under your control right
now whatever the words are here
for the year media controls at
that we said so clearly it's
under immediate control yes the
person's immediate control but
you're going to a restaurant you
didn't really know that this was
a.
Serving hard drinks of you we
can carry in today in places
that serve beer and wine okay if
you have conceal carry license
which walking there you go so
now I'm going to take it back
out I'm gonna put it in the
glove compartment of my car.
And I'm gonna lock the glove
compartment.
Then somebody steals my car okay
so the drug dealer the stole my
car breaks into it and now he
put rifle on his dining room
table well he snorting coke or
doing math so whatever the drug
dealers doing and a six year old
picks it up and walks outside
with it imply responsible for
that.
I looked up I looked it up in a
poor place because the best
place to have a firearm is on
your body not in the glove
compartment.
The Senate's into my immediate
control but if I put it in the
glove compartment is no longer
in my immediate control and I
locked it up.
I looked the glove compartment I
locked the car.
The Albuquerque is like the car
theft capital of the world.
So somebody's going to steal my
car.
Because that happens.
And after the still my car
they're gonna steal my gun in
know they were getting a gun
they got a two for four.
Now you're saying I'm
responsible because it wasn't
the person's immediate control I
let it out of my immediate
control so that I could go we.
Because we refuse to pass
Senator niveles Bill.
I think this gets us there.
There is no I I can't remember
when it was.
Several years ago.
Three year old shot a small.
This was devastating with the
national news because it is
rare.
But it happened.
Mom had a concealed Kerry Perse.
There is a grocery store the
three year old was in the cart
the persons in the park mom
shopping we could assume that
that was under her immediate
control one very far away from
her purse or trial.
Trial reached in person pulled
the trigger mom died.
This family is now destroyed the
three year old has to grow up
the rest of his life knowing
that he killed mall.
Brothers and sisters have to
grow up knowing that.
Other kids small that has to
grow up continue knowing that
brought the son killed maam.
What is more on the what if it
was more what if is grandma that
was killed.
Monogram were shopping together
what if.
It was grandmother was shot we
gonna put we can put mom in jail
in the families already ripped
apart because of this tragedy
terrible ugly sis unbelievable
Human imagine tragedy and so the
answer is but mom jail.
All that devastation already
happened putting her in jail
doesn't do anything for anybody
except.
When wider open.
But it was under media control.
With senator Senator terrible
story.
I don't know I I don't know any
of them and I want to cry about
it.
But I do know that people carry
firearms.
People have firearms at their
house because their freight.
My mother's might my wife's
grandmother.
Had a pistol on her nightstand
after grandpa died.
Sat right there until she died.
Because she was afraid of who
might come in her house she
didn't she there was no
immediate threat to her nobody
said I'm going to kill you.
But without him she feared what
might happen in its set there on
that night stand.
Because she was afraid.
Lots of people have firearms
near them in their house but
maybe not the.
Directly to your amendment so
under my immediate controls on
the nightstand but I get up in
the middle of the night to go to
the bathroom light because a
mold.
No longer my media control
because I'm in the restroom it's
by the nightstand.
About violated the law you put
me in prison because I have to
pee.
And solve anything.
It makes us feel good because we
did something instead of
thoughts and prayers we did
something but we didn't do
anything.
We didn't do anything.
And I hate to pass a bill just
because it feels good.
But it didn't do anything.
Unless you're going to come into
my house with your own arm two
guys and search my house every
day to see if I have a firearm
not locked up some.
One of the worst things you
could do military.
I
walk away from economic anyway
somebody had to be there it was
on you.
Where you were standing in front
of it was too big to carry.
But there's lots of places we
can go all my gosh we can't go
in the Senate chambers now.
I walked back and forth every
day that means I cannot protect
myself from my house to the
Senate chambers every day.
Because we have stupid no
No gun rules.
I can't protect myself.
I have had real death threats.
I don't know but you know I'm
gonna vote against this but I'm
gonna go vote against it not
because it's not a good idea to
secure your your your weapons
absolutely it's a good idea to
secure the.
What level of security does it
mean.
I got a rifle that I'm certainly
not using it belongs and unsafe
your ammunition belongs and
unsafe to.
But if it's something that I
think I need.
Then I needed.
I've got rifles and shotguns
they're in gun safes which was.
I am concerned about this other
issue here brandishing with the
intent to intimidate.
I get that payment around.
That bad bad bad very bad.
That.
But from simply carrying it from
wherever I was in class to the
car.
And somebody sees it and I know
this happens.
And they're intimidated they're
scared they brought away the
call the cops know like it was
doing was carrying it from the
from where the class was for the
car not waving it around he just
came from a gun safety class he
knows not to pointed anybody.
With the intent well is it the
intent of the guy with the gun
city intent or our intent.
Decided by the person who's
intimidated.
Because all the time we see
things like that oh my gosh he
had a gun.
Will.
Okay country legally New Mexico.
In fact it's legal to strap it
on to your to your amendment
carried around downtown Santa
Fe.
Legal in New Mexico.
I personally think people would
do that are stupid.
But it's legal.
We used to have people in the
building here carrying rifles.
The irritated me so bad I I
straight up walk over to until
put the damn thing way.
You are not helping the costs.
Go away.
On the second member guy.
Were they intending to
intimidate I don't think they
were intending to intimidate us
and that they were going to
shoot us.
They were declaring that they
have a right to carry a firearm.
They were but plenty of people
were intimidated.
Lots of people are intimidated.
That's why I told them to go
away every time one of them did
it.
And sometimes they would and
sometimes they tell me to go
away.
It right to.
I wish there was an answer.
What I know is that is that the
tragedies that are brought up
are are fairly rare.
I don't know how many guns for
New Mexico two million people
probably million guns I do want
to having a.
I don't know.
I know that America by floor has
more more firearms per capita
than anybody else on the planet
I saw where nobody is even
close.
We don't have more murders than
anybody else.
We're not even close to the top
of murder rates.
We're not even close to the top
of suicide by cop.
We have a lot of guns.
But the thing that we're doing
away with the staffs.
In the more data we run out of
the families.
More problems we're going to
have in this bill can't replace
that that.
I'm also sure that if somebody
came into Farmington high school
when I was in high school with a
gun to try to hurt somebody.
The veterans from World War two
or Correa were Vietnam would
have acted.
If there were football player or
a history teacher it would have
taken the rest of the football
team and the rest of the history
class into tech.
In that shooter might got some
of us.
But that should would have been
put down why because every one
of those guys was a dad that
knew how to use a firearm they
didn't have to be armed.
How you deal with an ambush how
you deal with the shooters not
hide.
To attack on.
Charge the ambush in July the
pencil through their hard not to
the hard to their neck.
That's how you deal with the
shooter.
We don't talk about that either
we tell kids to hide under their
desk and wait for somebody to
shoot in their head.
Since saying to me.
This bill doesn't help.
I think this bill just turned a
bunch other people into
criminals.
This transfer models.
I do wish we had a good answer.
Because I don't want to see a
tragedy.
The tragedies happen.
Children fall into swimming
pools and frowned that's a
tragedy.
Children get poisoned by.
Household chemicals that's a
tragedy.
Children are killed in
automobile accidents that's a
tragedy we can't stop I we want
to try.
All of those wanna make me cry.
They do make me cry.
On the verge of it now just
think of.
This doesn't stop in the.
All it does is for to signal
that we care.
We should care.
We don't need to pass a lot of
care we don't need to pass a
law.
Before I start crying Mr chair
on.
Thank you senator
I do have a couple comments.
This.
Senator I don't.
I'm sorry.
It's here Senator.
Was it.
Senator Senator Burt thank you
Mr chairman.
I appreciate what you're trying
to do and and and.
We have about gun violence all
the time Mr chairman I I eat it
frustrates all of us.
But I can't on what Senator was
talking about
there are a lot of people who
have never been around guns
don't know how to handle guns
don't understand guns.
And I think in many cases are
afraid of guns and I can
understand and respect that.
But in much of New Mexico guns
are part of life.
As we know.
Minders can own guns.
In the state of New Mexico.
And there are so many scenarios
that could happen.
And I know we're we're kind of
talking about taking guns to
school but was it a different
picture here.
Let's say your sixteen year old
daughter.
Lives on the ranch is home alone
by herself issues that is no
because you grew up with a gun.
But because the sloppiness of
guns locked away.
They shouldn't have access to
that.
Parents are in town United Way
or church function or something
like that.
And there's a break in.
She knows how to use a gun.
To look at it Cockett fired name
it fire.
She does have to deal with
something like that.
Because you probably had to deal
with snakes coyotes and things
that that that nature.
But she didn't have access to
that firearm because this loss
as the moment that I can give
her access.
So what happens.
Terrible things happen.
Right the.
Maybe kids.
Because she didn't have access
to firearms to protect yourself.
That is part of rural New
Mexico.
There's a thousand one different
scenarios that make it difficult
to implement this law and and to
follow this call.
It's not that people don't want
to it's just sometimes you can't
but if you do the results are
just as bad in a different
direction.
Quite frankly if if somebody is
going to commit a crime.
That is a tool.
So we're we're here blaming the
tool.
Rather than.
The problem with the person who
pulled the trigger has a gun
never told anybody the person
pulling the trigger.
It was a perpetrator.
So what we really need to do
probably is become a lot more
familiar with.
And study and put together bills
like this that identified
behavioral health pro problems.
In deal with the quarter problem
which is a person who may have
an issue.
That's that's the problem
because I can guarantee and
we've seen it happen.
These things have happened with
machetes.
baseball bats.
Not I mean.
If we have a lot like this.
And guns are put away
and more people have access to
knives are we can lock up the
knives are in our kitchen or
whatever I mean there's so many
people who carry pocket knives.
You know people who work in
stores have box cutters with
them and they just carry on with
them all the time.
The tool doesn't do us any good.
We need to do is understand
behavioral health we need to
identify folks have a problem
and then help.
If you bring a bill forward on
something like that I think you
can get a whole lot support on
something like that bipartisan
support.
Because.
We don't like guns because guns
being used in some pretty
horrific instances.
We're gonna blame the gun and so
we're gonna try to take the guns
out of out of use.
And when you do that the new
impede the people who use them.
According to the law and that's
probably ninety nine point nine
percent of the people.
Three hundred twenty million
people.
And we hear more more instances
like that but the percentage is
pretty small so again I
appreciate what you're trying to
do but maybe we will list
directing more energy should go.
Interview should go is to help
people who have a problem.
If there was half the energy put
into understanding behavioral
health in putting that amount of
money half of what we do with in
regards to gun violence into
behavioral health.
We could probably stop a whole
lot of the stuff that goes on.
But because we don't understand
guns we don't understand
firearms we've never been around
them no was ever taught us how
to use one we we having been
taught basics about safety.
The rate of so it's guns guns
guns it's always fun that is the
problem.
It's.
The the pool.
The.
Is the person.
We get serious about behavioral
health none of this changes
because I guarantee or if people
that do what they're doing on
school playgrounds or in a
shopping mall or whatever else
they do these heinous crimes
they will find a way to do that.
No
I mean
for goodness sakes you want the
internet I find how to do that.
And you go down in a high school
hallway and throw one in every
single classroom in the
classroom is locked up you use
one of the bill at the door
million another one inside there
where there's a will there's a
way that's the way the mind
works.
When the problem is the person.
So I don't understand.
Again I appreciate what you're
trying to we're desperate
reaching out we're trying to
find an answer.
But I think this the answer
because I can guarantee even if
we'll talk about the guns how
many times you've heard that.
Someone who perpetrated one of
these
crimes.
What to the uncle's house
because this house has guns.
No coal.
Show some of the guys were how
to look at how to use it.
But I want to make a mistake and
maybe get McKee are sure where
the key was given a code to a to
a lot somewhere.
There's just a thousand one
different scenarios.
In you can't correct them all by
locking up a fire arm.
It just frustrates me.
That we don't spend.
Anywhere near enough energy and
time.
And money.
Trying to work on behavioral
health that we do all this.
Chatter day in and day out about
guns guns guns guns guns guns
guns.
Why can't we go to the core
problem.
Of behavioral health.
Because dividing our time with
guns guns which is distracting
us from the core problem which
is being.
Why can't we do something with
that.
At.
Anybody can take a car driving
down the sidewalk and killed
the.
Hey.
Any buying online we're not make
a long.
Anybody can get an eight.
In a subway and pull out nice
and just.
Create have.
They don't have a gun.
They won't even then we know
we're gonna just doesn't matter
if they're going to perpetrate a
crime they will find the tool to
do that.
With the tool.
I didn't kill anyone.
It's the perpetrator.
So it's hard for me to support
any kind of bills like this.
One is legally own guns miners
can on that is legally
we use them to protect ourselves
we use in for sports swimming
ninety nine point nine percent
of the people who own guns
handle them correctly they they
do the right thing and teach our
kids how to do it right.
They understand.
That you have to lock things up
you have to put them away you
don't use them.
For fun or taken school or
anything like that you use them
for the purpose that you use
them for for hunting for target
practice or protecting yourself.
They're trained they know how to
do that.
The kids with
mental problems and such as kids
it's adults.
In in in the it's any at all.
Date.
We'll find a way.
To make this happen.
If they can find a gun that's
great most adults in most cities
probably can go on the street
somewhere in and and by an
illegal gun.
In less than a day's time.
So if you want to done this not
a box uniform against on the
box.
But there's something definitely
wrong with that person wants to
buy a gun so we or she can go
kill somebody.
There in lies the problem.
There lies the problem.
So.
The representative of I I
appreciate what you're trying to
reaching out we're trying to
make things better.
But I can't support a bill.
That is misdirected.
And is going after the tool and
not the core problem.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Before we go to we got two
people on the list we're not
gonna hear the agencies today
plan on coming back tomorrow
morning we're gonna play catch
up tomorrow morning Senate
finance even even for late to
the floor tomorrow so sorry
about that but.
Santo Daime.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you to the sponsors of
the.
I.
I think whichever side of the
argument you're on here we can
agree on one thing we we don't
want to see loss of life
especially child's life to gun
violence we want to see loss of
life for harm brought by by gun
violence by right by drug
overdose by do you wise by a
stabbing.
What we don't want to see harm
done to anyone.
Expected but I I do want to say.
That is law abiding responsible
gun owners.
We have been noticeably missing
from the conversation when it
comes to how we are going to
address gun violence that seems
to be plaguing really the
nation.
We we can no longer just be a
voice of no no no and it and and
there's some responsibility on
our part is as.
As gun owners.
The policy up to the table and
to be part of the solution and
to bring forward ideas that does
do do not violate our second
amendment rights but how we're
gonna push back and making our
communities.
And our children safer for that
I will say we have been
noticeably missing from the
conversation and that needs to
change.
I understand the intent of your
bill I really do you you were
going after the bad guys and and
thank you we want we're doing
something to address.
These these shootings an example
say you've given when you first
start your presentation we've
got to do something I agree and
so we region we grant for just
coming up with anything but this
bill wouldn't have changed any
of the scenarios you opened up
there some of the laws in place
you're not under eighteen you're
not supposed to possess a
firearm unless you're hunting or
sporting event or your within
the sanity of of of your parents
anyway those laws that are
already in place didn't prevents
those horrendous acts in this
law is it going to prevent.
The next ones.
Although I think that you come
with good intentions the
outcomes are preventing anything
there's there's two separate
parts of this bill when I look
at a bill I think I understand
that your intent is to address
situations of the of gun
violence that you opened up with
but how would this bill affect
me.
Right there's two parts the bill
negligent negligently making a
firearm accessible to a minor
resulting in great bodily harm
or death I'm a single mom with
with with two young daughters
thirteen and fourteen we have a
number of firearms throughout
our homes and and extensions of
all homes that will never be a
problem and I say this with
confidence because one I'm
involved parents and to I'm
keenly aware and I understand
the mental state of those for in
my home I I'm not necessarily
concerned there's gonna be a
death of a firearm of
negligence.
It's the first part of the bill
that really concerns me the most
making a firearm this would make
it illegal for firearm to be an
access to my it's already
they're supposed to be eighteen
to possess it in the last and
there's a long list of long list
of reasons and why they can
possess including hunting she's
shooting events or anytime
within the the facility of a
parent but we're making it a
legal.
For a for a firearm.
To even be accessible to a minor
is so with that I want to log I
want to ask quick quick
questions what what does that
mean if I said my firearms
accessible to my minor at all
times she they would have access
to it even if they weren't in
possession so so I'll ask you
this in my truck I have.
A firearm in the vehicle another
one in the glove box and when I
heard door at all times when my
children were riding in the car.
There are there it's accessible
they're not in possession of the
gun but it's accessible under H.
B. line with that what I'd be in
violation basically nine.
Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Diamond the
answer is no this bill requires
the child to access the gun and
then to do something that that
gun is in your car and your
children do not access that they
don't kill a person they don't
cause great bodily harm they're
not going to be nor will you be
subject to house bill nine in
all of the scenarios that were
given by Senator Sayers Senator
Burt I'm they are absolutely up
provisions that have to be
enacted before any aspect of
this bill would be applicable
and it's not suiting the state
not shooting a rabbit and it's
not out hunting is not is not a
shooting incident I mean the
suiting competition it's talking
about a gun this not safely
stored a minor having access to
it in the in the the killing
someone because of great bodily
harm.
Mr chair representative that's
what I thought the bill was too
but but upon further research
reading is actually two fold
it's it's negligently making a
firearm accessible to minor and
I think that's where I come in
with the greatest concern is
there's a period on the end of
that this is without great great
bodily harm the bill would
require me to lock it up so what
what part of this get money my
god I just want to clarify does
not have to be in a locked
position lock box in my vehicle
on my nightstand in my purse
right because at all times that
would be excessive both to my
young daughters but not locked
up in my in my dented by elation
of HB nine.
This is to members of the
committee Senator Diamond
Digitel kill somebody that the
calls great bodily harm the
answer is no so you would not be
you would not have any liability
under house bill nine one of the
things that tends to be lost
when people read this bill is
the fact that there has to be
not only the ability to put the
child to access a firearm but
the child has to do something
with that firearm they have to
access that they have to call
some harm in some way and they
were to standards that were
presented within the bill for
purposes of that standard to
apply one that they brand to sit
with the intent to cause mayhem
and confusion are a disarray
then that so that was a
misdemeanor if the other part of
that even if you have that done
that successful to the child the
child never kill somebody they
don't cause any great bodily
harm to a child you would not be
subject to house bill nine so
those are the things that I just
want to convey when when we talk
about people this is not a feel
good piece of legislation this
is a piece of legislation that
does something if that piece if
that firearm Mr chair members of
the committee Senator Diamond
have been locked up the hard go
would be alive today and so that
doesn't make me feel good to
know that oh my gosh the child
had access to it investors this
is now it the result of a feel
good piece of legislation the
little boy in Roswell who got
shot at school and now losses I
this is not a feel good piece of
legislation in response to that
if that piece if that firearm
have been locked up in that in
the visual had not had access to
it and did not cause great
bodily harm and and that caused
the death of somebody that
nobody would be responsible but
once those things do happen the
responsibility and application
of house bill nine to apply.
So Mister chair and and
Representative I just want to
clarify that the firearm does
not have to be locked up in my
home.
In my purse or in my truck the
only time that that could be a
concern is if it was used.
In a shooting of someone it does
not there is no lock box
requirements with HB nine so Mr
Mister chair members of the
committee.
One of the things that was
brought up by I think senator
state or and senator Byrd is one
of my child needs to defend
themselves and they know where
the gun is then that's fine you
let them defend themselves
because this one of the one of
the one of the provisions in
here which shows a the part of
the bill that does not apply it
will not apply if someone is
using a firearm to defend
themselves and they had access
to it is when you would you
don't block at the and you talk
about mental health and a
Senator Burt talked about mental
health a lot and I just want you
to know that one of the things
that is part of this but it's
not written in this bill is the
fact that there are mental
health rooms but I'm asking for
in each and every middle and
high school throughout the state
of New Mexico because mental
health is a big kitchen I want
to know that so this bill does
not operate in the back and I
just want to say one last thing
to you that once this bill is
passed the goal of mine and and
the funding that I've received
is to go to all thirty three
counties and talk about gun
safety and I've already been
talking with the young man named
name angel Garcia who works for
the City of Albuquerque right
now in the gun put in the in the
violence prevention section
where we will be handing out
there and safety lots to every
single person who comes to that
to that of those losses this
bill is hopefully going to be a
deterrent from people leaving
the guns negligently accessible
by a minor the end goes out and
does those two things caused
great bodily harm or kill
somebody that's what this bill
is about and it is not a feel
good deal it is one that is
intended to have a reasonable
response and people to be
reasonably responsible for their
firearms.
Mr chair and representative and
I and I believe that you
introduce this bill with that
intent I do believe that I think
that now we have to understand
that any time that there's been.
harm done and some of these
issues shootings the the parents
are ultimately brought into the
lawsuit anyway there alternately
responsibility anyway there
that's happening anyway this is
to prove negligent that the
parent did that as well what
what happens when we have.
Cookie cutter legislation the
same to address and prevent
examples that you mentioned.
Is that we we seem to believe
that.
That those are the only cases
and and I I think what you're
disregarding is that their
lifestyles out there in which.
This legislation could
potentially make outlaws out of
law abiding citizens
earlier I'll tell you I'll tell
you a lifestyle that we have
right here earlier Senator share
I believe was making reference
to my thirteen year old daughter
who's grown up hunting fourth
and generation cattle rancher my
at my your young girls are she
can to knock it six hundred
yards running she's an
excellent.
Sportsman partnership she spoke
of competitive shooter but
additionally they've grown up
hunting and it's a way of life
and firearms or way of life and
so there could and I will tell
you this there is no one.
Who I would trust a firearm
better that I feel more
confident around then my two
young daughters so put been
raised around firearms for very
young age
and I and I say this because
there's such a disconnect from
people that we try to we try to
pass firearm legislation and we
think that it's just going to be
without this for you know
disregard for what this blanket
legislation does and the impact
it has and I'm gonna tell you.
But we're not an exception you
know we're not an exception
there's many people that live a
lifestyle in which firearms are
our way of life provided not
only for for for protection you
know for hunting and protection
I'll tell you I'm I'm a single
mom with two young girls in the
house there's usually there's a
fire and easily accessible in my
bedroom I wanted a house and
easily accessible for them on
their and if anything was going
down my side they they can
easily protect themselves is as
well I have guns to keep my kids
safe.
I have done this to keep myself
safe.
And so to say we're going to
lock up firearms to keep kids
safe is completely contrary.
To our lifestyle completely
there's no there's no law
enforcement to call they could
get there soon enough if we were
in trouble it is it's a way of
life tell you my girls we in
addition the cattle ranches in
middle of Mexican gray wolf
country when you send a fourteen
year old out out on a.
Course you can guarantee that
they're going to have firearms
for protection it's a way of
life and I will tell you they're
never going to they're never
gonna shoot someone it's never
going to be an issue in any time
to think we come forward with a
lawsuit if we blanket that
anyone under the age you know
any of these kids are
irresponsible is bullish because
these bills are not getting at
the core root of the problem we
we watch the news and it's
horrific which we see it's
ridiculous for aging you
supporters can say it's it's
disgusting and shouldn't happen
how do we address that how do we
prevent that from happening
locking up guns.
Doesn't prevent it from
happening setting different laws
doesn't prevent that from
happening and we have some
responsibility because we're
looking at everybody else to
come up with the solutions
without joining the
conversations at the table to
really address meaningful change
on how we push back and prevent
stuff like that from happening I
agree with my colleagues up here
the first step is to address
mental mental health we've under
funded it not just in the state
but nationwide we don't flag it.
We don't allow law enforcement
officers to do their job would
have concerns we we ignore it
until it's too late.
I think the addresses shooting.
Hello how that should have never
happened there should have been
red flags from the very
beginning.
To to to prevent that senseless
violence it took back there I
also think Senator share was
headed for right a right spot on
there we've also created a
society that doesn't value the
roles and responsibilities of
parents.
And the government can't command
we can't parents these kids to
do the right thing from the
beginning we can't we can't
parent to them.
To know the difference between
right and wrong is it as much as
I wish we could we have options
parents it's just a it's
systemic in the in the nation
I believe you having that it got
intense with us but what happens
is this blanket legislation
makes outlaws out of so many law
abiding citizens it's clear it's
clearly without doubt in my mind
a second amendment violation its
attack on any sort of and and
and and and in an attempt.
To keep children safe.
This would put money in more
danger the children rural New
Mexico and even in my art I
argue greater danger that's the
irony in here is that we're not
valuing a what if child.
The nerve area by putting money
in more danger.
And I can assure you that this
you know what happens is you all
you just create outlaws out of
all of us and that's that's in
in a mockery out of the
government of the legislator
when we do something like this
I'm I'm quickly gonna vote no to
this legislation what I can tell
you is that I feel like our side
and and and responsible gun
owners.
Have been absent from the
conversation and we want to come
up with real meaningful
solutions.
That may actually be able to
push back and address.
The mass shootings of the
terrible stories that we hear
them we need to come to the
table and be part of the
solution because we have been
noticeably absent this doesn't
solve the problem I appreciate
your time.
Senator Hemphill thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward and on given the
conversation regarding mental
health I just found that it
would be important to mention
the American psychological
association stand on this as
well as the national association
of school psychologists
especially as a school
psychologist myself.
So the APA American a
psychological association they
conducted a national survey back
in two thousand nineteen in the
aftermath of the el Paso and the
date and shootings and they
found that out of the out of the
adults in the US are seventy
nine percent of those who were
interviewed that said that they
experience stress as a result of
the possibility of a mass
shooting and the review of the
research on trauma and mental
health and the impact of mount
mass shootings concluded that
mass shootings and gun violence
is associated with a variety of
adverse psychological outcomes
in survivors and members of
affected communities in their
stand is that this is a gun
issue and not to conflate with
mental illness in fact data
shows that the overwhelming
majority of people with mental
illness are not violent and the
answer to reduce gun violence
really is laws that promote safe
gun storage and expand
background checks and other laws
that prevent suicides deaths by
firearms and reduce their risk
to others and the national
association of school
psychologists have a resolution
to support efforts to prevent
gun violence they support
approaches that protect children
because they are the most
vulnerable when it comes to gun
violence both as director
victims and as being traumatized
by the exposure to deaths of
family members friends neighbors
community members and.
Including eliminating an
inappropriate use access to guns
is one of the top
recommendations of the national
association for school
psychologists so thank you I
think that this may not solve
all the issues but it is a step
in the right direction and I
think that whatever we can do to
protect youth from guy gun
violence is
part of the solution so thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
I have a few questions can I
just addressed to that point.
Search.
Thank you.
I appreciate.
Senator the information that
you.
We have to research all but I
spent over fifty years in
marketing and research number
one you can you can you can skew
any research project to get the
answers that you want number two
I would like to know where that
research was done was it done in
the city was done in a in rural
communities wasn't done where
was it done because that's going
to skew the type of response
that you get please understand
I'm not I'm not saying you're
wrong or anything like that I
always question reserves we're
all in the political gain.
We get calls constantly.
And then we see research come
out in the media and so on so
forth and we get to the polls
also and this is totally
different.
Research and vocals often times
are not the end all because they
can be skewed designed to to get
the answers you want your number
to their the the wrong at yes
community is used to get those
answers or to get the answers
that you want so all I'm saying
is research is good I appreciate
the fact that there is research
should continue doing it but you
should always be skeptical of
all of the results because there
are not always exactly right.
Thank you Mr chair since.
Let me go to a some questions
says whoever could negatively
commits making farm accessible
to a minor Center dime is riding
along in her car and she tells
young child I mean that
kind of issue rattlesnake
something happens again goes off
Senator Diamond gets shot in the
foot.
The DA comes in and says you
made that make that she take
child we're gonna charge you
even though you're the victim
and you can just you can get a
little liberal progressive DA in
the district and decide they
don't want any gun violence or
guns and they can charge that
person in the gun in the vehicle
with negligence correct and you
have a former U. S. Attorney
General.
That.
I would turn to my experts to
let him respond Mr chair.
Chairman one US senators.
the scenario you gave the first
payment.
The feature name is oh I'm sorry
chairman my name is Damon
Martinez and I'm the senior
policy adviser the Albuquerque
police department.
And in the scenario that you're
talking about the first the
first thing is the the DA.
Is going to examine all the
facts and hopefully that DA has
common sense.
But in your scenario you're
saying that the charge occurs.
So in the criminal justice
system ultimately what that down
to is we have a jury system and
those jury members are they
represent the common sense of
the community.
And
based upon the scenario you
again I would find it hard that
anyone would provide
and individual guilty Fund
because you said it was an
accident right.
Of the the gun went off okay so
the question there's a there's a
couple issues let me go back to
with the district attorney's
gonna look at first of all the
district attorney's gonna look
at was it negligently store.
And that would be an issue
depend upon your scenario did
the that that person to hand
over the gun if the person
handed over the gun then this
law doesn't apply if somehow
that minor obtains it and it was
negligently stored then it will
be charge possibly.
the other part of this is been
the DA is going to be looking at
the exception specifically I
think it's number three
let's see it would be within the
immediate control so did this
person have it within the
immediate control of the person
responsible for the gun that
would be another issue that the
DA would look at whether to
charge or not so if it's within
the immediate control and
accident occurs there is a
specific exemption for that and
you know it's specifically
states the subsection a or B. of
the section of does not does not
violate if it fits within one of
those exceptions.
But isn't the policemen that
writes a police report they'll
look to statute site laws that
that why it happened in state
court in this current statutes
there was a gun in the vehicle
the minor got possession of the
gun in the statute is referenced
as a charge or to bring that
into in the court what senator
Munoz senators
We have online I understand
commander Luke language and he
can walk you through what he's
thinking would be specifically
but to answer your question an
officer or deputy first looks at
all the facts tries to put him
into consideration for example
you know who was responsible for
the economic what is the age of
that minor what are the specific
facts how far away from the gun
what happened that kind of thing
and ultimately doing into your
question the officer would it
depends if if the if the
misdemeanor plies CENIC then a
summons might be read if the
felony applies then the
complaint may be read but I
would if if if we have time I
would just ask that we the
commander language briefly some
make a statement.
He's he's calling he's
Eight six seven five three on
my.
Share more news Senators almost
I will five two two eight four
two five nine.
you're on the phone Mister
Langly commander language.
With.
Hello can you hear me did you
the question.
I'm sorry the the the you must
speaking can you repeat the
question.
I gave a scenario where someone
is in the vehicle with their
child.
they're driving down the road.
they get out there's a rattle
snake the mother said the
daughter to the truck get a gun
shoot the snake the gun goes off
it's a mother a liberal
progressive DA who wants to make
a record for himself charging
under the statute so are they
going to charge the the adult
with negligence and great bodily
harm.
Mr chairman and and
numbers of the committee are you
what what are you a judge
attorney what legal background
you have.
So much my name is the plan when
I'm a commander with Albuquerque
police department
and I can tell you from I
thought the law enforcement
response our job is to do this
you would find in the scene
collect evidence secure all the
evidence collect all the facts
and circumstances which includes
you know interviewed anything
let's take evidence
and and taking account all the
circumstances that led up to the
incident and to document that
if it determined that there are
you know misdemeanor charges I
mean that would be complete in
the form of a up of a of the
criminal complaint common to
learn individual would have to
appear in court
if you it indeed Friday at the
level of felony the law
enforcement officer had the
option to consult with the
district attorney that's not
that that point the law
enforcement officer does have
for the one probable cause of
the average to making a raft and
that will start the case in the
criminal justice system from
there it will go to the district
attorney to look at all the
facts and evidence that the
police officer had gathered to
determine if they do want to
prosecute as far as charges so
really with any particular
scenario
not every not to finance are
gonna be the same I mean in in a
in a way
we got a look at the
circumstances we got a look at
the act.
Pretty much everything that.
I miss the fact in your scenario
the the law wouldn't apply to
your scenario because the parent
handed the weapon to
hello the parent was on the
other side of the vehicle and
the child was closer to the
glove box the parent told the
child and on the left I see I
still don't believe that the the
lawful the law under
consideration place your center
so what is the learning it G. I
think that C. under the law.
That's that definition.
Will
It would go back to the J. I.
fourteen dash one three three
the so the negligence would need
to be established it's one of
the elements that we need to be
established a cordon I can read
the crew of the.
Okay so for you to find that the
defendant negligently in this
case of.
You must find the defendant
acted with willful disregard of
the rights or safety of others
in a in a manner which
endangered any person or
property.
So that when applied.
I'm sorry for property.
Well that's one of the elements
but Mr chairman senators because
the the parent told the
individual to grab the gun of
it's not.
It's not a question of whether
the gun was negligently store.
I think that's a little bit.
For me that's a little bit hard
to swallow because.
You get these dust or
prosecutors that want to make a
name for themselves on the first
time this happens and they're
going to say whether negligent
then if they really if there
people that don't have any money
to hire an attorney I think of
the public defenders they get
some kid a law school that is in
there for six months and they're
gonna get prosecuted this this
is probably gonna happen in real
life and then that's going to
happen in and then we're gonna
have real issues but the real
problem is when you and I grew
up in the center share we all
went in the.
Back in the back of the building
in each other.
Faces in and whoever won one and
children are not allowed to act
out anymore no matter what
happens in the schools you can't
do this arguing it suspend so
the parents don't want to all
right in children act out
differently today in so there
there's no there is a we'll see
in the
People that want to establish
dominance as human nature
throughout the world right and
so the kids are allowed to do
that anymore they're not allowed
to.
Fight with each other not
allowed a hit each other in a
lot of push.
Because we're not allowing that
schools and that's just human
nature for people pushing each
other around and that happened
in in now there the resulting to
how do I get even with that guy.
In the way they think they need
even as the co chair of our
taken school because they'll
show that there and that the
already in their power in and
this happens this should never
happen with that kid it's
partially the parents is partly
what society's lean this in two
weeks you can act out and you
can't do anything anymore or
you're not in the line of
society is as we see it in the
certain situation but in rural
New Mexico it's completely
different why do not tribal
governments pass laws like this
Siemens's happen on reservations
that they don't pass laws like
this I've never heard of the
tribal nations passing a law
like this in any incidents or or
enabling gun rights or anything
like that on any tribal nations
have you as the district yes
turn the general former governor
of the tribal nation passing gun
restriction laws on the on
tribal reservations in any way
shape or form Senator time
arsenal Hemphill could Google
that force of.
Mr Mr chairman
Senators respectfully.
Your identifying a lot of issues
in our communities but.
Respectfully this law only
applies to this very specific
instances now you're asking me
about my past experience as the
U. S. attorney.
So as the U. S. attorney I
served as the co chairman for
one of the attorney general's
three subcommittees his oldest
subcommittee which was the it
Indian subcommittee and so I was
able to deal with laws across
the country also in New Mexico
with our nineteen tribes or
pueblos and three reservations
at the time I was able to see
the crimes that were prosecuted
one of the things that we've
learned looking at that time and
I left in two thousand fifteen
seventeen I was in the DOJ for
almost seventeen years was that
any countries disproportionately
to charge compared to other
Eunice or other jurisdictions
one of the main crimes that was
charged with felony possession
it was a it was a
it what it is you know that
obviously is a firearm charge
and so I can represent to you
and I can Representative to this
panel that that was something
that was taken extremely serious
and
Because of the federal
jurisdiction over Indian country
I I can tell you in general
firearms or of the very
There are two large part of the
prosecution's that occur.
But they're not passing laws to
restrict the third amendment
right if you if you go to any
tribal nation
I have never seen it I'm close
and have over to the Zuni I have
never seen any gun laws that say
we're going to take away your
third amendment right by
storage by you can't have
automatic weapons you can have
this Mr.
Just real briefly Mister
chairman senators
under under Heller and under
Bruin
The United States K. R. respects
your right to a second amendment
protection in the home and
outside the home and that that's
in all jurisdictions whether
Indian country
in federal agencies FBI ATF to
the or the state has to abide by
that.
Okay Representative earned have
you ever bought a gun lock or
installed in lock on a gun in
and have you ever been able
dealing again.
Mr chair members of the
committee senator you know do
but have you ever had the
stalled again lock on this I own
a gun lock down more than one
gun.
And do you know how quickly you
can get a gun lock off again.
I understand how that could
happen but Mr agency senator
Munoz I also understand the
responsibility to keep my fire
arm out of the hands of of
minors and make sure that is
securely stored so that's what
this bill is all about and we
can we are creating many minutes
there it's scenarios that really
don't apply to this piece of
legislation and I just present
that to you senator or creating
real life scenarios that happen
in real life I mean I grew up my
kids I was at guns around my
house my kids knew better my
neighbors called the sheriff
connection jackrabbits of the
twenty two with guns and and
they just moved there they're
not used to being out in the
country in rural life right but
kids around our house grow up
with guns right they knew not to
touch him you know what to do
this is a this is a scenario
that happened.
Warrick kid acted out in the
only way he thought he could get
even was was to shoot the other
kids sad tragic should never
happened parents responsibility
falls all upon them.
But you can't change the way
people are in that in any gonna
be responsible gun owners are
not going to be responsible gun
owners
but you're not gonna force him
into that I'm I'm I'm gonna go
to your gun lock safety net the
ever breaking a lock on my gun
or still my guns and do that
that I'm gonna come back and of
probably file a civil suit
saying that the gun locked the
soul mate wasn't adequately
enough to avoid this law and
prosecution and so the liability
will be on whoever gave me the
lock or wherever it is if the
kid is able to get through it
and so the liability will be
upon the gift the and so I just
caution that.
I think that in certain
circumstances.
Dust that want to make a name
for themselves that want to do
high level prosecution in charge
these are going to push these to
the limit on what is negligent
what is accessible and what is
great bodily harm and you're
gonna get some good people
caught in a situation the
patient begin it being caught
and maybe even go broke because
trying to defend themselves for
a reason because the government
has all the money to prosecute
and people have very little
amount of money to defend
themselves we see that the
legislature with and X.
complaints every single day so.
I don't needing comments could
have a motion from the
committee.
So the motion for do passed by
Senator Steinborn in the second
by Senator Rodriguez we call the
roll.
Senator Campos this.
Senator Diamond nope.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill yeah.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Munoz yes screaming
about.
Sixty six to four the bill
passes Representative I was
gonna put amendment on this bill
that says contingent on no
special sessions in call for gun
violence.
The my mom my wife read the
paper before I did this morning
and threatened me that if I
wasn't home when the session
ended and so that may be a floor
amendment that I'm gonna be
looking at so we don't have to
hear anymore again bills good
luck I think you're gonna hear
lively debate and and I just
caution you that pride in some
of the young Jr the.
Somebody want to make them a
name for themself is gonna be
trouble it'll hurt people more
than it will help.
So thank you we're gonna come
tomorrow morning because we're
running late everybody's bills
in committee we're gonna try to
play catch up in the morning
maybe get one or two built up
over all the other ones to the
afternoon can play catch up with
agencies because we got to get
caught up on on specials and
supplementals and we gotta get
to language because we're gonna
wrap up house bill two of.
Sometime over the weekend.
Six.
