For all the members and our
audience. There's still six
presentations for this
afternoon.
And maybe if we can just keep in
mind to stay like
Between 20 minutes at the most
half an hour.
And that way of the committee
won't be here that late.
So go ahead and start you bet Mr
Chair and we'll make this go
quickly. I'm Michaela Fischer.
I'm the deputy director at the
Legislative Finance Committee.
And I'm joined here today by
Secretary perhaps from the FAA
and don't blink, Secretary of
State Personnel office.
I'll just quickly go over. Um
you have a hand out in front of
you should look like this.
And just go over a few key facts
from that, and then we can move
on if you turn to page three of
that handout.
You should have what looks
should look familiar A personal
services Calcavecchia's Calcutta
but this is for the whole state.
So the way to look at this is
that for fiscal year 24 last
year's budget
Um, you authorized a little over
27,000 employees across the
state that includes all three
branches of governments.
In Column B. About 22,000 of
those were filled as of January
1, which means about 5000 were
not filled. That's about a
19.4% vacancy rate.
In fiscal year 24 You provided
enough budget to fund about half
of those vacant positions.
Um or about $213.6 million.
That's about another third more
than what you give for funded
vacancies and fiscal year 23
That's in column K.
And then just the last thing to
note is that last column. Oh,
you know, on top of the existing
19.4% vacancy rate statewide,
we're seeing agencies asking for
another about 1600 positions
positions.
Um, and they're asking for an
additional $157.4 million to
help fund those positions And
then also, sometimes there's a
little extra on top to give
increases to existing positions.
And then so that's that's the
PS. Calcasieu. Look at, um the
first page of your bullets.
All right. You can see what it
costs to give existing state
employees are 1% raise. This is
a number that, um us and the FAA
analysts have come to consensus
on it's about
$10.8 million for every 1%
compensation increase.
Yep, Sorry. It's about it.
10% or sorry, 10 minutes $10.8
million cost for every 1%
increase you want to give in
salaries, too.
Um, state employees.
So you can see there at the
bottom. In the LFC
recommendation. Currently, there
is a recommendation to give
state employees
2% cost of living increase
across the board. There's
another 2%. That's about $21.7
million.
Um, to give to agencies to help
with merit based increases or to
help with recruitment and
retention. There's also some
money in the LFC recommendation
for compensation to help with
the increasing costs of health
benefits, so just to compare
You know about $50 million of
compensation increases right now
In the LFC recommendations,
agencies requested about $157
million extra for new positions.
Then the last thing I'll
mention, and then I'll turn it
over to the other speakers is
on page two of your bullets as
most of you know, the LFC got a
special appropriation for $1.2
million last year to do a larger
look at the state personnel and
compensation and classification
system. This hasn't been done in
New Mexico since about 2000.
So this summer we issued and we
issued an RFP. We've been
working in good conjunction with
SPO and D F A Deloitte was the,
um
The contractor that was picked
from that RFP and they've
started on the process of doing
several different things,
including reviewing the State
personnel Act looking at
compensation across state
classified employees looking at
how we classify jobs you heard
from Salina Bussi. I think at
the LFC meeting in January, most
of you did about the progress of
that project.
But, um the short of it is, is
that it will be wrapped up and
we'll have by May and we'll have
some hopefully, good
recommendations coming out of
that process to the Legislature
for next session.
And with that, Mr Chairil
alternate over to the other
speakers.
Nine just received a message
that
Our listening audience cannot
hear us. So if you want to get
closer to the MIC and
Sure.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez
again. My name is Dylan Lange.
I'm the director of the State
personnel office. Um, you do
have a hand and hand out in
front of you called Key
Workforce Metrics. Um, I just
want to highlight the vacancy
rate currently in FY 24 for
classified employees is 22.7 d r
7%, which is down
Um, from
I guess. July when it when it
was at 23.54, so I want to
commend the Secretary's here in
in attendance, forgetting that
vacancy rate down and also the
ones um
Watching to get it down. I do
want to highlight something that
you you all know and you've seen
and and it was an L S. C s
presentation that, um
Basically the new positions that
that we create that you will
create exceed the rate of them
being filled and so it can
create a perception of a rising
vacancy rate. Um, and you'll
just see, uh, on the handout.
The positions filled has never
been higher. Luckily, we did
get, um the vacancy rate down a
little bit, but that's that's
our biggest challenge that that
we're seeing it.
At the state personnel office,
um, that are keeping our vacancy
rates up. So what? What we are
what we are doing at state
personnel. We are an office of
35. We are meeting and
conducting strategic planning
meetings with agencies to assess
their needs and concerns trying
to to make sure that they have a
fiscal and a and a plan
generally to pay their current
employees and create
Um, new divisions and positions
as they see fit. Um we also have
been updating and maintaining
salary schedules. Um, and we are
reassessing current salary
schedules. We just did one for
the attorney classification.
Taking the attorney
classification down to three
classifications. It was at
Eight and and also, uh,
expanding the salary schedule
for attorneys. Um, as you can
see on the on our fourth quarter
report card and FY 22 the
attorneys were were very high in
the competition shows, so we
continue to do that in our
compensation and classification.
Um, division when asked by
agencies to assess
Current salary schedules and
classifications and trying to
lower minimum qualifications so
we can get a skills based
workforce back in into state
government. Um and those are a
lot of a lot of the things that
we are trying to do do it to
help agencies excel and to hire
the people that they that they
want to need and to create.
Ah, the greatest workforce they
can if they can't bring in
those, so I will tell you that
we did redesign again. The
Italian the attorney salary
schedule, peace officer, salary
schedule and a scientist salary
schedule. We are currently
reviewing and in the process for
engineers, water resources,
social services and engineer
text. And so those are meetings.
Uh, where we bring
State personnel office brings
subject matter experts in time
to get feedback On on what the
proper classification Pyszka
salary schedules can be. And of
course, we are awaiting the
Deloitte studies. Final results
to Really, um
Dig in as well, but we also
aren't waiting at the same time.
Um, the next slide really talks
about how we, um some of the
tools that we allow through
through rule to have state
agencies keep the workforce that
they do. They are in pay band
adjustments. They are
recruitment differentials and
retention differentials. So
we're paying our current staff,
um, to to ensure that
That that they are compensated
as best as we can. Of course, it
always comes down to budget
availability. Um, so for in pay
band adjustments, you know, and
and fy 23 We State personnel
office approved 2008 896 for
recruitment differentials. We
approved 673 and for retention
differentials. We approved 265.
And so these are tools that
agencies are
Empowered to use and that's what
we try to talk about in our
strategic planning meetings. The
last thing I will say is, we do
have a wonderful influx of new
employees outside of the state
system. For the first time
coming in, we have the highest
number of new hires entering the
state system now, and that's
Uh, in a large part due to our
hiring and recruitment processes
and trying to launching speed
hiring events, rapid hiring and
speed recruiting. So this this,
um
I guess that speeds up the time
to fill positions. They've been
successful. I'm sure you've
you've heard other state
agencies talk about the the
success that that that they've
had, so we have, uh, rapid,
higher events and rapid higher
our in person and kind of
designated for lower level
classifications. People can come
in. They bring their resume. If
they they're screened if they if
they meet the minimum
qualifications are given an
interview and can be even given
an offer, And we also allow for
speed recruiting, and those are
for the higher
Local level classifications. I t
we've seen successfully used and
also
Um, finance where someone
applies online through share
like anybody else. They are
screened. And then if they meet
minimum qualifications they are
interviewed during that time, so
we believe that we are providing
tools to help agencies succeed
to get these vacancy rates down.
Um, and that That's my
presentation. Thank you.
When
Good afternoon Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Wayne props with the
Department of Finance and
administration.
Mr Chairman is some of you who
have been around for a while.
No, this is the fourth State
agency that I've had the honor
of being the head of
And yes, Mr Chairman, as some
are probably hoping that it will
likely be my last
Um, but what I've learned over
the almost 20 years in state
government and having had that
honor of managing four state
agencies is that
It's the people that matter, and
in the end, that's that's all
that really matters and creating
a safe, respectful and healthy
workplace for your employees.
Is your number one priority as a
head of a state agency will say,
Mr Chairman, that it is. This is
the toughest environment I've
ever faced in terms of both
recruiting.
And retaining, uh good
employees.
Barely a week goes by where I
don't hear of a talented
employee who is leaving the
state.
And virtually every time I ask
where they're going, the answer
is Los Alamos. It's just really,
really tough to recruit and
retain.
A good employees, but I don't
know of a single Cabinet
secretary.
Who isn't doing everything they
can with the assistance of the
state Personnel Office, and with
the assistance and guidance from
the Legislative Finance
Committee.
To fill the positions that we
have. Nobody wants to have a 20%
or 15% vacancy rate.
Speak for myself and DFA. I want
to fill all the positions that
you have authorized force, and
we were certainly are working to
try to do that.
With respect, Mr Chairman and
members of committee in terms of
compensation for the current
session, As I believe I reported
to this committee, the executive
is recommending a 3% across the
board.
Compensation increase for all
state employees were also
recommending an 8% increase for
correctional officers and a 14%
increase for state police
officers.
We do appreciate and respect the
LCS 2% that they've set aside
for appropriate placement. Um,
we think that's important to
look at that. But we are, we
would respectfully, uh, submit
that perhaps until the study
that has been mentioned is
completed that it might be, um,
better to wait until that is
done in order to look at
Appropriate placement. Um
Compensation.
Um
Do appreciate, as Michaela
indicated as well, You're the
Legislature's willingness to
look at funded vacancy rates as
you build agency budgets that
funded vacancy rate has has come
down as Michaela indicated.
I was suggested as we look
forward, perhaps not in the
current legislative session, but
wants to study is completed.
That we might take a look at
some of the agencies are that
are facing the most difficult
challenges with faith filling
their vacancies to see if we
could even reduce the fake
funded vacancy rates for those
agencies sort of as a test to
see if that if they're able to
fill the positions they have
That are vacant and that would
reduce the request coming to you
for even for more new positions.
So Mr Chairman and members of
committee in
In closing. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here with the
real experts on this on this
subject. Um, you know when the
executive and Legislature
disagree, that's usually when we
see the headlines, but the many,
many times when we agree and
work together as we are on this
compensation and personnel study
that you authorized
Um, you know, may not get the
headlines, but it happens more
often than people think. And I
want to thank the LoC for their
the way that they've approached
the study. We are working very
well together and we hope in May
that we will have a product that
can help guide policy personnel
policy for the state for the
next decade or so. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Very well. Thank you to all of
you go to committee.
Senator Woods.
Um, Mr Chair I've been talking
in here.
Probably didn't know what I was
talking about.
But I've been talking in here
that state personnel office and
HR of these agencies should get
together and
Make some movement on these
And Lo and behold, here's state
personnel office. So I'm happy
to see you today.
I know that we've had
presentations in the past about
pay bands and
Yeah, that stuff works and
It's amazing that
We can pretty well reach a
consensus that were evidently
not paying enough money.
In her salaries.
But we can't do anything about
it.
Can you tell me exactly?
What needs to be done.
To increase
The mid points.
Of those pay bands, Mr Chair.
Chairman, Chairman, Senator
Woods. Um, but I tried to
explain some of the ones that we
are trying to look at, but
pursuant to State board rule
upon request of an agency. They
can have a classification study
done on a particular
classification or in the salary
range, So we just did one for
the attorneys we bring in
subject matter experts. We use
data to see what the market
reflects, and then present that
to the to the state State
Personnel Board for approval.
So, but I guess what I'm saying.
Mr Chair and Mr Director ASUs.
Over the last 10 years. How much
have we increased salaries,
honor bands this chair.
Hmm. Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, I
hope. Hopefully, um
Ah!
Makayla can can fill in. I know
that since 2000 and and 18 till
now we've increased salaries by
18%. But do you have
Yeah. Mr Chair and Senator
Woods. I don't have 10 years,
but I I went ahead and wrote
down. So last year you did
essentially 6% for state
employees, with some targeted
compensation increases beyond
that, for things like the
district attorneys and the
public defender's office the
year before that you did 7% and
also increase the minimum wage
to 15. So nobody's getting paid
less than 15 an hour.
Um, but before that the
increases were much lower for
fiscal year 22. It was only a
percent and a half in the year
before that. That was the 2020
session. You did 4% increases
but subsequently had to sweep a
lot of that when we were nervous
that we are in a precarious
budget situation because of the
pandemic.
So that's about
If I'm not mistaken, that's
about 14.5%.
Over.
Three year period.
Yeah, Mr Chair. That's about
right. You know, Before that
compensation increases were not
that large, and they were not
that common and you know that's
kind of part of the reason that
you know, we as a state feel
like we've fallen behind market
and a lot of positions.
And that's what I'm I guess I'm
asking
I know we're asking for study.
But we should be able to
I was gonna say Google it, but
we should be able to find a
place Mr Chair to
Come up with an idea of how far
behind we are, if we are behind
and I know we did a short study
on on a few, and we found some
positions.
Up above market and some
petitions below market.
But, uh
We've been talking about this
for a while.
Um
I remember.
Talking with the
The good secretary.
Some time ago about this.
And
If we're losing our talent.
Do the wages were there's we
should be able to fix that in a
year like this.
It's gonna be a reoccurring,
but, uh
It's probably a better place to
put reoccurring, then growing
other parts of the government.
If we are growing government
faster than we can find skilled
labor to fill the spots.
We're almost growing government
faster than the population.
If that makes any sense.
We're certainly growing
government faster than skill
neighbor that we can bring in
With the wages.
So
It's kind of, uh, I keep saying,
it's it's an HR problem.
It looks like
Each one of these agencies, Mr
Chair.
Could go to their HR department.
And have them investigate call
their counterpart.
In another state or two or three
or five.
And get an idea of what their
agencies you're paying.
And it wouldn't cost a lot of
money to do that study. I
wouldn't think if they actually
picked up the telephone
ourselves.
And along with I'm sure other
states have state personnel
officers.
And I know that you have a lot
of classifications, and I'll
know that you're classification
is probably aren't the same as
is other states.
But, uh
They shouldn't be.
It shouldn't be a major study
that
We would have to do to figure
out especially when we're losing
talent.
So if the problem is that that
it needs legislation to change
pay bands are to change
classification czar to
consolidate classifications.
We just need
Some direction.
There's there's guys up here.
I've heard that can carry a bill
all the way through.
So
Mr Chair.
I guess something through
spouting Thank you.
Very well. Senator Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr Chair
and of course to the members of
the Senate Finance Committee.
To our presenters Really applaud
you all not only coming before
us today, but
Talking about some of the issues
that continue to endanger if you
will.
The the work that we do, and I
really think about how on a
global scale as we deal with
things like compensation
benefits as we move forward, and
I go back two years ago, when we
dealt with haste study go even
further than that.
But to go ahead and, uh,
continue along the lines of what
Secretary probes is talking
about.
As as we move forward when it
comes to compensation, and we
see some of the exterior issues
that we're having to deal with.
Which range everywhere from
commuting where people are, uh,
living in Real Rancho and
Albuquerque commuting to Santa
Fe and anyone who gets involved
in traffic at 7 to 8 in the
morning, or 5 to 6 in the
afternoon. Continuously see if
you will, what we're dealing
with so
Compensation definitely is an
issue, but at the same time we
put lives in danger as we deal
with these issues. The other
thing when we start talking
about inflation, the cost of
living the kind of things that
we're dealing with when it deals
with pensions, the people that
are leaving. It's not only to
Los Alamos, but they're leaving
and they're going to other parts
of the region.
And why is that Because we're
educating them, and they're
finding that there are better
situations for them as they see
it.
In other states. So what? I what
I'd like to offer as we move
forward, and and this is
something that not only that
goes along with the study, but
how we can fully support our
state employees during this
session.
My very first session, one of
the
Um
Pieces of legislation that I
carried happened to deal
directly with state
compensation.
And within that I still recall
the issues that we dealt with.
And that was 32 years ago.
In dealing with it during those
days.
State employees were allowed to
come to the roundhouse They were
sitting in the gallery.
And they were very concerned
because a lot of the similar
issues that we're dealing with
today where issues that we dealt
with them.
In order for us to not only
catch up to come up with a
comparables and to develop if
you will.
A fair compensation system. It
really takes all of us and I am
not going to get into the
preaching of it. I just, uh,
really compelled because what I
heard Mr Secretary was your
heartfelt approach to this and
and that's what I truly
appreciated as we go forward, Of
course. Uh, Mr Lang is you're
dealing with it.
Ah, it's a horrendous task.
But it's something that is
meaningful and worthwhile.
And so as we go forward, please,
uh
Involved me in whatever way I
can. I can offer that support.
Because it's not only about the
compensation today. It's about
the livelihood of our families
tomorrow. So I just again thank
you very much for bringing this
forward.
And for giving us an opportunity
to participate. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chairman.
Senator.
Oh, there Anyone else? Salute
Father you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and thank you,
secretary and director and
Kaylen and companies. So, um,
I've been getting some feedback
lately and on social work parody
across multiple departments.
Just one example. Um, do we have
the role of social worker will
just use that as the example
where we're might be
compensating at different levels
based on C Y f D versus D O H
versus where elsewhere, Other
places where social workers,
maybe maybe working out it could
be a different role. I mean, I
You know, I'm just that's my
question. Why would we do that?
We wouldn't want to.
Have somebody kind of
Department hopping if you will,
and you can't quite get the role
in your department that you need
filled and scratching that
forehead. I'm sure that's
probably something you want to
add to that.
Chairman, Senator Padilla.
Please excuse my head
scratching. I was listening as
well. We we We established
classifications. Right? And we
do have many in the social
science. Um, uh, category. Um,
but each each
Agency, you know, can can
utilize those classifications.
You know how they best see fit
and and, uh, Also, some agencies
have more budget availability as
well. So when we were talking
about appropriate placement,
internal alignment there, there
Some agencies are more more able
to pay certain classifications
more but on the list here too,
is we are working with a C Y F
D, um on potentially, uh, salary
schedule. Study for the social.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chairman and
director, So I'll just go a
little bit further in then.
Um, So you know, we have
multiple departments sit in
front of us throughout the year.
Um and and talk about the
difficulty that they're having
to recruit and the difficult,
you know, to close these vacancy
rates. And what have you so you
know, is there like a massive
blue ribbon study that can come
together? Or is it coming
together on just a full sweep?
End to end?
You know, I feel like we need to
just collapse. All of the
multitudes of job titles and
classifications and all of that,
so that we can really sort of
begin to understand where we're
Where did you get this? You know
this done? I mean, it seems like
all we do is talk about this.
So, Mr Chair and Senator
Padilla. Yes, that's 100% within
the scope of the Deloitte work
That's ongoing. Right now. You
know, Senator Compost mentioned
the Hey study, which was what
happened in 2000. You know, at
that point in time we we can't.
It's kind of like back to the
future. We had a proliferation
of classifications. Hey, came in
and you know, over 1000 Hey,
came in and said, you know, no,
we really only need like a
couple 100.
You know, Um and we need to kind
of tighten this up. So like you,
said a social worker at the O h,
you know.
Paid the same for the same work
as if that's the case. Um, you
know, so we're awaiting that it
it you know to to Senator Wen's
time it
We should be able to know some
of this. It's it's surprisingly
complicated to do it. They did
10 for us for the LFC, um,
hearing just to kind of preview
how they were going to show
which positions were above or
below market. Um, but the idea
is that by the end of the study,
they'll do 215 more of them for
us, and also make some
recommendations for where you
know we might tighten up.
Within the classification
system. I don't know if you did
that.
Uh, but also add Senator
Padilla, Mr. Chair. Senator
Padilla is part of part of the
study as well as um, We are
surveying state employees to to
to see how they feel about
working for the state and also
if they were to leave what would
be the reason and if they are,
if they did leave, you know
what? What would be the
motivating factor and so that
that feedback will be really
helpful because there was a
study that was just, you know,
published for other states.
Uh, classified service and
number three. The reason why
people left was compensation
number One was, um job
engagement and number two was
opportunity for growth. So I
know we're in finance and we
talk about compensation, but But
you're right. It does take a
lift of of everything, and we're
also studying. You know that, um
Just generally, so I just wanted
to provide that as well as part
of the study. We're hopeful that
it's it's as comprehensive as it
can be. And it will really put
the state in a position to, um
to bring concrete proposals to
you all.
And so chair and director.
Whoever wants to respond to this
one. So is there already a, uh
you know
Defined project team or a tiger
team to implement the changes
that are already that are going
to come out of these studies.
I'd hate for us to go a whole of
the year after the report comes
out, you know, in terms of what
we're gonna do here because you
know, we need some action here.
Chairman and Senator Patty at
least from from state
personnel's offices.
Perspective. You know we are. We
are working well together with
the FAA and LFC. And so we don't
anticipate that changing to try
to implement some so some real
concrete things to bring to you
next session.
Okay, so, Mr Chair so that I'm
to understand changes won't
begin to be implemented until
after the next session. Mr.
Chair, Senator Padilla, Uh,
State personnel offices were not
necessarily waiting for, um, the
things that we can control right
now. So we are looking at
classifications We've are now
going to, you know the activate
about a, you know, over 215 or
about classifications that are
either inactive or no longer in
use. For instance, if there's a
cook, and there's three
classifications
A O and B. We're going to get
rid of the two that aren't being
used right? And so, um, you know
we so that's something that
we're currently doing. We're
currently looking at pay bands
working with agencies and if
they feel like a certain
classification, like the
attorneys like the firefighters,
right what wild land Fire fire
fires need to be paid more? We
are currently working with that,
Um
And so we are currently working
generally, I don't think there's
anything we are waiting for the
budget, but any any large scale
changes, I think, um, will come
before you next year if you want
to fill out, but we are
currently working every day, um,
to to try to make compensation
classification in the state of
New Mexico, the best place to
work.
Okay, So Mr Chairman and
director, I'll just ask one more
than so It seems to me like
departments when I interact with
them for any number of reasons.
Sometimes you'll tell me that
cash. You know, we're trying to
fit this.
Job title classification into
our environment into our world.
Um, and for the type of work
that we do. Are you spending any
amount of time during the study
period on understanding what the
department's truly need for? You
know, for example, um
The term quality specialist,
doesn't example there might be a
quality measurement that would
be very important to bringing
additional say federal dollars
into a particular department or
something. Uh, but maybe that
job title that that role doesn't
they can't seem to find that
anywhere in the universe of
these, You know, I guess
potentially now 1800 job titles
or whatever. So are you spending
time with the departments to
understand what they really
need.
Chairman, Senator Padilla. Yes,
absolutely. That's what we're
trying to do when we meet with
agencies, much like deface State
personnel office also has
analysts that are assigned to
each agency. And so we we sit
down and we talk with them about
what they need and what
classifications they need. I
will tell you that most of the
classifications when they were
created are are assigned to a
specific agency.
Um, but we are moving away from
that model to allow that
flexibility and if any agency
would like to use a certain
classification that was
specifically like an evidence
tech for for for DPS, You know,
the A G s office could use that
if they can provide that
justification, So we are
currently trying to make our
system as flexible as possible.
And we are engaging with with,
uh, all the state agencies as
frequently as we can, and that's
that's part of our strategic
meetings that we are.
Ah doing meeting with them. We
are trying to leverage our
knowledge and the abilities and
the tools that the state
personnel board rules allows for
agencies to help them excel.
Thank you Chair and I'll just
make this my last question then.
So what are some of the agencies
and departments telling you are
some of the biggest challenges
in this area?
Um, Mr Chair.
Senator Padilla budget
Is is the largest a factor
right? Because I mean there's
not an agency here in a
secretary leading an agency that
doesn't want the best for their
staff, and also to make sure
that they're providing the
essential services that that
state that the state citizens
need. So I think a budget is a
big thing. We want big, bright
ideas, but we also want to bring
up the people who have
Who have been, um, a loyal or at
least, um, have have have helped
the agency shape and giving him
the great reputations that they
do have And so really, that's
always something because that
analysis about
Um, appropriate placement and
internal alignment.
Takes place any time. There's a
new hire. There's a promotion.
There's a transfer reduction in
force that that is a is
necessarily a calculation that
goes on in every agency. So I
think it's trying to balance
that. What we try to do is, uh
Try to help him the best we can,
so they're making sure that
they're providing the services
within the budget that that that
they can that they can have. So
I mean, that's that's the
largest, uh, problem that that
that we see and we try to help
navigate and luckily we have the
tools to do that.
That's my answer. Okay. Thank
you, Mr Chair and
I know I had a lot of questions
here, and I appreciate you
answering them, and I know you
have a Herculean task ahead of
you to get this thing ironed out
This very wrinkled shirt is what
it feels like. They were trying
to wear this shirt. That's just
not quite whatever. And but
again, I do have to say, you
know, we hear all the time on
this topic and just trying to
figure out you know what? What?
How can we help you to get this
done Because
There's an awful lot of
frustration out there. Thank
you, Chair.
Thank you. I'm just laughing
because I think I have a
stalker, Senator Bert.
Thank you, Mr Charron. And I
guess along the same lines, you
know, we
And all these empty FTE
positions and every agency every
year.
And some of them get killed on
the front end and don't get
feeling on the back end.
And I appreciate it in your
court. You're making headway in
in hiring those folks. But you
also made a statement that the
creation of new positions
In government outpaced them.
So I guess my question is, Is it
that difficult? Or is it do we
have rules and regulations where
you can't reclassified position
if you have an empty FTE
position that never seems to get
filled, and now you're mandated
to hire new positions for maybe
a new program or something. We
just instead of creating more
FTE positions that don't get
filled.
Can we just change someone that
already exist? They're not
filled two different
classification and go from
there, and I'm just looking at
people laugh when I use this
term efficiency in government,
But I'm looking at efficiency in
government of instead of putting
all this money into big pots of
unfilled positions were just not
being very efficient about how
we do it Can can we change
classifications and go forward
in these agencies?
And and maybe not reserve a
whole bunch of additional
dollars for new positions that
we're creating.
Or something.
Uh, chair Senator Bert. I think
that's a pretty pragmatic
approach, right? And but from a
state personnel perspective with
the classified service, we we
just try to to to help and
assist agencies and and and
seeing and supporting them and
what they need to do right. So
if they want to fill positions
that they want to re class
positions to help handle finance
for these new divisions, or help
HR and these new divisions,
that's what we try to do, But I
think you're pragmatic approach.
um you know, could be could be
beneficial.
Well, um when dealing with
agencies and we try to have
those conversations about, you
know. Well, what exactly do we
need to do? You all need to to
request right? Um, from you all,
but so that's what our role is
kind of more.
You know, you all have done your
work, You know, And how can we
help you? All? Um Ah.
Take the Herculean task of
Senator Padilla say, um and and
and and ensure that your
divisions are running smoothly
and FDs are being appropriately
paid, funded and
Everybody's a aligned properly
in your current division.
And I appreciate that, Mr Chair.
I mean, it really is not your
your issue. Quite frankly, it's
it's us dealing with agencies
and
Being a little more efficient in
how we let agencies applying new
FTE positions. Uh, with regards
to if you I mean, if you're 12%
empty
Uh, why can't you take those
positions and reclassifying for
the new positions? You want to
add? Because you you know you're
never going to fill those
positions anyway. I mean, again,
you'll feel some on the front
end. Drop off some on the back
end. So I understand really. It
is our our issue, but we need to
somehow work with every agency
in the state to get them to
think when they add programs and
things like that.
Uh, maybe readjust.
What they have on the books
already, so we're not tying up
additional monies. Um it's just
not individual way to run
things. So anyway, I just want
to bring that to the table.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. I may be the bearer
of bad news. But somewhere today
I heard, I mean,
Ha!
Should we just turn this over to
agencies and give them the staff
and get rid of spool?
And say, Okay, you manage your
levels. You manage your hiring.
Imagine that managing number
employees you need in
And
I don't know if we need spumoni
Mayor anymore because spoke it
seems to be the hang up and
agencies. You know we have
employees applying and spoke
Everybody's gonna blame
everybody in this scenario
because I've heard it both ways.
You know, we sent it the
employee over disposed poses.
They didn't approve it, Uh, the
agency says the employee and
check a box and sport rejected
it. And it's this
Back and forth back and forth.
I mean, at some point agencies
need to know. Know what they
need to hire?
Look at D O H, They need 50% of
their financial right?
But they have to go to school to
get that approval.
And shouldn't we just place
that?
State personnel person or a
personnel person in the agency
and say
Okay, Here's the guidelines and
here's the rules. You gotta
follow them.
I mean, for how many years have
we heard That spo is is
The hangout for an employee
getting hired some of its
employees, some of exposed some
of its agency.
And I know you're new, but
How long you been around, Joey?
And and we're doing. A study
hasn't been done in 20 years,
right?
In
That's a lot of the problem, but
I mean, I think it
Some point, I think
Mr Secretary there, and I had
this discussion is like
Even if she's need to control
their own destiny, And they can
only do that with employees and
and do the hiring.
Instead of getting allowances to
do rapid hires and
All these changes to get
employees into place and look at
the numbers over the years.
I mean, the total vacancies kind
of just
Floats around the scene.
Number right?
For year over year and and
It looks like we're 19% over on
employees, right?
And some of that is technology
driven computers right gates and
killed the most jobs in America
than anybody.
In
I don't know what how we do
this, But I know I know. How do
we manage employees?
And not hear the agency scene. I
need these FTE s and I need
these vacancies in. I need these
funded FTE s
In case that higher and then
they come for us and see
Oh, it's poets, Poets Po, and
then you talk to Spokane and say
it's partly the agencies.
I know you haven't been there
very long.
You have any comment, or
Michaela or Wayne?
The most senator. Uh, Chairman.
Thank you for that. You know
that there was, you know, maybe
that that perception of spo, uh,
a couple of years ago. You know,
the I know that since since I've
been a part of spo, you know,
we've we've worked
Tirelessly with with agencies to
make sure that they are getting,
um
Their actions completed quickly.
You know, we've given a lot of
agencies autonomy, so we are a
state over wide oversight agency
about 35 employees. I think with
the last study that was done in
2000 spo is about 60 or 66
employees. So we're half of
that. But we are an oversight
agency. And so we don't most
agency actions don't need to
come to spoke.
Any longer. They can do them
theirselves. It's only just in
great hires of promotions over
15% someone trying to get
cooperation over 15% 115%
creations and positions that
there are very few actions that
actually have to come to spo
anymore. So we've empowered
agencies to do the lot of their
HR work.
As well. But we do provide
guidance on on and and stability
right as, um, for the classified
service, as as as governments
change and and and that and so
that's that's what SPO provides
just generally, but we have
empowered agencies more and more
with with their own HR
decisions generally.
I think you just made my case.
Right. You're really not
providing except oversight on
large increases.
Right in 66 employees there and
Agencies are kind of doing it on
their own.
I mean,
We'll see what comes out of the
study. Maybe they'll tell us
whether we need to explore.
Don't need a spo.
Right?
Or if we can hand that off to
D F A
Since that's our favorite.
Um
Ha!
Yes, I think I heard it. Yes,
Over there. Um, I'm you're
shaking your head one way, but
your lips are moving another,
but I mean, that's the whole
problem and deal for years and
years and
If we have 66 employees, and
they're basically just managing
Larger increases in 15%.
Surely we can fix that problem.
Right?
Thank you. Thank you. Chairman
also says, you know, we all love
you tell me Thank you for that
comment. No, you're speaking
candidly. So I appreciate it. I
mean there. There's a reason we
need to study. There's a reason
why individuals are upset.
There's a reason why you want to
hear from the state personnel
director. And so I mean, what
I'll say is we also are are are
in charge of our compensation
and classification and auditing
of what agencies are actually
doing and how they're paying. Um
you know, they're They're agency
individuals. We also train
right. We have a training arm.
As well. So we provide training
on management. We provide
training on civil rights. Um and
we also provide HR services to
those smaller agencies that, um,
are any either in transition or
don't have this the FTE to
actually manage their to
actually do their HR. So that's
that's the end. We're also the
Ah labor negotiator for the
state with our union, So we were
actively working with
With unions, so I want to make
sure it's that
Um, our our workforce planning
team where I was talking about
approving actions and
recruitment is only 11 piece of
our office.
But but to go to that point, I
mean, we wouldn't be in that
situation with the environment
apartment.
It was supposed was really
auditing and paying the right
classifications.
So
I'm not blaming you on this, but
I mean, when we got a $6.3
Million.06 million dollar
increase in exposure to cut that
in auditing.
At some point if we're not
paying the right
classifications.
So I mean,
You're not to blame, but it fell
through the cracks somewhere.
Well, Chairman, I can tell you
that we are working closely with
environment. You know, we we do.
We do approve their their their
in pay bands. You know, I think
they had a pretty pragmatic
approach and in trying to get
and pay bands and pay their
current staff, you know
properly, um and so and we will
continue to to be there to
provide support to them.
And I'm not blaming you for this
in any way, shape or form, but
You know, I've spent
Prior to you, and maybe prior to
the other one. When we did pay
increases, I spent two days
inside my office and the SPO
director then says, Oh, I know
how to do this. I know how to do
this, and we did the pay
increases and they were all
messed up.
And and we trusted him and
believed him.
But I mean, some of that stuff
should have been caught. I mean
environment department pay
increases should have been
caught. If you're auditing that
now, I don't know why it wasn't
caught because they're paying
out of funds, and it didn't look
like they had a deficiency. You
weren't paying correctly, but
At some point. I mean, how many
more audits and pay do you
think?
How many audits overall Maybe
your new have you seen where
there's deficiency in P
Oh, Chairman, one of our
Performance measures is the
number of audits. I don't know
where we where we are exactly.
We were just able to hire one
person. Our our Our audit team
are is one person. Um, and so
I'll get back to you about what?
We're finding you. Answer me.
one person. Yeah. Audit team for
payroll in 25,000 employees.
It's like taking a couple of
water out of the ocean.
Right?
That you just can't get there.
So
I don't have any other
questions, but I think it's
gonna be interesting with the
pace that, he says, because I
think that's going to be a high
number across the board.
As we look in
And then we're gonna come back
and say we're not gonna fund
Vacancies or or FTS that you're
not gonna fulfill because we had
this big, large increase, so
agencies very good kind of
prepared.
That there's gonna be problem
massive pay increase.
And then
We're going to have to tamper
down the number FTS.
Especially since overall vacancy
is like 19% on average over
I think that's it. That's all
the questions I can have.
Thank you Appreciate your time.
We're working hard over. All
right, Mr Chairman, members of
the committee.
My name is Eric Shenyang. I'm
the LFC, analyst for the
Healthcare Authority.
Ah, sitting next to me. I have
Secretary. Uh
Of the healthcare Authority
carry Armijo.
And sitting next to her. We have
the executive budget analyst, Ms
Mary Beth Densmore.
Um, I just wanted to go through
real fast where you'll find the
lfc write ups in your, uh
Volumes in front of you in
volume one. You'll see our
policy right up on page 52.
In volume one. You'll see our
performance right up page 121
Volume two. You'll see our
Ah!
Our budget right up and page 290
volume three. You'll see our, um
Graphs and tables Page 70.
Um, I'm just gonna go ahead and
jump in here into the bullets
that I believe you have in front
of you now.
Uh, just to kind of mentioned
kind of some of the history on
this agency. Last year, the
Legislature passed a bill.
Creating the Healthcare
Authority Department.
Ah, that was basically taking
all of the
Programs that were previously a
part of the Human Services
Department and then adding the
developmental disability support
division and the division of
Health improvement.
From the Department of Health
and then also adding state
health benefits from the General
Services Department.
In total, LFC recommended a 7.5%
increase in the executive
recommended an 18.4% increase in
general fund revenue for the
authority.
When factoring in prior year
budgets for the programs
transferred from other agencies.
General fund recommendations
differed on assumptions for
Medicaid program growth,
developmental disability support
growth and the need to offset
other revenue sources.
Through Medicaid provider rate
adjustments. Both
recommendations prioritize
provider access and network
adequacy.
With LFC investing more in rural
access and the executive
investing more and services for
the elderly.
The executive assumed continued
Medicaid enrollment growth while
LFC assumed to reduction and
enrollment.
The executive recommended
increasing Supplemental
nutrition assistance program
benefits and Tan if benefits
And the L C did not support
those increases.
The executive supported
administrative expansions to
increase spending on the call
center contract, adding FTE
increasing spending by about 8.3
million for I t infrastructure.
Software I T support and
creating a data analytics team.
Um
Before I go on it once you get
into the tables that you have in
front of you the difference
sheets If you're starting to
look through those
You'll see some pretty
significant differences in
their, um
I just wanted to mention that
we've been meeting pretty much
every single day since our HFC
hearing a few weeks ago or about
a week ago, I guess.
Um, to come to a consensus on
the budget, uh, coming out of
the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee and and I
believe we do have a consensus
at this point. We can't talk too
much about it right now because
it hasn't been passed through
their committee yet, And it's
still um
Somewhat of a work in progress,
but I do think we're pretty much
there and we've been able to
bridge much of that gap.
Another thing I wanted to notice
note in your different sheets
that you'll see in front of you
is in the medical assistance
division. If you look get to
looking in there, you might see
Pretty large difference. I think
it's you know, it's it's pretty
big, few $100 million
Big chunk of that is because the
executive recommended
Moving the funding for the
developmental disabilities
waiver into, uh, the medical
assistance division and LFC did
not recommend doing that. And so
that's that's a big chunk of
that money there.
Um, And with that, Mr Chairman
and senators, I'll pass it over
to Mr Brady Mary Beth Densmore
if she has further comment,
Thank you, Eric. Hello again,
Mr Chair. Um I just have a
couple of comments and then I'll
pass over to the secretary for
you. Um, I was going to say just
what Eric did a moment ago.
We've been collaborating, and I
think some of these gaps that
still remain where we're making
some progress on.
Getting to the same page. So,
um, it's It's really great. Um,
there were working together so
well, but there are a couple of
key differences that are still
in the budget that Eric did
mention. I just wanted to get
into real quick detail is
there's still 19 million
difference in the Medicaid base.
um, as well as differing
approaches and discrepancies and
funding for the provider rate
increases.
In both the Medicaid and
Medicaid behavioral health
programs. Um another thing um
Eric mentioned about the program
support.
It is well to elaborate Hcs
request contained items to help
them succeed with this with
these new divisions, right, um,
to set them up for success.
However, there's still a
significant gap between the
executive and the LFC for this
purpose. Um, and I think it's a
pretty
Important thing to be
considering, um, for the agency
as they are, and there are a few
other notable differences. Um
the biggest ones are probably
the two that you'll see an
income support that Eric covered
the snap difference in the town
of difference. Um
Those I think are the big East.
I just wanted to give you a
little
A little more information before
I passed it over. Um so thank
you, Mr Chair and Secretary.
I'll give it to you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. Good afternoon.
Um, do you before I start and
carry Armijo, secretary
designate of the Human Services
Department, which is
transitioning to the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority. Um, I
would like to just briefly. I
want to introduce them all, but
I would like to just briefly
acknowledge the incredible team
of public servants working
behind the scenes and then
behind me and really sort of the
thought leadership that went
into this budget request.
They're all behind me. I just
like to acknowledge them.
Really. They are the reason that
I am here so
I want to just say thank you to
the team of folks behind me and
also like to think H A F. C and
the lfc, including Eric Shinier
and director Sally for working
closely with us over the past
week to address the differences
in the recommendations. We have
made a lot of progress, which
was cited earlier, so I feel
like we're coming in a really
good place. Still some key
differences, which I'll talk
about today, but I really want
to just acknowledge the
transparency and partnership
between the two entities to come
together.
And then Lastly, I'd like to
thank all of you as members of
the Senate Finance Committee for
your leadership in service to
the people of New Mexico.
Moving on to the next slide.
Um, I just like to reiterate
that the framework for the
executive budget request is the
healthcare authorities, New
Mission Vision and goals. We
These are new Ximena. Restate
them. I know you've got a
preview of these yesterday, but
I'd really like to restate that
the mission of the agency is to
ensure that new Mexicans attain
their highest level of health by
providing whole person cost
effective, accessible and high
quality healthcare and safety
Net services and as we become
the healthcare authority, we
retain those safety net programs
like food and child support and
income assistance.
Which help lower income new
Mexicans with their basic needs
in order to support their health
and well being. Our vision is
that every new Mexican will have
access to affordable healthcare
coverage through a coordinated
in seamless healthcare system,
which we acknowledge does not
exist today. But that really is
the future state and where we
are heading for the state of New
Mexico. We have four primary
goals. Those goals are to
leverage the purchasing power
and partnerships primarily that
we've established in the
Medicaid program by covering
875,000.
Mexicans.
To create innovative policies
and models of comprehensive
healthcare coverage that improve
the health and well being of new
Mexicans in the work force to
achieve health equity by
addressing poverty,
discrimination and lack of
resources Building a new Mexico
where everyone thrives.
To build the best team in state
government by supporting our
employees, continuous growth and
wellness and to implement
innovative technology and data
driven decision making to
provide unparalleled convenience
services, access to services and
information, all of the
executive budget recommendations
tied directly to one of these
four goals and as a reminder, I
do want to say that the
healthcare authority will
directly serve more than 50% of
New Mexicans.
One in two new Mexicans as a
recipient on services through
our agency. I'd also like to
call out the enormous economic
engine that is the health care
authority. Um all of the grocery
stores in the communities that
you all serve all of the
providers offices. We are very
important and so as you think
about the health care
authorities budget requests, I
hope you'll consider that
economic investment in New
Mexico and people that we serve.
Next slide.
Okay, So this is a high level
summary sheet of the executive
recommendation. The FY 25 Hcea
executive recommendation was for
$12.4 billion 16.9 percent of
that is from General Fund. The
General fund shares 2.1 billion.
That's an increase of 310
million from FY 24 or 16.9%.
88% of that growth is attributed
to recurring Medicaid general
fund. So that total is about 244
million. That is really
attributed to a few things.
Enrollment trends, um,
utilization of services.
Sustaining provider rate
increases, including the House,
The rate increases that were
made through house built to last
year. Thank you very much an
investment that I'll talk about
in a minute and then changes in
federal funding. Um, during the
public health emergency, we
received enhanced federal
funding that is now going away
or has gone away, um, that we
have to account for in the
budget request about 4.3% is
related to of the budget is
related to new hcea costs, which
I'll talk about a little bit
more on the
Next slide.
I do want to just call out that
our fy 24 24 23 reversion rate
is 1.62%. Almost all of that is
due to enhance federal funds
that were we received as an
agency due to the public health
emergency. So almost all of that
is Medicaid. We have a 0%
reversion on the administrative
budget.
Um so I will talk about the key
differences between the
legislative and the executive
budget requests. Um, in a little
bit more detail, but I did want
to just call out that we started
with $197 million difference. We
are now closer to 99 million
Really good progress. I think
most of the difference at this
point is really going to be
around expansion items. Um, and
decisions about the legislative
about what to do with those
expansion items and then the
foundational support for the
healthcare authority.
Through programs support. Moving
on to slide for
Um, the three key priorities in
the executive budget requests
are to fund Medicaid coverage
and workforce innovations so
prioritizing again provider rate
increases. We did phase the
first phase of rate increases
Last year we invested as you can
see in the map on the right $410
million into the provider
network. You can see where those
dollars went by county.
Pretty huge investment here in
the state of New Mexico. We
really hope that was step one
and not the endpoint. We really
want to use those provider rate
increases to improve access to
care and attract providers here
to our state. And then we've
also proposed the addition of
some new services to our benefit
package. Do you want to call out
just the graph below you can
see.
Um, the behavioral health visits
in the graph. So in 2019, we
implemented some rate increases
for behavioral health and a real
focused effort on rebuilding the
behavioral health system. We
have more than doubled the
number of behavioral health
visits in New Mexico. We believe
that we'd like to see those
visits double again. But we
really believe those investments
are working and improving access
to care. The second component
for our budget is creating a
more effective safety. Net. Um
much most of much of this is
driven through expansion.
Is that we're seeking for tan.
if, um and for food in
particular additional food
support for people with
disabilities and elderly New
Mexicans.
And then lastly, really making
sure that the healthcare
authority is established and set
up for success, making sure that
the agency has an adequate
foundation to ensure that it can
meet. The mission does require
some level of investment in the
talent of the agency.
Moving on to slide five.
Um, So we started with the
biggest differences in Medicaid
and again, as you know, as, um
Eric pointed out, there are some
changes being made as we speak.
I'm gonna just kind of we've
really narrowed the gaps and
talk about where we think those
biggest differences are today.
Um, once that's going to come
over from the HFC, so the first
is going to be around provider
rate increases. Um
We have, um, a difference really
In terms of trying to get the
agency the executive request is
trying to get us to 150% of
Medicare through the provider
rate increases. Um, we have also
a preference to start those rate
increases on a calendar year
basis to align with our
contracts.
So we're really trying to do
that and also so that we can do
all the work we have to
otherwise do a lot of
retroactive re processing of
claims. We think it will be more
effective to do those on a
calendar year basis going
forward. Um and so that's our
proposal, so there's money in
both parts there for rate
increases, but the legislative
side does not get us to that.
150%. We think it's closer to
130% of Medicare, potentially
for some providers, although
Those increases will be smaller
compared to what the executive
is proposing.
Secondly, we are proposing new
benefits and services in
particular. We want to call out
that we're not providing vision
or eyeglasses. Two adults We
think these are important
services for people to work. I
personally would not be able to
work without my glasses. And so
I feel like it's a really
important for us to be able to
provide those services providing
acupuncture benefits and then
preventive dental services so we
can prevent cavities and
Children primarily
Um, I also want to mention that
we have proposed pay parity for
what we call mid level providers
so that they would be paid equal
to what a physician is paid. So
a nurse practitioner would get
the same amount as a physician.
Um, and then, Lastly, I did want
to just call out it's a small
amount of money in the relative
budget scheme for Medicaid, but
we have requested for new FTE
for our oversight of turquoise
care or managed care program. We
want to say, you know, we really
agree with the lfc that we need
better oversight of our managed
care contracts, and we'd like to
be able to do that. Our
contracts are huge. They are
$7.2 billion contracts. Um and
We have a lot of recruitments
lots of financial penalties
being built in. We really feel
like we need to have better
oversight and we would do that
with these additional FTE. So we
would like to see those
supported. I also want to call
out that we do have a very low
vacancy rate. Our current agency
vacancy rate is 12.3%. Actually,
that is below the agencies
funded. They can see rate right
now. So we have no room for
additional FT without either
funding from the Legislature or
cutting FTE elsewhere. We are
really at a point where
Where we cannot add positions
unless we are gonna get the
funding for that.
I also want to highlight the
incredible amount of work done
by the Medicaid division. Um,
there were 19 bills passed last
legislative session. Almost all
of those were Medicaid related
bills, no new staff, no
appropriations. All of that work
is completed.
Moving on to slide six.
Um some additional differences.
I want to highlight between the
two recommendations. These are
really in the category of
foundational support for the
health care authority and
program expansion items, So I'm
just going to call it the
largest ones. There are still
other differences that remain,
but these are the biggest ones.
So, um, I want to call out that
we are getting 411 new staff
from the Department of Health
and the General Services
Department as we become the new
agency.
We really need to be able to
provide it. Equipment, support
and software if we are
underfunded, and right now the
legislative under funds us for
that these are really just basic
functions. You know, many of you
operate businesses and will
understand that when you have
staff come on, you really do
need to provide the support that
they need just in terms of
equipment, supplies and things
like that. So there is a
difference there. I also want to
call out that the healthcare
authority
We have a 0.15 administrative
rate. This is the lowest rate
for administration in state
government, but we are doing an
incredible amount of work as we
take on additional staff. We
really need programs support to
that includes legal counsel
human resources, financial and
leadership support to achieve
our mission, and we think that
not adequately some funding the
support for the agency puts us
at risk of, um
Accountability issues and risks
to service delivery.
I want to call out that there is
a pretty big expansion here for
snap. We are proposing to expand
the snap benefit supplemental
benefit for older adults and
people with disabilities.
Currently they're receiving $25
a month in food support. Um,
that would go up to $150 under
our proposal.
125 sorry
I'm wrong. My slide must be
wrong. Okay? Um $125, Mexico is
number one in food insecurity in
the United States, So we really
feel like this is an important
investment in our seniors and
people with disabilities. I also
want to point out that people at
risk of food insecurity are also
at risk of institutional care,
which is a much more expensive
Um, way to go when people can't
meet their basic daily needs.
They are at risk of having to go
into nursing homes or other
institutional settings, which
then sort of reduces their
quality of life.
Moving on to slide seven. These
are just again some additional
budget variances. I'm not going
to call all of these out, but I
do want to point out the one at
the bottom. It's just a
$705,000 difference. But this is
really, um
Sort of a reduction that was
made by the Department of Health
when they were sending over some
positions to the agencies that
they reduce their budget. Um
we're intending to send some
positions over to our agency.
Those did not get funded. And so
I am asking that those get
returned into our budget Since
those were taken out of D O H.
In summary, Go to my last slide
here in summary, I just want to
restate that we are seeking
legislative support for Medicaid
coverage and workforce
innovations, creating a more
effective safety net and setting
the healthcare authority up for
success. I do want to say that
in closing the health care
authority doesn't just
administer public assistance
programs were also successfully
because connecting our customers
with employment and training
You can see in the graph on the
right. We are seeing a lot of
success being recognized for
this nationally and connecting
our child support customers with
work. You all have helped us
modernize our child support
program. But we have our efforts
have successfully resulted in
nearly 40% of parents getting
jobs through our DWS
partnership. That means more
money for New Mexico's kids, and
that helps people move off of
assistance faster.
So with that, I would just like
to ask for your support for the
executive budget. Um,
recognizing the importance of
these investments in the lives
of new Mexicans, and I will
stand for your questions. Thank
you.
Which is going,
Mr Chairman. Uh, I think what
you're referring to are the rate
increases to maintain rate
parity. Yeah, go ahead.
Okay, Mr. Chair. It's so yes,
it's half of the year is what's
funded in the recommended for
funding. In the executive
recommendation. The executive is
really trying to get 250% of
Medicare for these providers
that we started these rates or
you started. These rate
increases, um, in the current
year for them, Um, but due to
the large cost, it's simply a
way to start moving in and
raising these rates for
providers.
Um, In addition, one of the
things that does
administratively, um is
supports, um how Currently HST
runs their contracts. They do
them on a calendar year basis,
not a fiscal year basis, so
starting them on July 1st is a
real hardship for them to get
those rates going in time for
July 1st and so not only would
it give them the right amount of
time to be able to get
everything in place. So these
rights can be, um increased, but
it will also keep them in
alignment with all
The other contracts and rates
that are increased on a yearly
basis.
And I mean, we haven't heard
from the house. But if they
increased, HST by $100 Million,
I mean
We're probably at maximum
capacity in the budget.
What's supplementals and
deficiency So we might as well
just go home right now, Mr.
Chair. I do want to say the
agency also has yielded, um so I
think that's really the the 99
is really kind of where we think
we are having yielded a lot. I
think that, um, based on what I
understand is happening at HFC
they've added about 20.
Is that right?
Well, we don't know it was Mr
Chair members of the committee.
It was 12 Million General Fund
added, And then there were some
additional replacement of like
through other funding sources
like the opioid settlement and
tobacco settlement That was
about 12. Sure tennis. I think
We don't like I don't know I
can't respond, but I mean
You know, this is the biggest
budget cost, right? And you have
an $8 billion budget larger,
very much larger than the state
and
Senator Stein, board chair,
Madam secretary. Good afternoon.
It's good to hear that you'll
have worked out the differences.
It sounds like and you know, I
think HFC does a good job with
subcommittees and working things
out. So so it sounds like it's
good work this out, and they get
first crack at it. So
That being said, I just want to
mention two policy areas number
one.
I was listening. I wasn't here
because that was the most
crucify for funeral. The
Health care purchasing.
Procurement effort that you're
doing. I wanted you to make make
you aware, Madam secretary that
few years ago we passed a lot
Was my my bell. Some very aware
of it, um, to create a
pharmaceutical benefits
purchasing collaborative.
Within GSD because they were
course risk management or
running purchasing health care,
But it was to do exactly as you
described and I know you're
subsuming that so I didn't know
if you were when you were
describing it. It sounded like
you were describing her old bill
if you were literally well, but
you're putting money into
professional services to study
it. Which is good. I bring it up
to you because
No, that was in effect for
several years. They met. We also
author appropriated money to
hire
I don't think that they did a
very good job of driving a hard
enough bargain. One thing we
know about the health care
purchasing industry is they'll
always fight to protect their
profits. And if you're not
equally equally as wily, you'll
lose. You'll lose the battle and
I don't think we gave it what we
had to give it to compete, but
And so I would give you that
word of caution as we like to
say here, you know is be
aggressive, be very aggressive
to find those savings because
that's a tough one. But I just
wanted you to be aware so we're
completely duplicating like you
could contact GST or those folks
and get any paperwork related to
that effort. Any progress
related that effort that Bill
Actually identified a 13
different cost containment
strategies. Everything from 430
B two multi state purchasing of
pharmaceuticals and health
benefits. They were supposed to
evaluate all those strategies. I
don't really know what they did
What? They didn't do what they
got out of it, but it's good for
you to at least know about it
and get whatever you can get out
of it and give that to your
Consultants, So we're kind of on
the shoulders of that effort.
That's one thing. Um
I wish you well on that because
it's a lot of money.
Um
It was one other thing. I didn't
write it down, but doing too
many things. So, Miss Tremaine,
you need to go back for a second
little but at the apple. I
remember what
Number two US prescription
three. Mr Chair. That's the
Department of Health.
I like that, though. Yeah,
Health as well. Mr Chair. Can I
can I respond just for real
briefly on prescription drug
purchasing. I think that's a
really great suggestion,
Senator. Um, I actually am
familiar with the interagency
pharmacy Purchasing council. Our
agency participated in that
effort early on one of the
things I am excited about. As we
become. The health care
authority is the potential to
leverage that Medicaid
purchasing power for the first
time really across the market.
Medicaid is guaranteed best
pricing. Uh and we have
guaranteed rebates. I'm really
eager to see how we might be
able to leverage that, um,
across the market to achieve
some savings. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you. And that's
great. Remember one second thing
was the substance abuse study
that we contracted this last
year that we funded this last
year.
Just for everybody's benefit we
funded
Study that I work with you,
Secretary. We were gonna
partially funded with Medicaid
money to do a statewide
substance abuse study to see
where
Our specific needs were and how
much money I was going to take
so we can actually fund a
roadmap of funding substance
abuse in the state. Since
seemingly we could never produce
a number of saying, Well, how
much would it cost? Where would
it need to be? And you know, I
never seem to have answers, so
we funded a plan and I know you
had good response to the RFP.
Can you tell us where that study
is at right now, Mr. Chair,
Senator Stein Burns all start
And then, um, you know, I may
need with your permission, Mr
Chair to call on my team here
behind me for the latest, and we
are working on that it is. We
actually are trying to do a full
map on behavioral health
services, so not just limited to
substance abuse because
We are trying really hard to
build out the network of care
here in New Mexico. We really
want to make sure we're filling
in gaps and being intentional
about it. So it is underway. I
will ask either Secretary Deputy
Secretary Castillo Smith or
Okay, Director. Nick Bolkus,
Behavioral Health Services
director of this just step in
with the status update you
Good afternoon and thank you, Mr
Chair, and Senator Stein born
for the question. Um, so we had
a, uh, a request to go out and
we had three response to that we
chose via positive. Uh And they
are. They have recently started
work on that We chose them just
because of their roots within
New Mexico, which was important
for us, as well as having two
connections.
Do you municipalities as well as
with the tribes, So we are
convening some stakeholder
listening sessions. Part of the
scope that we had put in there
is to not only identify the
costs but to look at what the
sustainability will be for local
governments moving forward so
that they can then transition to
a longer term plan.
Great and follow up question. Mr
Chairman, Secretary, sir, So you
would secretary you had said.
Looking at a holistic other
issues.
What I what I founded was
specifically a substance abuse
study statewide. It's great to
look at other things, too. But
does your study key in on that
that we funded the substance
abuse treatment? Part of it?
Yes, sir. Mr Chair and Senator
Stein Born again. Thank you. It
does include that That is part
of the scope of work. Yes, sir.
Specifically come up with a
statewide plan. And, yes, sir.
Treatment and that will be
coordinated with the behavioral
health Collaborative so that all
agencies that are doing
behavioral health as well as
substance misuse can be on the
same page and not duplicating
efforts. Great and Miss Chair.
We're also checking into the
Miami model, the famed of Miami
model.
Reaching out to those folks.
Mr Chairman, Senator Sign born?
Yes, sir. We are looking at that
as part of all options, almost
chair colleagues. I just hope
that when we come back with a
number that this can help guide
Those of us that want to fund
more substance abuse around the
state that this can actually
create an informed plan that
then we fund
So we can maybe try to put a
dent in this new Mexico. Thank
you, Mr
You get a second bite of the
apple right now.
I don't know. I kind of threw
mine in the trash.
I mean, I mean for me, it's the
supplementals and deficiencies
in an apartment are really
scary.
The way that you guys can
override a system and write
checks, understanding some
cases, it may be necessary, but
not all cases.
I mean, you're supplementals
Deficiency, Railway 202 million
or something. Mr. Chair. We
don't have any deficiencies.
We've asked for supplementals,
um, to cover the unwinding, So
we've got the unwinding costs.
We were facing penalties of up
to $34 million per quarter from
the federal government.
The remainder have to do with
the fact that the table here um
some, we won't spend money We
don't have so we would. There's
an impact. If those
supplementals aren't approved.
Then we would
We would have to cut those
things that they were designed
to fund and so really, the main
one is the primarily around the
Medicaid unwinding cost.
27. I'm looking for my sheet 27
million General. Correct. Mr.
Chair. This supplemental that
the secretary is referring to is
about 27 Million General Fund in
105 million Total funds. 105
million in total in total. Yes,
I'm looking on page 24.
And it is this sampling and
Special supplementals and
deficiencies in Section five
totals 230 million. That's just
not all this. That's every
agency correct.
Uh, Mr Chair members of the
committee? No, that's that's
just hc A So you've got, um for
section 51 of the big ones.
There is 120 million for, um
For the rural Healthcare
delivery fund.
Um, And so that's that's 11.
Huge chunk of that.
Mr Chair. I do want to say our
agency has never had a
deficiency. Accepting Medicaid.
Where As you know, Um we are
able to carry a shortfall. Not
that That's something we ever
want to do. But, um, you know,
given the fluctuations in
Medicaid that has happened
previously, but, um, yeah,
that's sort of the only place
that the agency is able to do
that and other than that, we
I have never carried a
deficiency. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. So, Eric, run through
me this just for me. Then I see
Aged 24. There's a $230 million
total right in Section five
totals.
And it's 191 short of General
fund.
Right?
Hmm.
Run through that chart for me,
because I'm looking at the total
sheet.
Right, Mr. Mr Chairman. So, so
you've got the executive
recommendation on the left and
then the LFC recommendation on
the right.
And then you've got the section
five totals there? Um, And so
they executive recommended in
General fund revenue.
220 million, and then the LFC
recommended a total of 191
million in general fund for
those specials there.
And then you have the other The
other funds so that the total
total amount is 230 million for
the executive and 196 million
Then you have your section six
supplementals.
Um So then you have the
27,000,001 that we just talked
about.
Um
And that totals up to 108
million.
Um in total in the 80 million in
that line is what
That's other revenue. That's
federal funds, okay?
I'm gonna go get a haircut like
yours.
The shave it,
The Shavit.
Um I'm expert in health care
that I mean, I just I struggled
with it's a huge, enormous
budget.
Hmm. And
I don't have the expertise and
just flat out tell you rely on
other people to give us good
advice.
We do that? I mean,
We heard questions from
committee members, but it's not
really into the budget.
In, you know.
I think snap is a question I
would bring forward is why Why
did you guys not? Why are people
waiting so long for snap?
I mean, that is that FTE
problem? I think we've heard
that analysis. She I mean, you
could go
And in and out. We know this is
the largest percentage of the
budget increase. We're going to
see
I don't know how we cost contain
this in the future.
I mean, you guys wanted
expansion for
For higher rates in
50% of the state has already on
Medicaid and Medicare, right?
How much further we can go.
And sustain this. I mean,
If you didn't have oil and gas,
I mean
We will be talking about maybe
100,100 million for the entire
agency budget, But I
I'm not an expert on health. So
like
My stalker is over there, but
Hmm. I just don't have the
questions to ask you something.
May bring you back on me.
Get a little more out of the
house since you were at
The deficiencies you talked
about that they're working on.
Wasn't 100 million was, in fact,
roughly 30 or
And Mr Chair, the only other
thing I would add on that
deficiency thing is just to keep
in mind that there's also the
This is the first year that, uh,
the department is taking on or
the authorities taking on the,
UM State Health benefits fund.
That state of Health benefits
Fund does have a deficiency and
a supplemental and it's
You know, I think it's around.
Rough numbers 95 million, but
that that amount is enough. We
think sufficient
To bring
The state Health benefits Fund
over to H C. A, uh, you know,
without a deficit or a
shortfall, and then there's also
increases in the rate already
built in through the executive
and then also the, UM,
compensation plan from the LFC.
American propaganda after at a
whole hearing on that scene, the
bill introduced to me and I'm
not kidding. It's that
It's not humongous, right?
Probably the only thing we can
read the entire session if we
started today.
And still not comprehend it.
And so we'll probably have to
bring him back for another
hearing. Get some questions.
Let's see what the House doesn't
And figure it out from there.
Okay. I appreciate you carry,
you know, I support you.
Thank you have knowledge and
every I just don't have that
knowledge and they don't have
that skill set.
I struggled with health care
except for my stalker over
there, eventually going to leave
the room when it pointed at her,
Um
Yeah, And so I just am not the
expert and I can talk about it,
but I wouldn't not be adding to
the conversation. Mr. Chair. I'm
just real quick on a couple of
points. I think we're very
close, really on Medicaid and
what we're really talking about
our expansion items that we've
discussed, you know, and you're
raising some valid concerns. And
then, um, you know, the
foundational sort of see a
program support. I think that is
really kind of the difference at
this point.
So we're happy to talk about
that and happy to come back. I
do want to just say we are in
the middle of the Medicaid and
snap on widening and what you
are seeing is performance
related that prior to the
unwinding our timeliness has
been 95 98%, so we're really in
an unusual and extraordinary
circumstance that we will that
will be over soon.
Unfortunately, so I did want to
just answer your question about
snap performance.
Yeah, and I will break the bad
news to you. We will have more
LFC staff to look at the
Medicaid budget. So now the
House bill one is signed.
Eric will be hanging out there
by himself.
Who got to sign this right
because you used to do something
different.
Mr Chairman. That's correct.
Yeah.
It's a great budget to have,
though, as an analyst
and a A Never mind. I won't say
that.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
We have
Something or D F A secretary
knows about aging in long term
services.
I didn't see her in the room
earlier.
Alright, Sydney. You guys you've
been laughing in the front row.
Uh Hmm. Share
Dark.
I did. That's right. Really,
Really. We're gonna have a staff
making jokes.
I
From somewhere that got stuck.
Uh, no, I didn't. Really, I
didn't know. Just see. Yeah, I
apologize somewhere along the
line night. You Somebody said
it.
Maybe we need to find this
agency a little bit more could
help me.
The longer you keep us here, the
older we get
And I'll forget to see his name
again and color. Sydney.
You guys know you love coming
into into Senate finance because
it's
There is some humor in it.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair Kelly
Clint Legislative Finance
Committee were on agency code
624, the aging Long term
services department with me
today is a secretary designate
Schreier and I
Called you acting last time So
sorry. Designate Good acting
designate, and also has an idea
to counterpart. Um Miss Siaca.
So with that we'll go over some
of the differences. I will know.
Page two of your handout is your
General fund high level summary.
So you have some bullets and
then on the back of that is the
General fund level high summary,
which breaks up the major
differences.
So from all revenue sources, the
executive recommendation was 3.8
million above the LFC. Um most
of that was from General fund
revenue, and most of that was
for the New Mexico program.
I will note that the LFC
recommendation has 12 million
for the New Mexico program, but
not in Section four. As the
executive did it, It's in the
gate or grow whatever we're
calling it now.
Ah, So there's 12 million in
that from the LFC
recommendation, which is in a
different section.
Um, The LSE recommendation
included one time non reverting
language for personnel services.
Um, and this is really due to a
technical need for the agency.
So right now, the long term
services is receiving some
Medicaid revenue to pay for
personnel in the adult
Protective services program.
There is an administrative issue
with the timing of the billing
and the reimbursement to the
agencies so that they can use
that money to continue to fill
positions. Um, so the LFC is
Recommending non inverting
language. We don't usually do
that, but we're going to do it
for this one time while aging
works with the healthcare
authority to fix that
administrative burden and get
that personal money flowing in a
more stable condition.
Both recommendations included
increases in personnel for the
ombudsman program while the
executive recommendation was
305,000 above the LFC.
Additionally, the executive
recommendation include a
reorganization, um of the area
agencies on agents to their own
P code, while the LFC
recommendation kept that into
the aging network.
Other than that reorganization,
They're pretty close to the same
recommendation that comes to
rate increases and other
supports for the Triple A's.
Um, the executive recommendation
included funding for community
health workers, senior Olympics
and food initiatives, which were
not included in the LFC
recommendation, and they love
See recommendation included 5
105,000 for the senior volunteer
coordinator, not including the
executive, I will note that HFC
took the LFC recommendation, but
they are doing a couple
additions that the secretary is
aware of. And as those come out,
we will let
Ah, SFC now and with that I will
turn it over to my D F a
counterpart for any additional
comment.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Senators. The only thing that I
would like to add Well, Kelly,
first of all, did a really great
job summarizing the differences.
The only thing I would like to
add are a couple of non
recurring items that were
supported by the executive and
not supported in the LFC
recommendations.
The first one being $5 Million
to the Kiki surveyed reason your
dignity fund. The agency does
use this fund to improve and
deliver high priority services
to seniors.
And the second would be a $3
million supplemental for
personnel services due to the
decline in volunteer
participation in the agency
needing to use FTP to assume
those duties to keep that
program running.
With that I will turn it over to
Secretary Designate. Come here.
Come here. Name so I don't call
you a different name, Lori.
I haven't met you before Loreal.
Having it
That was ages ago.
Sweet
Mr Chairman, Straight face, er
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um
Thank you so much for having me
here today. Um, I'm Jen
Schreier, the designate for the
cabinet position for aging and
long term services Very honored
to be here Honored to be in this
role, um and really appreciate
the trust of the governor to to
move me into this. This
position. Um, we have several
staff members here today. I'm
not going to introduce every
single one of them, but really
want to thank their service and
their team service.
For everything that they do to
support our seniors and disabled
adults across the state of New
Mexico. Um, I also want to thank
both Kelly and Laurie, um, for
their help with really putting
together this year's budget
request for the LFC and for the
exact Um have you had turned to
slide two of your presentation,
please?
Um, we did ask for a reorg and
we're pretty much there. Um, So
thank you for listening to our
needs and why we needed to make
some adjustments within our
organization to better serve new
Mexicans. There is one piece on
the LFC budget that was not put
into the budget, and that was
just really a difference of, I
would say, opinion on accounting
of something that we were
looking to do to better
collaborate with the Triple A's
across the state, which are the
bodies that receive in the mail.
Jor itty of our funding that
work throughout New Mexico to
provide direct services.
Um to seniors.
If you turn to slide three of
our presentation, we kept it
nice and short for the chair.
Um, it has a comparison of the
executive budget in regards to
specials and supplementals to
the lfc budget. Um, so again,
the Kiki Saavedra fund that is a
dignity fund that the
legislative body developed. It's
a non referring fund to really
support. Um
Providing direct services to
seniors in rural areas. Um, the
complexity of our aging network
and needing to rebuild the
network, um and making sure that
we have service areas across
every corner of the state is
critical. We want to make sure
that seniors can age in place
with dignity. The last thing we
want to see is that people in
rural areas having to be sent to
long term living facilities
somewhere else and away from
their families, because we
You know that aging in place is
critical to their health.
Um And so the Kiki surveyed your
fund is really allowing us to
solve very complex, unique
challenges throughout the state.
Because every community um it's
it's different. And while um
some of the problems are the
same. The factors and variables
around each of those problems
are different. And so we want to
make sure that we have the
resources to support our
seniors.
Um, secondly, technology
solutions. We're looking for an
additional 500,000. That's the
difference between the two
budgets, requests and really, we
have antiquated technology at
our agency, and we could be
making smarter decisions if we
had better technology that
provided a stronger data.
Going across the agency and all
the various programs. Um and
that will help us make better
decisions with our funding and
develop stronger strategies to
support seniors.
Um and then also the last on
this page personnel and employee
benefits shortfall for FY 24 we
I heard a lot of talk around
different agencies that have a
hard time filling vacancies. We
don't have that problem.
What we have is vacancies
because we don't have enough
funding.
To hire those people. Um, so
currently this is the gap
between the folks that we have
on board, and, um, the funding
that we have. So, um I would
really appreciate a
reconsideration of the
supplemental, um, moving
forward. Slide four. This is a
base budget comparison. And, um
there is some some nuance in
regards to
The 300 category for New Mexico.
Um this particular program is
new, and it's really feeling a
gap for caregiving services, um,
across the state, and so we
started as a pilot program, and
now we are expanding it just
within this year, and it's
really making sure that we are
training and we're reimbursing
people who need to have
Caregiving in their homes, and
that might be a family member, a
neighbor, a community member
that is already providing that
service. We want to make sure
that they have the resources
there needs they need, and
they're empowered to make sure
that they can be a great
caregiver to our fellow new
Mexicans. Um, the executive
budget has the the full amount
in the three hundreds, while Lfc
has it in the trust fund.
And so we're respectfully asking
for those that funding to be put
into the three hundreds. Um and
then, in the four hundreds, we
also have a small gap between
the two budgets. Budgets that
I'm hoping that we can close
loop on, and that's really
around our senior programs that
we have within our agency. Um,
New Mexico grown. That is a
program that's sharply focused
on making sure that we have
fresh food and to our seniors in
rural areas. We want to make
sure that they
They have access to fresh food
and do not have food insecurity.
And then our other is our
volunteer programs that includes
the senior Olympics. Um, senior
employment.
And the community health
workers. Um so we're very close.
I think, in my opinion from a
monetary amount, um, but I'd
appreciate just a little bit
more. Um
Review on how we can get a
little closer. And then finally,
I just want to make sure
everyone knows on slide five. We
are having senior day tomorrow.
Here at the roundhouse. Um and
so we'll be looking forward to
speaking with all of you with a
lot of senior community from
across the state. They're all
coming in from all over and in
the afternoon in the morning. We
do have a breakfast that you are
all invited to, um, we have Dan
Butner.
Who is coming in to speak about
living to 100. He has, um, a
Netflix series that's called
lived to 100. He coins the
concept of blue zones, so with
that I want to say thank you so
much, and I will turn it back
over.
Oh, centers. Stein Mart Racing
chair. Um, Madam Secretary,
doesn't it just a question? I
had a constituent who needed
help from your department. I
didn't really know who to call.
I called. I never got a call
back. Who should I contact your
department? If I need help with
a senior in my community that
needs help Mr. Chair members of
the committee Senator Stein born
Thank you for that question. Um,
we have something that's called
the A. D. R C. It's a call
center.
That they actually specialize in
working with seniors and
disabled adults in their
caregivers to make sure that we
can connect them to resources
across the states that includes
direct services that includes,
um connecting even for Medicaid
purposes, so we we really want
to make sure that we have people
on the phone being able to
connect with constituents call
center.
Um Madam, Check who you want me
to come.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. This is the call
center within my agency that is
specialized in this particular
area. Yes, And I love I'll give
you that 1 800 number or, of
course you have my my phone
number.
Uh okay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Appreciate that. Thanks. Thanks.
Mischance. 1, 808 675309,
Senator Padilla.
Well, okay. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and Madam secretary and
all I have to give the opposite,
You know, experience that I've
had, which is outstanding. So,
um, you know, I I had a
Any time I've had an issue.
Should go through the call
center, but, um, I I sometimes I
do sometimes I don't And I will
say that Madam Secretary, you've
done a phenomenal job. Every
time I reached out and most
recently might recall last week,
we had a very serious matter
that we had to deal with. I
think it was even out of your
purview only figured when we
really got all the dust settled,
But I just want to thank you.
The folks in my community want
to thank you, I mean, really did
turn into a much better
experience.
For that particular
constituents, And I guess I'm
just not shy about calling a
secretary directly and getting
getting things you know,
rolling in really did so I
really appreciate it. Thank you.
That's all comment I have. It's
just I know that there's some
work to be done in your call
center, and you've acknowledged
that several times and you're
working on it. I know you are
like you just extend great every
time I've reached out, So thank
you. Thank you, Senator.
Everybody aged out, I guess.
Appliance house built to comes
over prime, bringing back to see
they're not a mother.
You don't have a lot of
questions. That's kind of a good
thing.
Or a bad thing.
And, uh,
We'll just see his house built
to comes over and see where you
come at. Okay?
We're adjourned. Okay. Thank
you. Mr Secretary. We're gonna
have veterans Affair Veterans
services.
I wouldn't do that.
Maybe.
As soon as you start, the
quicker we get done.
Kelly. Fire away was chair
Kelly. Clint. We're on agency
code 670, the Veterans Services
departments.
Well, both recommend sorry I
forgot to introduce the
secretary, Um and my DFA
counterpart, Lori Schock again.
So while both recommendations
increased general fund revenues,
the executive recommendation was
2 million above the lfc,
including a large increase for
personnel recommendations.
Increased personnel.
The executive increase was
769.2000 above the LFC, a
majority of which was for
additional Veterans Service
officers, also known as V. S. O
S. Both recommendations,
Increased funding for additional
VSO is the executive
recommendation, however, was
that 700,000 above the LFC.
Executive recommendation was
507,570. I was in above the LFC
and contractual services for
suicide prevention, Honor Guard
veterans, transportation,
burial, equity and homelessness.
The LFC also did increase for
veterans transportation, but it
was lower than the executive
The executive recommendation
increase other costs for
additional travel outreach
certification processes for
those Nuvi esos and pretty, um
for the advisory council and
risk rates with that I will turn
it over to my counterpart for
any additional comment.
Mr Chair. Thank you. Kelly
again, another great job
summarizing the differences. The
only thing that I will pull or
call out is again. Another, um,
non recurring appropriation
recommended by the executive and
not recommended by the LFC, and
that is the agency's request for
a deficiency in the amount of
$881.4000.
Um
Secretary designate Herrera can
go into more detail, but
basically this deficiency is a
result of the transfer of the
veterans home in truth or
consequences back to D, O H and
expenditures not properly
transferring along with that.
Uh, transfer back to d O h. And
with that I will pass it over to
Cabinet Secretary designate
Herrera.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
senators. Thank you for the
honor of being here to represent
the veterans of the state of New
Mexico and, uh, speak to you on
behalf of our budget today,
obviously, uh, were there There
is some considerable gaps
between the executive budget and
yellow sea recommendation. Um,
we have worked with the
Uh, how's how's finance as well
for, uh, additional, uh,
appropriation there?
And I think that's still in
progress. Yes, Mr Jerry s. They
took the LFC recommendation,
which was for three additional
VSO is the executive was for 10.
Additional VSO s and I think
we're trying to close the gap on
those two recommendations.
So I just wanted to highlight
that and obviously the 10
personnel that were recommended
as as V S. O s was
Further request of
I think every legislator in the
state of New Mexico because of
the large geographic dispersion
that we have, and the lack of
personnel or representation in
every county as a minimum.
currently we have 24. We have a
couple of vacancies right now
that are that are that are out
processing so about 22 on on on
hand and the additional 10 would
would feel at least one
Per county, but also um that's a
start The issue that we're
having with our personnel
wholeheartedly is
We can't have a service office
open and do outreach at the same
time with one person shops.
Um
For instance, Uh, Mr Chair, you
know if we closed down gallop
and we're doing outreach, we're
not servicing anybody in that
vicinity and the closest office
there is grants, which possibly
might be that same person
traveling to grants because we
don't have a people person
there.
Or someone from Farmington
moving down.
That's a two person shop, so
we're juggling razor blades
right now and trying to figure
out where to accept the risk and
we're not too
And that's where the the
Request for the additional
personnel obviously resides.
Okay, um, so I am respectfully
requesting that we do get to at
least those 10 so we can
implement the changes that are
necessary to to meet the
executive.
If you go to a slight, slight
three
That funny mechanism really
breaks down the percentages of
the increase that that we have
we have seen in the V. S. O s.
The pact act is, uh, severely
impacted. Our throughput Um and
RVs OS are working as hard as
they possibly can.
And amongst about 80,000
veterans in the state of New
Mexico that are packed, act
eligible. Um we still have
probably a third
Two.
40% of those that may have not
entertained it don't know about
it or haven't filed yet.
So we're continuing to move to
move forward with that. That is
just one aspect of the of the
VSO position and the
opportunities to go. Go there.
Um, while we're talking about
the VSO is the initial training
Dollars that were not included
in the LFC budget or critical
not only for the initial, uh on
Um, on boarding of these V S. O
s for the initial train up, but
we have sustainment training
that is required every year that
they have to attend to continue
there see us to continue to be
certified, and that's a national
certification that they were
able to accomplish, so I think
it's it's imperative that that
we could reconsider those
training funds.
Not to mention that we also do
the outreach for the tribal
liaisons.
That might not be employed by
the pueblos but are appointed
and getting those personnel
trained within the pueblos
tribes and nations as well. We
fund that training to ensure
that they have the proper level
of training and oversight to
assist the people in those in
those out out outlying areas.
Um with this, and I'm I'm
talking very quickly because as
you stated, you know you you're
you're you're on the clock, Mr
Chair, but
We've also asked for in our
budget recommendation, the
increase for the classification
reclassification of R V. S O s.
Currently they are an elegy
eligibility interviewer. Uh,
position description that
classification and it does not
fit this scope of work that the
V S O s are doing.
And I've heard it more than once
from several of the committees
that we've briefed that we need
to be paying RVs owes more. Pay
them what they're worth so we
can actually recruit and retain
them, so they're not going to
the next job. I know you've
heard this all afternoon.
But, uh, I'll continue the
onslaught of getting the proper
classification in place. So that
$180,000 that's that's the ask
will take care of obvious OS to
be upgraded to the proper pay
rate under the classification
that we are currently working
with spoke to get accomplished.
We go to, uh, slide four.
Couple of the other differences
that are are notable is the
honor Guard support.
Everybody wants to have the
proper burial rights. If they
have served this country that
they've qualified for that they
deserve.
Not supporting our honor guard
support at all from the LFC Fun
table.
Basically
You're sending a message to
every veteran that that's not
that important.
Um And I I really truly believe
that, um, that is an area that
we've grown the number of teams
to accomplish this throughout
the state. We have people
traveling from Albuquerque to
parts of the state Santa Fe, Las
Cruces to outlying areas.
Just because we don't have
enough teams, and there's people
that are standing these teams
up, so we get them properly
trained and the protocol and
equipped and that's part of that
budget is the training,
equipping and then then to
ensure that they can pray it
provided the proper services to
our veterans as we move along.
Also not included in the L. C
recommendation was the Burial
Equity act.
Uh, the the executive
recommended 100,000.
And that is a public law that
was passed two years ago that we
have yet to implement in the
state of New Mexico.
And, uh, Reader's Digest version
is
If there is a veteran, somebody
who puts on the uniform to serve
their country and does not go on
a title 10 mobilization or to
support an endeavor overseas
unnamed operation they could
serve for six years in the state
of New Mexico having served
fires, floods freezes.
And not qualify for burial in
our national cemetery.
This provides us the funding to
accomplish that. The N C. A has
has given us the authority to
bury them in our state militia
are in our state cemeteries that
we currently own.
Using the same protocol, but we
have to pay for the plot.
And the headstone.
We provide the same thing that
the V A would provide for an
active duty veteran.
And I think that's important and
to not have any funding at all
to to start. This program is
again. Um you know, we're our
our National guard and
reservists serve at home.
And, um, I just don't believe
that That's a
Maybe not complete
understanding. Maybe I haven't
communicated effectively enough.
What That program represents and
why we need the funding in that
in that program.
Um Lastly is the transportation
we were funded, Um, below. What
are ask was from the executive
from the HFC for the 200,000, I
believe is what was put in the
LFC recommendation.
I can work within that as
additional state funding to
augment the V, a funded highly
rural transportation program.
This year. We've worked hard.
We've got $250,000 from the
federal government. That's
already all encumbered and
contracts are ongoing and and we
have expanded that program so
quickly this year.
We are. We're running out of
funding basically on that
program, and that's why the
state funding is so imperative
to have in place to be able to
continue to augment that
throughout the rest of our
fiscal year.
Um
And we're not guaranteed the
250,000 from the V. A.
So, um, I think it's that's
another program that if we're
telling them that we will get
them there. We we've got to have
the resources to do it.
Lastly of the two capital and,
uh, special the capital. We've
talked about it a few times. And
that's the, uh
The veteran Resource Center
currently, uh, the latest update
on that is we do have a pending
tenant agreement with GSD
They're working on getting that
finalized for us for the
property on on Gibson Boulevard.
Offer Gibson Boulevard and then
our Veterans Mobile unit, which
was approved or recommended for
approval by the by the LSC of
the 600,000 as a as a special
correct,
Yeah.
Yes. Okay, So just making sure
we go to the last slide, Please
slide 13.
This was a This was a
recapitalization of what I
provided to the the House
Finance Committee subcommittee
that we were assigned to
basically justify what what we
were trying to get at. And if
you if you see
Basically the 300 services that,
um, none of which we got in the
lfc.
Honor Guard services are in
there that I just talked to the
public law. 1 17 103 burial
equity.
Um, I think are critical.
Obviously transportation if I
get 200,000, and that's what it
is, and I'll work as hard as I
can to get the V a funding to
match this year.
Um will be about the same level
we are this year. If I get
nothing from from the V, A
Okay. Um, veteran homelessness.
I think there's a lot of
programs throughout the state
that we can assist with and try
to latch onto if we don't have
our own funding.
But again, it's a that goes
against the Democrat goes with
the demographic of moving
specifically to our veterans
needs.
And in the 400 series.
Um, marketing.
With lack of personnel and
inability to do outreach. Talked
to everybody, um in in in
throughout the state, and they
keep saying, we need more
outreach. We need to tell people
what they do.
We don't have enough marketing
and advertising out there.
We're instituting a contract
right now for the rest of this F
Y to get that word out, and
that's going to be an English,
Spanish and Navajo.
And we can continue to expand on
those languages. We need to get
the word out to the veterans
about what benefits they
deserve, and that they've earned
and how to get them.
So that's really how we're how
we're trying to get them done. I
know I've received several phone
calls from some of our state
legislators that that's the
first phone call they make
because they don't know where to
turn.
Um, whether it's connectivity
issues or just unaware of the
programs that we provide.
Um and lastly the deficiency or
speak to that briefly.
Obviously, that happened in
2019 well before my time, and it
was a transfer of the veterans
home back to the Department of
Health when they transfer that
there was outstanding
expenditures for all the staff
payroll and invoices that were
open so when they were closed
That became basically became a
negative cash flow. And if we
don't fix that he's been
carrying as a material finding
on the audit for the last four
years.
And if anything, if we can clear
the clear the books and and move
forward with with that
We've got a clean slate and and
we know exactly what we're doing
to be fiscally responsible for
the state of New Mexico.
Lastly, I just want to introduce
my staff that has been working
so diligently. I've only been
here for 4.5 months, but they've
been here, um, pushing through
this, So I just if I could, I'm
just gonna read them off very
quickly. Our state benefits and
cemeteries director is Mr Ed
Mendez.
Field services directors Robin
Wilson
State Approving agency is Kathy
Snyder.
Or acting ASD and CFO is Mr
Daniel Lucero. Health Care
coordinators. Diane Morning,
Brown.
Our women's veterans program is
Theresa Figueroa.
Our budget analyst Mister David
Padilla.
R P I, o rei Siva!
Our veterans business outreach,
Mr Johnny Martinez.
And also with cemeteries dying
Myklebust and David Walker.
Um So with that, Mr Chair and
senators, I stand for questions,
Senator Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I think you pretty
much answered. The question I
had was stuff. I'm looking at
this handout. Yes. Yes, sir. The
part World.
We have our state veterans
cemeteries.
So if those were to become
federal
Then, as you were mentioning
national garden that would not
qualify.
That is correct. Well
So a National Guardsmen with a d
D 214 that qualifies them for
federal service. They are
qualified to be buried in a
national cemetery.
If they have not done
The federal active duty time
that qualifies them, which is 90
consecutive days on an active
duty order.
They are not qualified to be
buried in the national cemetery,
but we could bury them just the
same rights.
As in the national Cemetery and
one of our state cemeteries and
providing them a headstone, much
like the Via does to take care
of those individuals.
Obviously the veterans who
served between 4020. There's
very few of us that did not
serve in a contingency named
operation over those 20 years.
But we have a generation now
that is coming in that we're
recruiting right now that
Could possibly see
A named operation in their
future, but that's not
guaranteed and if they only
serve six years and depart
They've served our country and
our state and may not have any
Any other designation or benefit
for doing so.
And I think that's that's a
travesty for anybody who puts on
the uniform.
So, Mr Chairman.
Uh, right now I know that
Angel Fire and towels would like
to become a federal
I don't know about Gallup.
And, uh so pros and cons.
Um, Mr Chair and and Senator
Gonzalez, Angel, Fire and
Gallop.
Or not intended to be federal,
Uh, cemeteries. We built them to
federal standards so we couldn't
meet that and continue to serve
the citizens of New Mexico.
As well as by building them to
federal standards. We have the
authority to bury our federally
qualified veterans in those
states cemeteries by federal
standards if we had built it,
not to those standards.
Um, we could not enter a federal
veteran there and be paid by the
by the federal government to do
so.
Because they wouldn't recognize
the cemetery as a proper
placement. Very well. The other
one Mr Chairman is it's just a
thought.
In, uh in towels. The
The veterans clinic that we have
Ah!
You know, we pay rent on that.
And you know now for a while.
The National Guard National
Guard Building that it's in
towels is vacant. And why
couldn't the clinic be there and
make it all the A
Facility.
Um, Mr Chair and Senator
Gonzalez. I know the Chinese
army right now. The one you're
referring to, um, I know they're
in in concert with the city of
Taus right now. And the county.
Um as far as negotiations of
possibly transferring that over,
I'm not exactly sure where
that's at and the status so I
I'd be remiss if I commented any
further on that of how they
intended to use it.
Well, Mr Chairman.
Still a little more. There's
more that would like to have
that you and m towels.
And their adjacent to the
property that the point that I'm
trying to make is white Pay rent
when there is a facility.
That could very easily. It's a
beautiful facility.
You know it as funding that
It took us six years to acquire
the funding to get that building
and then in the process, it
became a transportation unit.
Which we got a better building.
You know, it has a gym, kitchen
and classrooms the whole thing.
Just my thought.
Yeah.
Thank you. Mis. Thank you,
senator. Born
This chair, General. Good
afternoon. Thank you. Good
afternoon being here. Thank you
to your whole team. Thank you
for what you all do. We
appreciate it knows that served.
Thank you for your service very
much. We appreciate it. Um, I
have a few questions for you.
Um, I just It's funny. I stepped
out because I got a call earlier
from the commander of my D A. V
who have worked with for years.
And, uh, he's now the
legislative liaison and I kind
of made a connection. Hey, maybe
he called me because you're here
and I better talk to him before
I Yeah, which I did. And he
shared with me one of your
priorities. So congratulations
for activating your network. Um,
but at any rate, he, uh, brought
up one of your priority areas,
which is the transportation
extending the rural
Transportation, D A. V and our
community brings a lot of
veterans to their doctor's
appointment. So what, not so I
guess my question to you just do
you if we gave you more funding
for that, so you could go into
Dona Ana County. Would that mean
you would contract with the Navy
to do that work?
Mr Chair Center, Sanborn, so we
would contract with any
qualified vendor to accomplish
that. D A V is currently one of
our our contracted vendors
throughout the state and Dona
Ana is one of the areas that
they're contracted to do
Services. Okay?
So this chair right now I know D
A V. You know, they're funding
is not always consistent, and
that's super important, such as
super important service for
bringing veterans to
appointments and stuff, So this
is being one of the expansion
goals of the department. You
know, we were looking at little
Maybe supplemental areas if we
have any capacity when the
budget comes over to me and my
community and veterans in my
community, this is pretty
important. It's not a lot. It's
$570,000.
And as I see it second
recommendation so
So that's one thing. Um and Mr
Chair, General, I want to ask
you a little bit about, um
Veterans suicide.
And, um, sorry. I don't mean to
trigger anyone. I know that in
Mexico as I understood it how
one of the highest rates in the
country.
For that.
And, um
I feel like someone in crisis
may not know services or their
supporters there, and I feel
like for our state and our
veterans Services Division.
There is a real need to be
proactive so that people know
services are there they question
is as a department What is your
strategy for for that?
Mr Chair, Senator. Stain warden.
So
Currently what we are actually
working with the D O H
initiative with the governor's
suicide prevention campaign, and
we are actually pushing
Some of that advertising those
monies to advertise and get
those out. Every one of our
outreach events. We're making
sure we're making contact with
our local or local veteran.
Services are American Legions V.
F W s, as well as the D A. V as
we're doing the outreach to make
sure because they know their
population better and maybe
who's at risk Because they're
they're willing to talk to them
a little bit more and ensure
that we're getting some of that
feedback and as we get those
phone calls, getting them to the
proper resources throughout, so
that's where our VSO is coming
as well, Um, they can go to that
VSO office and they can identify
that they need help.
And we can get them to the
proper community resource. Um,
based on the situation scenario,
that's that's presented.
Okay. Thank you, General. And Mr
Chair General. One last question
that the mobile unit is that
funded right now. At this point,
it is
Um, um, Mr Chair and senators
time. We're yes currently is
recommended as a special to be
funded by the LFC and the and
the executive that matches and
if, and two of the positions
that we are getting would
probably
Be assigned to that so that we
have certified V s. O s to be on
the outreach.
Um, as we go to each part of the
state, of course. So, its in
house bill two right now or will
be
Okay?
Good. And then what will it do?
It looks like kind of a tank
almost kind of a robust purpose
Here, Senator ST word that it's
it's we, we? That's a rendition.
Um, that's actually not the
exact vehicle, but we needed to
give give you a visual, But this
is so we can actually take
services to people that are
unable to get to to us.
Rather than relying on a
transportation service to bring
somebody to us to have an
appointment. We can actually
take the services to them and be
able to get them it will be
handicapped, accessible and be
able to get veterans in there
and actually do their claims on
site. Um where where we can so
basically taking services to to
the individuals. Okay, Very
good General team. Thank you all
again.
Work. You do? Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Center Brantley.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr.
Secretaries. Yes, yes, General
General Secretary General
Sometimes
Mr Secretary General, this
committee has heard a lot of
funding requests a half billion
dollars in fact, expansions of
snap benefits. Unemployment
benefits for people who may or
may have not ever worked and the
state of New Mexico.
E bike rebates charging stations
that we need to invest in in the
middle of nowhere. New Mexico
and
Then you come with requests like
this, And I can't thank you
enough.
For asking for money where
really matters.
Um, this sacrifice in the
investments that veterans have
made into this state or far
greater than many of the other
constituents that we're just
throwing money at, So thank you
for one for coming with
requests.
VSO expansions to make sure that
there are a number of veterans
services offers.
His actually there's been a
number of legislative efforts
for many years to increase those
via so it's it's gone ignored,
So to have the executive come to
us and say we're interested in
this expansion is music to our
ears? Not only does that help
our veterans, but for
legislators, they're doing a
good job. It helps legislators
because many of my phone calls
are veterans seeking, you know,
in in need seeking services, so
That that is a must and should
have happened years ago. Thank
you for really pushing that, you
know, proper burials would be a
bare minimum. Um, the the
Resource center. The mobile
Resource Center addresses are
ruling in Mexico, You know, Gap
on how we how we get that out
for our rules veterans out there
and then, of course marketing
because at the end of it
If our veterans don't know the
services exist, and then
ultimately it's a failure. We're
not getting the resources and
the money out so absolutely with
the marketing. I just want to
thank you for asking for money
for the first time rarely come
to Senate finance where we're
like, Thank you for bringing us
good, solid, um, investment
requests forward.
Before I let you go. And I know
that I know that your department
doesn't have much to do with the
oversight of the Veterans
Hospital that is this house out
of truth or consequences. New
Mexico, But I do want to provide
you with an update. As you may
or may not know we've had a lot
of challenges with with that
hospital For many years we have
a new director there, and he is
phenomenal and the care that
those veterans have gotten in
just in the last year.
Is is amazing. We have a huge
Veterans day service at a park
that is really within blocks and
we have never had our veterans
participate. He has new Busses.
He takes those veterans
everywhere. You can see them at
WalMart, every parade and
picnic. He has community events,
so I just want to put a plug
that the hospital is under new
management and is a completely
different facility.
Um, I also want to compliment
you on your communication now.
So when you say we've got to get
the word out, I don't disagree
that that money will go to, you
know, good use, because for any
of this, if you check your
email, we get regular updates
from your department all the
time, all the time, any sort of
veterans event all over this
state, which allows us to share
that information out with our
constituents.
So I just want to thank you guys
for the agency is doing tell you
that I fully support these these
asking if New Mexico legislators
going to put their money
anywhere. These are sound
investments. So, So thank you
for the work you're doing and
thank you to our veterans. Thank
you Share.
Thank you, Mr Chair in general,
so
Burial. Thank you. Outreach.
Um
Do we have any kind of list or
notification of veterans who who
are in the state?
Um So, Mr Mr Chair, Senator
Scher.
We have a running list of of of
the number of veterans and
obviously using the census data
as far as my name listings.
That's where we rely on our
local VSO. Our Veterans service
organizations to assist us
because obviously
We? We do have many that passed
on as well as those who moved
back to our states, currently,
um, re engaging with the the V,
A. And the federal entity that
supervises all the title 10
discharges, They'll be letting
us know.
What people are intended to come
back off of active duty back to
the state of New Mexico and
getting those veterans listings
so we can better serve those
people and meet them where
they're where they're at, and
through those transition
programs were doing the outreach
to our our veteran business
outreach. We do our women's or
tribal veteran tribal programs,
They go to the transition
services as the briefings as
their departing there's their
services and inform them of what
we provide in the state of New
Mexico.
To to bring them back. So we're
trying to meet them where
they're at, rather than waiting
for them to come to us, So they
know exactly what services are
coming. So we're we're trying to
get a better handle on that, so
we can identify that. And and I
would be remiss if I didn't tell
you. Thank you for your service
as well. Thank you. So the
reason I asked
Um
And I know it's difficult to
keep track. But if we have an
idea that that sharers coming
back to New Mexico then we can
reach out to him. Nobody's ever
reached out to me. Nobody's ever
reached out to my son. Nobody's
ever reached out to my father.
Or grandfather. Um, all who have
DD two fourteens.
And granted. Now we're talking
generations back whole different
world.
Um, my son. Not that far back,
though. You certainly in Iraq.
Um
And I think that's important,
Sort talking. You know. Senator
Stein, born
If I need help.
I'm probably not reaching out to
you.
So how do you find me? How do I
find you? How do we connect?
In in, um
I'm just not sure how that how
to do that, But that's what I
would like to to encourage. And
certainly if we had a list, then
we can call them when they show
up.
In New Mexico.
Mr Chair, senator share. I
wholeheartedly agree, and that's
what we're trying to change that
mentality.
And again the outreach with
Qualified people to talk about
the programs that we have. And
and again we hire
The majority of RVs osr, our
veterans, they understand how to
communicate with the veteran.
It's not just somebody you know,
answering some questions and
going off a script. They walked
a mile in their boots. So they
understand that and that's where
we're trying to get these
outreach events are tabling
events, and that's where the
challenge becomes, is if I'm
closing the service office when,
instead of putting it in
Helping somebody to to file a
claim and I'm out doing
outreach. So I'm mixing and
matching resources, and that's
where the additional personnel
or so critical so we can get the
word out and have that the
mobile piece the the, uh,
communications over TV radio
billboards as well as the
printouts because obviously
we're talking about chapter
houses at times, and we're going
to drive out there and just give
them something to pin on their
fridge, so they have a number to
call.
Should they need that and and be
able to spread the news? I've
been out to the Navajo Nation a
couple of times and met with 18
of the chapter house is, uh, to
speak to them about what
benefits we provide. So that way
we can close that gap of the
information sharing that's not
taking place in in in this
chair in general, I absolutely
appreciate that. I do think that
that's where
Our efforts need to be is
because
I know veterans that need help.
They know that they know you
exist, but they're not going to
reach out to you so
Yes, sir. You know, I have to
take them or somebody has to
take them to the local VSO and
here.
Even then, some of them aren't
interested at all.
But those are the people that
need the most.
The most love. Yes, sir. I lived
with one for
0 45 years of my life as a
Vietnam veteran childhood
Vietnam vet.
So
And then the honor guard. That's
one that, Uh um What do we do
for the Honor Guard or are they
paid? Do they get per diem? What
do we do? Their their their
their paid a stipend. We equip
them with the the equipment.
They require the proper
uniforms. The bugles.
The and the other equipment that
they require we due to trainings
a year for them to get a trained
and do the proper protocol and
get graded on that so that we're
providing the proper services by
tradition, as well as we have
weapons that that they they are
provided. So we provide a lot on
top of that.
It's paid.
If somebody gets a
Flight presentation.
We have the firing unit.
And a bugler. That's $300 to
that agency.
Two.
Get there Do the service and
and, uh, police up the area and
and and then return to wherever
their home home station is?
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr
Sandberg.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
General. Thank you for your
service number one and thank all
of the folks within veteran
services for their service as
well. And I. Some of this issue
has been discussed already.
Um
But
Mr Chairman.
Probably 20 to 35% of my ongoing
constituent calls are from
veterans.
Uh, part of it is the
frustration trying to deal with
the V A.
Ah, and part of it is not
knowing that veterans services
in New Mexico can be a really
good bridge for them.
And then on the last couple of
years.
We've had real gaps in V S O s,
Um many regions areas haven't
had a VSO. And so that's been a
frustrating thing.
The number of
Um, veterans that we lose data
day to suicide.
It is disgusting.
And so what we need to do.
Better and New Mexico is to
continue to ever ties and
outreach, social networking,
traditional media to get to
these veterans, especially ones
who probably are, um
You know the younger veterans
from 4005 or six on up to
understand what we have in the
state to provide to them.
It is great when I can call him
your officer called VSO, where
one back in my area Apartment
and Alamogordo, Electoral Kenny
Lincoln, um, so that they can
make those connections.
Um
I don't know if you can imagine.
But zone as PTSD.
And is out there alone.
And calls better in the V. A.
And they say they'll get back to
you and 24 48 hours or in some
cases longer than that. That guy
needs help now.
So the the need for VSO is
number one is critically
important.
And if you're not asking for
enough, ask for more.
And secondly, we need to do a
better job.
Is as the Legislature and is the
government.
And certainly you guys and your
media partners need to do a
better job of explaining the
connection with the S O s
veteran services in the state
and the V A, because we can
streamline a lot of those
requests along those needs for
them.
So I appreciate you bringing
that just like Senator Branly
Senator Sheriff mentioned and
and I was out for a little
while, So I know we have some of
the folks questioning this, Um
This service is critical.
Yeah, and, uh,
I think you've got people in
this legislature certainly
willing to
You know, support all of these
needs.
And I will say personally, don't
be shy about asking.
Um
Just like Senator Brantly said.
And we're asking for millions
and millions of dollars.
At a time for new programs and
things like that. These are
programs that are established
that we know work.
And we're asking for less than a
million dollars. I mean,
You know, seriously, folks, we
We have to put this in
perspective a little bit.
So I appreciate your request,
and I appreciate the fact that
you're
Willing to work with this. I
encourage you to continue
filling up those VSO slots as
soon as possible.
I know it's not easy thing to do
In some cases, um and we will do
our best. I mean, there's
there's people.
Who that's who are are providing
services looking at Bob Wooley
over here is connection to, um,
healing American heroes where
you get horse therapy and not
just for
Um
Development, but the whole
family
Comes out there and they
Hmm.
They bond and he'll
So
Not only these.
Services that are needed from
veterans services, but also, um,
programs like that, so we'll get
on my soapbox. But Mr Chairman,
I appreciate the opportunity to
speak a little bit on this.
Because
These are the men and women.
Who
Go anywhere in the world.
At a moment's notice.
And put their life on the line.
For us.
Hardball judge meeting emotional
But that's America.
That's what we are. That's what
we stand for.
I just want to thank you Don't
want that.
I hope that this legislature in
this Senate Finance Committee on
appropriations
Well over fund you in all of
your requests.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Byrd. Thank
you Know I'm not gonna thank you
for everything right? You know,
Veterans services. We've had a
few
Turnovers right and no real
direction.
And when you have that turnover
and leadership
I mean, there's no direction in
in
Hopefully, you're with us for a
long time.
I'm here until they tell me I'm
not Mr Chair with this
executive. You never know have
full confidence in that, but but
I mean it. Stability is very key
in what we do right in not to
rehash some of the other stuff,
but
How much does really 100,000
really getting suicide
prevention?
I mean, what is that? Really? I
mean, we know this new group. We
know the problems. We know the
issues, right? I mean, is that
enough and suicide prevention or
or is there more needed? I mean,
maybe this is just a
conversation. And you just tell
us I need more.
Maybe just we need the truth.
Right, Mr Chair. I'm also trying
to be a fiscal conservative as
well because with a small staff
From giving too much. I'm not
going to execute, and then I'm
gonna come get beat up next year
about asking for money that I
didn't execute that I reverted.
So I've got to balance that with
the staff that I need If I get
the personnel to execute the
programs that we need to be able
to do and the money to fund it
to fund those the sky's the
limit, But it's a matter of it's
got to be, um
They've They've got to be
somewhat equal. So 100,000 right
now augments the programs that
already exist in D, O H and some
of the other programs that we
are partnering with the other
state entities that are doing
suicide prevention because
We have a large population
there, and I believe that
synchronization state cabinets
is is critical, and we're
getting closer and closer to
that, as we as I continue to
work with some of the other
Cabinet secretaries because
we're doing a lot of the same
things, but we're doing it in a
stovepipe and I'm trying to get
those bigger, broad brushstrokes
and get involved with everybody.
So every touch point
Is if if I'm somewhere that
aging long term is I can be
there and they can talk about
the services and get them in
contact with me If there's
somebody in a in a in a long
term home, those are the things
that I think that we're
expanding upon. So I would say
that, yes, at least 100,000. I
could double that with the
proper ratio of personnel to get
out and and actually meet with
the veteran groups and continue
to do the education piece.
But that's in your 300
categories, so that's in
contractual services.
So if we did increase that
right, you would be able to
contract those services. Yes.
Yes, Mr Chair and make you wait.
Is that enough? I mean, tell us
a number. I mean, I come from
Gallup. The reservation right.
Large native
Serving people. Gallup has a
large number, and they're all
kind of aging out, and there's
no young guys to come back and
fill those those in but what I
mean.
We have to be honest with each
other and you say Okay, I need
500.
In in mental and
In suicide prevention in my
advice to you is don't rely on D
O H because we've seen $20
million sit there for from
behavioral health, Mental health
services in the U. H hasn't
moved it I mean,
This is the conversation at the
point C
If I had 500,000, I could
contract 500,000.
I had 250. That's my capacity.
I mean,
Sometimes what the Legislature
asking for in what you get are
two different things, but I
think
You've had some topics, right?
That maybe we didn't have the
leadership before. Maybe there
was no stability for us to you
know, everybody comes in and
they want their own ideas and
they want to push this direction
and you have basic ideas that
need funding transportation
right important that is to
gallop. And if you don't have
that
And your basic needs in basic
funding and basic requests.
But if it's not enough
That's the longest conversation
and believe me in this agency
reverting money. Don't think
You never had a larger versions
that I can remember at all.
But I mean
I mean, just run through the the
I guess the the 200 level b f T
E s. But I mean, that's
something we'll do and probably
I think you're probably gonna
get there with your budget. I
mean, I don't think anybody's
gonna push back from what your
knees are. But the other thing
is, you know, we have this
growth fund.
And sometimes we'll see where
money people put their money
where their mouth is when they
do this.
And but to these other
To these other categories. I
mean, is suicide prevention,
behavioral health.
How much do you need?
Mr Chair to do a proper
assessment. I'd have to look at
the vendors that are available
because obviously in behavioral
health. This were the
The ability to get the proper
vendors to meet the services
because of the behavior house
providers that are available in
our state.
I wouldn't want to go to large
And, uh, but easily we could
double what? What? I'm asking
for their in 200 services.
Wait one second, there would
just get through some of these.
So if we double that number,
Okay, Honor guard is that I
mean, I bought the trumpets for
the honor guard before in my
area and gave him a float and
impress supportive of my guys,
right? But I mean, is that
enough for honor guard? I mean,
these are small numbers, right?
I think What I asked for Honor
guard was 20 was well below what
I need. I expended 100 and 90
this year, so I need at least
200 with the growth of of those
teams.
That have been put in place.
Well, Kelly tracked these for
us.
So suicide prevention 200 Honor
guard. He was 190 last year.
Give him like
250
Give him leeway.
We'll jump down to the next one.
Transportation services, 150.
So that was to get to the
initial ask of what I asked for.
We got 200 from the LFC already
is what's on the on the table I
had asked for 375 from the state
so we could expand into some of
these rural outlying areas were
were not able to get to. And so
what would the 150 increased?
That would be a total of 350
from the state.
And that's 100,000 over what we
have with the federal grant
right now, so but
Your ask is when 50. That's too
To meet what we're what I'm
asking about What? What? On top
of the 150, do you think you
need
375
So 150 plus 3 73 75 total.
375 in total 375 total, So we
have 200 right now. 75
additional
No, it would be to 75 because we
got 200. You're you're right
under 75.
That's it. I'm just gonna run in
total at the bottom of the page
and then
The public burial equity.
I think I've done a good job of
that estimation because we're
not sure how many we have that
also goes for our fallen heroes,
Mr Chair that I know. Right now
We have the statewide program
that we run, and there's several
veterans that have been buried.
Hate to say it this way, but as
normal citizens because they
didn't meet the federal
requirement, and so we're not
sure what that number is going
to look like this year with the
and then as we continue to go,
so 100,000 is
An excellent start for us to get
at that veterans homelessness.
Um, we've
Already spent this year about
200,000 on that so I would
double that so 400,000 No, I
would double the 100 that was on
the on the Ask so 202 100,000.
So that's 100.
So, Mr Chair 25.
925, okay?
Make sure that we get that I
know the house is kind of
wrapped up. Let's get that
increase in the red in the
number four Senate finance
right? Anything else, Mr
Secretary General.
Um, no, sir. I
Again. I appreciate the
opportunity to to come to you
and speak to you on behalf of
the veterans and and and the
support that you're that you're
that you're showing here is is a
Is very well received, and much
appreciated on behalf of every
veteran. Yeah, I mean, it's
important across the state. I
mean,
You know?
There. It's a matter of respect,
right?
Their friends or cousins or
brothers, their relatives right
And we don't want to leave an
agency short, especially, you
know, the suicide prevention is
is I hear that story way too
often, right? I agree, and I
just don't know how you
Manage with D O H, but they seem
to be and it for me and
behavioral health issue. I mean,
He spent $700 million a year
before and couldn't say where
change was, but don't have a
problem. I'll tell you right
now.
Increasing that 925. We'll see
what the house does and make the
adjustments. I mean, that's the
only 400,000 difference that
that you see fit and that you
see needed. Um so I have a
problem with. I don't think
anybody in the committee will
have a problem with that.
Senator Steingarten ended
questions Chairman. I do, um
Um so, Secretary General, you
know, we're talking a lot about
marketing.
And it really begs the question.
Kind of what is the department
doing on a marketing level? Who
are you working with? People
have different skill sets,
right. You're a general. And you
you may or may not, You know, be
a marketing person or people in
your agency may or may not have
a social media person.
You know the old model of having
P IOS write press releases Man.
Today's world is on Social
media.
So
You know, That's a question, Mr
Chair for the committee. We have
marketing people on this
committee. Senator Byrd's one of
them, but, uh
I just wonder, you know.
Do you need a social media?
Kind of a modern marketing
person on the department can
help educate and create more of
a marketing. Robust presence.
Some of these vendors you're
talking about. So when we asked
you the question, How much do
you need from marketing kind of
have to be a marketing person,
or have you know?
Work with modern marketing
professionals to understand what
that looks like. And I'm not
saying you don't, but I think
it's a question we should be
honest about because you can we
can say we're giving you an
amount. That doesn't mean we're
going to do an effective job
senator share had a very
practical suggestion about
actually contacting veterans
directly and
Through mail. That's one way.
But then again, you know tiktok
social media variety of
platforms. People are actually
on these days.
And, uh, I think that that pro
activity and sophisticated
marketing dollars and approaches
what's needed.
Not necessarily contracting
someone else who may or may not
know how to do that. So I don't
know if you're connected
anything like that General Mr
Chair Center saying word. Um, so
I'm a former public affairs
officer.
Um oh, boy, before it became a
general, So, um, second, I was
one of the guys with the old
press releases. Um, but I
understand that we've
transitioned we are on on social
media platforms. We do our our,
um I think a couple of people
showed their their do We do a
newsletter that Mr R P i o
receiver has about 35,000
followers. Right now. We pushed
to the American Legion VFW and
that gets
Replicated and we're and we're
continuing to grow because we're
getting the word out. We're also
doing obviously with with this,
uh, the new mobile van. We plan
to get that wrapped, so that's
gonna be it's advertisement and
itself of of what we're doing
and getting out with New Mexico
Broadcasters Association print
media radio TV ads
Because you never see anything
about suicide prevention and
veteran services and anybody
discussing these things. On top
of that, Looking at some
marketing, um, putting together
some products for the card stock
as I mentioned talking about
hanging something on the fridge
in the Navajo Nation, something
that is resonant that gives them
some quick contact numbers so
they can reach out and and get
in touch with us, something that
resonates with
The cultural nuances we have
throughout New Mexico as well.
so that it's not just gonna be
another piece of paper, so we're
trying to be culturally
sensitive and do that outreach
and make this matters to where
we take ownership and
everybody's community.
Social media, George
Absolutely, Senator Burke. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. And, uh, I
appreciate your comments and
your your thoughts more concerns
about this.
And, uh, I always want to make
sure that people are aware of
the services and New Mexico
broadcasters because radio and
TV in the stadium Mexico, um
And so we understand that, uh
What we can do with that,
Usually a little bit of money
can go a long way with that.
We use that first for
Scholarships for kids getting
into the business three year
donation into the broadcasters,
but the nice thing about that is
it goes all over the state all
over TV, all of the member radio
stations and so I encourage you
to continue doing that. Not
because I'm in radio, but simply
because you need to make the
general public.
Aware of what you're trying to
do the sacrifices and so on and
so forth, because then they buy
into which applies more
pressure to now federal
government are are folks in
Washington D C, but certainly
yes to do something to help you
out. So I encourage you to
continue doing that Encourage
you again to be bold about your
request.
Don't be afraid to to, You know,
really, Whatever you think you
can spin and what you can do
within a year's time. Uh, please
budget for that and asked for
that, Uh, you know, the worst
thing to happen is we say no,
we're or cut that back and
report But I really, really
appreciate the uh yeah.
Chairman's interest in this
because I know his issues with
Native Americans and his folks
there in the McKinley County in
that area as well.
Unfortunately, I I'll finish my
comments. Mr Chairman by
according to USA today.
September 1st 2023 16.7 veterans
commit suicide every
Mr Chair. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. I'm
Um and we can make those
adjustments for you. So I just
wanted to clarify. Mr Sheriff.
I'm sorry to interrupt, but
being bold
The additional FTE s Did we
agree to fund those? Um, you
know, we're gonna We're gonna
see what the house does with
FTE. Okay, My focus was on
contractual services. Okay, and
I don't know what they've done.
So if they and you know, we're
all sharing this together,
right? They may want to add FTE
s. You may come and we may want
to add FTS.
Just to show both sides showing
support.
And so I don't know the answer
to that question to clarify
that, but we'll we'll have that
conversation, but I think you
know the contractual services
dollar amount in the increases.
I think we can make that
commitment from us in the
Senate.
Thank you Rest is
We'll see what they do. Because
if we steal all their thunder,
you know that they'll just be
mad at us and and they're
already getting mad at us
enough, Okay? And I understand
that respect. Thank you. And
thank you to all the senators.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you. Have a good day.
German
