Or thank you.
Good afternoon to everyone the
state senator but what about the
J. one sizes districts six Santa
Fe Los Alamos to everybody else.
Thank you.
I'm Senator sire quite a I
Hemphill from Senate district
twenty eight which includes
Grant County catching County in
Westchester court County.
Senator Woods age before beauty
all Senator Pat Woods.
And curry could you counties
district seven thank you Mr
chair madam chair.
Senator bill Burke the district
the thirty three in Lebanon
border point of Otero linking
and Chavis counties in good
afternoon.
Mr chairman and members the
committee crystal diamond Senate
district thirty five hello New
Mexico.
Senator Campos in.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee it's been delighted
with you all the eight four to
our committee meeting state
senator Pete Campos representing
all parts of seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico where we
continue to move forward thank
you Mr.
Thank you and I don't see the
Senator Steinborn or senator
Candelaria or not on with us or
Senator share I don't see any of
them.
And senator George yes
Representative Senate district
four hi this morning was six
degrees so little chilly in our
part of the country Senator
pindi and I seen here with us
for Senate bill ninety three you
wanna explain Senate bill ninety
three and then we do have an
amendment for Senate bill ninety
three.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for having me today soup this
semester can actually give me
Hearing right so I would
appreciate that I have a slight
I'd like to show you.
And you can see that Senator
Campos or central bank is if you
just give me a thumbs up if you
can see it Senator Senator.
Thank you well essentially
everyone we know that we have a
problem here in New Mexico that
we need to solve and we have a
couple of solutions one of them
is regulatory in nature that
with several facets to it this
piece legislation has absolutely
nothing to do with regulation
whatsoever this bill is
primarily around governance
continuity
a plan if financial planning
things of that nature we know
that broadband brings us
economic development job
creation distance learning which
we've all become very well
attuned to because of the
pandemic and then it also brings
us telehealth and telemedicine
as we know many communities in
New Mexico Mr chairman and madam
vice chair members of the
committee I've never had a
health care professional ever in
their community and this is one
way to help bring the bridge
that gap and so they can receive
some care and then they have to
come into the cities and towns
in order to get the actual
formal Care right to them so
what Senate bill ninety three
does is it creates the New
Mexico office of broadband
access and expansion I use the
word I put the words access an
expansion in the name of the
office because some areas
approximately twenty one percent
of New Mexico has a zero
broadband and all the other
seventy nine percent of the
state has broadband and that's
why I use the term expansion
seventy nine percent of the
state may have broadband but
really only twelve percent of
the seventy nine percent R. one
gig speed or higher so the
remainder of that broadband is
is subpar as it relates to FCC
standards and how New Mexico
competes around the world and so
that's why I use the term
expansion that's with the title
came from the office actually
has is gonna have six key
responsibilities that are going
to be dramatically helpful to
the state one is you know when
you go to open a business the
last thing you want to do is go
down to the bank to borrow money
without a business plan or a
financial plan so as a result
you know we do that every day of
the week trying to bring money
into the state and.
And we we're not as successful
as we as we could be if we put
this office together with that
with the responsibility of
owning that the formal New
Mexico broadband plan the plan
will have where is it where is
it what we need what we need to
what what are the speeds were it
is existing and things of that
nature it'll also have a
financial component financial
plan component and the office
will also have a statewide will
pricing agreements as part of
that plan.
The second item that the office
will be responsible for and
there are many maps of broadband
in New Mexico there about
seventeen that I can personally
count as you know Mr chairman
and madam vice chair and members
of the committee I've been
serving as chairman or vice
chairman of the science
technology telecommunications
Committee every other year since
I've been here in the
legislature well I've counted
seventeen different ways that we
measure and we we caught
broadband over the the map of
New Mexico what we really need
is to have a map that links up
with the FCC the USDA and other
organizations so that we meet
those requirements and that
again makes it easier to draw
money down into the state you
know to help us access to expand
broadband the third critical eye
to this office will be
responsible for is to be a
central repository for rights of
way easement access the reason
that we need that is because if
you want to stretch broadband
really across anywhere in New
Mexico the likelihood is if you
go over fifty miles you're
probably going to run through a
reservation you're probably
gonna run through a secular
Association maybe an H. away
possibly you're gonna remain the
run through federal land state
lands lands owned by the
Catholic Church is simple so we
need a central place we can go
to get that information to to
negotiate and to adjudicate that
quickly
is cities towns political
subdivisions that may need to do
that wind up individually having
to pay attorneys and attorney
fees and an engineer's assessors
and things of that nature or
they could just come to this
office and easily access that
information the fourth critical
element of the office will be
reporting and analysis of our
statewide broadband plan your
New Mexico and they would report
that to the people of New Mexico
the legislature the governor so
they were all kept on the same
page in concert what we're
trying to add additional dollars
and improve broadband here in
New Mexico.
The fifth critical item the
office will have is three to
five specialist they're going to
work with other political
subdivisions here in New Mexico
to design develop fund and
implement their broadband plans
so as an example that I've used
along the way when I presented
this bill Mr chairman and madam
vice chair members of the
committee and that this
literally might be my two
hundred and I think it's two
hundred fifty fourth
presentation on this bill I just
to community associations and
different organizations and
groups that have interest
obviously and other committees.
What this is that you know you
have the more Columbus as an
example wonderful human being I
know she needs broadband for his
town but just doesn't quite know
how to do it so this office we
utilize all the information I
just reviewed that the office
will have access to to help that
town that political subdivisions
design develop fund implemented
broadband broadband plans for
that to happen and one of the
more critical items is funding
this plan so in two thousand
seventeen I was able to pass
three critical pieces of
broadband legislation that
you're want to place broadband
the local infrastructure act to
to reform the U. S. F. frontier
to direct most of the monies to
new technologies or broadband
and three to rewrite the.
Entire telecommunications act
New Mexico to make the state
look much more attractive for
investment so when I talk about
funding for this that's coupled
with what we're doing this year
and what we did in two thousand
seventeen it really puts us in a
really great place to to move
this forward the six the thing
that this office will have
responsibility for is an
individual that can leverage New
Mexico investment dollars that
we put in into into a place with
other funding sources literally
around the world we do believe
that we're going to invest
dollars in in in the funding in
broadband this year and we could
potentially see a ten to twenty
percent match on those dollars
but we need all of those first
five items in place in order for
us to be able to
bring those dollars down in the
state this bill does have an
appropriation for nine hundred
fifty thousand dollars to staff
and established the office the
office would sit
administratively in the
department of information
technology the office will have
a director that's appointed by
the governor so that they have
the teeth and the power and the
ability to get a lot done in a
short period of time
and so that's basically what the
office does there is an
amendment Mr chairman that I
worked with Adrian are relying
on your staff your committee
staff and makayla also already
LFC and we we did a lot of work
in the background to get this
ready there is a piece of
legislation going through the
house there a couple of items
here that may be interesting for
the committee to consider and
that's the bottom right hand
slide a portion of the slide
here and and that's establishing
a council to oversee the
awarding rewards of the monies
that might leave the second item
which is what we want to amended
here which is a fund so that
dollars a come into the state
have a place to land and how to
work them for leveraging into
the future so that's the
amendment Mr Chairman I'm open
to questions or feedback are you
want to go from here.
I can get my computer to.
Work
would you like me to take this
off the screens are Mr.
I just want to take that off the
screen Nathan do we have any
money in support or opposition.
Our weight.
Apple things we need to do
before we go to that Center
using the Senate finance
amendment that sits at all
Adrian will you explain the
amendment our circle so give me
a motion to.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I move for a the option at the
minimum for a discussion.
The gentleman expression so we
have a motion the second Senator
Wirth we're gonna let Adrian
explain explain that amendment
and then we'll need one more
that we're going to do really
quick.
You explain the amendment of
the.
Sen finance committee substitute
amendment.
For the good evening Mr chair
and senator the amendment
creates the council just like
hunter for the a mentioned that
the council is going to be
composed of thirteen members fix
for those members are from the
executive branch that include
the director of economic
development or their designees
the director cultural affairs or
thank me do it
the mortgage finance authority
higher ed or public school
facilities authority or their
designees on top of that it
includes four members are
appointed by the legislature to
buy the majority party to by the
minority party and then two from
each chamber
and we do have three
representatives from our native
communities one will be
appointed by the Navajo Nation
president and the other two will
be appointed by the tribal
infrastructure board and there
is a requirement that they be
specialist with in the broadband
area are on top of that the
council will have the power to
establish the rules governing
all the terms and conditions for
requests from this fund and they
will evaluate the proposals on a
monthly basis so this allows
coordination across all the
agencies and it the office of
broadband at center pretty is
proposing will provide the
staffing support to get this
proposals to them and a timely
basis the fund itself is on a
competitive basis.
And it's available for local
governments state agencies
public education positions
tribal governments and any
entities that are created by a
joint powers agreement and the
way the fund to set up it is
very much technology neutral and
insurers that we can leverage
the most money that comes into
the state as possible so it's
flexible enough to meet the
needs of.
You know whatever gaps and up
arising from the federal funding
so our it basically allows the
fund to evolve with the needs of
the state so it's not so static
and it does specifically
delineate that we should focus
on.
The needs of our most needy
communities those that are not
connected at all or half of our
standard service
how well we can leverage
existing infrastructure in those
areas as well as coordinate with
regional
plans that might be a rising as
well as our state plan that
center Padilla mentioned that
the officer broadband would be
establishing.
And that's basically the way the
amendment is working any money
that is going to be going into
the fund are being appropriated
for broadband by the state
through the supplemental
appropriations act will have an
your mark on it requiring the
passage of either this bill or
House Bill Page ten in order for
those funds to be used so we're
basically providing the
accountability protocols for any
broadband funding.
I.
I agree with the work that
Adrian just outlined Mr chairman
again in the highlights but he
gave you the the meat on the
bones thank you.
Thank you questions on the
amendment.
Mr chairman I don't have a
question and thank you for for
explaining this but I was
thinking it it seems like what
we're doing is making I heard it
correctly we're making the fund
any appropriations going that
contingent upon the junior bill
which is a supplemental
appropriations bill number
Senate bill three seventy seven
that we just passed and also
Senate bill ten I heard that is
that correct the board up a
little bit here and I want to
make sure I understood those two
bills that that's what's
contingent of the thank you you
might either the passage of this
bill or the passage of house
bill ten they're very similar
they establish an entity that
facilitates broadband for our
state so as long as we have that
entity in place we have the fund
and we have the council
overseeing the fund than the
fund can be released okay so
it's only right for your.
There were not three three thank
you Mr chairman that's all I
have.
Thank you senator Rodriguez any
other questions on the
amendment.
Hearing none can have a motion
hello Mr chairman that can.
So a motion and second and how
you want to call the roll.
Those on yes Mr chairman can I
find out again who did the
second.
Close your Campos that half of
thank you.
Okay I'll call the roll Mister
chairman Senator for yes Senator
Burt yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria is excuse Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales.
Yes.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes.
Yes.
Senator share yes you you're
here I'm here thank you senator
share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Yes Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator right yes and senator
Munoz.
Yes.
Yes yes that is ten yes and one
excuse it does pass the
amendment act.
He.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you senator yeah we're
back on the bill members do you
have any question on the
questions on the bill.
Mr chairman I think you
mentioned it yet one other
amendment as well that that I
think I don't know that I was
aware that we which ones
that'll.
Senator work we're looking
because you have the the nine
hundred and fifty in your bill
yeah we may need to strike
section five of that bill
because that that that funding
is already within the do a
division and they already have.
In the committee so.
We have any we're looking at
that so just give us one second
you have any questions on the
bill.
I have a question is Mr chairman
or.
Number I see is yes.
But yeah and and Mr chairman and
senator I know how much.
And how long.
Michael center but he is working
on this I'm on science
technology as well it's it's
been the first to the committee
for years and he is working
diligently to make this happen
and I quite frankly and that do
it is is very good at what they
do
but from I have a management
standpoint so on so forth and
and doing what this bill is
designed to do.
I think it is a plus.
For the state I would hope that
the funding issue is resolved
but to.
I would like to see this happen
and I would be supporting the
effort we've got to wire the
rest of New Mexico and yeah I
grew up in Deming and and apple
one listen and clockwork not
close but Columbus down there
with the issue is just a a a
prime example of something like
that we've got Cloudcroft in my
district the that is only
partially connected the you know
it's it just goes on and on and
on people in canyons and and
some support we have to find
that especially if if.
We're supposed to have kids in
school on Jan so anyway I just
want to come in I I appreciate
the senators for work on this I
think this is probably a good
way to really expedite this
process and and move farther
down the road and so I just want
to let people know and and
senator no I'm I'm supportive of
this issue thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you so.
In just just for the committee's
information you know this this
is adding the employees to do it
which they already have the FTEs
for to do this so we don't want
to give them any more money than
necessary if you pull out your
volume three I think it's in
line to you look at the FTEs in
the vacancies
so that's our concern right now
that we that we didn't catch
that real early but
Senator.
Campos you have a question.
The text me in my job thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the Senate finance committee.
I'd like to make a statement and
then of course I have a couple
of questions I I want to really
thank Senator Padilla for his
diligence over the years this
foresight to help to put
together if you will.
Broadband piece that now reaches
our and will reach every corner
of our state over the years and
in particularly many
Various factors we're dealing
with technology.
Working very closely with the
National Guard and other
entities some of the things that
we dealt with coursework towers
and how we can make the
connectivity work.
And they're still quite a few
places throughout New Mexico
some of those being.
One of the most important story
in daylight and the Floyd.
And then just pueblo Newkirk
hello my yes I do I could go on
us Phil Sienna and and some of
these areas the connectivity is
really working well but in
adjacent communities just a few
miles down the road it's not
working as as well as it could
so what does that do it hampers
if you will education and
hampers Health Care telehealth
is.
The pieces very incumbent upon
the future development of our
entire state particularly as we
see our population moving from
the rural parts and frontier
parts New Mexico into the more
urban areas I could go on and on
but the question that I have
before I
leave this the statement as I I
just again want to thank
Senator Padilla for his vision
and the people that he's been
working with
one of the subcommittee's work
with over the last several
months just don't directly with
this piece of legislation and
within that I hope that more
people will consider
that this is a plan.
There definitely will be if you
will oversight the transparency
and accountability definitely
will be there and in order for
us to move forward we need to
have
a good shepherd if you will
individuals like members of this
committee to find if you will
the strands as we move this
forward in terms of a question
and I realised the roll out is
something that all of us are
very concerned with and we
continue to hearing the.
The federal government's can
send resources to us we deal
directly with the FCC we
continue to deal with rights of
way
where and how this is going to
get to northwestern New Mexico
north eastern New Mexico
if you will leave into the movie
all these parts of New Mexico
definitely have areas that
continue to be there are areas
where there's brown outs
blackouts we don't have the
service and we want to make sure
that we start talking about how
we have the deliverables for our
kids so that as they move on
they can carry that Chromebook
with employer private when
you're riding the bus.
And this is something one back
many years that we're able to
find them if you will with time
so that they can make up for
that the last period if you will
of education and social
interaction that we would expect
for all of our our kids and then
we telehealth care and
telemedicine and some of the
smaller hospitals we don't have
those services at the level that
we should so Senator Padilla as
you move forward as part of that
vision and working with so many
of us over the years how how do
you anticipate this is going to
be rolled out and if you can
give us an idea in terms of of
the time frame of what would
happen if the resources course
our approved and if the plan
itself is signed the into law by
the governor
if you can kind of give us just
a it is a synopsis with that
that perspective would look like
in the year for years to come
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Campos and I appreciate
your comments and many people
that work on this no not at all
just just myself many many
people yourself included I'm in
terms of how this would be
rolled out I think you know
there in lies the the challenge
in the problem and the issue
that we deal with on broadband
we have entirely too many cooks
in the kitchen and some have a
skill set in this area and some
have a skill set in this area
some people want to do it one
way some you want to drive
everything through the public
school some people think it's
you know who knows what you know
but the bottom line is the
legislation puts it in statute
states that have have placed
their broadband
Pueblo rations in in statute
have seen great success with it
and the the legislation calls
out specific the six items I
reviewed with you when we first
when I first made a presentation
about the fifteen minutes ago
our ten minutes ago you know
gives that this very clear
charges in terms of how we want
them to do that whereas today
you have a lot of starting and
stopping and you have a lot of
inefficiency and how dollars are
used because you might have
seven entities working on the
same problem in the same area
broadband well now you're gonna
be able to to to to to take that
very wrinkled shirt as I tell
people and we're gonna take an
iron to that sure and it's going
to be in much better condition
in terms of how we utilize those
dollars and what specific tasks
we have them working on and then
you know in caps awaiting all of
that and underlining old that
was the the the importance of
having that plan document today
we just don't have a plan I like
to the to the example I gave
when we first when I first
presented to you in just a
little while ago when I started
my business you know what behind
the ears and just didn't know
exactly what I was doing didn't
come from a family that owns a
lot of businesses I went into
the bank and I had everything
sort of written down it were my
notes but I can walk in there
with the business plan and I do
walk in there with a financial
plan and I got left right out of
there and well tell you what
that taught me a very valuable
lesson about that's happened
anybody.
Else on this committee but that
was about twenty one years ago
and and then within three months
I went with the plan of
financial planning center and
think it was a whole different
interaction and and I would like
to act how that's going to
happen for us here.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
I'm gonna kind of throw out
because now with the
press something else because of
the commission you will our that
is going to provide the
transparency of the oversight
and accountability so we start
talking about LFC alias he LCS
S. H. E. D. P. T. O. H. DHS the
O. T. T. P. S. our tourism
economic development all of our
agencies and and frankly they're
all using connectivity and and
working stringently towards
stronger broadband I am how do
you anticipate this commission
created if you will the
interaction amongst all of our
state agencies in order to move
this and as a use of the term to
move the dial so that we're as
efficient and effective as
possible with the with with this
this new initiative that is
really long overdue thank you Mr
chairman center for the please
Mr chairman and then Senator
Campos I'm so glad you you you
you you framed it that way
you know to date once again we
have a lot of groups doing an
awful lot of work but we just
really don't know who's on first
is on second center I would
envision that over time because
the plan we will be put together
the reporting and analysis
component that I showed you
you're gonna have Representative
Reporting to the people of New
Mexico the legislature the
governor the the various
departments much like the way
LFC does their work where you
have a performance based
initiatives in terms of how
things are getting done how much
they cost do we want to continue
that and that we can very easily
look through LFC reports as an
example I would envision this
office operating in a very
similar function or fashion
where you can look across
departments to see where they're
at and what were their deficient
for what they may need and then
that on the right hand side
bottom left or bottom right hand
corner gives us a good picture
of what we need to do in the
next legislature in the next
funding cycle in the next
whatever to fill those gaps that
may exist.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
there are several more questions
but I think the Senate finance
committee for their
consideration of this piece of
legislation and thank you
Senator Padilla for those
remarks.
All I have Mister chairman thank
you senator thank you Senator
Campos at Smith and we do have
public comment on and get that
quickly because I'm trying to
manage tourism that texting
device.
Making you want to tell us who's
for and against.
Yes Mr chairman and we had no
opposition indicated for the
bell
In quite there are a number of
people and.
All calls at the port in the
order that I received it please
be mindful that the entire group
of support does have that ten
minutes total.
Enrichment where New Mexico
rural electric cooperative
association guy had.
Members of the committee that
model with New Mexico will
electric cooperative
association.
I would like to thank the
sponsor for bringing yet another
broadband bill Ford.
The rural areas remain on
serving comes to broadband
infrastructure especially the
most remote areas in New Mexico.
We are hopeful that federal and
state investments in broadband
infrastructure as a result
of the COVID nineteen pandemic
improve connectivity the most
rural regions of the state.
Mr chairman and committee
members of our organization
stands in support of Senate bill
ninety eight.
In respect to the amendment on
the formula you know with the
council.
Rural electric cooperatives are
they want to be involved and
have input broadband expansion
in rural areas of the state.
What part is served over eighty
percent of the land in New
Mexico thank you very much.
Then a conical registered
lobbyists representing Economic
Forum.
Good afternoon thank you very
much I am registered lobbyists
for economic form as you just
heard and we strongly support
this bill and the amendment our
membership supports this
legislation and we we.
Hi statewide wholistic approach
to critical and substantial
broadband infrastructure access.
This proposal includes we're
finding both the opportunities
for innovation inclusion and
economic development let's
usually providing guardrails
protecting governance and
oversight over the long haul
again the director support thank
you.
Next we have Ashley Wagner with
the New Mexico chamber of COVID.
Actually.
All of the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we support this bill
and the plaza Sanchez effort to
bring it to the next.
I get access to the state and
remove the barriers holding us
back has been a top priority for
the chamber for many years and
we.
What did you for a long time we
appreciate continues to work
with industry to ensure that we
get more private investment in
New Mexico not less I urge you
to support this bill thank you.
Next we have dated Boeing ten
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of COVID.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
chamber we need Senate bill
ninety three to fully meet the
challenge of the broadband
access throughout the state a
well staffed office in state
government that is accountable
for extending broadband across
New Mexico is a good sound
investment this bill will go a
long way in making reliable
internet or for table for local
governments and families as
users by leveraging the state's
negotiating power and knowledge
available funding resources we
are support for this bill and
look forward to seeing it make a
difference in our local
communities.
We have doctor Kerry gray hair
with a a RP New Mexico.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for listening to me today I am
doctor career I am the a a RP
New Mexico co chair of the
consumer advocacy team and we
are speaking today in support of
Senate bill ninety three if
there's one thing that we
learned from this pandemic it's
the importance of our broadband
communications center this bill
will establish a framework for
organizational.
Broadband and that's really
important to New Mexico we need
to make sure that our
communications are available
reliable and affordable to all
New Mexicans a a RP strongly
supports this bill and we think
Senator Padilla for bringing up
for work thank you.
Next we have bred Mantan former
cabinet secretary with the
economic development department.
Not I cried with that at next we
have at and Baker.
One is here yeah I'm sorry I was
routed.
Is that okay proceed I apologize
the committee wanted on my
process.
Mr chairman I represent the
north American intelligent
manufacturing and this
initiative which is called may
be what and we're leading an
effort on a clean energy economy
roadmap through New Mexico State
University of like to just come
at the this is so this is a
basic build Senator be able to
put together a like the fact
that it creates our calls for
the creation of the of a map a
roadmap to to make this all
happen through up to create a
plan all the fact that you
create staff to be a
professional staff to be able to
make this happen well in my
opinion I think we will get the
state will get most of the times
it's money back up because of
requests from you know from the
from both the federal government
so under the pandemic money as
well as USDA it's important for
education for public school
education for post secondary
education all the job at all as
you know from sacred when is
been very involved in this he is
very excited I just folks vote
is very supportive of the bill
as well it telemedicine we don't
we we have a world class a
project through Project echo
which is so this as most of you
know doctors of the drive
outside G..
Is just so has just develop some
tremendous technology economic
development this is really
critical for our ability to
recruit companies they're
looking for space communities
that are wired and I think this
would this would make make that
happen I'm very involved in
international business and again
I think this would help us.
incompetence internationally so
again congratulations and thank
you very much Senator Padilla
thank you very much Mr chairman
for allowing a few words thank
you.
Next we have planned Baker with
New Mexico democratic veteran
caucus.
Thank you Mr chair in the
committee of my name is Pam
Baker the United States navy
submarine veteran.
And I'm representing both the
New Mexico democratic veterans
and military families caucus in
the current president of the
baton chapter of the American
veterans for equal rights.
Expanded broadband service in
the state of New Mexico provide
so many benefits so clued
veterans access to telemedicine
access to D. O. H. vaccine
registration which I hope we
don't have to continue to use.
Access to these proceedings so
we can be involved is veterans
remote learning again we stand
in strong support of this bill
thank you for your time and your
work.
Next we have to take a stand
beyond just the executive and
director with the New Mexico
exchange carrier group.
Chairman you know some members
of the committee to take us on
the on this executive director
of the New Mexico exchange
carrier group the enemy CG is a
telephone industry association
of eleven incumbent local
telephone companies providing
voice in internet service to
customers in rural areas in New
Mexico I want to thank Senator
Padilla for his vision and
sponsoring this bill to
establish an office of broadband
understanding that currently
several state agencies have a
responsibility for broadband
development in the state and
we're very grateful for that the
having one single entity an
agency tasked with the six main
purposes and objectives Senator
Padilla highlighted in Senate
bill ninety three which
ultimately maps and tracks and
specific broadband projects
investment funds and
coordinating activities between
the state agencies has great
benefits and Senate bill ninety
three does that Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
with you today and I ask for
your support for Senate bill
ninety three.
Next we have the call up
following OPEC's secretary
beauty way foundation in
Albuquerque interfaith.
Chairman members of the
committee my name's Nicole one
of H. and I'm here on behalf of
Albuquerque interfaith in the
beauty way foundation we work
with indigenous folks in rural
New Mexico who lacked urban
access paved roads running water
and internet access in these
communities many of the elders
are the primary caretakers of
household which spanned multi
generations these households
have to support computer access
for various school age children
in addition as noted elders need
access to talent telehealth
however we are plagued with dead
spots drop zones and overall
lack of internet access elder
should not be risking their
lives when rural urban
communities can hop online for
health care indigenous you
should not be selecting who in
the household will be attending
class and who will be dropping
out which could very well lead
to the school to prison pipeline
in the future we are happy to
hear that you have invited
indigenous stakeholders to the
table when deciding how to
expand and build the structures
as to do minimal harm the beauty
way foundation in Albuquerque
interfaith respectfully ask you
to vote yes on Senate bill
ninety three thank you.
And Mister chairman Senator that
back included public comment
NFL.
Thank you Senator Woods I seen
your hand a person but I don't
see that now.
If not we'll go to Senator
Hemphill.
Mr chairman I don't have any
questions out Mona question was
is this money RDM.
H. H. R. House Bill.
So somebody elements that after
awhile thank you for your.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
want to thank Senator for the up
for all of your hard work on
this bill for almost a decade
now and I just want to reiterate
some of the thoughts that
Senator Campos shared this is
legislation that will address
issues related to health care
education disparities and
economic development within our
state and it's just perfect
timing given our current
situation and it will really
help the areas that rural areas
within many parts of the state
including it but then my
district particularly catching
County and I look forward to
voting in support of it my
question is regarding the
commission Adrienne mentions
that
people who will be who will have
who will be appointed on the
commission will need to have a
specialty within the broadband
area can you explain what that
entails Senator Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator quite a bill so
experience can be something like
you have have had a past
position and technology related
to some sort of a broadband type
of work to managing broadband
could have been the and one of
the offices of broadband for say
it's the tribal government could
be
an individual that raised money
for building a broadband network
might might be an engineer that
specializes in this area those
are the types of backgrounds and
experiences the commission of
the council would be looking
for.
Thank you senator and thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you senator.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Padilla Senator Mr chairman I
just want to I just want to
follow up on something you said
it got my attention what when at
the outset when you said that.
Do it has the money for this.
I don't know if you said they
have the money or they have the
staff.
Could to kind of clarify because
I guess I'm just wondering are
we talking about hiring new FTEs
or retesting do it FTEs Sir
could you could clarify a little
bit.
Senator in in volume two of the
LFC
appropriations act you'll see
that do it has a hundred sixty
seven employees with a vacancy
rate of about thirty percent so
that's roughly forty five FTEs
that are vacant I believe they
do had they did have I FTEs that
were signed to broadband those
are currently make it and have
not been hired because we have a
new do it secretary
so the funding is there
To that end so we're probably
gonna strike so everybody's
aware we're gonna strike out
making appropriation from the
bill and strike section five of
the bill in the probation.
Okay thank you Sir.
Your project Mister chairman
Senator us time works so I just
more specifically on your
question so the staff and with
the money or the The
appropriation of the money would
be there to manage the office up
for staffing the money for
broadband work is something that
you all have been crafting this
entire session or whatever and
you'll somehow wind up with some
sort of a figure that's
astronomical and wind up
available to the office I know
that you all are going to do a
very very good job of finding as
much money for broadband as
possible.
You know it.
Mr Chairman said thank you that
helps that helps explain it
Senator Padilla so we're we're
we're basically taking the money
that's sitting they can do it I
guess that we've appropriated or
their appropriating
appropriated funds and we're
going to fill positions and
stuff that might be helpful.
The work will be assistant yeah
Mr chairman you know I've talked
about this are you as a you know
read the mission of this
department at some.
We're asking a lot of them and
and I'm sure they can do it I
mean I people or whatever is not
insignificant do you see
leveraging the existing staff
that do it though is there any
relationship there we can
leverage their talents and
manpower will open the door.
Mister chairman Senator
absolutely that's why it was
important administratively
attached them to that department
and have them be a part of that
that that leadership and within
state government you know we're
starting out with you know five
to seven focus I mean and just
like any other department they
will come forward you know and
subsequent budgeting cycles to
ask for what they actually need
but we need to get them off the
ground so that we have you know
we have anywhere from point
seven five to one point five
people actually doing this work
it's not in statute so they're
also being called a number of
other directions they're doing
wonderful work but they simply
need to help to get this thing
done the right way.
Okay very good all right thanks
Senator thank you Mr.
Senator Steinborn as Senator
share and then Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman so Senator
Padilla one of the things that
has always of concern to me when
we talk about these is.
Public versus private are we
gonna are we going to compete
with with private providers
today or is this because believe
me I understand the need in the
northwest corner I now
understand the need into the
mountainous regions around
reserving and Cloudcroft and
other places.
But I don't want to set up a
system where all of a sudden.
We're driving out.
Private providers.
Mr chairman no I would say
Senator sure know the actually
we're we're gonna be highly
dependent on working with with
industry I would envision and
and and it was a bill that I
wanted to bring this year Mr
chairman but I wanted to get
this done much like we did with
when I created the early
childhood education and care
department Wirth you know every
year making that even better but
I would envision this helping is
also to to establish a much
stronger framework on public
private partnerships because at
the end of the day that private
investment it is going to be
super important to making this
thing you know really fruitful
for New Mexico in two thousand
seventeen you know you as you
know I was able to accomplish
three pretty significant
broadband bills that you're
almost local infrastructure act
too was the reform of the U. S.
up on but number three is right
up the alley with what you're
what you're kind of referring to
Mister chairman Senator which is
was a complete reformation of of
our New Mexico
telecommunications act which
have been updated since before
the internet came along right
away when in the re wrote all of
those laws to make New Mexico
significantly more attractive
for investment for private
industry to come in and help us
with that we were not going to
be in a position where we can be
open to that we have to to to to
use in all of the above solution
I mean in terms of the
technologies we have a lot of
New Mexico companies right now
we have starlink we have
optical zoom Albuquerque we have
skied down in Roswell those
companies are going to benefit
greatly by helping to utilize
and and maximize their
technologies so there's going to
be a handshake across the board.
Okay Mister chair I just wanted
to make sure that we were
competing for a and I'm glad to
hear that we're interested in
the new technologies well I
think it's kind Ross well it is
is getting ready to put some up
over Navajo Nation and I want to
make sure that we're not.
Cutting them out because of some
something else going on and
finally Mr chairman I just want
to say that that Senator Dr
Campos obviously knows an awful
lot of letters but he didn't put
him in the right order.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman and also
Law Center of the all.
You know well your hard work you
know just really prevailed.
And though this is so big go a
big step forward in the giant
step forward for our state the
only part that that I would ask
because some in reading in the
past and the time that all the
huge in the front things
infrastructures develop is
still.
Is there a plan for the
maintenance.
Mister chairman Senator you know
I'm not gonna tell you at this
very moment that there is a plan
for the maintenance but I think
yeah I I feel like that will be
part of what happens here
because now we're going to have
performance
measures that we're gonna be
looking at that's called out in
the legislation so if if things
are being maintained and we know
what to do to get the maintain
how much that would cost this
and that
we don't have a framework for
public private partnerships yet
I it's gonna be a big project
I'm gonna bring it for for
broadband only probably next
year and and that will call out
maintenance of of these projects
and programs but yeah I mean I I
can't tell you that the
legislation specifically says
these must be maintained but
there's going to be an awful lot
of scrutiny of the projects and
where the money was spent how it
was spent and and so to make
sure that we're meeting the
expectations of the project.
Which would which would require
maintenance of whatever the.
Well hello very well thank you
thank you very much but you for
your hard work thank you thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator I don't see
anything body else on our list
Senator video before we get to
that amendment Mr Chairman sorry
sorry I just I was trying to get
on the list sorry
I didn't get a text from you
Great can learn.
Representative anyway.
So Mister chairman
video why do we need a public
private partnership act Leda and
the state of Economic
Development Act already provide
an exemption to the anti
donation clause which allows
local governments to basically
partner with the news public
money for private broadband
infrastructure why do we need a
new act why can't we just be
used.
Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria very good question
that's probably why we've had
such a hard time.
Passing in documenting and and
bringing to fruition a public
private partnership act
you know this legislation does
not is not about public private
partnerships but that the answer
your question the business's I
can't at this moment it's so
that there is a document in
framework of how the public
private partnership will work
you know when do you jettison
the private partnership when
does the private partnership
what what sort of grammars would
be in place for a particular.
The private partnership deal
that produced a return on
investment of acts and went is
that when the private partner is
jettisoned from the project who
would maintain the project from
a maintenance standpoint to
Senator Gonzales mention so
public private partnership can
help us to document all of those
items in these agreements but
that's you know that's an
excellent question and that's
probably why we don't we have
been able to the stallion.
Mr chairman I respectfully
disagree because in late if you
read Lita it requires all these
local governments to put
together their economic
development plan to do all this
planning your discuss.
The problem is no one's done it
because it's it's an issue of
political will people and I find
it interesting this session
local governments want the
legislature to invest the
legislature in the public's
money statewide but local
governments don't really want to
put up their funds and so you
know I'm just gonna respectfully
say leader provides the
framework Mr chairman and
provides a framework for the
planning for the consultation
for the engineering for all of.
So maybe we need a new act that
builds upon Lida and
specifically for broadband that
could be good I think it's a
good idea maybe four to talking
about that about Mr Chairman
just on a separate issue
regarding regarding this bill.
Senator let's just let's fast
forward three years.
For three years and we're in
session and there has not been a
substantial increase in
broadband coverage for New
Mexico.
Who do we hold accountable and
how do we hold them accountable
or is it simply gonna be we
tried our best.
You know we have some more money
please.
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria it's simply not
working for us right now the way
that we're doing so we do need
to try something else and I am
very confident I feel very good
that that what we're doing here
is going to drive accountability
it's going to drive efficiency
it'll drive that consistency
across the continuum of how we
develop design develop implement
broadband on site I I believe
that that you know what we're
doing today is it working for us
and we need to do something
different and this is what I
propose what will make that
change so that we all you know
feel like we're going in the
right direction.
Mr chairman again with all due
respect thank okay within the
specific legislation that.
Are there any accountability
provisions if this new office
fails to meet its benchmarks
and.
All of this infrastructure and
government bureaucracy we're
creating and celebrating today.
If if it doesn't result in real
results for the people of New
Mexico who do we does the bill
provide any accountability how
do we hold them accountable if
those if this if that is matters
it's just an aspirational goal
Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman the U. S. bullet
number four I I don't know
center kinda let if you were
part of the presentation when I
first started but has a
tremendous amount of reporting
and analytics so that there
should be a tremendous amount of
transparency on on where the
work that's being done how it's
being accomplished how much it
costs where we still deficient
etcetera and if the director of
the office is not.
Reforming get on to in meeting
those goals or whatever's
establish for them and I would
envision there would be a change
there so I you know we we have
many offices that we don't you
know we don't are you know run
the the director off the plank
with this this this is gonna be
very well transcriptions parent
so when the exactly where
they're achieving their goals
are not.
What happens I mean Alan
believer the point but.
You know I
I I I.
I I I just don't know.
Sure you have read the
legislation there's no
guarantees.
What providing a structure which
is good.
available for this.
but you know I I remain
concerned that.
And I hope I'm wrong but I have
a sinking feeling that in the
notes over the next three years.
we'll get some we'll get some
more data some recompile data.
We'll we'll get some maybe some
explanations of how money is
going to be spent which again
it's not your fault Senator
Padilla at all you're trying to
solve a problem I commend you
for it but it's just always been
troubling to me this session
that when I've asked the
question multiple times.
Broadband money can be spent on
people don't know.
And I just don't know running my
own business how you al you come
to the table proposing that you
want hundreds of millions of
dollars and can't answer the
question okay waiting to spend
that on.
So you've you've exerted
tremendous leadership no doubt
about that you know maybe the
consolidation does provide us
that accountability and I'm
gonna trust in you and in the
bill that it does of all for it
but I I hope I'm wrong but I
have a sinking feeling in three
years.
Our results will not have really
improved.
and and then we'll we'll you
know we'll do what we need to do
them thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator.
Where I and I do apologize for
that you did text me at.
Trying to manage as much
technical devices I can a one
time so I do apologize for that
Senator Padilla at I do it again
could be great admiration for
taking on the broadband issue
and and it has been a learning
experience this year about
broadband issues and what we
really lack in New Mexico
because we really lack of plan.
In the plan doesn't exist we
know that it doesn't exist we
know that the the governor does
not have a plan in so
incentivized and so we're kinda
tasked with how do we build the
structure how do we make it work
who's gonna put the plan and in
give credit where credit's due
is Adrian bus this tale to
figure out how we create this
this board in this condition how
we get everybody to coordinate
how we know what's happening New
Mexico in each area what parts
are underserved what parts are
over served eight to Steve
what's the latest technology and
we came up with this amendment
that we've been discussing for a
week or so.
Senator built in so.
I think at you know senator
Candelaria maybe maybe right we
do need some accountability and
we may have to do that on the
for us to make sure that they
are proceeding in a timely
manner
in that we're not going to be
left in the dark so to speak
with broadband and slow
broadband and high dollar
broadband that doesn't give us
the speeds that people need
Senator you know currently how
much federal broadband money
there is out there.
In total Mr Chairman.
In total yes.
I'm told that it is upwards of
two hundred billion dollars.
Maybe just for the state of New
Mexico for the state of New
Mexico should be somewhere in
the one billion dollar range I'm
told somewhere between nine
hundred and forty six million
and one point three billion of
the two hundred billion that's
available.
Correct.
We create this funded and this
process there's currently you're
right just call it a million
nine hundred seventy nine
million dollars but there's five
hundred forty four million that
came from the cares there's two
hundred million just for tribes
that they have on their own
there's another one point five
for do it just by itself.
And the latest bill that we've
seen coming out of the house.
In the office too okay
connectivity has about twenty
seven million in there and the
FCC has a hundred sixty five
million for broadband those are
just a few of the highlights so
there is but does have to be
leveraged and if we don't have
the plan and we don't have the
resources and we can't rely and
do it
for employees to to try to get
some billion dollars worth of of
I and many we have to figure out
a way to do that
You know the council should work
because every agency what we
learned is thirteen agencies
across the state have some way
shape form broadband but
nobody's coordinating with each
other and that's the thought
behind the council to coordinate
and then creating a fund that
the council can then control and
say okay here's your plan for
northwest New Mexico whether
it's bland in the ground system
or what it is that they need for
their services don't know the
access the low speeds don't know
where it's going and will have
on that.
We are still lacking a plan for
broadband New Mexico that's
something you should think about
between here in the house in and
how to get that plan put
together because the feds will
not fund this until we have a
plan so.
That's that's the key function
Mr chairman of the office is the
documented New Mexico broadband
plans to include a financial
plan all that's in the original
piece legislation all the
recordings of the original piece
legislation all the
accountability all it's it's
it's that's how it was designed.
Senator at a gree with you and I
hope it works that way but you
know where the government we're
here to help you we haven't
moved the needle quite enough
but with putting state funding
and putting.
The federal funding match week
should be able to move the
needle quite a bit and fill the
tank so.
I just want to do that Senator
sure I I there is another Senate
bill I may have the wrong number
it's for thirteen it creates an
enterprise and municipalities so
they can partner with the state
come to this fund created
enterprise zone have a public
private partnership to
create an infrastructure build
that infrastructure so they have
some revenue generation and they
have.
Some resources to complete that
so that is coming as a follow up
just so you know that.
Senator we need to we do need
them and your bill so what we
need to do and pregnant I'm
wrong at any point
that we need to strike making
appropriation in the title and
we need to strike section five
of the bill The appropriation.
So that is.
So that is the in and out.
I have a list.
Mr Chairman.
Wishin and the school Senator
Pat you want to call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes
secretary of our yes Senator
Campos yes.
Campos yes senator Candelaria
yes Senator Candelaria yes
Senator Diamond appears to have
left.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes.
Yes Senator share yes Senator
Sharif yes Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn yes senator
one yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes Senator manual.
Yes.
That is ten yes one excuse.
Thank you we are back on the oil
they have a motion on the bill.
So moved.
Sorry.
Second.
Seconded by Senator repeating.
So we have a motion by Senator
second by Senator Rodriguez
because I couldn't I think other
people stepped all over time
just can hear who they work
that we call the roll please Mr
chairman if I may interject a
little bit and regressive after
mandated so the proper most you
think is yes.
Thanks.
Thank you Mr chair and vice
chair senator Byrd.
Yes.
Yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Candelaria
yes Senator Cappelletti yes
Senator Diamond is excused.
Senator Gonzales yes
yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Sure yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes German else.
Yes.
Yes that.
And what you.
Senator Padilla just before we
close this out I mean we
currently have about fifty five
million dollars in our budget
for broadband throughout New
Mexico if fifty five million can
get us a billion dollars worth
of federal match matches imagine
what we can do with seventy five
million.
Or a hundred million at the most
and broadband New Mexico and and
so think about that as we move
forward with your bill of what
that looks like so you can give
us some advice created time here
Senate finance and senator do
you have anything else that.
I just want to say thank you to
everybody this is a huge step
forward for the state of New
Mexico and I knew if I could get
through this very very important
committee but I thought that I
think we're in pretty good shape
and I really appreciate all the
comments they were all very very
well taken thank you.
Thank you senator and next time
you come to Senate finance maybe
you could that bring some
cookies or or or something that
I have a little over to our
office may go a little smoother
for you but thank you sent it
will do I will do Mr chairman
thank you.
You got it.
blue coming your way.
Senator I'll take some ice tea
and then.
I'll be good thank you thank you
all.
Thank you
Members I told you we're gonna
leave it six and I'm sorry for
those other people that had a
bill on and and not that we've
had a long day on the floor in.
I think that in order to get to
some of the other bills people
really need to be on top of
their game.
And get a good night's rest
tonight and hopefully we'll have
a long or session again tomorrow
we'll see what happens
I do want to inform everybody we
may have to come in Saturday.
And to get your calendar ready
to gets caught up in the Senate
finance we will have to stay a
little bit later in a little bit
later as the days go by if we
from the for this long but I'd
like to get through some of
these bills so we can really get
to working on house bill two as
as a wrapping up some numbers
and some language for us all the
review.
And go through that so.
Thank you for that I'm sorry to
the to the other sponsors of the
bill but we will try to stay
late I'll list announced on the
floor where we're gonna be at in
what time frame we think we're
going to stay to every me
just so everybody knows it those
sponsors have built in Senate
finance so thank you guys have a
good evening appreciate you guys
staying with us.
By.
But.
