That was directed at you from
Senator Shindo Senator Tomason.
Joey, he's doing the pay stuff.
Come on up.
There's a bigger hammer in my
office in her shindo right
behind the.
Twinkies.
We're ready, uh, who's gonna
start us off? Joey Selena, yeah,
um, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. So,
um, my name is Joseph Simon. I,
I'm your analyst for the state
personnel office in the state uh
personnel system, and we, we
just, uh, uh, you should have in
front of you a presentation that
our partners at uh Deloitte
prepared for you on uh the uh
current uh work that is going
on, uh, regarding the uh job
architecture redesign, um,
there's also some information in
here on.
sort of some of the work that's
been done to date, um, we
started, uh, a study back in
2023 of the state's compensation
and classification system and
really as part of that study,
what really came out is uh a a
key recommendation of that study
was the state needs to take a
close look at its job
classification framework and job
architecture, and really set up
a more rational system, a real,
uh, a clear system that's
transparent for everyone that
has aligned career.
tracks where job titles have
common uh common phrases across
them so that, you know, a
manager in one classification
means relatively the same thing
as a manager in the other in
another classification, and
that's something that over the
last 20 years between uh the
previous study that was
completed and, and, and our
current system has started to,
to, to fragment a little bit.
So, um, you know, for the last
couple of months, we've been uh
getting started on this, uh, job
architecture work.
And I'm really actually in your,
in your presentation, uh, get
you started off on, on page 6.
So sort of some of the work
that's already been done is, you
know, Deloitte's gone through
our current classification
system and then, um, done, uh,
you know,
Taking a look at what, uh, the
New Mexico's needs are in terms
of uh what job families are out
there and then sort of what job
subfamilies. So they basically
delivered a draft catalog that
we've been, been working off of
of of um all the job families
and subfamilies, and then
developed a sys a system, uh,
and a job leveling guide. So,
uh, throughout.
State classifications, there's
a, there's a uniform system of
leveling. So entry levels,
intermediate, senior, um, and
there's sort of um guidelines
for agencies on, you know, what,
what, what is an intermediate
level employee, what's their
general responsibilities and,
and education and things like
that, um.
So they, they, as I said,
delivered a job, uh, job
glossary so that we're
consistently using the same kind
of titles and then sort of most
importantly, just very recently
delivered a new job catalog
listing about there's about 680
classifications in this job uh
uh job catalog, um, that's down
from a little more than 800 that
we currently have. So there was
a lot of consolidation in in
that and but just the entire
purpose of this project is to
create a more rational
systems, um, for state uh
classification.
And so that's just that was just
sort of the background that I
wanted to, to give you on the
program and I'll just sort of
hand it over to our partners at
uh Deloitte and uh the state
personnel office for any
comments that they have.
Good.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee.
Um, it's a pleasure to sit in
front of you again, uh, Selena
Bussy. I'm a client relationship
executive with Deloitte and have
been able to help support our
team, um, in this important work
that's been going on since the
summer of 23. Um, we've sat
before you, um, a couple of
times to provide updates. I mean
as Joey so thoroughly got to,
we're a really pivotal point,
um, in the project when we talk
about job architecture. Uh,
that's an interesting term. A
lot of people, I think, say,
well, can you define that for
me? What is job architecture
exactly, um, as Joey pointed
out on slide 6, I believe it is.
Um, I really like the middle
column because it talks about
the objectives of a job
architecture project, but on
either side of that, it really
helps to define what is job
architecture and maybe more
importantly, what is it not?
When we start talking about the
20,000 plus state employees in
New Mexico, it becomes very
personal, very fast. When we
start talking about things like
classification and compensation,
and what does that mean? Are we
gonna be looking at an agency or
an employee or the jobs that,
you know.
a certain type of employee does,
and that's not what job
architecture is. It really is
looking at the entire system and
how to create the transparency
that Joey talked about, the
leveling between classifications
so that there's a lot of clarity
for employees that when they
first come into a role in an
agency, what are those
expectations? And when they're
thinking about a career path
over 5, 1030 years, they really
understand the differences in
the types of skill sets that
they're going to need to have,
the types of responsibilities
that they're going to inherit as
they move up in their career. So
a lot of that is
is encompassed within the job
architecture part of this
project. Um, doing a lot of this
work in a lot of different
places, uh, Deloitte really
brings to the table a lot of
examples, um, a lot of best
practices, but probably more
than anything, the team is
really focused on an outcome
that is right for New Mexico.
What does this look like for New
Mexico's job architecture
framework going forward. What
does it look like for New
Mexico's compensation strategies
and philosophies going forward.
So it really is what is going to
be best for the state, um, and
that's really emphasized by the
state personnel office.
Department of Finance
Administration and our partners
at the LFC that at the end of
the day, it is about what's best
for New Mexico, um, and it's
classified system of employees.
So a lot of time has been spent
on that, um, but I think
oftentimes we have to demystify
what is job architecture, why
are we doing it? Um, and more
than anything, I always point
back to the last time New Mexico
undertook this significant body
of work.
was 2000.
A lot has changed in 25 years in
terms of jobs, um, employees,
how do we recruit? How do we
retain? So while this might seem
like a huge undertaking, that's
because it is, um, a lot of
effort and a lot of patience has
to be exercised to really do
this and do it well, um, so the
investment is the right thing,
the time commitment amongst all
of the partners is the right
thing, um, and really encouraged
to see the legislative bodies
still behind this work, um, and
ensuring that the strategy is
going into the future, um,
really reflect the type.
Of uh compensation and
classification that you want to
have on behalf of all state
employees. So we appreciate the
continued partnership um with
those that are here today and
happy to continue to answer any
questions that you all have, um,
and support them in their
objectives.
Mr. Chair, members of, of the
committee, I'm the proud
director of the state personnel
Office. My name is Dylan Lang.
I, but before we um start, just
wanted to give a special uh
celebration to my uh son. He's,
he's 3 today. Uh, his name is
Wesley, and this is just an
opportunity as I look around the
room to just uh really celebrate
the sacrifice all families have
uh for us to be, um, here for
your staff to be um present and,
and the hard work that you all
do. So I just wanted to say, uh,
thank you to our families for
allowing us all to be here
generally.
I, I reiterate everything that
you want to sing him Happy
Birthday to.
Sure. All right, so there you
got what's his name? His name's
Wesley. All right, send it
there, you're gonna lead us off
and help you all better get in.
Uh, maybe.
Really
Dylan, is he watching you right
now? Uh, it's, it's recorded.
Great, thanks.
Yeah, great, thanks for that
reminder.
My wife's not on a plane now.
All right, you ready?
Happy birthday.
Happy birthday.
He
you did
I.
You burn.
This is.
Thank you very, thank, thank you
very much. I, I really
appreciate that, that, that was
unexpected. That is the first
time I think we've ever sang
Happy Birthday to a 3 year old
in committee.
He has broken the ground I might
have to get the committee back
together for my seven year old,
yeah, I don't think that's gonna
happen,
um, but no, but this just
reiterates the fact that we um
are at a crucial part of this,
of this project where Deloitte
has delivered, um, the, the,
the, the, the first draft of the
job, um, catalog, right? We're
looking at the, the titles of
what these jobs are going to do,
right? Um, and so the validation
sessions will start in, in April
and what that is, it really
brings New Mexico's.
value and the Mexico's um um
knowledge of these
classifications, um, uh, and
really reiterates the fact um
that this is what we need and
this works and this makes sense
in New Mexico. So that'll start
in, in, in April. So we're
excited to, to, to, to have that
work start, um, but other than
that, we're, um, we're working
well together. I think, uh, the
executive and and the
legislative branch are, are
committed to the success of this
project and we're, we'll stand
for any questions.
compass.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, members of
the Senate Finance Committee.
Thank you very much to the
presenters.
The uh next step, if you will,
as we deal with this and I hope
that this can be included also
and it's not to add additional
work to the uh to the ongoing
efforts that you all have put
forth, uh, over the last couple
of years, uh, but of course as
we've done uh past studies and
now we're doing this 11 of the
big issues and I wanna thank our
chairman, uh, not only our
chairman but also uh the
director of LFC and uh our uh
employees.
The staff has really reached out
to take a look at what is
actually occurring at the
federal level with federal
positions that are being cut
with uh uh revamping, if you
will, along with possibly the um
resurgence of uh new duties and
responsibilities.
And along with that many of
these individuals uh are from
New Mexico and I've already had
conversations with dozens of
them.
And they're seeking, if you
will, uh, state employment. They
have the skills, the expertise,
uh, one of the issues, however,
is gonna be the uh cut in pay,
if you will, as they go forward,
and I hope that within this that
one of the big issues that we're
able to address will be, how do
we take uh advantage of the
brightest, the smartest, these
individuals that are coming from
uh the federal positions and
coming back home.
And how we can help so that they
continue to help us grow and,
and help us to muster, if you
will, the expertise that is
gonna be needed as we secure uh
federal resources and continue
to manage, if you will, many of
the larger projects, so again,
uh my my compliments to our
chairman to the LFC, uh, in the
ongoing work that they're gonna
be looking at because right now
as we're gathering information,
we see that New Mexico is
receiving.
about $40 billion and it's still
not at the at the the full level
if you will, of bringing all
this together and you see about
$3 trillion where we're gonna
continue to go into the, the uh,
the deficit or if you will, the
debt service at the federal
level. So with all the
machinations of the changes that
are occurring and now as we
reach this level in the pinnacle
through spo uh, please, and I
hope maybe you all can comment
briefly. How do we, how do we
address this issue because it
definitely is going to be
something that uh is going to
affect us for years to come,
specifically beginning um with
these uh quick changes that are
occurring now at the federal
level. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, I
mean, we are, we are, if we had
a press conference on Monday,
uh, uh, the executive and some
legislative representatives all
about trying to hire federal
employees both uh who were
terminated under probation and
also those maybe just looking uh
uh for public service that more
aligns with, you know, uh, how,
how they believe public service
should be. Um, we had a, we had
a rapid hire and a resource
event on Friday for um federal
employees. We also have
resources on the state website.
My comment was simply, if you
are committed to better outcomes
for New Mexicans, we have a spot
for you in in in the state of
New Mexico. And that is, is what
we do have. What I will tell you
is that that's one of the issues
with job uh one of the benefits
of job architecture and then
moving to a single salary
structure, which we haven't
spoken about, but that's another
piece of it. It will allow us to
be more nimble, to be more
flexible, right, to hire
individuals, um, uh, more
quickly and, and at a pay that
uh maybe
more um uh reflective of what
they make both in the federal
government but also in the
private sector. We don't make
any, any, any bones about the
fact that we can't always um
compensate uh and pay, right?
That's direct compensation, the
base pay, um, and as the private
sector or the federal, but we do
have um absolute bevy of
indirect benefits, um, that,
that uh makes the state of New
Mexico competitive, but what
this project hopes to do is to
make agencies more.
Nimble, more flexible to bring
in talent, um, and, and
innovative talent into the state
without having to go to the
state personnel office to
adjust, I think you saw one of
the other pictures that I've
provided in the past. We have a
10012 pay grades, we're gonna
move it down to 25, um, or, or
20. So that's that's our
response, but we, we would, we
would love to have any federal
um uh employee come, come to the
state and provide their value.
Thank you very much and Mr.
Chair, if I may also, uh, Joe,
you might have something to, to
add to some of those comments
that I noticed you were ready to
go ahead and uh, so Mr.
Chairman, uh compass, you know,
Director Lang read my mind, you
know, a major part of this
process has been moving the
state towards a more
market-based system of
compensation and, you know,
Director Lang covered that in
his comments, and that's exactly
what I was going to say.
So if I may, Mr. Chair, and I
want to go back to the specifics
as we deal with this. So within
those pay grades and as we deal
with it, uh, has the uh the
federal factor been uh brought
into this at this point. I know
this possibly was not, uh, one
of the ideologies or if you
will, one of the specifics for
the study itself, but as we move
forward and going back to the
term that you used, Mr.
Chairman, of course, uh uh the
director spoke as we deal with
it.
To be more nimble, are we going
to be prepared again to to help
New Mexico rise to the point to
where the jobs are gonna be
available, the work is gonna be
there. These people are gonna
line up with you will, with
bringing the federal uh
intelligence so that New Mexico
not only becomes stronger
economically, uh, but with our
labor force and we're able to go
ahead and bring people back and
keep people here within the
state, uh, to develop a much
stronger state. So Mr. Mr.
Chair, if, uh,
If you may maybe uh on behalf of
the study, you can maybe
elaborate a little bit more. I
want people to understand that
in this to be nimble, to
continue to ensure that we're
gonna move forward, uh, all
these steps have to be
considered. We can't be
complicit in what we do, we're
gonna have to become very
aggressive in vision building,
if you will, in order to go
ahead and move forward,
particularly with the pay
standards that we're
establishing. Thank you, Mr. Mr.
Chair, and maybe that somebody.
Want to respond to that and then
that's all I have, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, we,
we are ready, um, uh, now,
currently and also once this uh
project goes into effect in the
beginning of the next fiscal
year, we'd be even more nimble,
I think, uh, ultimately, like I,
like I said with pay grades that
are going to be so wide, some
70%, right? It, it really is and
the agency will not, uh, the
only real limitation is agency
budget at that point to be able
to pay these, these, these
individuals, um, yeah, uh, the
base pay that, that, that
they're probably see.
So we, we, we're able to, to
meet that need.
Thank you very much. That's all
I have, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Lanai.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, afternoon, where we
were at.
Um, excuse me.
Director, we, I visited with you
quite a bit on this, and, and
really I just want to show my
support for this program we did.
Um
Do this kind of in San Juan
County and it is a rocky start.
I'm just gonna let you know,
it'll be a little tough to get.
Um, up and going, cause you
don't have to move things around
a little bit, be flexible, but
it is settled so much down, you
know, that initial attack first
is, and I think I said this last
time, well, my, my employees
work harder than that
department.
Employees and you you're gonna
have some of that, but it, it
calms down, you know, over time
and
It, it just made a world of
difference in San Juan County.
And I, I think it will here too.
I know how big a feat this is.
Since I've been through it once.
And I appreciate you guys taking
it on cause this.
This is gonna be a big one, so.
Good job. I just want to say
good job this morning.
They are getting paid to do
this.
It's still a lot of work.
No, I, I think you're, you're
final page, page 8, where it
says the future of the state,
right?
We know that since 2020, the
wages have changed completely,
right? And we created an arms
race over police departments.
There's arms races over
architects, engineers, you name
it, and what those costs are
gonna be.
Uh, the last thing I want to do
is do a study and then not do
it.
That's not gonna happen if I'm
here, right? We're not gonna
waste our time paying you a
million and 1.5 million and then
us not listening.
You're gonna create that inside
po, right?
You're gonna help them make
those changes. I don't want this
to be just a, let's turn the tab
and keep.
Keep our budget low. Let's fix
where our real works are, right,
where problems are, I mean, the
courts came in and said, oh,
25% of our lowest paid workers
are on Snap. Well, that's not
true. The executives.
Has a higher number of people on
Snap.
So if you're gonna go to work
every day, do you think you
should get
that benefits I, I think where
they're not paid correctly.
We're not ever going to get to
the level I don't think of the
federal government, their, their
jobs are pay a lot more, uh,
their benefits, their
retirements quicker, uh, there's
a number of things we're not, we
can't print money like they can.
And so I think
As we head down this path, I
just want to make sure that
agencies that may have went over
this, are now going to have to
right size.
And that's happened, but we're
gonna have to write some of this
whether you're too low or you're
too high, you're gonna come into
one of the thresholds.
Uh, we've done how many years of
CPI? 44 years of 4 years of 4%
increases.
Uh, to state employees and and
we do 6 or 71 year, I think we
did.
So we did 6 or 7, so we're,
we're holding the threshold in
the market trying to keep up
with it, but at the end of the
day, I'm not gonna just pay you
money and then not implement the
study and so make sure that Spo
and Dylan, uh, you guys are
implementing this. This is
important to
People to attract recruit,
retain people, our our state
benefits are so great.
I mean
When you're on vacation, you're
building vacation time. I don't
know what other workforce that
you allowed to do that.
I mean, our cost on the district
judge with their pay of 15, 160
are cost for retirement.
Everything is like.
3 290 or something with
retirement benefits. It's
Our benefits are way too rich in
in people really want to come
work for the state and put their
years in, I mean, nice thing, 30
years, gets you 90%.
That's a pretty good benefit.
Start young and and you get 90%
of your pay.
Dylan, you'll probably stay long
enough to get.
90% of your pay, that means your
kid probably about 33.
When you retire.
But I mean this is something
that I thought we had to do.
We're never gonna keep up. There
was agencies not paying
attention, there's agencies that
were getting lawsuits filed on
the Environment department
because their wages weren't
right. They had people doing two
jobs and couldn't hire people.
Now we're running into the
problem where the environment
department hired and all the
people from uh in state
engineer's office moved to the
environment department and now
they're asking for supplemental
to get him there.
Let me ask you this, uh, Dylan,
and do they have the ability
right now, the state engineer's
office to come to the same pay
as an engineer in the
environment department.
Um, Mr. Chair, they do, I think
it just comes down to agency
budget. I mean, that's, that's
just where, where they, the
determination on where to spend
their money, how much to pay.
They may have priorities and
environment that they're able to
pay more money to get more
innovation than they can at
state engineer, but right now
our current system, even as uh
as as flawed as it is, would
allow them to pay as much as
environment if they had the
budget.
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, I just sort
of wanted to say on this. So,
you know, one of the, one of the
things we're really gonna have
to pay close attention to going
forward is as we, we ship to
the, the new pay bands that that
uh that Director Lang was
talking about is there's gonna
be a lot of pressure within
agencies to sort of keep people
where they were in the pay band,
and, you know, as we're, as
we're shifting strategy, that's
not necessarily necessarily
something that's gonna be
possible. We really need
agencies to be using the entire
of their pay band when um
they're when they're making pay
decisions about where their
employees are so that people
have opportunity to to grow
within those pay bands and
they're not just, you're not
just focusing everyone at the
top end of those pay bands, and
then they cap out and have
nowhere to grow, so they got a,
you know, go to another agency
to get a potential pay increase.
So that's gonna be something we
have to watch going forward.
I, I couldn't agree with you
more, right? I mean.
This is kind of the sad story,
but a guy that works for DOT.
Came into my office and another
guy that works for DOT came in.
The one guy had 13 years. The
other guy had 53 years, and he
was paid higher at 3 years than
the 15, and then that weekend
wasn't any part of the state's
deal, he got an accident and
broke his back.
And so when that person really
needed the pay and needed the
money and needed the workers'
comp in the in the higher level.
Have you've been there longer.
Now he's
Sad story, I mean, when we don't
fix things the way they should
be. I mean, those are just some
of the stories, right?
But things should get fixed, I
mean.
People who got hired for more
than people that had 20 years.
So that's the agency's fault and
agencies are going to have to
get on board and we hear those
stories, we'll just start
calling them up, I guess.
They're gonna have to work hard
once you get the redesign, you
get implemented and disposed
system.
Uh, Dylan, do you think you're
gonna need any IT stuff to
implement any of this as we go
forward.
Uh
Chairman Munoz, uh, part of the,
the, the other agency, um, a
part of this study is uh is DFA
and DFA uh actually runs our
share team now, that's where
all, all the, the IT work is
done when it comes to entering a
a job title, someone's pay,
their uh their benefits, and so
that is the, that's the support
uh that DFA or that will need
to, need to deliver, you know,
we are in conversations with the
share team. Um, it is a large
task, um, but we are, we are
working with them to see.
To ensure that if they do need
support that they, that they
come and ask, but state
personnel office is working with
with DFA and um I'll, I'll have
to follow up with you on that.
Well, dig deep into that because
now is the time, because when
they finish, you're gonna have
to do this conversion and
I don't know what you said
share, but I don't know what
system you're using, that
conversion has to happen and it
has to happen.
Really quickly cause you're, I
think the timeline was June for
completion.
So then we're starting to build
the budget quickly after that,
so we're gonna have to need to
know some numbers and make sure
that you can convert in time, so
that we can do that, but, I
mean, a lot of it is agencies
and HRs aren't hiring correctly
and in
Too many pay bands and too many
compressions and I.
I remember this how the
spaghetti strung in those.
Um
So I think that's some of the
stuff that is happening, so I
see Senator Campos, you have
another question. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, and, uh, I
apologize, but for a second
time, so as we deal with it and
we have the uh qualifications
for positions in the different
departments and even though we
indicate that uh potentially
that these individuals could be
paid the same. I'm going back to
1980 when I was in the auditor
auditor's office and what we
used to see is employees going
from one department in position
to another because that was
gonna go in.
help to escalate, if you will,
the compensation. So within that
there might be the need for us
to uh look closely at how we can
create, if you will, these
strands that are going to be
unilateral number one because
right now what we do is we have
stranded staff in the example
that you just mentioned and so
within that uh I believe within
this study, and I know this is
kind of a, a quick uh compressed
uh.
Portion of it, uh, but we really
need to look at that in order
for us to uh help to alleviate,
if you will and eliminate some
of the uh jumping and going from
one position to another, and I
don't blame people for doing
that, but as we deal with it, if
we have the unilateral uh past
trends and people realize that
we as a legislature can look at
the resources needed for these
departments so that we can keep
people within the departments
and they continue to go and
build institutional knowledge
and have that high level of
productivity. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Guys, I don't have any further
questions. Appreciate that.
really.
And thank you, uh, uh.
Members of the committee and
Senator then year for that uh
wonderful memory for my family.
Hickey,
uh.
Thank
That's his birthday present, so.
Happy birthday.
We are doing uh 119 Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, just a
quick editorial comment that
last session was one of the most
refreshing things that's
happened in this session, and I
thank you for carrying it out,
um, I am presenting Senate Bill
119 that came from uh the
judiciary Committee, uh, this is
the bioscience fund, which uh 2
years ago was passed unanimously
through both committees and but
the governor vetoed it. The
Changes that the governor
wanted, which was to be sure the
money stayed in New Mexico for 5
years and that the money didn't
go through you and them and
disbursement rather it has to be
signed off by DFA and the
Department of Economic
Development and any bursement
were built into the bill.
Senator, you know, we have a
committee substitute, so you can
go over the bill and then we'll
make a motion for the committee
sub and then move on.
OK, so that that was the you are
aware of the committee
substitute, correct? Yes. OK.
Mm
Right.
Over the mill and then we'll,
we'll do this committee sub and
then we're gonna go to the
audience. OK, so you want the,
the first bill.
Do not pass, correct? We'll
we'll do that for you. Just
finish going over the bill as it
sits and then and then the
committee sub and then you'll
tell us the changes and then
we'll go to the audience. OK,
very good. Um.
So the um uh anyway, this is uh
25 million, it requires uh
investors 2 to 1, uh, to the
money that the state puts in,
uh, it will create significant
uh uh jobs that will that will
have a median of $104,000 in the
state and help the state take
advantage of uh the
Uh, money that's coming into
healthcare, 68% is going into
bioscience. Uh, I was in Silicon
Valley recently, and AI is
another part of it, the
bioscience is really the
critical component and we do
have the abilities to supplement
the development of that here. So
that uh is the original bill and
I handle that.
Center accomplish, you wanna do
that first.
Oh thank you, thank you very
much Mr. Chair, member of the
Senate Finance Committee, uh,
first of all, I move a do not
pass on Senate bill 119 is once
amended in a due pass on the
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 119 is amended for
discussion purposes. OK I have a
second on that motion. Seconded
by Senatoria.
Any objection to that motion
seemed none, uh, we are on the
substitute bill, Senator Hickey,
tell us the differences. OK, the
differences are in section 5A 1
and 2, and it changes, uh, the
word average to median, which
increases the amount uh from
60,000 to 104,000.
Section 5D3 that defines a
possible response to bankruptcy
to align with the law in New
Mexico, Section 5D4 as the
language that milestones will be
met to release the disbursement
of funds, that is to say,
Um, milestones will be set out
at the beginning and the DFA and
uh the economic development,
we'll be reviewing him to be
sure they're being met if
they're not being met, then no
more money comes forward.
Um
The section 5e removes the SIC
as a collaborator for the
recommendation of the SIC and
the FRI and adds the
stipulation, uh, regarding the
cash value of the stock and
section 6B changes felony to
misdemeanor, and those are the
changes that came out of the
judiciary Committee, Mr. Chair,
and uh senators.
Everybody's digesting.
Questions on the substance.
Letting Senator Lanier catch up.
Tobiasson looks like.
I heard they had to call the
fire department, somebody shoes
caught on fire because they were
dancing so much last night.
Oh, was it you or?
Senator
I know if you're gonna go to the
audience, Mr. uh.
however you want to do it. Yeah,
let's go to the audience, uh,
how many any of those in favor?
Will take
2 and how many we have on Zoom?
In the opposition.
OK we'll take 2 in the room and
2 on Zoom.
Mm.
He took the batteries out for
Eugenie.
Yes.
OK
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce supporting this bill.
I think all of us want to ensure
that New Mexico gains a larger
share of the very lucrative
bioscience industry with good
high paying jobs. This industry
is responsible for major medical
technological advancements from
modern lab equipment to new
effective medications and cures
for ranges of diseases while the
state has other investment and
venture capital funds. None are
dedicated solely to attracting
and growing bioscience
investments. This sector is
highly competitive and requires
dedicated attention and
resources.
And that's why Senate Bill 119
is needed. This bill is going to
put New Mexico into the game in
a much bigger way.
Who's next? I'm.
Uh, good morning, uh, Mr. Chair
and members of this finance
committee, I strongly
supportable. My name is Alex
Coglan. I'm speaking on behalf
of the Bioscience Authority
here, and the bill allows to
directly support at least 6 to 7
companies, biotech startups in
the state. That means it
immediately affects uh 60 to 100
jobs. It allows those companies
to expand to what I would
estimate to 150 jobs total.
And they, um, changes that,
well,
Mentioned by Senator Hickey, the
trench release of the funds
actually also allows a better
monitoring and a better
interaction with those startups.
So there's a better
understanding of their needs and
the ability to better support
them going forward and that
grows and the co-investment and
I think that needs to be
recognized also allows for a
direct return of investment on
those investments that are made.
Thank you.
Thank you, we're gonna go to
Zoom now, Diane, you're our
first person.
Robert, you're the first person.
Unmute yourself, Robert and.
Who's next?
Robert, are you there?
He's not there. Questions from
committee members.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you and thank you.
For presenters and Doctor Key,
um.
So would this be happening in
other places in the state or
just out.
Um
Mr. Chair and senator, I have
two experts with me, uh, Paul
Lauer, the chair of the board,
and Stephanie Tofii, uh, the
executive commissioner, uh, and
I'm gonna let them answer that
question.
Um, Mr. Chair and senator, um,
this would be statewide, a
statewide program. So it can
help uh companies and the
Permian Basin area with uh
bioscience uh companies that are
working on renewable energy, uh,
it could help uh companies and
um northern New Mexico and uh
Northwest Newex going in the
same areas, um, there's
different sections, so
agriculture is one of the
sections.
medical supplies and and cures
and devices is another one.
those, those would be more or
less on the Rio Grande corridor,
I think, uh, by and large, but
it could be anywhere in the
state.
And just if I could add to that,
um,
Mr. Chair and senators, um, the
bioscience Authority is a state
agency, and so we are
represented by members of the um
all of the research universities
we have.
Um, partnerships with Los Alamos
National Lab and Sandia National
Lab.
We work with everyone throughout
the state to be able to empower
the bioscience industries there.
Um, we actually have an
ecosystem called the Rural
Biotech ecosystem, which
actually um focuses in on the
rural areas since Albuquerque
and Rio Rancho in Santa Fe and
Las Cruces are the um major hubs
right now. We're working to
diversify that.
And I just wanted to add to um
the.
From what, um
Alex Coughlin said earlier that
6 to 7 businesses would be per
round is what we're envisioning.
And so this fund would be able
to, to support many more
companies than that.
Very well, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for that.
Thank you, like, Adrian.
Senator Stein.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, good morning and good
morning to your experts.
So I have some questions, Mr.
Chair, cause I know you've been
trying to do this for a number
of years, and I'm curious.
What? I'm just curious why we're
seeing it again and I apologize.
What's new here that we haven't
been able to do in the
I will defer to my experts.
Um
chair and senator, um, the bill
passed unanimously in both the
House and the Senate two years
ago. Uh, the governor pocket
vetoed it, and she was concerned
that there weren't enough uh
guardrails uh for companies that
would take state funds and then
move somewhere else. So in
addition to being an economic
development bill, it's a job
creation and, and economic
diversification bill for the
state of New Mexico and um we
would hope that that would.
they would attract companies to
to come here and form an
ecosystem of biotechnology
companies that can actually uh
pay back the state in uh in in
in.
In the investments that are
made uh when they either go
public or they are acquired uh
that money reverts to the to the
fund. It's an evergreen fund, so
I I I envision growing this fund
from uh where we started uh this
year to um uh much larger fund
in the coming years, um, we
also, I spoke directly with the
governor and her chief of staff
and our economic development uh
advisor and these are these new
Uh, issues the um the guidelines
for milestones and uh also for
uh preventing board members from
participating in any of these
business transactions were what
they requested that we had, so
I, I feel that they'll if we
pass it again this this time
around, it'll be uh signed into
law.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. um, so
I see, so we, we're calling for
a $25 million appropriation. Has
that money been added in the
hospital too at this point?
Uh, and this is called, it was
calling for 25 substitute to the
appropriation now, I think
there's 8 million in house bill
to you right now.
Thank you, Ms. Chan. Is that 8
million go into this fund, this
or is it contingent on this bill
passing?
Uh, yes, it is contingent, OK.
So, um,
I, I, it's funny, I'm, I'm
looking at it, it's bringing
back the memories of hearing
this bill multiple times, and I
had some of the same concerns
the governor had, I'm gonna
raise them again.
You know, what we're talking
about here is, is
Economic development.
Like Lita, essentially, but
we're trying to do this outside
of LEDA.
Of course, Lia, localomic
Development Act, Economic
Development, closing fund in the
economic development department.
We had a bill the other day, uh,
Senator Sendo to create
reporting requirements. So what
we're trying to do here for some
reason that I would like to ask
you about is we're wanting to
fund a separate entity with
maybe less guardrails, different
guardrails.
Didn't used to have any garrs
initially when we first heard
the bill. Why are we not giving
this funding to Leda. Why are we
not doing this within Lita?
Mr. Chairman and senator, um, so
Lita has a one requirement that
if a company takes state funds
through the LED program, they
have to put up either a bond or
some kind of a clawback
provision that the state can
take the money back if the
company fails to perform on its,
uh, on its contract.
Uh, that's very difficult for
startup companies to come up
with, um, case in point, I, I
was able to get a $4 million
LIDA grant for Pebble Labs, they
had to take $4 million out of
their operating budget and put
that in a escrow in a bank.
So it, it's, it doesn't help
startups that are really trying
to get through this so-called
valley of death where they get
to a point where they're
starting to
The cash flow positive, and I
see this bill as being more
targeted directly at a startup
companies to really help foster
them, get them to the point
where they're sustained by their
own cash flow.
I hope that helps. I think Li is
a good program, but it helps
later stage companies that can
afford to put money aside.
Senator Stein more, this is more
in line with the angel
investment that we're spending
700 million on, right? We're
we're putting it out there and
saying that we hope you're
successful and if you're
successful, we want to partake
and if you're not successful,
then
We're gonna get hit.
Miss Cha. So yeah, I have
another question, which is like,
I know.
We have other funding mechanisms
in the state, and I'm not an
expert on it, but like we have
different funds, we have the
State Investment council.
Which I think we authorized some
investment in New Mexico funds.
Or none of those appropriate
investment opportunity vehicles
we could have used.
For this.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, the
state investment council is a
fund to fund, so they invest
money in venture capital groups
and what this does is it, it
allows the VC to leverage
additional funds from the state
to make it a more impactful
investment plus we bring
expertise in this particular
industry sector. Uh, I'm a
founder and and president of a
biotech startup here in New
Mexico. I've had several bio.
The companies, uh, Doctor
Coughlin that spoke on uh for
public comment, also started a
very successful biotech company.
So we're we're focused on this
sector as opposed to just any
kind of technology, any kind of
business, uh, brick and mortar
stuff.
Thank you, fair enough, um, what
is does the board, Mr. Chair,
have any conflict of interest
policy. You tell us about that.
Um, yes, Senator, it's actually
written specifically into this
bill that anyone that's on the
board or that has a
has any ties to a company that
gets invested with state money
either uh individually or as a
family member that has any ties
that that's prohibited. So, um,
you know, this won't help my
company at all, but uh and also
they they even provide for a
misdemeanor if uh if someone
violates that, um, section and
uh I have an employee or a board
member can't work for a company
that gets state investment for
at least a year after leaving.
I mean the um the board.
Perfect. Thank you. um.
Question, what, what percentage
of startups fail.
Mr. Chair and senator in the
bioscience sector, it's, it's
Hi, um, but I think any um the
return on investment when
companies succeed is also very
high. Uh, they can go 100 times
in value and with the invention
of say a a therapeutic for
COVID.
Um, there's, there's, uh, and I
think when you talk to venture
capitalists that are in this for
a living, um, the statistics or
something like 6% of their
investments pay for 80% of their
returns. So it's, it's a high
risk, high gamble, but
Um, it's certainly uh clean
paying jobs, the, the money that
flows through these companies in
my company, the average salary
is $100,000 a year.
And it's a non-polluting, it's
actually really good for the
economy.
Thank you.
Well, I guess that's one thing
about Li, right, if you're
investing in something that's
more established, it's more of a
uh
closer to generating jobs as
opposed to more speculative.
But I know that we do, it may
not be the state of medicine
council, maybe the board of
Finance. I, I don't know, we do
invest in there are funds in New
Mexico that it does invest in
startup.
opportunities.
So I'm not sure about this,
Bill. I appreciate the goal of
it and I'm just gonna listen to
the debate, Mr. Chair, and
Yeah, thank you. Any further
questions?
There.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and uh thank you Senator
and for your presentation. Uh,
I've been a supporter of this
the whole time and I I I see
the, you know, potential for in
it um but in in along the lines
of what Senator Steinborn was
asking. Are are you familiar
with the um
Success or failure rates in
terms of the SIC and State Board
of Finance investments that we
make.
Are these, is this, is this
industry, this area any higher
or lower? Would you like to
address that at all? I think we
have some comments.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator Padilla. Um, yes, we
actually have just done an
analysis of the SIC's
investments, and we found that
65% of their investments are in
bioscience companies, um, for
the fund of funds, like
bioscience companies are being
invested in 65% of the time by
those fund of funds.
But the majority of them, the
vast majority of them, most of
them are not in the state of New
Mexico.
To are in the state of New
Mexico. And so it is clear that
the bioscience industry has been
seen as being a lucrative
investment by the SIC.
We want to take that
understanding and bring it to
the state.
Um, this is something that we
feel that this investment
specifically will continue to
grow. It will continue to be a
return on investment and we will
be able to have equity in
companies, unlike LIDA, which
does not allow for that kind of
mechanism. And so this the
companies will have better.
Support by the state.
Uh, and if I may, uh, Mr. Chair
and Senator, um,
Part of what we need to build
here when we already have the
labs and so forth. They have
kind of their own ecosystem.
We're trying to build the
bioscience ecosystem, and why is
that so critical? It's critical
because as these companies come
and go and move, they have
people to tap into that are here
to be able to put into the new
companies which then open up
jobs for others, and that's
essentially what's happened in
Massachusetts and Silicon
Valley. That's why they all go
there because they all tap that.
talent that's already there, so
it's building the talent here
that that new companies can tap
into, and again, they have to
stay here for 5 years. That's
the other really critical part
of it. So this, this is the seed
that as it grows, it kind of
explodes because it then will
attract other bioscience
companies that New Mexico, which
is a great place to locate
people in many ways, uh, we'll
be able to attract and then
they'll have the personnel as
they move in between the
companies over time.
I thank you, chair, and just
some thank you both for your
responses, outstanding, but my
other question was really around
the success rate of
Those companies versus
What, what, what you see in your
industry.
Or what is predic predicted on a
similar model to what you're
trying to, what you're proposing
here.
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, um, bioscience
companies have shown that they
have the potential to grow.
Um, more so than other companies
in the long run, um, though it
does take a longer amount of
time for them to reach that
amount of growth, which is why
it's so important to have this
investment opportunity.
To be able to support that
growth.
Um, but when it comes to maybe I
should re-ask my question. I'm
sorry. I'm probably confusing
the question. So, so the success
or failure rate of
The the firms we already invest
in through the SIC versus the
stuff that's happening in, in,
in your project. Where, where's
the connection? Is, is it
higher, lower, um,
They, they, they, um, my
understanding is I talk with my
expert, Mr. Chair and Senator is
that they, they are making
money. We don't know that exact
figure, uh, but again, I would
come back to the point that
68% of the money is going into
bioscience because that's where
the money is. It's a little
Willie Sutton kind of thing. And
that's why we want to grow this
sector of our economy, and we
have so many pieces to build
that on already, but we don't
have the ecosystem.
All right, thank you.
Senator Lin here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, Senator Hickey.
Um
I, I just have
I, I really want to support this
bill. I'm really trying to get
on board with it.
I have one big hiccup and that,
it looks like it's a Rio Grande
or.
Bill me.
How would that not be true?
Um, so like we said, we are the
state agency. So we work with
all of the.
Now get closer to the mic.
otherwise get text.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
Senator Lanier, um, we are a
state agency and so we are
working with Clovis. We are
working with Gallup. We're
working with Los Alamos, we are
working with all of those age
areas that are not only in.
Um, that area.
Um, when it comes to San Juan,
for instance, when it comes to
your county, um, we see the San
Juan Community College is being,
you know, something that is
Turning out by the science. Um,
we have an ecommath that is
making sure to um put in the
jobs that are available there,
the professorships that are
available there. We're working
with.
Um, the area to make sure that
we are.
Exploring any opportunities that
could be available, um, the
reason that right now
Albuquerque Rio Rancho Santa Fe,
and Las Cruces are, you know,
seen as being the hubs that are
growing.
is because they have airports.
They have freeways, they have,
you know, transportation
opportunities.
Um, but Clovis does have the
railroad as well, and Gallup
also has the railroad, which is
why we're looking at those
regions as being, you know,
really hot spots for bioscience
because of their ability to move
their product around.
OK, thank you. I
I, I'm still just having a tough
time because
If we're going to sell this as
an economic development.
You know, we,
you just look at this small
group right here.
We're pretty good.
Diverse group as far as we have
Pueblos, we have the Navajo
Nation, we have
Um, the northwest corner, you
have the southeast corner.
I want to know how you're gonna
economic develop those smaller
rural areas, even the larger
rural areas.
How are, how are you, how is
this bill gonna help?
San Juan County, uh, you know,
how, how is it gonna help the
tribe? I don't understand. To
me, it looks like it's just
gonna be a big city.
Type development.
I was chair and senator, um, we
also on the board have one
appointee from Spaceport
America, and there's new
exciting research being done on
developing pharmaceuticals in
outer space. So that's an
example where uh that's
certainly not on the Rio Grande
corridor. Um, I know I years ago
I grew algae and produced water
and Yao, New Mexico, that's
considered bioscience. We use
the algae to sequester carbon
dioxide and to make renewable
fuel.
as well as uh protein for cattle
feed. That's another example of
a business that could be in the
in the Mr. Chair, I understand
that, but this bill right here.
How is it gonna help?
Those rural areas. I, I
understand what you're saying,
and I, and I understand it's
gonna help New Mexico, but I
need to.
To be able to get my head
around.
You know, if it's not because of
railroad, how, how are you gonna
help?
Develop the rest of the state,
um, Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
it also includes agriculture and
value added agriculture
products. So those kind of
companies can be funded through
this fund, um, basically, uh,
crop protection, um, developing
uh
Uh, cures for plant viruses and
fungus and so forth, uh,
certainly in the cannabis
industry, there's research being
done on, on different projects
uh for that. I know there's a
Uh, psilo Simon bill working its
way through the Congress right
now. So um these are all
innovative uh industries that
fall technically fall under our
definition of biosciences.
OK, and then Mr. Chairman, my,
my last question is,
How do you, how do you tie it to
the medical?
I mean
We, we said, we, we've got all
that, but how, how does it tie
in just to the medical field if
you block everything else out.
Uh, senator and chairman and
Senator.
So biotech includes um molecular
biology, and there's some really
great applications happening
right now to design cures for
everything from brain tumors to
uh wound repair to uh viral
infections to combat um uh.
Pandemic type diseases that
could break out in the future.
Um, these are also being
developed in in with uh.
The state um small business
assistance program and the state
uh trigger program or
collaborating with the National
Labs on some of the cutting edge
research that they're doing in
uh bioinformatics and molecular
biology. So uh very applicable
to to modern medicine.
OK. And Mr. Chair, last
question. So,
Being said that
Is that a way we can get it to
these rural areas, maybe through
the hospitals, clinics.
Things like that, but is that
gonna
Develop it economically.
Or is it just gonna be a
preexisting business.
I'm kind of giving you an out
there.
Uh, Mr. Chair and and Senator, I
believe so, um, one of the
companies that the um the
bioscience authority has
invested in to date. It was not
a big investment. It was $75,000
of state money, a company called
Benubio. They developed a flow
cytometer that can be used in
hospitals, so they make, they
produce the instrument and sell
it, and I believe you and I just
bought one of their instruments
as well. So it can uh the the
school systems, the colleges and
Um, in, in all over the state
and potentially utilize some
equipment and also uh
They, they have programs at some
of the uh colleges now for
biology, chemistry, where these
graduates would want to stay in
the state and so we're trying to
build companies that can hire
them.
All right. Well, thank you for
your answers, Mr. Chair.
your back to accomplice. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much, members of the Senate
Finance Committee and thinking
about all this, going back about
25 years, uh, when I visited, if
you will, the research triangle
in the Carolinas.
Dealing with that and then
seeing how they invested their
resources at that time, and they
continue to be strong and now
today they're, they're totally
strong when it comes to uh those
investments.
And then moving along, if you
will, to work with the uh angel
investors and.
Working on legislation several
years back and watching how that
has grown.
But the concern that I'm
beginning to, to
Feel more and more as we deal
with our technology many years
back and I'm, I'm bringing back
some of the history because over
20 years ago as I visited
Oklahoma, Washington and.
In California, the legislatures
were, were, uh, dealing with uh
modern technology with
touchstone screens and the
kiosks and other things, and so
the point I'm getting to when we
deal with all of this.
It, it's really time for us to
become much smarter in how we're
gonna be dealing directly with,
uh, not only if you will, the
bioscience uh investments.
Uh, with our, uh, institutions
of higher learning, how we're
going to become stronger with
our uh elementary and secondary
educational systems, uh, how do
we tie all this in, Mister
Chairman, as we're moving
forward because again what it
sounds like is that we're gonna
take on, if you will, another uh
enumerated or if you will,
another uh investment and with
that going back as a senator
Padilla had mentioned with SIC
we have all these investments
with a low rate of.
return and, and the point that
I'm getting to is that uh this
is the time for us to, to really
uh ratchet up, if you will, and
decide how we're going to go
forward when it comes to uh the
the use of these resources and
then going back to what Senator
Lanier is talking about.
Do we develop, if you will,
maybe not a triangle, but ensure
that farmington, ensure that
Albuquerque with UNMH ensure
that New Mexico State University
all tie in, if you will, the
components of this, but do it in
such a way so that there is
going to be the rate of return.
There's gonna be, if you will,
the uh investment in our youth
in our in our in the future of
education and research and then
lastly, as we deal with it, so
that we have the measured
outcomes.
We consistently deal with this,
but in the long run as we go
forward, where are the outcomes?
Where's the research? Where, if
you will, are the, uh, uh, the,
if you will, the sustainability
and stability of keeping people
at home, investing in one
generation, so the next
generation is gonna be prepared
to deal with this as well. So,
Mr. Chair, just briefly, if
anyone wishes to to talk about
that because I'm not hearing how
we're focusing in on what the
productivity in the future of
this and other
investments that we're making
definitely will make a
difference for New Mexico. It's
really prime time for us as we
see the big changes at the
federal level for us to be able
to move forward in Mr. Chairman,
I thank you, uh, for placing me
on this, this thought process
because since you brought this
up, uh, a couple of weeks ago.
I've been thinking about how are
we going to ensure that that
stability, that firmness in the
future for our state is going to
be first and foremost. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Campos, uh, these are exactly
the problems that the Bioscience
Authority is working on meeting.
Uh, we have been seeing
companies leaving the state
because they don't have funding
for businesses. They don't have
funding for buildings, they
don't have funding to be able to
get the right CEOs. They don't
have the funding to be able to
do these things and so they're
leaving to go to San Diego to
San Francisco to Silicon Valley
to um Boston to the research
triangle in North Carolina.
We see this as being a loss of
intellectual property. We see
this as being a loss of jobs. We
see this as being a loss of that
future planning that you have in
mind.
And so what we want to do with
this fund to be able to invest
in the businesses that are
growing is we want to continue
to work with them to have that
network of organization. Um,
right now we're working on
developing a pilot program for
the summer that does not relate
to this bill, but it does relate
to the work that the bioscience
Authority is doing to be able to
create an internship program
where students would be able to
go from the universities in the
community colleges into the
biotech companies that would be
receiving this kind of fun.
to be able to then train them
while they are still students
and then to have that.
Incentive to be able to hire
them once they graduate. So we
keep the, the people here.
Um, we make sure that they are
being trained in the biotech
industry to be able to be
successful, but we're also
growing the um ecosystem that
Senator Hickey discussed that
needs to be here to be able to
move employees around to be able
to generate new intellectual
property to be able to have that
kind of conversation that allows
for a dynamic future.
So Mr. Chairman, if I may just
in closing, we continue to go
and develop the silos, but as we
deal with it, where's the, the,
the collaboration, the
coordination and the investment
in terms of what our focus is
going to be on the future of New
Mexico. No need to respond.
That's all I have. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator, just to kind of go
back, right? There's been
If a, if a person is getting
their PhD and they develop
something in New Mexico and
higher ed.
There's no place for them to go
but out of state to start
looking for money to develop. I
ran a bill last year that the
governor wouldn't message it for
them to set up funds so they
developed something.
Out of a university that they
could then have the first
tranche of money to begin that,
I mean, I forget what the lesser
tape is used for athletics now,
you see every athlete wearing
it.
The reason he left the state was
because he didn't have enough
funds to get his, his company
where he was in.
A lot of these are being
developed at Sandia, and they're
handing them off to people to
develop.
Outside of New Mexico.
And, and so when you go to look
at some of these things, it's
like they're high risk, they're
high reward.
But they're coming out of New
Mexico, but there's no funding
to to to.
really
Get him started and and whether
it's 75,000 for that one company
that started on with their net
worth is now, but.
Um
That's kind of the, what's
happening and then send her
Tobiasson will go to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I've been taking notes. I feel
like I should be sitting at your
desk helping you argue this
spill because I've taken notes
of all the concerns here and
developments in bioscience touch
every single one of our lives in
every category you could
imagine, um, and I think New
Mexico is ripe for investing in
the technology coming out of the
bioscience sector, so we can
just like you said, keep those
businesses and and that um
That education, that capacity
here in state, and I would think
that our investment within the
STEM programs that we have
around the state feeds right
into what you're talking about.
Um, I was researching while you
were talking, Utah, Iowa, Iowa,
Michigan, Maryland, they've all
figured it out and they have not
only created billions of dollars
in revenue for their states, but
thousands and thousands of jobs,
um, in a real easy stream for
kids that get the right
education to go right into that
sector. Um, I think
This helps us diversify our
state economy and really helps
us um have a strong foothold in
the future for our state of
where we're going in, in the
category of bioscience. So thank
you for bringing this forward
again. I hope you don't get
another pocket veto, um, but I'm
a fan of this all the way
around. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
time one for a second time real
quick for a 2nd time, Mr.
Chairman, um.
So, um, couple of thoughts.
It took me a while on page 7.
Number subsection 2 or whatever
you bring that to understand
that organ that investing scheme
where I don't mean scheme in a
negative way, just the structure
of it to where the authority
cannot be more than 1/3 of an
investment, an investor.
Then you use this term
co-investing organization, which
is not defined in the bill.
Don't believe I is that a
venture capital firm? Is that
what that means those words, uh,
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
that's correct. It would be one
of the local VCs typically
tramway ventures, cottonwood, I
understand. I, I think it would
be helpful to do that since
we're putting that, I mean, just
Since we're, we're basically
giving money to a firm or
letting them be the quarterback,
but we don't define what it is.
Even though we define the
experience they have to have, I
think it'd be appropriate to
define what a co-investing
organization is who could
qualify for that, um.
Someone theoretically with some
investment experience could
organizes that, that's how you
get kind of shady.
Things crop up, so I think it's
worthy of definition.
Not necessarily here, but if the
bill moves on, unless the bill
is held here.
Number 2, on the conflict of
thing, you say that you can't
employ Mr. Chair, a board
member, but it doesn't say
anything about family.
And I think honestly, I think
that may even be another way to
strengthen this bill is say that
you can't employ a family
member, that's often what we see
happen with these kinds, not
these kinds of things, but
When there's
This kind of behavior that
you're trying to avoid it
sometimes benefits family. So I
might suggest adding in a family
member, not just a member of the
board.
I'll throw that out there. You
don't have to answer unless you
really want to. Um, thank you,
um, Mr. Chair, Senator
signboard. I just wanted to, um,
emphasize that I, I.
Um, the, the organization, the
co-investment organization is
not just BC and it does not just
have to be local. It can be
private equity, it can be, um,
family business, it can be any
of those things and it does not
have to reinforce my point even
more, like, who, if we're
putting them on point, who is
that? And we need to make that
more transparent.
The rules of that game.
Um
Num along those lines, although
we may not normally specify this
in law.
principles of, of equity
investment, what is that? I know
in years past I worried a little
bit like what if we make a
stupid deal? What if we make a
bad deal?
You know, if we just simply
delegate that decision.
You know, I don't know how you
manage that, but
I'll just put that out there,
um.
Again, don't, don't answer it
just yet because time is
limited. We have a lot of other
bills, OK? I just wanted to say
we do have an RFP. Let's just
keep moving forward.
OK.
Well
So that's a concern to me.
And um
Finally, I, you know, I looked
at the board. I, I don't see a
lot of people with investment
experience directly, candidly. I
mean, I see some people who have
that background. So, you know,
we're, we're saying here's a
bunch of, you know, geniuses
that are gonna make us all this
money, it really matters
experience. So how many
vacancies are on the board right
now?
No, no vacancies, so that's
good. That's one of our
functional boards. That's good
to hear. So it's just some of my
concerns and
Uh
For us to strengthen this bill,
Mr. Chairman, if we want to
build the confidence to support
it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We're just gonna wrap
up here real quick so you guys
know, uh, I carried the original
bioscience bill and, and uh Mr.
Avila, who worked for me as a
staffer.
Who now has his bioscience
degree from Edinburgh.
Um
That was prior to his degree in
one of his 8 or 9, I don't how
many he has. I mean, that he
worked and really worked hard to
save this with Senator Worth and
we worked it out so the bi sites
got created. We never really
funded it correctly, it's been
through the tranches and ups and
downs. We have uh present
Protem, I think appoints one
member, um.
The speaker appoints one, the
exact appoints 2 or 3, I can't
remember exactly how, um, but
it's one of those things you,
you go to Arizona and you go to
ASU and where they put a
facility right next to the Mayo.
For bioscience development in,
in research. I mean, you, you
have to start playing this
arena, otherwise you're just
gonna continue to see these grad
students had developed something
out of the University of New
Mexico or NMSU.
Go to looking for resources for
money and whether they're not
available here, they're going to
keep pushing it in another
direction until they find money
uh to try their research, um.
There's 2 or 3 examples of that.
I don't know off the top of my
head. I just know the one, the,
the tape was a was a big one
where we could really kept that
guy in New Mexico, but we had no
money to keep him and we didn't
have the money to keep him, and
he moved out and now it's
probably pretty close to a
billionaire and may have sold
out to another company for for a
lot of money, so with that I'll
entertain emotion.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I move a do not pass on
Senate Bill 119 is one's amended
and a do pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 119 as amended.
Hey, I have a second by in.
Mice and choro.
Senator Brent
That
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
votes yes. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes
Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes no. Oh yes,
thank you
you have in the wrong deal.
The compost voted yes, Senator
Gonzalez voted yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Mhm. I'm.
Senator Tobiasin.
Tobias and votes yes, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods, Senator Sendo,
Senator Shendo votes yes.
Senator Brandt.
No
Senator Brandt votes no, Senator
Munoz, Senator Munoz, yes, we
have a due pass 8 in the
affirmative, 2 in the negative.
Thank you.
Uh, explain your boat in the air
first. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
just want to say that um
This will probably be debated on
the floor. I think it has earned
its way to be debated on the
floor and so that's my yes vote.
Senator Stein, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I, I really, I'm, I'm
open to supporting the bill,
but, but, and, but I'd really
encourage you to look at those
amendments I suggest because
we're we're talking about giving
millions of dollars and so
You know, we need to uh have it
be really adhere to the highest
principles of good government
and transparency.
There's some things we can do to
tighten up the belt. I hope you
look at that for floor
amendment.
I'd be happy to work with you to
brainstorm it if you want my
help. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Tender to share your next, I
don't see senator, oh.
We'll put you both there.
And then, uh
We do have an amendment for
this.
And make sure we track the
amendment 512.2.
I mean we have, you should have
that same amendment.
Mhm
We are doing Senate bill.
We're going to do Senate Bill
88, and then we'll do 37 since
the senators there.
This year
our cinders tonics, whoever's
gonna start this, um.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I'm gonna
Start with Senate Bill 88 and uh
my expert witness apparently
went to Edinburgh recently.
So we're gonna go for it.
So what this is is it's a
Medicaid trust fund, like so
many of the other trust funds
we've built recently and the
value of these trust funds is
the volatility of things going
these trust funds just kind of
level everything out.
The amendment does a couple of
things. One, it leaves only the
state treasurer as the sole.
Um
Um
Revenue source.
But it also puts a trigger in
there in case other federal
funds go away so that we can
actually get to this money.
And so it builds a trust fund we
put a trigger in so we can get
to it if we need to.
So, Mr. Chair, members of the uh
committee, the Medicaid uh
funding from the federal
government, uh, without any cuts
that are being discussed now is
still going to lose money. So
the purpose here is to
plan for the future, ensure that
our Medicaid recipients still
receive services. Thank you.
Thank you. We do have an
amendment that's, can we move
the amendment for discussion
purposes.
Emotion.
To move.
Amendment 1 for discussion
purposes to Senate Bill 88.
Any objection to that motion,
see no
centers, which one you're gonna
do them in inertia.
Um, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair, uh, the amendment, uh,
the first part of it simply uh
make sure that the state
treasurer money is the sole
revenue source for this, so it's
not coming from somewhere else
and the second part simply
allows the trigger, so if
there's uh.
A reduction in federal Medicaid
funding that we can't still get
to this if we need to. So it's,
it's locked, but with a trigger.
Thank you. Questions on the
amendment?
none can have emotion, motion by
trio
none can have emotion, motion by
real
I get my in Padilla, any
objection to that amendment.
Right, you have amendment
amended bill. Let's go to the
audience. Let's get 3 in
support. We have 2 on Zoom.
as quick as you line up the 1st
3 will get to talk.
Thank you Mr. Chairman
Members of committee JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce that supports this
bill, this bill seeks to ensure
that the state can sustain the
Medicaid program regardless of
federal funding reductions or
through extended expanded usage,
the cost of Medicaid have grown
exponentially to the point where
it places the 2nd largest demand
on the general fund just below
public education. So in addition
to receiving revenues from state
agency reversions and unexpended
balances from prior year
appropriations. This bill
creates
The new Medicaid trust fund that
distributes money annually to
gain federal matching funds
after the trust fund reaches
$500 million. The Chamber of
Commerce supports this bill
because it believes it is likely
to be a critical need that this
bill is going to satisfy and the
chamber supports the legislation
or does it do pass?
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Michael Richards, the executive
vice president of the Health
Sciences Center of UNM and the
CEO of the Unim Health System.
We are strongly stand in support
of Senate Bill 88, um, UNM is
one of the largest health care
systems in our state and also
one of the largest Medicaid
providers. And as a result of
that, we've had a long standing
relationship with the state, um,
the HED and with and with the
currently now with the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority on
Medicaid programs. We believe
that this.
State has actually had a very
thoughtful approach to Medicaid
that is created um much needed
access to care, supported our
providers and also help
stabilize the overall delivery
system for the entire state.
Specifically for UNM with nearly
50% of all of our patients in
Medicaid, Medicaid support is
absolutely essential for us to
be able to carry out our mission
as an academic medical center,
but beyond the issues of access,
the state's very forward
thinking around supporting
Medicaid has done other things,
such as support our graduate
medical education program we
have had one of the fastest
growing GME programs, which is
actually the ability to grow
residents and fellows, um, as a
result of our statement.
Medicaid support. We will then
be able to.
Yes.
We will
So as a result of that, we will
soon be one of the largest GME
training programs in the United
States, which helps us do
something absolutely essential
for the state of New Mexico.
Build the health care workforce.
So this kind of Medicaid support
is absolutely essential, but
another really important point
for us is that our health care
delivery system is one system
and with nearly 50% of these
patients Medicaid. Wherever we
go with Medicaid is where we
will go with health care for
everyone in New Mexico, so.
strongly stand behind this
opportunity to provide an
enduring financial support for
the Medicaid program. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Fred
Nathan. I'm executive director
of Think New Mexico and we
strongly support this bill and
commend all the bipartisan
sponsors of it.
New Mexico is the only state in
the last 5 years to lose
doctors, 248 doctors. That's why
while nationally the number of
doctors was going up by 44,000.
There are three reasons why
doctors retire early or leave
the state. First is our very
high medical malpractice
premiums that are nearly twice
uh what our neighboring states
are and thanks to Senator Woods
and to some of the others of
you, Senator Hickey, uh, we have
a bill with.
22 co-sponsors, 11 Democrats, 11
Republicans to address that
problem. A second reason is
because we are one of only 2
states with a tax on medical
services that doctors end up
paying thanks to Senator
Steinborn, there's a bipartisan
bill with 17 co-sponsors in the
Senate to address that problem.
This bill addresses the 3rd
problem which is we have very
low Medicaid reimbursement rates
despite the Herculean efforts of
this committee and many others
to raise those rates and we hear
from doctors all the time that
on most procedures for Medicaid
patients, they continue to lose
money. This bill is such a
clever solution to that problem,
uh, I think when you look back
on this session, you will
understand that this is one of
the most important bills that
can.
before you this year and we
strongly urge you to support it.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, bill sponsors, thank
you for allowing me to speak and
to, and for bringing forth this
legislation. My name is Angelina
Villa Adams. I am a native New
Mexican, a medical doctor,
committed to New Mexico and here
is president of the New Mexico
Medical Society. I will always
advocate for patients and more
specifically for patients of New
Mexico, be that here in the
capital through the medical
society or in the walls of my
office. This legislation will
promote stability and long-term
funding.
For the Medicaid program where
there is concern for instability
with federal support. This
critical, critical safety net
funding will provide access to
care, which is already fragile
in our current system. With each
legislation that contributes to
stability of the health care
system, it removes barriers to
recruitment and retention of
healthcare providers,
physicians, and specialist
physicians. This all rolls
downhill to the patient. So with
stability, which would promote
growth for robust system,
patients will
fare better have better health
outcomes. That is something that
we can all get behind. Thank you
again and I ask you for a pass
of this legislation. Thank you.
Thank you. We're gonna go to
Monica online.
Just so people know I was asked
to let one more person speak.
Monica, are you there?
Yes, um, good morning, uh, good
morning, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Monico Otero, Health Research
and Policy analyst with New
Mexico Voices for Children, and
we stand in support of Senate
Bill 88. We believe in equitable
access to healthcare coverage
and Medicaid provides a
sustainable and reliable source
of healthcare coverage in New
Mexico. Medicaid is essential
for providing health coverage
for many New Mexicans in New
Mexicans
According to Georgetown
University's Center for Children
and Families, Medicaid covers
55% of our births, 61% of our
children and 30% of our
non-elderly adults. This
investment is an important step
in protecting Medicaid in New
Mexico, especially with the news
of the proposed cuts at the
federal level. We thank the
sponsors for this bill, and we
urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you. Who's next?
Day in, you're next, and then.
Ian, are you there?
I'm here. Can you hear me? Yep,
we have.
OK, thank you. Good afternoon,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Diane
Lindstrom volunteer advocate for
AARP New Mexico. On behalf of
AARP's 240,000 members
statewide. AARP New Mexico
supports Senate Bill 88.
Medicaid is a lifeline for
millions of older Americans and
thousands of older New Mexicans.
It means access to care that
helps them live with dignity,
whether in nursing homes or
receiving home and
community-based services that
enable them to age in place.
This trust fund will help
improve access to care and
increase the healthcare
workforce. We respectfully ask
you to pass this important
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you, before we start.
I just wanted to bring the
members' attention. So the way
we're funding this is the
volatility in the state
treasurer's office is the
overnight deposits that come in
and come out.
It's the most volatile part of
the general fund that we deal
with because we don't know what
those are going to be in and out
overnight. So our initial
thought to to invest the
Medicaid trust fund is to take
those the those the interest
from those deposits and then
begin to fund that and and your
FYR should have a number of what
we think those are, if not Mr.
Avila, may have that number, but
just think about smoothing the
ball. This is kind of financial
step at the same time.
smooth the volatility out of the
general fund, but where we're
most needs are.
Medicaid is our number one issue
in the state of New Mexico for
every single year when we
started LFC the beginning year,
that was a $250 million number.
It came down with some
adjustments to 86.
Uh, we know that the feds are
Looking at Medicaid very hard.
We know that
If we don't keep our Medicaid
where it's at, provider rates
will go down. Doctors will
leave, and so those provider
rates that we've increased over
the last 3 to 4 years. Uh, we'll
go away almost immediately and,
and when those rates you just
heard the lady testimony that
they don't get their full
Medicaid reimbursement. If we
don't keep those for rider rates
at a high enough level, then
they'll be the next ones to
leave, so.
Questions from committee we did
we move past this subamendment,
right? And it's on the bill.
Questions from committee
members.
Mr. Chair and the senators, uh,
great, great job. I think uh
right out of the gate. So would,
would, would we have to come
back again?
On this inside of.
The fiscal year or what is this
gonna be something that's an
automatic trigger and helps us
and
You want to address that at all?
So Mr. Chair,
Uh, a big part of this is the
state revenue, I mean the state
treasures office, that's the
revenue source.
So
This should be continued to
feel, fill up. Do you have the
FIR there?
Um
So we continue to to fill it up.
Yes, at a rate of about 279
million.
dollars a year.
So I mean $100 million a year,
which first thing gets to the
279.
And if I've missed something,
my, uh, Scottish.
Uh, expert witness.
Your chair center but the the
trigger in the amendment, the
way it's written, it is subject
to appropriation by the
legislature, but it opens up, so
within House Bill 2, you could
include language that
Appropriates whatever the
balance ends up being.
The complication with that is we
don't know the actual final
number. And we don't know
whether that trigger is actually
going to get hit.
Right, um, so there's a lot of
uncertainty.
At this point, so chair and
Adrian, so where, where does the
uh the state's portion begin
whenever there's an automatic
trigger to put money into this
box.
Uh, Mr. Chair I asked that. I
hope that makes sense I think I
understood your question, um,
so I believe starting July 1,
every night, once a month.
Whatever investment.
was made any gains are gonna be
deposited into this, and if
there are losses, this is why
it's volatile. It'll be drawn
from this. So the money is going
to start flowing July 1
regardless of whether the feds
make a cut or not.
The uh federal budget.
Begins in October. So we'll know
around that time, whether or not
any of this money is going to be
necessary to be used or not. We
can estimate how much money will
be in this.
Um
A trust fund, and you could
include language in household
too that basically says, in the
event of federal cut happens and
the trigger of the spill is
enabled.
And in what order to pull money
from.
Very smart.
It is, I just, um, I'm just
curious to see which funds are
the ones that get hit first, as
you can imagine which one I'm
worried about, so
Mr. Chair, this is the first
fund.
OK
And then, uh, thank you, chair,
and, and then on the uh the the
the chair said when he opened
when he made his comments
earlier on the state treasurer's
office with the inflow of the
daily transaction inflow
outflow. What, what, what is
that amount every day that we
benefit from?
Or what is the upside, I guess.
Oh, Mr. Chair, that definitely
varies, um,
Which is one of the reasons why
it's the most volatile.
Uh, revenue source that the
general give us some sort of an
average on on the figure.
Uh, within the crag that you
will received, uh.
to.
7.8.
So Senator, you know, if we get
a tranche of oil and gas money
that
Puts in 500 million one night
then the interest is gonna go up
and then you know during tax
collection times and numbers
shoot up for the overnight
before they're moved out to
other there's really not a way
to predict then.
I guess seasonality would be,
yeah, it would be seasonality
and overnight.
OK, well.
Let's just make sure the state
treasures on top of her
business. Thank you.
Any other questions? See none
can have emotion.
A motion for do pass by Senator
Brent, 2 by center Padilla, the
Calderon.
There's the one that you're
gonna sit right there for your
next bill.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Compos.
Senator Campos votes, Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Gonzalez votes
yes, Senator Lanier. Senator
Lanier votes yes, Senator
Padilla. Senator Padilla votes
yes. Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasin. Senator Tobias and
Botsia, Senator Trujillo.
Yes.
Senator Trujillo Bosa, Senator
Woods.
In her woods boats, yes, Senator
Schendo. Yes, Senator Schendo
votes yes, Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz, you have a past
11 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative.
Thank you, Senator Sheer. Thank
you.
Thank you and Senator Woods was
also, um, a sponsor of that bill
as well, OK, Senator, uh,
Stepanic so we can hear you, uh,
377 as
an expert witness and um a
technical.
Expert.
We have no amendments so as
quickly as you move through
this.
Yes, uh, it's already been,
it's, you have another
amendment? No, we have no other.
So it's, it was amended in
Senate Conservation. It had a
lot of scrutiny. This actually
does not make an appropriation.
It creates the strategic water
reserves so that the money can
sit up to $15 million as its
appropriated in the budget to
make water deals in a plain
language specifically when uh
the department goes out to uh
purchase.
water rights to pay for fallowed
land, you use it on um.
Settlements, legal settlements,
it takes much longer than a
year, and that's why we're
asking for a fund to be set up
so that the money can sit there
for a period of time, only up to
15 million before it would
revert back, and with me I have
the attorney for the Interstate
stream commission or the state
engineer? Yes, Senator, Mr.
Chair, my name is Lisa Hanna.
OK, and I also have with me um
Trish Schneider from New Mexico
Wild Organization.
Thank you, um.
Anybody in the audience in
support.
We'll note those. Anybody in
opposition?
See none anybody on Zoom.
and support, we're going to try
to move this real quickly
because we know what it's gonna
do. Questions from committee
members.
You know questions center, would
you have a question? Are you
making do pass motion with that
wave.
Question, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and again,
If I, if I understand this, this
bill, it sets up a fund. Does it
do any other than just set up
the fun.
Uh, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods, I'm gonna have
Tricia answer, uh, it does
change some language
very short.
Very briefly, Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods, there's 3 components to
this bill, creating the fund. It
adds a third purpose to the
reserve to benefit aquifer
recharge, just recognizing the
surface groundwater connection
that exists in many places
across the state, and then it
allows the interstate stream
commission to prioritize
transactions, um, that have
multiple benefits, you would
still need to meet one of those
primary benefits, but if you
could say that a transaction
also carries water further down
and is beneficial to
agricultural production.
um, or for recreational uses,
those transactions could be
prioritized,
this is, this was the
My reserve.
On this deal was that uh in
stream flow.
Declared a, a beneficial use of
water.
And the problem I have with
street flow.
And I know that you're gonna
tell me this is not right, and I
hope you tell me this is not
right, is that when we, we uh
leave water in the river.
And, and don't divert it out of
the river, you know, it takes so
much water to make an aaa work.
And
Also
Under the present water right
law, we understand it, uh, you
divert it on acres, you put it
on, there's a, a piece of land
that is tied to that and so.
As it irrigates that water, any
water that goes return flow to
the river.
is, is, uh, counted as return
flow. Now you're leaving it in
the river, so you're leaving it
in the river until that return
flow point, in other words, your
point of diversion is only on
the river for that length of.
That link
Right?
We're not putting in a drop in
Chama and saying it doesn't
count, it's got to stay in until
it gets to.
El Paso.
Um, Mr. Chair and senator, on
page 5, this may help answer
your question, but if not, I'm
gonna have the department
attorney talk to it online, this
is, I'm looking at uh amendments
in context. It says surface
water leased or purchased shall
not be converted to groundwater
via any methods other than
natural passive infiltration
through the stream bed.
So I think that answers your
question, but if not, the
attorney can answer it further.
No, that, that doesn't answer my
question, but I, I understand
what you're trying to say there,
that you're trying to say that
you can't.
But um surface water back in the
ground, which is, is a
In the ground is a great way to
store water.
Um, to put it back in the
aquifer and you're, you're
making it explicitly
preventative to do that here,
but what I was saying, I worry
about the in-stream flow idea as
being uh uh.
Saying that many times in the
middle Rio Grande spots at the
river dries up.
And I'm saying if you buy a
water right or lease a water
right in Chama, you're gonna say
through that dry spot that's
where my water has to be. It's
got to be flowing through there.
And as long as you're leasing
water and Chama and as that
natural backflow that that would
have went through. That's the
link to, that's the link.
Of that one right.
Is that right? I mean, it's,
it's, we're saying no that water
comes on down the river.
So a month ever making my
question.
Plain, Mister Chair, and, and
senator. Yes, thank you I think
you are, but you need to
remember that this is a fun.
And so that would, they're
limiting how that can operate,
so it's not a statute saying.
This one's there, this isn't
make them ineligible or eligible
to tap the fund.
But, but what I'm saying is
we're, we're, we're making
another identifying another use.
A beneficial use in this, aren't
we, Mr. Chair.
Or not, in my, in my crazy as
hell.
Senator, uh, we are not changing
the primary uses, the primary
uses come first, only if it's
acceptable can the department
choose to use it for the uh next
beneficial uses of recreational
or cultural, but it's the
primary uh uses have to be met
first.
And this hen will correct me if
I say anything wrong.
Senator Lana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right. Um,
I have a, I have a few questions
for you. Let, let's start with
the ISC.
How, how are they appointed?
And how do we, how is that
commission developed?
Thank you Mr. Chair and uh
Senator Lanier, we have, um,
A number of uh water rights in
the reserve currently, um,
they're being used in the Rio
Grande Basin, the Pecos Basin,
the Canadian and the but I'm
sorry I don't mean to interrupt,
just how, how is the ISC set up?
How is that board formed the
interstate.
commission who appoints him, uh,
how are they, how are the
members appointed. Yes, there
are um statutory provisions
that, um, set aside or, or lay
out the qualifications for
commissioners that they are
appointed by the governor.
Oh, how many are there, Mr.
Carre?
I, I believe.
And Mr. Chair, all of them are
appointed by the governor.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I would
have to check the statute again,
I don't have it right in front
of me to recall exactly how each
is appointed, but I believe they
are all governor appointees. I
do have the.
I don't have the John Deere back
there at the back of the room.
Can you look that up real quick
and tell them thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair. So now if
we go to page 2 and then 3, page
2 on line 24.
Um,
Interstate streams commission
shall establish a strategic
water reserve.
And I mean that's the bulk of
this bill.
Um
So
are they gonna be able to
purchase water rights.
Mr. Chair and
linear, yes, uh, we have
purchased some water rights
somewhere under lease and so
that is the purpose of the
reserve is to allow the
Interstate stream commission to
hold these water rights for
specific purposes, which
primarily are, uh, which are in
unless there's this um statute
is
Passed
It's for compact compliance to
ensure that we're making the
deliveries that are required
under the compact.
And for endangered species
purposes.
This bill would add a third
purpose for the reserve, which
would be to allow for um aquifer
recharge and stream connected
aquifers, um, which also can
help support stream flow.
OK, but Mr. Chair, if we, if we
just narrow in on the water
rights.
So let me give you an example.
Let's say a farmer, um.
He decides to to sell part of
his water rights.
Will that go through the ISC?
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Lanier.
If we were, if, if the ISC were
to want to purchase those water
rights for the reserve is your
question whether the, the
commission would have to approve
that purchase.
Yes. Yes, sir. OK.
And Mr. Chair,
The, the, the problem I have
with this, and, and I'm not
saying I'm not going to support
it. I, I just, I have a little
bit of a, an issue with
The state acquiring water
rights, especially if they are
from, you know, private
individuals.
I, I just feel like it's a very
socialist thing to do. Why does
the, why does the state need to
own those water rights.
I mean, that's something that's
that's cherished by by the
public.
You know,
It says in here, and I don't
have the exact spot. I believe
it's on page 3 that the water
rights would be at market value.
It be purchased at market value,
but if the state starts buying
up water rights.
Isn't that going to inflate that
rate?
At some point, a private
individuals not gonna be able to
purchase water rights because
the state has inflated that
price.
Does that kind of make sense to
you?
Yes, and Mr. Chair, Senator, I
think where you're going in uh
Miss Hen is a technical expert.
She's not our political.
spokesperson. It is a political
issue, uh, about whether or not
taxpayer dollars should be spent
for this.
But we continue to have lawsuits
here in the state that the state
is responsible for in
negotiating water between
different states and even
different countries. And this is
part of the purpose of the
strategic water fund and we're
just trying to ensure that this
reserve will hold the money
necessary for up to 15 million.
We already have this statute,
we're already needing to do
these transactions. So that's
the purpose, but I understand
it's a political debate.
All right. Thank you. And Mr.
Chair,
I, I guess that kind of brings
up my, my other point.
Texas, New Mexico legal battles
is, is this kind of
Directed towards that or with it
in mind at least, um.
Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
not the only legal settlements
that we have to worry about. I
can have Miss Hen, uh, talk
about it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
We do have water in the reserve
for compact compliance. You are,
you are correct about that. Um,
we also have it for endangered
species, um, requirements.
Um, what I would like to add to
this is that the ISD does not
consider the strategic water
reserve to be the only tool that
we would use, um, to ensure that
we are meeting compact
compliance requirements and
endangered species requirements.
We are also looking at other
programs, um, so that it, uh,
our intent is not to have the
state hold all of the water
rights and, and nobody else can
use them. We are looking at
other programs. We are only
interested in voluntary, um, you
know,
Transactions, uh, we have a
program in the lower Rio Grande
with some voluntary following to
help reduce water use, um, in a
way that compensates, uh,
farmers for that. And so, um,
Our view is we need many tools
to manage water in the future,
and this is just one of them,
but it is a very important tool
for the commission.
OK. Thank you. And Mr. Chair,
So with that being said,
Are we
If we start buying up water, we
may not have that intention.
But if we start buying up water
rights as a state government.
Is the, the uh state engineer
ever gonna sell those water
rights back to a public
individual.
The answer is not.
There there's no way. And so
that that's my point. We have to
be careful. And then just to
wrap up, Mr. Chair, um,
On the ISC appointments if it,
if it is truly by the governor,
there there are state engineer,
there's 9 state engineers
appointed by the governor, all
the rest are appointed by the
governor. OK.
That's another issue that I have
with this because
Um
What, what if you have a
governor come in with a mission.
Either side of the aisle, I
don't care. It doesn't matter.
But if you have a governor come
in with, with a mission, say to
take
Take up water rights.
That's a lot of power.
If we, if we give them that
power right now. If we get the
state engineer and the ISC that
power right now.
In that scary for for one
governor to have.
Have all of those nominations.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, it was
brought to my attention that
Senator Wirth had a bill that
actually changed this last year
or the year before, and she's
quickly looking that up, but uh
it's not all by the governor,
correct?
It's
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, Senator
Wirth sponsored a bill that
dictates what representation
needs to exist on the Interstate
stream Commission, and I don't
have that bill number in front
of me, but I can get, I can get
back to you, but it is still
appointed by the governor, but
there is some limitations and
Mr. Jared,
and you're right.
It's still appointed by the
governor. Uh, his bill
diversified who, who the
responsible people would be
underneath there the.
Office of Engineer and all of
that, so, but I appreciate you
guys fill in those questions and
answering those for me. Thank
you very much, Mr. Chair.
Sinnert bison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, OK,
so,
Senator Lanier answered a couple
of my questions. So if you all
buy water rights, let's say.
He's in agriculture for some
reason something happens and you
buy his water rights.
They're never going to be sold
again, so in essence, if you
start buying water rights,
wouldn't it stand to reason that
we are putting a cap on
agricultural expansion industry
expansion, what municipalities
can do going forward. It could
actually limit in a lot of
different ways, what different
industries and municipalities
could do going forward. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and Senator. Um,
Well it is true that the reserve
would retain those rights and,
and I
Yeah.
I agree it's unlikely that
They would be sold, although I
can't say that for certain.
I don't think we're
contemplating purchasing water
rights in an amount that would
Essentially deplete the
availability of water for other
purposes in the state
and Mr. Chair, can I ask you one
question on that? You don't
think or I mean, is this mapped
out? How, how do we as the
people know what we don't think
we're going to do means exactly.
Mr. Chair Senator, we, um,
report annually to the
legislature with our um our
priorities for the reserve, um,
and so that is one,
You know, one vehicle for
oversight so that that attitude
could change, Mr. Chair,
annually.
Uh
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, I, the,
the attitude in terms of what
our priorities are, yeah.
It can change, but the basis for
our priority is compact
compliance, endangered species.
And if this bill is passed, it
would add a third purpose which
would be to support Aquifer
recharge and stream connected
offices which also can helps
protect stream flow. So no, we
would not be um expanding our
purposes for the reserve, we
would not be, um,
Essentially, I'm sensing there's
a, a, a, a concern that there
could be sort of a water grab or
uh, you know, purchasing more
water than we actually need.
So Mr. Chair, what, what I'll
say is what you're sensing for
me is true and I'm not a water
expert at all. I'm just thinking
of what are the broader
implications immediately and
long term, and
There seems to be a a pattern
that when a bill like this is
brought forward, we aren't given
a ton of specifics. It starts
feeling really nebulous and
that's where people get fearful
or ask questions like what,
well, what can this really mean?
And it's not that we don't want
to preserve water. It's that we
want to make sure that we're not
destroying, let's say industries
availability to water in one
fell swoop, um,
It could affect land value down
the road depending and for me, I
think, do you already have a map
of specific areas throughout our
state that you're already
looking at and identifying and
then how are you going to market
to water right holders that
you're looking to purchase their
water rights, um, you say it's
voluntary, but
How does that, how does that
work? And how does that end up
feeling for people who are maybe
in a specific situation with
their water rights and feel like
they don't have a choice but to
sell. And then again, it's, it's
a forever, it sounds like it is
a forever grab.
Potentially because you're
saying you
Can't really foresee or tell
whether they'd ever sell those
rights back to um private
ownership. So for me, it leaves
me with a lot of questions and
I'm not even a water expert,
right? And my, my mind is
spinning on what this could
potentially mean.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I, I
thank you for those questions.
They're very thoughtful. Um, I
would say.
That
One of the things that we face
is, is water scarcity in the
future, um.
For compact compliance purposes,
it's possible that we would end
up having to administer by
priority, which would mean that
people would be cut off.
We want to do everything in our
power to prevent having to do
that in this, this is one of the
tools that we can use to ensure
that we stay in compliance and
that we don't have to resort to
more draconian uh methods to be
able to administer water. And so
our interest truly is to make
sure that everybody in the state
has sufficient water in the
future. So, Mr. Chair, what,
what are the agencies and
association um throughout the
state that are behind this pill.
Um
Thank you for that question.
Let's see, um,
Howard Hutchinson, who deals
with the Southeast, southwestern
part of our state works with
Arizona and New Mexico. He
spoke.
Zoe Barker from a conservation
voters, a Marlow Schultz from
the mid Rio Grande Trish Snyder
from New Mexico Wild Camilla
Fielman, Sierra Club, Christina
Fisher from Think, New Mexico.
Um
Rachel Khan from Amigos Bravos.
And
I think, I don't know if this
person was a
Supporter or opponent, but I
have another name here so I
don't want to say it because I
don't know which way they went.
OK, thank you for that. And Mr.
Chair, are any of the um ag
associations.
Uh, supporters of this bill.
Well, Mr. um, yeah, Mr. Chair,
Senator, the Middle Rio Grande
represents urban and rural
areas, uh, and I don't know if
Marla's here or not, and then
Larry Reagan spoke from the farm
bureau, so I'm not sure if
that's the person I don't know
was supporting or opposing.
my notes to myself here. But
those are the individuals who
came, no one came in full force,
like in sharing conservation,
the cattle growers didn't come,
the dairy, the no one else came
to the table because sometimes
they are in the position for
asking for assistance from this
fund.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thinking we'll wrap this up, and
the strategic water reserve, I
mean, if we really get into the
D cell.
Part of this, right?
As we generate water and desal.
The water has to go somewhere. I
mean, those of us in LFC toured
El Paso, right?
And they could turn their desal
plant with the turn of a dial.
From 0 to 10 million gallons a
day, right?
And so if you need to produce
that water or Rio Rancho or
Albuquerque cause there's a a
well being drilled outside of
Rio Rancho. If that inter
connects to the pipes.
And then all of a sudden we have
10 million gallons in the tank
and we don't need that 10
million. You need to send it
somewhere. So you either got to
send it down the river or back
into the ground to, to reinject
it.
The long term plan with that, I
mean, if you look at Phoenix
right now, Phoenix is on, on a
development hold. They never
really had the water to develop
phoenix and all through canals
and pipes, and so they never
planned for a strategic reserve
when they're really gonna need
water over the next couple of
years or this year especially
because there's no water in that
system.
And so,
My vision is, I mean.
In order for them to buy water
rights. It's not a condemnation.
You gotta have a willing seller
and a willing buyer.
If I were to take my land at
Cedar Hill, and we, uh, I think
I don't know Senator Laniro
represents that, that's an
Aztec.
And and say I'm gonna develop in
that in the housing. I gotta
move my water rights somewhere,
or I got to sell them, right?
And they have to move to some
other piece of property, or I
have to lease them to someone
that's gonna use them for a
benefit, and you have to track
that benefit whether you're
watering cattle or growing
alfalfa or something.
Some of those water rights
naturally go away, it's not a
requirement for the county to
say, when you do that, and we
tie you into that North star, I
think.
No star domestic. There's no
requirement for me to do
anything with my water rights. I
could sell them to the state.
There's been an incidents before
where we did that following of
land and we bought a bunch of
water rights to the north of us
here.
And that was a holy mess,
because the state bought them
and then the state was gonna run
this farm and then all of a
sudden we had to buy it back.
We had to buy, they bought them
back for us. We had to get rid
of him at a higher rate than
what we bought them.
And it was a mess, but this is
not a condemnation, this is
saying, if you really, if you
want to put this money here,
there's certain areas.
Or that need extra water if
There was one in, if, if the I'm
just saying this imaginary or
figuratively as we think about
this. If all of a sudden the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy,
we need more water for farmers.
B cell will pump that water too,
right? Doesn't all have to be.
Drinking water. It's clear
cleaned.
To that standard, but it doesn't
have to be that way. But there's
an it's just, it's so innovative
to me that you could create so
much water with brackish water.
For whatever use and put it
where you need it.
Through a pipe, through a canal,
through the river.
That, that you have to build
this scenario and, and for me,
strategic water fund is is
planning for that future, that
well in Rio Rancho needs money
to develop a domestic system.
That's where the money is going
to come from, is this fund.
Uh, I think we have money headed
there in the budget.
The house, put it in, I think
there's, I don't remember the
dollar amount, but there is
money for that, but that's,
that's my thinking the strategic
waterfront. If you look at
Gallup, we spent about $3
billion on a pipeline system
that's going to be dependent on
river water.
And we have to buy our water
from the Hickory.
Nation to put into that
pipeline. I mean, we, if we'd
had desal, we could, we could
energize that line immediately
and and be water all over the
reservation, which is stringing
out right now with tank, so.
See no further question to have
emotion
and emotion for you passed by
Senator Gonzalez. Do I have a
second by Senator Padilla, we
call her up.
They're
Senator Brant as amended.
Yes
Senator Brandt votes yes,
Senator Campos, Senator Campos
votes yes. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Lanier. Yes, Senator
Lanier votes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padillasia, Senator
Steinborn. Senator Steinborn
votes yes Senator Tobiasson,
Senator Tobias Sibosia, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woodboat's snow, Senator
Shendo.
Yes. Senator Sendo Boas, Senator
Munoz, yes.
In rene sports, yes, we have a
DuP pass 10 in the erative, 1 in
the negative.
And
Senator Woods, explain your real
quickly, Mr. Chair.
Most of our, most of our
jurisdictions.
Are not adjudicating.
So how do you buy water right in
a non-adjudicated area.
Just a question to think about.
Don't think about it right here,
this next time I talk, we, I
will ask that question.
Thank you. We're on Senate Bill
236 as amended it's quite thank
you Senator, look twice for
motorcycle license plate, any
questions from committee
members.
that anybody in the audience in
support.
I haven't seen anybody in
opposition seeing none can have
a do pass most
I say one thing real quick.
You just did
Go ahead, go ahead about this
license plate is this license
plate already exists. There was
a drafting error in 2023 that
did not allow for the motorcycle
size plate to be made. All this
one is doing is making one
that's smaller.
And we all stayed home from the
dance last night and did our
homework. We have a motion for
Du pass motion by Senator Campos
said goodbye Senator Padilla.
Any objection we call the role,
I guess, quickly.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Compos.
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Lanier. Senator Linier votes
yes, Senator Padilla
Cener Padillaia Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasin.
Send
Senator Tobias and votes yes.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes, yes,
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
votes yes, Senatoro.
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Munoz. Yes.
And sports, yes, we have a do
pass 11 to 0. We didn't want to
charge you rent for the
furniture because the
clerk gets mad at me about
chairs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and members of this. Thank you.
Senator Brent, you're gonna do
your bill.
We do have an amendment for that
too.
There's some handouts right
here.
He was chairman and this is a
committee sub because I was
listening the other day when you
said how people don't like to
bring committee subs, so I
brought one.
It makes it cleaner for us,
absolutely.
Sore, fire away.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um.
The 202 number on that sub
should be 231-529.2.
Uh, the committee sub fixes
technical drafting issues
identified by LFC, um, and now
that these issues are fixed, the
financial impact of this bill is
0.
Uh, let me explain the bill, all
the health care providers who
receive payment from Medicaid
are required unless they're
nonprofit to pay gross receipts
tax on the Medicaid
reimbursements.
Received for services.
This bill does not provide any
kind of tax relief for the GRT
that is required to be paid on
the Medicaid services because
providers do not need relief
from those taxes, they just need
to be sure that they are
adequately reimbursed.
For those taxes.
Um, uh, draw your attention to
the healthcare authorities'
analysis for the bill where it
explains that there are no
physical impacts of this.
state because the Medicaid
program currently factors in
gross receipts tax when cap.
Calculating capitation rates for
MCOs and pays providers GRT on a
fee for service basis.
Uh, this means according to HCA
MCOs are receiving the
appropriate funding to pay the
providers the appropriate GRT.
The problem is that the MCOs do
not show the GRT is a standalone
item in the billing and
payments, so there's no way for
the providers to know if they're
actually being paid for the GRT.
Bills solves this problem by
simply
Directing the MCOs to reimburse
the providers for the applicable
GT and to provide documentation
that the.
That differentiates the
reimbursement fee.
Uh, my expert witness is Gary
Brunner with the Medical Society
and I'll turn it over to her for
just a quick second.
Um
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, I'll make this very
quick. Uh, the only other
differences that you see in your
committee sub from the original
version is rather than saying
itemize the gross receipts tax,
we say there has to be
documentation to differentiate
the reimbursement amount versus
the tax amount. That's so our
providers can actually
appropriately and correctly
report to the state, what was
the receipt? What was the tax,
and that they can be fully
reimbursed for that.
The second thing is we make an
effective date for January 1 of
2026, so it aligns with the new
tax year.
Thank you, I'll entertain a
tabling motion.
Nobody in the audience in
support.
We'll note those. How many I
want Zoom and support. We'll
note those for aid and support,
uh, Senator Steinborn, you had a
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I don't know if anyone was
opposed. Nobody, OK, OK. Oh.
On one imposed him.
So
Um
Well, we'll hear 14 and 1 in
opposition, so we can just
balance it out.
Let's tear those for first.
It was an 8 to 1.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee again, Angelina Villa
Adams, president of the Mexico
Medical Society, medical doctor
here in fierce advocate for
patients. We are one of the less
than a handful of states that
impose sales tax on medical
services. This is one more issue
that makes it increasingly
difficult to re recruit and
retain physicians, specialists
and providers to our great
state. We must stabilize the
system, promote development, to
promote access for patients. We
must be as attractive or more
than surrounding states for
clinicians. We have to compete.
This is for the benefit of
citizens of New Mexico. It's
that simple. The progress made
in the last couple of years is
much appreciated by the medical
community. I believe the intent
of the recent legislation was
that providers actually receive
100% and 150% of Medicare, not
that rate minus GRT. This is not
just tax policy, this is
healthcare policy. This is about
transparency. This helps to keep
and attract clinicians and as
doctors, which protect and
expand access to care. This is
one step closer to ensure that
every New Mexican, no matter
where they live, can see a
physician or a clinician when
they need one. Thank you.
Marla, are you gonna tell us the
opposite of that?
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marlahos registered
lobbyist for Blue Cross Blue
Shield of New Mexico, and we
stand, uh, in support of our
providers, of course, and their
reimbursement and uh we have
been working with the New Mexico
Medical Society on some
amendments, but we still have a
few concerns regarding the bill.
We would like the committee to
carefully consider whether the
bill jeopardizes federal
financial participation FFP or
the share of Medicaid costs that
the federal government pays by.
holding providers harmless for
healthcare related taxes. Senate
Bill 2491A states that
healthcare providers shall be
reimbursed for all applicable
gross receipts, taxes that the
healthcare provider is required
to pay. This guarantees that the
service provider will be held
100% harmless from funding the
GRT tax that is under existing
New Mexico law, the provider's
legal obligation to pay to fund
and pay. Federal Medicaid
regulation.
42 CFR section 433.68 allows
states to receive certain health
care related taxes without a
reduction in federal match only
in compliance with that rule.
among other things to be allowed
without reduction in FFP, a
healthcare related tax like GRT
on Medicaid receipts must not
impermissibly hold harmless the
taxpayer as described by the
rule. Section 433.
68 B3 states that a state may
receive healthcare related taxes
without a reduction in federal
match only if the taxpayer is
not held harmless under the tax
program, a taxpayer is
considered held harmless if the
state imposing the tax provides
for any direct or indirect
payment such that the provisions
of that payment directly or
indirectly guarantees to hold
taxpayers harmless for all or
any portion of the tax amount.
If this bill does not violate
federal law, Blue Cross Blue
Shield could support this effort
only if MCO's cafetation rates
include any additional funding
that is needed to close gaps and
what providers previously
negotiated and GRT versus what
is now mandated to fully
reimburse. This is the language
that we've shared with the New
Mexico Medical Society, they
would not accept MCOs and
providers have a clear and easy
implementable process.
to address the transparency of
what is paid for services and
what is reimbursed for GRT.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Steinborn,
you got a question. Well, I just
want to make a comment, Mr.
Chair. Um,
To simplify a little bit what's
what's happening here is, is for
Medicaid providers are being
given, they're supposed to be
given their GRT rate on top of
their provider base. What's in
fact happening is that they're
being sometimes shorted that GRT
and they're being given an
average.
And providers don't know this
because they're busy running a
practice, they're kind of left
to fend for themselves and try
to negotiate and all this does,
Mr. Chair and colleagues to say
no, they have to actually give
them the GRTode in that locality
and that it's transparent so
they can account for it.
That's all it does, uh, Mr.
Chair, and it's needed to help
advocate for a doctor, so I
support it. Senator Tru Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward and expert witness
for being here. It looks to me
like this substitute is a
direct.
Response to TRD's concerns and
technical issues. Is that
correct?
That's correct, OK, OK, I just
wanted to make sure that that's
the way that I read it and then
um, the idea that this may
violate federal law. Can you
explain that? Or would your
understanding of that means and
whether you think it does, Mr.
Chair, and uh and Senator
Trujillo, uh,
Blue Cross Blue Shield has not
given us all the cross
references to CFR that they just
told you, but what our
understanding is, is, uh, it
would run afoul of federal law
if we had a standalone provider
tax that then the state was
holding providers harmless for.
Um, so think back to the HDAA
that we passed in 2024. There's
now a stand-alone surtax on
hospitals. They have to pay that
tax and we actually had to get a
waiver from CMS in order to do
that. That is not what GRT is.
GRT is levied on all
services across the state. It's
levied on all of the providers
across the state and what we
have already in our contracts is
that the NCOs are supposed to be
doing the minimum fee for
service schedule, which is the
100 to 150% of Medicare plus any
applicable GRT. That has not run
afoul of federal government
regulations for the tens of
years that we've been doing
that. So we don't think this is
gonna be a problem. All this
is asking is, please tell us
that it was $100 for the baby
well check.
And then the $7 are for the GRT
so that our providers report
$100 as their gross receipt. And
then they have the $7 to remit
back to the state as the GRT.
That is all this bill does. It
doesn't change how we are doing
the taxes or how we do the
capitation rates. Mr. Chairman
and um Senator, so you say when
they report, they're reporting
to TRD.
And to the federal government
for for IRS purposes, uh,
Senator, yes, and Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. So when you get a
$100 service charge or $100
charge, 7% still has to be
reported, right?
They're gonna pay it to them.
They still put it in the tap
system and showing it as paid,
but they're doing is an average,
and so the tax and.
Albuquerque's 5 and it's 7 in
Gallop, they can see what's the
average 6, right? So they're
reducing that, so, uh, can I
have, um, any other questions
see no center. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, members of the
Senate Finance Committee, I move
a do not pass on Senate Bill 249
and a due pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249.
Wait, wait, wait.
And we move them a substitute
for discussion purposes. So
let's start right there and
clean that up.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
It was a good catch and I'm glad
that you, uh, you brought that
up. So basically, Mr. Chairman
of the Senate Finance Committee.
I move we do not pass on Senate
Bill 249 in a due pass on Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 249 for discussion
purposes.
And no, and we have a seconded
by Senator Padilla. Any
objection to that motion seeing
that in combos. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair, members of the
Senate Finance Committee. I move
a do not pass on Senate Bill 249
and a due pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 249.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'll second that motion.
Cholera.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes, yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes yes,
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator to
line. Senator Linier votes yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes yes, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes
Senator Tobiasin. Heck yes.
Senator Tobiasson votes yes,
Senator Trujillo.
I'd like to
Trujillo Bosia, Senator Woods,
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Shando. Senator Sendo votes yes,
Senator Munoz. Yes.
Senators, yes, you have a do
pass 11 to 0. Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
really just want to say thank
you to Senator Tobiasson for the
party last night, although I did
go home early enough that I
could read my bills.
We are adjourned, they're
ordering lot bringer for our
members if you want
Lauterburger.
They'll they'll run and get it
today.
I'm sorry, Senator Tobison, I
mean Senator Lanier, it's not
Taco Bell.
Uh, just seeing that look and
then I just figured it out.
Uh, we're adjourned.
