Table.
State Land.
The use.
No thank you.
Good morning morning to everyone
senator Munoz is on its way and
I'm going to get the meeting
started sectors are running a
little bit behind so what we're
gonna do is go on first to the
at to the nine thirty economic
outlook for New Mexico see how
long that takes and then we'll
work on the bills so how's that
and you are Nicholas lie I am
thank you Nicholas vice
president economists in Denver
branch executive for Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas city long
long time yeah thank you all
right you can proceed all right
thank you kindly thank you for
the opportunity of the committee
to to present here I hope is
that too is to protect present
in outlook some narrative on
economic conditions here in New
Mexico my comments are gonna
focus mostly on some that
develops that are developments
that I think are shifting most
rapidly in the last six to nine
months me where we actually see
some of the changes or
developments we want to continue
to monitor and then also focus a
bit on areas where I see the
economic conditions involving
differently here in New Mexico
then maybe the other parts of
the country are surrounding
states so I'll try to keep my
comments there that said I I
hope that my prepared comments
are brief and then it's we
believe time at the end of the
session be able to have an open
dialogue and be happy to answer
any questions so before I begin
I wanna make sure I was give the
standard disclaimer that these
views are money and don't
necessarily represent those of
the founders are back Kansas
city or the fetters our system
and my aim here is to be a
resource as always on it for
providing impartial information
about economic conditions are
developments that we're seeing
certainly not provide commentary
on any policy that sits within
your domain and New Hope for
those to be conversations you
have with your constituents so
there is a package in front of
you that's a few charts that I
will rely on for the
presentation many of these
charts and and narratives come
from reports on the find a
little bit.
More detail that are out there
all briefs but if there's any
particular topic you'd like me
to follow up on I'm happy to
share those but I think most
importantly where this committee
come from most of it is inspired
by the conversations that we
have with our community leaders
business leaders from the US for
them telling us here's what
we're seeing on the ground if in
terms of economic developments
and we really take seriously the
responsibility to share those
local perspectives up to the
national level so with that I'm
gonna go ahead and get started
with the brief over here
overview here on the first slide
attacks just a few themes I'm
gonna go ahead and hit is that
we are Sir see a little bit of
softening some labor market
conditions but that said it's
softening from some historic
tightness and it's we see
tightness meaning difficulty
recruiting workers more jobs
open than available what's
notable about this period as we
have tightness that sits across
industries across regents
meeting with in New Mexico and
also broadly and across skill
levels where you have difficulty
recruiting from entry to mid and
even some more senior levels.
The federal reserve has
responsibility for maintaining
and promoting price stability so
we pay close attention to not
just maximum employment but also
inflation pressures I'm gonna
spend a little bit of time
talking about that from both the
national and state perspective
we see inflation pressures we
often aren't familiar with being
elevated but important part of
that inflation narrative is how
closely tied those inflation
pressures are two sectors of the
economy there have really labor
intensive it's not so much the
goods anymore it's not so much
the oil and gas pressures that
we're seeing as much anymore
it's the part it's the things
that houses or bind actually
require a lot of labor to
produce and that says a lot
about how we might see the
outlook for interest rate policy
or inflation narratives are
going forward.
One thing to continue to monitor
particularly here in New Mexico
is that household consumption
has declined quite quickly in
recent quarters and the trick it
into the difficulty is banned in
characterizing that decline what
is it falling to is it falling
and and softening in a way that
we think is is certainly
persistent Klein or might take a
different take on that and I'm a
try to highlight that we're
seeing a lot of still
normalization in consumption
from some of the highs that we
had over the last couple of
years and so the yes the false
that we've seen in consumption
recently are precipitous but
they fell quickly towards normal
levels types of growth that we
see during expansion periods
they also fell to levels that
balance more evenly between
brick and mortar storefronts and
not so much as the online sales
that we have recently and so in
a be careful how to characterize
that quick decline I'll try to
highlight why we're looking at
that differently.
the declines in spending that we
do see though are pull backs in
travel some leisure still pretty
robust here in in in New Mexico
but places that we see spending
still continue to rise at a
quick pace is the food spending
on food spending on energy
spending health care those non
discretionary needs households
are still have to spend quite a
bit more on that and there's
reason to think that can
continue over the medium term.
So business investment is
declining broadly I won't spend
too much time on that and those
who want to provide if you only
to provide some commentary on on
business conditions we are
seeing businesses start to
tighten our belt a little bit
with regard to expenditures on
capital and and that's something
to look forward to that often
signals their confidence about
the future all know that it's
following but again falling
towards levels that look a bit
more neutral.
So moving on to slide three
which is the first one of with
charts on it was spent too much
time on this but just to note
that New Mexico followed by the
rest of the of the country this
way in a way that it didn't
following the global financial
crisis with rapid declines in
unemployment get employment now
sitting below four percent here
in the state on that's
supporting some of the tightness
that we're seeing uh in in the
markets the difficulty of
workers I see me difficulty of
firms in being able to hire
we've also seen outsized growth
here in New Mexico in terms of
wage growth which growth is up
broadly for sure but it's been
growing a bit faster here in New
Mexico and this is been a
challenging thing to try to
understand you can see the
outsides wage growth this
doesn't necessarily look like
more households getting ten
percent wage growth that also is
wage growth with some of the
resumption in oil and gas
activities and as those
relatively high paying jobs came
back online
just calculate on average you
had more people into higher
paying jobs as of the
composition of the workforce
really supported the headline
number of wage growth if you
were to look at wage growth
among households are
continuously employed is a bit
more moderate still elevated in
that regard unfortunately though
that wage growth of the last you
got here so has not kept up with
the pace of inflation so it's
welcome to but this is not I
significant increases in
spending power of of New Mexico
Health schools right the wage
growth is going up but so have
the prices of the last four
years.
Moving to the next slide here on
page four when I think about
labor market tightness and the
difficulty that firms have in
hiring labor bringing in those
skills there's a couple places
that I'm I'm really focused on
with regard to New Mexico and
areas were potentially see
developments of the sixth last
six months the first is this
left hand side chart which is
what we call labor force
participation so if you look
across the United States we
noticed that it's actually quite
subdued relative to where we
were prior to the pandemic this
is the labor force participation
that willingness and ability of
households actually supply the
labor it has been subdued
nationwide and it's an unlikely
to recover much more.
But I think some of that is
driven by some demographic
features not necessarily
pandemic related features the
labor force participation was
gonna come down just because
retirees what is more notable to
monitor here in New Mexico is
that first as you probably all
familiar with labor force
participation on average is
quite low you're in the in the
state but over the last nine
months you've actually seen the
labor force participation rate
started to climb a little bit
and although it seems modest
moving you know just a few you
know half a percentage point in
terms of the scale of that over
the over the
entire state a significant
reduction in the available
workforce that's there so real
pressures I think for folks are
here for businesses here in
state that are trying to
recruit.
Moving to the right hand side
chart another factor that you
might not always think of as
being a driver of the labor
supply or the ability of to get
workers its the elevated quits
right we knew that we had the
great resignation nationwide but
actually New Mexico had some of
the more a little bit more
sustained increase and run up in
the quits rate meaning the
willingness of workers to jump
from one job to another when
that happens first they're
usually leaving because they get
higher pay and so I pay a lot of
attention to the quits rate
because that tells us a bit
where wage growth is going
usually when workers are leaving
one job another that's because
they're doing getting higher
wages you'll see wage growth
come but another part of this is
we have to constantly retrain
workers and you have in your
your brain just onboarding new
staff that's costly it's costly
in terms of productivity and so
that is another source of loss
on in terms of overall labor
supply so we'll challenges for
businesses is not just getting
labor into the door and into the
seats but also getting them up
to speed to being productive so
there are certainly some labor
supply challenges on here in New
Mexico they've softened a little
bit in recent months but even if
you took where we are today you
say it's a historic level of of
quits rates and difficulty of
keeping workers on in in in the
within businesses.
Coming to the next page here on
chart I if you recognize that
that labor supply is difficult
it's hard for businesses to
provide workers that's driving
some wage growth it's a real
impediment of some of the some
of the growth opportunities that
they've pursued for you look to
the
the demand side what we're
hearing is that there is
something a softening of of
labor demand that's resulting in
lower hours worked we also saw a
different dynamic here in New
Mexico that I thought to
highlight on the left hand side
we're looking at the United
States notice that the scales
are different here said that the
point of that left charge not
the number here but it's that
during the pandemic across the
United States we saw a pretty
significant rise in the amount
of hours worked in the service
sectors and the that's what
attributed a couple different
ways use of remote work our
capability to access your work
place from your home allowed a
large number of individuals to
actually work more hours working
on because they have to cut out
some the commute time we're also
hearing that in the service
sector women who are able to
take for predominantly women who
disproportionally bore the
responsibility for childcare or
elderly care actually will take
advantage of some of these
service jobs and get offered by
working partly remotely or
hybrid setting.
If you go to the right hand
chart is more volatile just
because of sample size we go to
the right hand chart is the same
look for New Mexico I'm what you
notices there was not the same
increase in the use of the in
the hours worked in the service
sector.
So that question to me is
something that we've been trying
to ask households is you know
they don't maybe don't have
access to a remote work maybe
that they've had more difficulty
in in finding opportunities here
in the state to actually
increase the hours using that
hybrid model whatever the reason
would be it is a notable
departure from the rest of the
country that service employment
hours did not take up supporting
that together workers according
the rates and equity their job
at the store rates switching to
one of the other the labor
supply is constrained by just
participation and is constrained
in terms of hours worked really
broad based labor supply
concerns here in the state
that's that's a challenge for
businesses so avenues to improve
the ability to supply hours or
take a job anyway or to create
some some stability in terms of
how often workers according some
jobs can really add to that the
productivity of the labor force
here.
All right coming to that the
next slide here which I'll spend
very little time on because I
think we're all familiar with it
and as a national basis on slide
six is just to say that
inflation remains elevated
there's two different measures
of inflation that are
illustrated here you could pick
a variety of different measures
of hot which takes a good to
include or don't include the
take away is that however you
measure it inflation is high
much too high well above with
the federal service target would
be and so the odds concerted
effort to use monetary policy
interest rate policy to bring it
back down but we're really gonna
spend most my comments on the
facial narrative is what is the
latter part there of the COVID
is that where do we see
inflation it's in this labor
intensive categories okay
succumbing to the first page of
this are the next page page
seven is we've watched over the
last year when we all experience
that food price growth has been
quite high that is a serious
challenge for all households is
a particular challenge for lower
income households to spend more
of their money on food prices
are on food.
What I want to highlight is the
contributions here if you look
at the different components
which is the different colored
bars here are the indicate if
you look at the different
components where food prices
really grown the most it's an.
Processed food.
Okay and processed food is very
labor intensive that's were you
needing your workforce and so
the labor costs associated with
the manufacturing food is
actually driving up quite a bit
of price quite a bit of the food
inflation there were certainly a
story over the last year that
following the invasion of
Ukraine by Russia the so
commodity prices go up he's also
shortages there that did
contribute to the rising food
prices but this process food
category being the largest
corporate contributor highlights
so that's really not the main
driver of of of higher food
prices for households it's that
constrained labor and difficulty
in getting that set those
manufacturing process is under
way.
All right coming to is slide
eight here is assumed out I
started with food prices because
I think it's something that his
house was pretty quickly let's
zoom out a little bit and talk
about where do you see
higher costs really hit
households and there's two this
is again just breaking out some
different types of categories
cars and Services emit different
things what I want to highlight
is the outside contribution that
blue and green component housing
services and services so thank
food bank restaurants thank
hotels think
Health Care those labor
intensive services are really
driving a lot of the inflation
pressures that we're seeing and
so I go back to why I started
with the labor market tightness
it's not just a challenge for
overall growth activity that
labor market tightness is a
challenge for some of the
inflation pressures that
households are feeling because
the inflation pressures are
concentrated where we see labor
markets being very very tight.
All right going on to slide nine
here I want to zoom back down
here and actually have the focus
here on New Mexico where we
started to see some differences
in housing production housing
price growth here in Mexico
relative to some surrounding
states I think Arizona Colorado
but also relative the rest of
the nation so yes home prices
and rent growth have just
celebrated their slowing down a
little bit relatives where they
were the last few months but
still in a position where across
tears that's what each of these
lines highlighting bottom tier
the bottom third of price growth
middle tier price growth or even
more expensive homes are all
growing quite quickly from
historic standpoint also rent
growth in the area we can get
this really only for Albuquerque
is a credible measure that you
see we hear broadly that
Representative prices are also
growing up being that housing
ISIS are rising for really all
house switch is different we
have historically.
There's an interesting period
that I want to point out here
which is the on twenty eighteen
to twenty twenty period we're
actually had some net in
migration into the the state
ahead of the pandemic looks at
some some modest but population
growth a real reversal of the
losses in employment you also
had in migration it was broad
based across skills across
household wealth levels as you
actually saw in migration and
with that you also saw something
of an uptick in acceleration and
housing prices ahead of the
pandemic they turn to the next
slide here maybe put some
contrast and aware that I why
that might have been.
Is relative to surrounding
states.
On page ten here relative to
surrounding states are relative
to the rest of the country the
amount of permitting activity
for new housing starts the
amount of new construction
during house inside of the took
place you madam invest in a
multi family which is not
illustrated hear me apartments
others was quite subdued so for
the ten year expansion that
occurred between twenty twenty
to twenty ten and twenty twenty
one of the longest on record you
really did not have an uptick in
the amount of housing supply
here in New Mexico is really
growing up at a modest level it
wasn't so we got into the into
the pandemic we actually saw
permitting activity the
construction activity picking up
so yes we have C. scene the same
types of housing pressures
housing price pressures here in
New Mexico that we have in other
parts of the and other parts of
the country but it's on that's
predicated on this
decadeslong underinvestment sort
of housing yes this aligns a bit
with the lack of of in migration
over the last decade as well but
I would say it was it was quite
subdued relative to other parts
of the country so the challenge
for leaning against his housing
pressures means the housing
stock has to be brought back
alignment with the influx of of
workers so.
Okay turning to slide a lot of
in want to know what I said in
words in charge here which is
to return to the normalization
of if of consumer spending to
something that looks a bit like
a new trend we can we've been
hearing from a number of
business leaders number of
retail owner shops the it seems
like things are coming back to
normal but normal is a very hard
thing to define for a number of
different reasons is in the
tourism space we just now gotten
back some of the international
travelers so that looks a little
bit different.
we've come back from this growth
in the blue line here which is a
look at the national is the
growth in consumption that took
place during the pandemic of
online sales without a started
to normalize back down consumer
spending is split somewhat
between retail online retail and
the brick and mortar storefront
sales the way that it used to
be.
But what's different this time
around is that more and more the
brick and mortar stores now have
a way to use what they call on
the channel they have a way to
almost all of existing retailers
really just to be able sell both
in store and online one of the
questions we've been asking as
we come down here in Mexico is
trying understand for the small
business here how successful
have they been in use in in
investing in some of these are
called omni channel the ability
cell phone on online and in
store we noted that the
businesses that have actually
transition to have both in store
and onset online sales have by
far the most successful they
have much higher sec
probabilities of survival less
likely to close as a key
question I think you're for New
Mexico relative to some other
parts of the country is how
successful is that small
business community and and I
retail communities
Representative large band and
shifting to both online and in
store retail as we could
insulate them from an economic
down.
All right.
Still focusing on households
something that we're continuing
to monitor and sort of put this
in historical context is how our
household able to support some
of the ongoing consumption here
page twelve one thing I wanted
to point out is that there are
still subdued rates of
delinquencies now for lower
income households we're seeing
some pick up in late payments on
autos we're seeing some pick up
and late payments on credit
cards in the in the lower ficus
score is lower income households
lower
credit score households but even
with that pick up it's still
historically pretty subdued so
in that sense consumption looks
like it's coming down its
retreating backs on the normals
there's been less of the
allocations on the stimulus
payments to support delinquency
but yet the optics don't look
like we're outside the norms of
what we think is a typical
pattern I take this as an
indication that consumption at
least over the near to medium
term have some avenues to to be
able to continue to grow
unfortunately we're seeing more
that spending that because
higher inflation go supporting
consumption on food energy and
housing and health care some of
those really essential items.
All right.
Right to page thirteen want to
highlight particularly bright
spot for other recovery in
spending and price pressures in
the in the state of New Mexico
relative the rest of the country
is we're seeing a recovery
healthy recovery in total
spending on hotels travel
resorts leisure spending all of
that the leisure hospitality
activities and New Mexico is
actually was pretty late in
terms of for number for variety
factors in seeing the employment
recovery in the sector that said
over the last nine to twelve
months it's actually outpaced
the rest of the country and it's
gotten back to where employment
in that sector was prior to the
pandemic the west in general
still far behind in that miss
racial sing some of those price
pressures is spending is high
but the ability of that this is
actually staff support that
activity is still quite low so I
look at this and say again
another leisure another labor
intensive category consumers
seem to have an appetite for it
you seem to be willing to spend
on it so you really need to
think about relieving some of
those those labor market
pressures to support.
Might take a turn here away from
labor markets and housing
markets and I want to talk just
a little bit about some general
business conditions this is
meant to just offer a few side
points happy to have a
discussion more broadly about
what we're seeing there but one
of the new the developments that
we watch during the pandemic and
continue to monitor was the
rapid uptake in new business
formation which can you can
interpret as being
entrepreneurship you can
interpret as an uptick in self
employment there's number ways
to think about where all these
new businesses are coming from
is if you look at the green the
blue bar together the the the
green areas here on this chart
what is showing is that we still
continue to have high levels of
of new business applications new
business formation more more
folks are trying to start garage
businesses online businesses
retail businesses are remote
businesses when I think it's
important to recognize though
that for the state of New Mexico
which definitely has more of a
small business or the sole
proprietor concentration in the
rest of the country the uptick
in new business formation right
doesn't actually track it isn't
likely to translate into a lot
more small business hiring the
narrative that small businesses
are passionate and job creation
they create so much of of new
jobs absolutely true but the
types of businesses that were
being formed in the wake of the
pandemic we're actually often
side jobs secondary sources of
income of employment we don't
hire their online retail so that
close to a four person shop in
the a work only in terms of
online retail
or they've been in sectors
they've shifted away from
sectors that are more retail
oriented and kind of required
only just one person to run I'm
so taking advantage of state you
know services that provide
logistics as opposed to somebody
Madam warehouse you're on your
own inventory so the small
business community in New Mexico
which is quite large.
How to the rest of the nation is
actually
doesn't look like it's it.
In a new businesses doesn't look
like it's a surgeon new hiring
among small businesses.
All right and finally I move
quickly for it to the last two
because I think these are things
that you're very familiar with
the things you have to recognize
is New Mexico attracts a large
share of oil and gas activities
you're certainly familiar with
this I just re bring up here to
highlight the fact that it's
very much likely to continue on
the Permian continues to be
reportedly one of the most
successful plays those
productive place you're seeing a
rationalization or reallocation
of oil and gas activity across
the nation where oil rigs not
growing that fast new rigs are
new development neutral if not
going that fast in New Mexico
but certainly growing here in
New Mexico and West Texas where
as you're seeing a shrink or go
to zero in places like Wyoming
or Oklahoma other places that
are traditionally competed for
oil and gas activity off with
New Mexico so it looks like this
place is likely to remain
productive over medium term.
Okay now the last slides that I
want to highlight here is just
to say that yes the the state of
New Mexico has a pretty
significant resource base in oil
and gas but as you probably all
know it also has its pretty
significant resource base in
total capacity total renewable
energy capacity here in New
Mexico on the left hand charge
just highlighting some intensive
states relative the United
States you see New Mexico there
in the on the red line in terms
of the share of renewables in
total like Chrissy production is
much higher than the relative to
the rest of the relative to the
country and even some other
potential competitors here with
Colorado Senator.
Moreover the right hand charters
highlighting not just what's in
place but what's plant was
actually docked for coming out
from the
from the I. eight and actually
see almost almost a hundred
percent of the plans energy
production electricity
production is in the renewable
space and so you do see that the
state of New Mexico has that
research based on the gas but
also has a resource base in
renewables the impact of those
types sectors on jobs and tax
revenues is very different but
you do see that they're not
necessarily competing at within
the state of New Mexico where
you know any shifts in oil and
gas activities with the city of
way from anything in renewables
so.
In closing here as a for the
prepared remarks before opening
up to discussion I want to say
that just ahead of the pandemic
you're the last line P.
seventeen is what we did see is
that population growth has
actually improved in the state
not to say that it was robust
but you would you would reverse
some of the net migration
patterns they're certainly more
favorable than on average and I
think most importantly is in
this in the years twenty
seventeen twenty eighteen twenty
nineteen ahead of the pandemic
the ebbs and flows of migration
in the state were not tied
solely or so closely to the EBS
and flows of oil and gas
activity so there were
opportunities in there was some
growth there have the pandemic
if you look recently where we
are now you're actually seeing
be out of state the the pandemic
we've seen a pick up in in
migration but I want to note
that actually it's really being
driven by the influx of
international migrants you
haven't seen that I think you to
expect the domestic workers
really coming from other states
so inflation of the the
migration patterns haven't yet
normalized.
And I'll just highlight again
that labor force participation
is likely to be persistent have
been a growth both for its low
level compared to the rest of
the country and its recent
declines of the last few months
so with that I will stop and a
broad overview of some labor
market inflation and housing
topics and then open it up to
questions I'm happy to answer
questions more broadly both from
a regional state and national
perspectives.
Thank you thank you very much
Nicholas great information I
have a few points but I'm going
to defer to members first
Senator Woods you are first.
The question on employment rates
will not employment rates labor
protests.
And.
A little later on you made
statements about of self.
One one person businesses yes.
How is there any way to actually
track how much.
Labor was done for cash only.
You know that's that's what I
suspect is happening and
participation there's a whole
lot of of of cash business going
on this you know would creating
whatever
landscaping whatever right that
doesn't show up.
That's right eight eight this is
our way to track it very well
there the short answer is is now
other ways to track it and
monitor it yes and and the trick
is really is are we getting high
fidelity take accurate measures
of account probably not but what
we can do is is track changes in
that activity with some
reasonable fidelity and when we
do this is is you do see not
mostly the incomes are the
revenues of the cash that's this
coming into people's pockets but
you do see folks that are self
reported as I was running their
own business and that was a we
we track that pretty closely as
an indicator and I will say it
surged during the pandemic and
the one thought was that maybe
that was a bit of a had been to
that in a sense it remains
somewhat elevated but we also
saw that we we also are
carefully counted if you run
your own business you're counted
in the labor force so I did see
that activity pick up but I
don't think of it as a driver
over the last nine months of why
we saw they were forced
participation go down those
workers we don't see the income
from the necessarily it's
difficult to track but we do see
them participating in the labor
force and count them
appropriately okay.
Okay I had.
Another
minute.
On your slide seven you this
nation and
And food.
Yes is that increase does that
also include the transportation
cost when you have food cost
that is from processed food
that's inclusive all those
inputs the transportation has
certainly been part of that Sir
and and I would even say for a
while it was getting boxes of
materials and then I was
actually getting the boxes
materials on the truck and find
your driver and it was also the
labor all of those being fairly
labor intensive process is yes
there's upward pressure on the
on the the cost of processed
food from a variety of those
factors I will know that I would
think that that labour demand
sorry labor costs are actually a
larger component of that now the
maybe some of that those issues
before I think a lot of has been
made out of the decline in
international shipping rates or
international transportation
costs right continue to hear
from businesses is that that's
fine getting refrigerated
trucking here in New Mexico is
still expensive and getting
shipments of of transportation
quickness with boxes and so I
think that that story
challenging for this reason that
that processed food would be the
very highest of for many reasons
for one reason.
An apple can be so as an apple.
But when you put it in apple
sauce finish process.
What's interesting now is if you
look at the far left charge
those are some historical
averages from two thousand
eleven to twenty nineteen
longest expansion on record for
the United States and you look
at the average growth in in food
prep processed food prices they
were quite subdued and
technology gains automation
better equipment more resilient
supply chains actually
contributed to some of the the
softer pressures in that sector
and we also had fairly subdued
wage growth for many years of
that tenure you know twenty one
twenty twenty period so I think
it is it does stand to reason
but it is outside this is this
is historically March in terms
of the contributions labor
intensive components to the cost
of food for folks at home.
Well and it surprises me
sometimes when when we do we see
these charts because we know
during the time of the pandemic
of there was much more food.
Vetted homing of prepared at
home and and eating at home then
thirty for the restaurants
available to eat out of.
And you would have thought the
cost of food would went down at
that point in time it's it was
more spent at home and higher
growth of prices at home so it
did hit households I think it is
quite hard what's interesting is
now that even as some Russians
vote food is our home so someone
element and CDC this is heading
households and a very real way.
Okay I don't think the.
The middle of quick but I think
I'm.
As we're going through a COVID
one more thing to we often get
questions about gig workers are
they counted in terms of labor
force participation in the
answers similar to those who run
their own business yes
absolutely those are folks that
we definitely want to track we
do so more here in the rocky
mountain region because for
states like New Mexico Colorado
it's a higher footprints we
checked trying to care for think
about how they're participating
labor force when we talk about
renewable energy yes and how how
much renewable energy we have in
our state and the plans of
future renewable energy.
The the funny part about that is
you know we're a small
population state madam chair I'm
sorry I haven't been going
through you madam chair but we
are very low population state
and because we have a high
production of renewable energy
most of that renewable energy is
exported out of the state so it
makes it a very viable of
product for our state of to
bring in outside money into the
state with renewable energy the
the laws we have in place today
certainly limits in a new
generation of.
Warning gas generation of
electricity
The I think the investors are
are pretty afraid to put much
money in any kind of of fossil
fuel generation
close they have no idea where
the the short term futures going
to be on that have you got any
comments on that madam chair
yeah I think it is one of the
follow up to I think what's
what's notable the way we think
about this and this is going to
be in conversation about any
transitions in the energy foot
print this conversation for
private markets policymakers in
households one of the ways that
that I try to think about is is
going to shift economic activity
in a way that affects the
regional economy and it was
really interesting to provide
for New Mexico is that you're in
a situation have both the oil
and gas footprint and as you
noted a renewable footprint so
the concerns about the economic
activity shifting to another
part of the country are maybe
less salient now the issues
what's the the value out of the
Representative the revenue
extraction and the employment
footprint that comes because of
a shift in activity that some is
very very religious tied the
production process is so the way
that I tend to think about this
is Hey how are we seeing the
shift in economic activity due
to to a potential transition
Committee was notable for the
state is that it isn't a shift
out of New Mexico and energy
production assistant.
But we certainly have quite a
bit of our state that that's
capable of war renewable energy
production both wind and solar
and it will be surprising
because the need of transmission
lines to to send that on out of
to actually achieve any greater
amount but with that madam chair
thank you for the opportunity
thank you that's all I have
how I noted I will follow up
with the committee a report that
we put out on on the renewable
footprint in New Mexico make
sure sure that resource all
right thank you very much we can
remain a little bit shorter on
your responses only because we
have to go into the Senate
chamber it at eleven and we got
other speakers and other items
that we want to hear some bills
all right so yes and then we
have Senator Padilla senator
Byrd the day and senator
conflict manager and I'll be
really quick
Excellent information by the way
outstanding so when when you
were on slide displaying real
fast you're talking about new
business start ups in New Mexico
are single individuals can you
give us some sense is that what
you're to get kind of whatever
yes we wanted we were tracking
the date the up taking new
business applications and one of
the servers that you saw was but
we saw a lot more new businesses
the question I want to
understand was does that mean
more small business employment
does that mean the word is
entrepreneurship is really
taking off and I think
unfortunately answer was no this
is a shift in the way that folks
are thinking about their
employment because the types of
small businesses in the
entrepreneurship that would have
been really highly likely to
hire that four to five workers
that did not increase it was the
it was the increase in small
businesses that are not likely
to tip and to hire and so on
well I think just welcomes it's
not not likely the manager thank
you so it do you think it's also
something so is it maybe
individual setting up their own
state.
You know I'll pay my own so
security mount you know as a ten
ninety nine worker and provide
services to say like an Amazon
or whoever and and then they
might start their own little
kind of entity that way so they
can deliver food deliver product
you know build something and try
to sell it or whatever is that
what you're talking about we're
seeing a lot of the more like
side businesses were not
necessarily bring in full
employment it's it's a as a side
job necessarily.
So so so but maybe a service to
a larger organization
yeah I think they can get
workers that could be a there's.
And then I had some more
questions about the inflation so
I might call you offline that's
alright because I'm very
obviously we're all very
concerned about that it what
what are your thoughts in terms
of where housing pricing on
housing is going to go because
it is just astronomical in my
areas examples I'm shocked to
see because I keep pretty good
track of it and I look at it all
the time and right now single
family homes that are for sale
are literally ranging six
hundred thousand dollars it is
truly amazing for my area so
what where do you see that going
I saving very closely tied to
the labor market is the is the
short answer is the the amount
of turn the quits people shaking
job another what amount of
vacancies and job that that are
available that tightness in the
labor market is going to drive
this so I see it moving quite in
line with where we see the
market tightness going so as you
start to see that turned labor
markets often so what I expect
also to see some softening in
housing price growth the new
manager wants to keep us moving
here's all this just one more
and it made me there others
do you do you spend time state
by state maybe providing sort of
a summary of okay so this
legislation would help your
economy do you put anything like
that together that maybe we
could take a look at
that's something I can say that
the federal reserve is really
stay in state dependent on the
fiscal policy so I definitely
don't want to make
recommendations or provide
commentary at that would be
support or Agence certainly
dissolution I think it's a
conversation for you
constituents that said what I do
have to be is a resource for
independence third party data to
say there's an impartial view of
some of the economic
developments that are relevant.
Okay and so I guess maybe a
little point more pointed
question then madam chair is do
you put out a list that says
this is the that nineteen things
that are harming the New Mexico
economy based on what we're
saying that's all I can do or do
you do something like that we
don't put our and things would
be harming or helping but in in
the folder with you is a beige
book we put these are the most
relevant thank developments that
we see adversely or promoting
the growth of the regional
economy what doesn't make
special comment always to New
Mexico part of this reserve
confidentially the reporting but
it's it's definitely reflective
off here the key developments
we're hearing from people on the
ground that tells us what's most
difficult or much much promotion
and promoting growth it's a
short two page report that we
put out every eight weeks thank
you madam chair and so I'm glad
we're doing this but maybe next
year madam chair and and we can
share this with the chair I
think see coming here a lot
earlier and have this
conversation with this because
it'll probably guide a lot of
what we how we think for the
rest of the session this was.
The best presentations I've seen
this whole session so thank you
I appreciate that and you should
give us resource all the way
throughout and happened upon.
Thank you senator I Senator Burt
thank you madam chair and thank
you again for the presentation
of coverage couple things here
from my cohorts food price
growth.
At the house at try ME what do
you see that in the near future
as well as long future is that
going to continue to go up is
going to level off is going to
come back down and what will be
the driving force behind that I
this isn't paying close
attention to we've seen some
relief recently over the last
few months and that's absolutely
welcomed but I think that I
would take from that necessarily
that the job is done it's gonna
continue to trend down because
food prices the relief was and
the components are not
necessarily tied to labor market
they were tied to other other
issues and so I'm waiting to see
softening and some of the labor
market conditions are of relief
from that tightness in labor
market as an indicator that we
might actually get some relief
and some of the the labor cost
drivers that are really holding
up some food prices right now
that said the federal reserve is
been at broadly has been
pointing out this connection
between labor markets and
inflation remains committed to
using centric policy to bring
down that tightness so
definitely the policies oriented
towards that type of relief for
households.
and madam chair.
Everything is tied to labor and
yet there doesn't seem to many
labor force out there right.
The where did they go I mean can
you give us a little bit better
Nick I've heard things but I've
I would kinda like your input on
that question yes and I and I'm
gonna talk quickly to make sure
that I but as I want to say a
couple things about this so I'm
gonna keep talking quickly a lot
so I wanna make sure that that
early on the pandemic on non
college educated women and
particularly Hispanic women were
really the biggest part of of
the the population of left the
labor force they have come back.
So the narrative is different
now than it was early on page
essential challenges there but
retirees is really a driver if
you look at fifty five and
older.
Many of those folks left the
labor force and did not come
back to the way that they often
do of the part time job during
retirement and and that is a
sizeable number that's affecting
us nationwide but also here in
New Mexico so the stories about
child care development very much
so for lower income households
still the stories about elder
care and and leaving the labor
force take folks on they were
very relevant last couple of
years but we have a different
issue now and I I see fifty five
dollars the one of the most
significant drivers of the
decline in participation.
That makes sense and I
appreciate that
And one last thing that madam
chair and and we've been the
recipient I think of a lot of
this and a resurgence and
leisure spending our tourism
numbers continue to go up
we see a lot of people here
Santa Fe which is not the least
expensive place to come visit
and and a plate of.
What's driving the lesion
spending.
Food prices are up housing
prices are up all consumer again
consumables are up
What's driving are they have
they just been pent up and
because of COVID for two years
something that's become an
unofficial part of the economic
jargon leisure blended leisure
travel with business and so that
is actually picked up the scene
the days of travel shift
actually away for the weekend
and into the middle of the week
and that's an indicator that
actually that's a different type
of traveler so that's been
support the ability to do remote
work maybe for one day a week is
kind of promoted some of the
spend came to monitor that
closely but we will know that
something we hear constantly is
that travelers just aren't
spending like the state meaning
they're traveling going to the
hotel room but not eating at
restaurants quite as often right
their their pick up food so it
feels a little bit different and
we that's with what is the new
normal for the space hard
understand but something want to
track.
In and I appreciated your
Committee about the.
We're getting back to normal but
there's a new normal and we
really don't seem to have
defined what normal is right now
so I think that's something that
we need to watch because there's
so many new influences and labor
forces driving a lot of that so
not really sure what normal is
anymore but thank you that's all
I have chair thank you senator
Reid Senator Campos thank you
very much madam chair and I
right to in joy The presentation
several issues of course really
dealing with a new economy and
of course inflation definitely
is striving that along with that
we're dealing with the
environmental issues the energy
issues the availability of
materials of course the shortage
in labor and we tie and all
those things together but as we
continue in this economy and we
see the consumer demand
basically we're paying the price
for inflation if if we go to the
grocery store we pay that price
if we to purchase a new vehicle
we pay that price same thing
with with housing so so it may
be at the lower level but at the
same time as we see the balances
that definitely we need to bring
to the forefront some of the
other issues tied into it would
be the catastrophes that
recently occurred here in New
Mexico with the the black fire
them right fire the Cathkin
slash Irma's peak fire and then
we have the flood so it so and
then of course the drought
situation and and the waters
shortage so so in dealing with
all these things as you've taken
a look at what the future could
could possibly be how do we
create that balance so that a
the consumer is not going to
find themselves in a situation a
few years where as we've already
seen the debt service problems
that are occurring with families
because of the lack if you will
of the ability to keep up with
the credit card and all these
things so all these complexities
what what would be if you will
at least a.
Baseline as to how we can best
prepare this year's budget for
for what that futures and start
to look like and how can we
start to talk about how those
changes definitely or needed to
to assist if you will the
consumer and constituents here
in the state thank you madam
chair I I don't see how I try to
think about this is the the
specter of of risks that is that
is sitting out there is is very
wide and not constraints of the
local or national and
international that lately is
what was seen hitting households
here is is really a large
exposure a large number of risks
when was that and thinking about
it this year compared to last
year has been our vulnerability
to coming risks last year to put
in contacts we had the largest
increase in food prices and
commodity prices since the dust
bowl and we also had the biggest
increase in energy prices since
we had oil embargo so over fifty
years with the biggest commodity
price shock in a century and
over the last half of the year
the U. S. economy grew at almost
three percent.
So I think the wrong conclusion
to take from that is that we
could take another shock like
that on the chin and and
continue to grow I think we're
more vulnerable to this type of
shocks this year that we would
have been last year as the U. S.
economy New Mexico I see that as
well certainly we could see
rates were low right at
employment was growing pretty
quickly consumer spending was up
and so you it was a there is
some ability to weather the
shocks very difficult for the
households in the communities
that this is their most directly
exposed but as a growing economy
was able to weather that I
wouldn't take from that that we
have the same going on the same
insulation from those types of
risks this year just because
we've seen some moderation in
growth in business activity.
So so madam chair as we go along
a couple of things that we're
seeing let's say for example
Medicaid and then of course we
had the PPP's before so we had
resources coming in we're now
going into a level where those
resources are going to be just
press a plentiful but yet people
have taken if you will the
rebates and other resources that
they've been able to muster that
being the case they've gone into
debt and now we're going to be
dealing with another situation
where we have an enormous number
of resources available for
construction capital outlay for
program expansion and and and
I'm still trying to go ahead and
and and grasp wraparound how
we're gonna help people in the
next couple of years to better
sustain what their future is
going to be and so that's going
to be something that so that's
important maybe you can just
comment on that madam chair and
then after that all all star on
the very brief comments very
brief the one thing I notice is
that the spend for some of the
the fiscal dollar software
question for me is when it's
going to be spent not how it's
gonna be spent because when it
says a lot about the labor
market our labors our workers
available now versus on the back
and we think activity might be
declines in the private sector
so madam chair on chairman thank
you.
Thank thank you very much.
Thank you Senator share your
next and then you will find
going to have to have a hard
stop on this because we have
built to hear that I'm gonna let
you continue as you waited for a
while thank you thank you madam
chair so the labor market still
has me concerned okay so we got
people retiring right up but the
small businesses.
Other coming up or these are
these the same people so I
retire and start my own the
shoe shine business whatever
actually we see that it's not
it's not it's it's a very
different composition of of
start up it's a different side
of of of workers and then we had
previously and for variety
factors into what is a good way
to summarize is it's different
types of businesses in different
sectors run by different people
with very different likelihoods
actually point people.
Okay so we talked about the
vulnerabilities one of the one
of the vulnerabilities that I'm
personally worried about because
I live in oil gas world.
Is pieces gonna break out in
Ukraine.
Good for all the people are
going to die what is that mean
for New Mexico yeah I mean the
day humanitarian benefits of
having some some relief there
are it would be profound on so
for that we haven't seen a rapid
uptake in oil and gas prices
we've seen range bound
internally after we've seen much
more discipline on the
exploration As You seem that
really gas price moves of last
couple of years so that absent
flows that we saw over the last
several decades of the secretary
it weathers investor additional
million capital discipline we've
seen a number of reasons to
think that actually there's been
less of a surgeon might have
more moderate absent flows there
and and and the secretary we
still see prices being range
bound another international risk
would be trying to coming back
online which is in the upper
pressure on to the Senate they
start increasing oil demand and
so there's a number of
international rex both to the
upside and the downside for oil
and gas prices but notably I
would say that New Mexico's
gonna be at the four of that
being one of more productive
place and so the state.
I think you meant thank you
thank you I'm gonna defer my
comments because of the time or
questions but just a point of
concern here at least one that I
saw on your page fourteen the
fact that we have a surge in new
business applications here in
New Mexico but it was good to
know all that the sad but it's
good to have the information but
it's coming from businesses that
are not likely to hire employees
that's pretty worrisome because
we're always asking ourselves
how can we can't find employees
or you know how come there's
such a great vacancy rate and
and where are they and what are
we can we do to increase that
incentive or whatever so this is
good to know but I'm not wait
because we've got lots on the
agenda Nicholas I appreciate all
your work thank you I hope we
can bring you back when we have
more time is Senator Campos said
maybe earlier are centered on
which one sits at earlier in the
session would be great have a
look thanks appreciate thank you
appreciate it all right we're
gonna move on quick Kalay
because we've got and I think
sent his records from the mail
give me just have a question LCS
yeah we want to do our our
committee wanted to our
okay we're gonna wait we're
going to do Senate bill three
thirty four Senator Diamond
would like to for us to give her
a few moments Senator dominant
Senator Hemphill Senator happens
here but we're going to honor
the request to put her nasty
she's presenting another bill
and Senator Hemphill has a great
so we're gonna move to Senate
bill four thirty and it's met
bright fire recovery center for
the Senators defending senator
Byrd can very
informative but of course the
shortest possible so we can keep
going with the others.
Or you have an amendment okay
creation of to strike the
appropriation is that.
To adjusted okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Just before thirty there is a
request for recovery funds for
residential reduces downs
Lincoln County due to the make
bright fire of twenty twenty
two.
The the fire.
Started was in town luckily the
trade winds for the typical
breezes in that town board away
from the community but we still
lost over two hundred buildings
many of them are for homes we
had to fidelity's from that fire
major damage to water and sewer
systems.
And the very disturbing is there
are four bridges that need to be
replaced one of them is a
primary feeder to the high
school and and right so the was
very slow to respond so this
bill would ask for the funds to
recover from that and we do have
a committee substitute ma'am
Senator an amendment Mr I'm
sorry minutes yes I was going
just trying to interrupt sorry
to let you know that we need to
move on the amendment for
discussion at least in this
amendment merely adjusts the
appropriation it does not remove
it yes just from twenty million
to eighteen million six hundred
which is the the the Act amount
that we would need to recover
okay thank you this second chair
motion the second any opposition
to the amendment can you have an
amended bill now you can proceed
on the bill and we will move
forward thank you and then with
my.
Initial presentation it pretty
much covers what we're trying to
do here it is a simple requests
to Fairmont of money but we need
to move this so that the
community can recover and we're
very concerned about getting
money moving that bridge that
will is again a primary feature
for one the schools there needs
to be replaced or early short up
because we will have a new
school session starting in the
fall.
So with that okay questions or
answers thank you senator Byrd
all right do we have any body of
support of this in the audience.
Anybody in opposition here in
the audience anybody on soon.
Buddy on soon okay we're gonna
move in a little quick I know
you wanted us to move a little
slower on bills but we have to
get at least a few out so okay
then committee members for
approval Senate bill of four
thirty madam chair as amended
sections okay there is a motion
Senator Campos a second from
Senator Padilla any and all my
guess we should do a roll call
because of the questions that so
okay let's proceed with the roll
call.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill yeah.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share yes.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes seven two zero hi
Senator you have a do pass
motion thank you madam chair
committees okay we're going to
move on to Senate bill two Santo
Daime is not here yet okay
center Senate Bill at two fifty
one is amended metro Development
Act changes Senator Hamblen and
and Representative or if you
wish to see as many of for is
that are you.
Which one is that working in
that state I don't have an
update was twenty five okay okay
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry can I have an updated
agenda I didn't see one.
Yes I'm getting yes you know
we're going to have you know
can't can we do this I don't I
was given an agenda that was not
updated can I have when I didn't
realize I saw senator to see you
know here the sorry yeah I did
not realize here's.
Thank you okay.
That **** let's proceed with
this sorry Senator W. I didn't
have an updated one till now so
thank you all right Senator
Hamblen you can proceed thank
you madam chair committee we
appreciate this opportunity to
sit before you to talk about the
metric Development Act of
Metropolitan Development Act
Senate bill two fifty one amend
sections of law related to the
dedication of revenue and
issuance of bonds for
metropolitan redevelopment
basically what this will do is
enable local jurisdictions to
collect up to seventy five
percent of the incremental city
county and state property in
gross revenue taxes for an
entire metropolitan
redevelopment area for twenty
years what this does is this
will allow communities without
MRAPs to have control over how
that money is used for economic
development we think about our
small rural communities that
could benefit from this that
don't have M. R. A.'s in process
we think about main streets and
small businesses this money will
go back and this is where those
local communities have a say on
how that money gets used
obviously there's a plan that
gets involved in there's a whole
process but this allows for that
money to help those main street
small businesses in town centres
direct where improvement is
needed for example in Los crucis
we have the opus corridor which
is really just a shopping go
it's not a shop and stuff and
we've got Bacon buildings and
they're been efforts by our city
and we've got a representative
from the city economic
development department Elizabeth
teachers here if we could talk
about that if we needed but how
we really need that economic
development opportunities to to
make sure that that happens we
do have an amendment madam chair
thank you I was just going to
bring that up can we have a
motion to madam chair the motion
the amendment the second for
discussion anyone opposed okay
you have an amended bill you can
proceed thank you madam chair
committee thank you at this
point I'd like to go ahead and
let my expert witness Larry who
ran who's a lobbyist for the
city of Los crucis within really
spearheading a lot of the
conversations between the chair
of this committee and making
sure that those questions are
answered Celerio go ahead with
the what you.
Go ahead and talk about the
amendment thank you madam chair
members committee Larry around
this for the city of Los crucis
briefly what the amendment
doesn't and I appreciate with
the working with finance staff
it requires if we're gonna have
a dedication of state gross
receipts tax increment into
these metropolitan redevelopment
areas that we go through the
board of finance we go to the
New Mexico finance authority and
we come to the legislature for
you to approve that dedication
of the increments so then it
treated just like it does other
increment financing to make sure
we have to have legislative
approval and very briefly the
MRI Act has been in the books
since the seventies actually my
father was referencing about
cricket put it in the statute
this just expands the way we can
finance those projects thank you
all right any any questions
and to move adoption of the
amendment.
There's a motion to adopt the
amendment to have a second.
Motion the second
From motions that a couple
secretary Padilla any opposition
okay passed all right we can
proceed with I'm sorry we're
going so fast no we do we
appreciate that we understand
that if there are opportunities
for questions were more than
happy to address those now madam
chair okay thank you know I am
in support of this bill in the
audience can you get up and
state your name here for the
record quickly.
Yes please here and just be fast
because we are moving.
And Samuel executive director
for now New Mexico my members
Representative really anybody
who touches the built
environment I'll keep it brief
and just say we support this
bill thank you thank you one
else any opposition in the
audience what about on to.
For one of our from the metal
okay yes let's hear from
somebody in support funds and.
Okay Mister Warren are you
there.
Yes I am thank you madam chair a
committee members here time I am
in support of this bill I
represent the Farmington
metropolitan redevelopment area
and our downtown exists in that
as well in this be of great
benefit to our current MRA in
any future ones thank you.
Thank you all right committee
members any questions Senator
Padilla I thank you madam chair
and and senator and and experts
so in when I was reading the
amendment and the term complex
procedures was was put there we
were very supportive and helped
to get that on there and and
whatever so what makes this so
complex it's weird I don't
normally see in.
And let's website not not it
what makes it so complex madam
chair committee and go ahead and
that Mr Graham has to that
question.
Miss madam chair Santo are you
meeting in in the amendment or
the complex financing this is so
what what's complex about these
you have to have a very detailed
plan of how you're going to
spend the money how that is how
the the dedication of the
increment is going to go into
the area and how that's going to
create jobs bring the community
up out of it has to be a
blighted areas of of out of
poverty what kind of
infrastructure you need so it's
not a simple plan you have to
put for let's go to a lot of
hoops of specially with the
board of finance to get approval
for the increments and so madam
chair and and senator
Typically likes let's just take
give me the largest one you
think this is going to affect
foreseeably in the future madam
chair committee right now and
get a lot of conversations about
the abandoned Walmart in
Albuquerque on how that would
help the the community around
that the international district
benefit from this MRI that makes
sense thank you madam chair and
so typically how long were these
projects going to before you put
a shovel in the ground start
doing anything help to get all
the approvals and everything in
place I just want to make sure
that we're not doing anything
here that SLO's these projects
down to a screeching halt before
they're able to get off the
ground and lose financing all
sorts of other things that might
you know where that money to go
back out let's get rolling let's
get things moving so.
Madam chair and senator I don't
I don't think it will cause even
with even with the look of the
tusky valley to they were able
to do that within about ninety
days with that plan together and
we have a lot of that
information already so once this
is in place will be able to get
going on that yes so by no means
are you know do I want them to
do things that they should be
doing but let's get things
rolling with before we run into
problems and you know political
winds and all that stuff so
thank you thank you set for just
a quickly madam chair this is
often any community
cantik and it has to be at this
have to be a a and agency like a
county or city requesting the
funds that they can be a private
Committee right mentor center
bird everyone and yes it has to
be through the local government
okay Thailand madam chair thank
thank you thank you much Senate
committee move for approval of
Senate bill two fifty one is
twice amended second is a motion
from sent a couple seconds
Senator Padilla anyone opposed
but when it will call the roll
might as well do that I keep
forgetting trying to be Senator
Burt yes Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Yes yes.
Senator share.
Senator Starbird is excused
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes seven two zero.
Madam chair to get it has the of
the folks on this committee
would like to sign on to the
field before it goes to the
floor I would welcome that thank
you senator Ortiz Y. Pino yes
thank you Senator Hamblen thank
you that yeah and senator we so
appreciate you being patient
with us and waiting and thank
you for for this all right thank
you madam chairman and and
following yesterday's of of
session with the committee we
prepared a committee substitute
that incorporates the
information you received from
Mister of the la and from Mr
Abbey and have reworked the bill
in indicates in its current
form.
I do remember this this bill was
discussed at length and the
actually we're at changes we're
were us suggested but it wasn't
riding right so we send you back
to bring back we can give you
the confidence thank you so I'm
gonna have to be fast here
anyone in support of this bill
from okay good yes we are ready
to adopt the amendment give me a
second.
To the substantive Mr secretary
thank you center thank you very
much chair I move a for
consideration the Senate finance
committee substitute for send
health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill for twenty five the answer
that now yes second thank you
all righty so you can proceed
with this and it will take a
final vote well I think we went
over yesterday basically were
asking the department of the the
Human Services to prepare
regulations that would govern
how you can use medically
medication assisted treatment
that's methadone suboxone
anything's been approved by the
FDA in correctional facilities
in that includes both state
prisons and local jails I thank
you and I'm going to go back to
the audience but we're gonna be
quick so can we just have a
hands and I've for the sake of
time we went just won't have
anyone come up to to the
microphone but if you'd like to
just raise your hands again we
wanna make sure we acknowledge
okay thank you anyone opposed to
the same thing would apply to
you know zoom no okay thank you
can we have a motion toward
comments from the committee I
want to open it up to comments
or questions anymore an
additional question thank you
center was
set for their company.
Chairman and and Senator Woods I
would it's hard to say all the
counties because of them don't
have just but we do have
interest from the counties in
doing this.
Exactly.
Yes thank you very much okay now
we do we have Senator Campos
thank rich madam chair I move
that we approve Senate finance
committee substitute percent
health public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill for
twenty five.
There's a motion Senator Campos
second from Senator Hemphill
call the roll place.
Yes.
There are a couple yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator starboard is excused
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes there were
no such as excuse to seven zero
thank you senator thank you very
much madam chairman or committee
members yes thank you are we
going to go we're going to do
Senate bill two seventy three
Senator Hickey they were going
to go back to Senator Hemphill
and Senator Diamond thank you.
Yes and you have an amendment so
we got almost an amended for
every bill thank you Senator
Campos for bringing up this
substance.
Okay so here we go we're going
to be amending the.
Committee substitute is that
what we are doing a substitute
for substance.
Okay so we have an amendment
let's move the amendment first
is yes you might explain the
amendment and then we'll guess I
would just to to remove the
amendment amendment is very
simple some misspelling on my
part I'm dyslexic and also
striking the appropriation
section okay thank you can we
have a motion to for the
amendment for discussion.
One
second chair motion and a second
okay any of opposition okay Evan
amended bill let's tell us about
your bill quickly yes basically
madam chair and committee this
bill
requires following the federal
legislation but with teeth in it
to take away the barriers to
access to behavioral health and
substance use disorder so there
is no referrals no prior
authorizations as you know the
the moment that when someone's
right to go you gotta go and the
other piece that it does is it
leverages it provides leverage
for insurance companies in
commercial insurance to
significantly raise their rates
for behavioral health providers
so we can attract and keep me in
the state and the and a few
other things but that madam
chair in essence is what the
bill does and then the to in
force through the OSI is coming
from funds a being diverted from
another kind of general fund
that they can be different from
that's been worked through the
LFC and it passed the house
yesterday okay fine in the COVID
center what's.
Do you expect this to to how
much do you expect this to
increase premiums on the US not
not the not the
On the web that's good enough
question madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and
senator great question in
California where this bill has
been in place for a couple years
something similar to this they
are not seen premium increases
and there's a very significant
reason why and I can provide you
the papers that back this up in
our demonstrating it when
behavioral health conditions are
stabilized or substance use
those individuals usually have
co morbid chronic diseases and
they're not taking their pills
are getting out of control
they're showing up in emergency
rooms they're getting admitted
and once they're stabilized
because they get access to care
those costs go down by a factor
of three to four the Milliman
actuarial firm the nation's
really best did a
landmark paper on this in twenty
eighteen.
What what my problem is in your
bill it says that they must
provide provide.
Am I wrong on that.
They must do everything it they
must make a best effort then
that they they don't hire the
providers they have to make a
best effort inch demonstrate the
strategy on how they're making
that best effort including
compensation or reimbursement to
get people to meet their network
adequacy requirements that does
not require them to put the
expert that okay with with that
madam chair no no we need to go
quickly.
How will we how will this be
done in a very rural community
of Clayton New Mexico.
Thank you Senator and madam
chair it in a rural community in
Clayton New Mexico there are
there are two methodologies one
an individual saves living in
retirement can go out and do
clinics in red in in Clayton I
set up the VA clinic and Raton
and we did that was Clayton yes
is back in the nineties it's a
it's a mechanism that works well
the other is to set up
the tell health and the other
part is that we would hire
peer professionals particularly
for substance abuse in Clayton
to help those individuals
professionals or people who have
become sober and they are the
most effective way of keeping
people who are trying to get
sober sober and and you you you
might say with that we will our.
Those people.
And madam chair I I didn't quite
hear that right madam chair
Senator no we will not hire
those people this is through
traditional health plan this
will inspire people because of
the compensation to locate there
and build services there and
have hospitals who can do very
well at this economically want
to be able to bring them in and
so this does not directly hiring
it creates the circumstances
under which they would want to
come and stay but that's my
problem I have I think Senator
is that.
Whenever you know someone has to
pay for everything.
And when you say that we're
going to increase provider rate
so that providers can be there
that's all great but.
But the dead that standard
premium essentially has to pay
for sooner or later and that's
my worry on how much there's
more as you know not much in New
Mexico can't afford the the
right now and if we increase it
more I'm worried we're going to
have more uninsured on on this
deal so that's my problem
Senator.
And and Senator thank sure thank
you madam chair and Mr Senator
the what what this does is it
lowers the health plans expenses
in chronic disease very
substantially and so that helps
a health plan rate these
increased rates there is also my
bill three seventeen from two
years ago that does away with
all costsharing and so the
individual is not going to have
to pay anything out of pocket
for the services.
Well I understand co chair but
also understood.
And there's two separate deals
here.
Share so I won't asking more
questions but you see my
objection to it thank I
understand thank you senator
thank you madam chair thank you
all righty and before we go on
to other members I need to go on
to the public here to ask for
any anyone in in support of this
bill because I went on to
Senator Woods and didn't ask
that so anyone in support of
this bill all right and I'm
gonna have I think because of
the time we're gonna have to
just have your hands up and in
we appreciate that we can't come
up anymore because we're gonna
have to go to the chamber soon
thank you for that anyone in
opposition okay so there's two
my goodness okay in opposition
to our anyone on soon.
Okay all righty well and with
continue thank you for that
we're going to continue with the
committee for any additional
comments.
questions Senator share.
Thank you madam chair first his
amendment I just like to to.
prescribed means bootlegger
smuggled so he took out an
insurers shall not exclude
smuggled coverage.
Interesting okay so no more
mobile coverage but I do
I'm concerned as Senator Woods
so we need to build a network
understand I don't disagree how
we build the networks
believe that your bill says
we're going to build the network
by paying the providers more
that's how we're going to build
the network but I think we've
got a lot of the things are
getting in the way this network
of.
It now B. and one of them of low
Medicaid rates being probably
the biggest one because half of
our population of forty seven
percent of like that is on
Medicaid and there's only a
little sliver of commercial
insurance left I believe that
true madam president.
Madam president and Senator
share of federal legislation
which pretty much mirrors this
legislation does cover Medicaid
so Medicaid has to essentially
follow these rules and Dr Scrase
and Nicole Comeaux agreed that
once we put this into law they
would put it into regulation for
the health plans so that you
would get the Medicaid coverage
secondly there's there's there's
more money going into you've
seen that bill for Medicaid
coverage.
K. so madam chair and senator
I know that the the the the
state and federal government are
self insured so they're a big
portion of this and I can see
how the feds can say we're going
to do this
But Medicaid the I'm not sure
that we've put enough money I
thought I thought the money that
we were putting in there
certainly was to help providers
but most of that was to help
family practice doctors or
surgeons or whoever I didn't you
know the whole of mental health
issue here I don't recall that
being in there do we have enough
money in there to do both thank
you madam chair Mr Senator they
put in a hundred and twenty
percent of Medicare for
behavioral health that's my
understanding however I want to
agree with you that because New
Mexico's index on Medicare
payments is thirty to forty
percent lower in the surrounding
states that doesn't compete well
with other states we have to
raise that up significantly
higher given the met low chair
base right in New Mexico and
that will need to be revisited
next year it will certainly help
retain some people because
they're eighty five percent of
Medicare and it goes to a
hundred twenty but again in
terms of rich attracting that
number is going to have to go
up.
So madam chair I just I don't
because commercial insurance is
only a sliver of what we do I
don't see how this bill achieves
the goal because it's so small
especially if we're not going to
dramatically increase or
Medicaid rates and if we
dramatically increase or
Medicaid rates.
Do we have that in the budget so
I'm just those are my concerns
the way to do this is to
increase premiums on the handful
of people are still paying
premiums Senator can you briefly
respond to briefly responding
actually this the federal law
covers self insured Carissa this
law covers all state employees
and the exchange and also if
insured which add up to about
four hundred thousand people.
Thank you all right I don't have
anyone else on my list of what
are the wishes of the committee.
It is a motion Senator Steinborn
and the second since senator
Karia Hemphill who is one of the
sponsors thank you senator can
we had never roll call please.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Semenya's is excused we have
five to three.
bass thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you thank you
senator all right Senator
Hemphill and Senator Diamond is
out as we said she was
presenting a bill earlier but
she in Senator Hemphill are
built Sanchez so here we go
Senator it's yours thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee I have Senate bill
three three four this morning at
St appropriation bill for three
million dollars for the black
fire recovery efforts with an
emergency clause and without
madam cherry stand for questions
thank you thank you very much
are anyone in the audience are
supporting this bill.
Okay in the okay there's a hand
up there and fortunately because
of time we won't be able to have
you come up with thank you for
supporting anyone not in
opposition.
Anyone on soon.
Thank thank you very much
committee members chair I move
for a approval or adoption of
Senate bill three thirty four
with emergency clause.
There's a motion Senator Campos
center section to Senator
Padilla with emergency costs
take a roll call please thank
you.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes my nose is excused
we have eight zero two passed
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee thank you for your
patience all right it seems like
we're done with the bills
correct thank you for that
thanks to the members for
indulging me and helping me get
this through now we're gonna
just at the agency hearings we
have a one thirty so we're going
