This morning we're presenting to
you our house bill one forty two
the title on that is enacting
the San Juan generating station
facility in mind remediation and
restoration study hacked so very
quickly.
I'd like to address the
important provision of this bill
and I want to remind my
colleagues that the San Juan
generating station and Sierra
mind recently closed after fifty
years of operation and during my
presentation before other
committees they all learned that
the San Juan generating station
have produced more than fifty
nine million tons of coal ash
and other toxic contaminated
contaminants to be disposed of
in online pets as I shared the
purpose the main purpose of this
bill is prevention David Ellis
is the cleanup plan required in
this bill will ensure the toxic
metal contaminants don't reach
into the ground and leak into
waterways or otherwise harm the
public animals for agriculture
and because negative public
health consequences for the
people of San Juan County.
If we fail to act.
Very serious injury to our
health and.
The water is very foreseeable we
do not want a repeat of what has
happened in the past with the
uranium mines that were left off
unattended and my people are
still suffering from the after
effects after seventy plus years
later we do not want a repeat of
that that's why are key to this
bill is prevention with that of
it this bill passed the house on
part bipartisan vote with the
voted fifty three to five so I'm
asking for your consideration
this morning my expert witness
should you have any questions
would be Merial donosi and my co
sponsor in the Senate would be
Senator Shannon Pinto.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair sure thank you
Representative Senator would you
like to say something thank you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee has a
representative of that area I'm
in full support of the cleanup
and hopefully it gets done in my
lifetime thank you madam chair
thank you very much merry and
would you like to say something
hello have R. thank you thank
sure thank you very much for all
this hard work Representative
anyone is support in the
audience okay there's two in
support continueing three and
you want to post okay can you
come up briefly and to state
your name and a few comments and
then we will move on.
We have to have yes I was going
to check on zoom after these the
physical thank you madam chair
of the committee members I'm
Douglas Michael Chun I'm a
registered lobbyist for
conservation voters New Mexico
weird to to get this bill would
do pass the study sitter called
for by the bill and would be
funded by the bill our important
start to as the sponsor said
preventing pollution caused by
the generating station and the
associate of mine and so we were
to to give this a do pass thank
you thank you very much next
person please yes you can speak
with okay perfect good morning
chair members of the committee
who's gonna with the Serra club
you're gonna chapter
representing our thirty five
thousand members we stand in
support of H. B. one forty two
this bill provides our state
agency the tools and resources
needed to do a thorough study
study of what risk remain and
must be remediated the plant in
my
it requires input from those
impacted by the mines pollution
and it provides the monitoring
and enforcement necessary and
prioritizes plant and mine
employees for cleanup operations
thank you to community leaders
organizations Representative
Allison and also
Senator Pinto for this work and
we ask you to vote yes thank you
thank you very much one more
please thank you.
I'm Dr Tyler Taylor a retired
family physician I hope you will
vote in support of the bill in
its so important to avoid any
more toxic exposures to people
New Mexico especially the Navajo
Nation
is this is
Really important bill and having
practiced watching people get
all kinds of toxic affection a
lot of different things I hope
we can prevent these in the
future from happening this way.
Thank you please proceed thank
you.
That not only Munoz thank.
Thank you committee.
My name is chilly all the home
from Shiprock Navajo Nation New
Mexico.
Pleased to be here was it before
you I'm a grandpa and I'm a
former.
As a grandfather greatest
driving force that compels me to
do the work that I do is the
concern for the health of the
earth that we leave for our
children urged that we borrow
from our children.
Much of the damage that has been
done appear to be
insurmountable but this is once
a one concern that is within our
power to do something about.
As a former we draw our
irrigation water of the river a
nightmare I am floor you to make
go away.
Is to prevent the filtration of
the contaminated wastewater and
the coal ash into the watershed
and and to and into our precious
river.
The mess left by the former San
Juan generation generating plant
please give the marching orders
to clean this up thank you
ladies and gentlemen.
Chilling to read that anybody
postal.
It was there anyone opposed here
today all right can we go to
zone please.
Six people have a you want to
hear from.
Okay but.
The economy.
Hey what was the first name is
that we're that for how to me
are you there on zoom.
Yes.
Yes we can thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is at the
heart of the and I come from the
close of the site and simply be
I'm also member leader and
organiser with you.
Are we stand in strong support
of H. B. one forty two and
sponsor for bringing this
important bill after fifty years
of pollution from the San Juan
coal plant and money the
community deserves justice the
importance of accountability
cannot be overstated because our
communities need assurance that
foreseeable contamination does
not occur there are numerous
risks if action is not taken out
of the one that I want to talk
about today's clash because it
is so incredibly dangerous even
short term exposure can bring
irritation of the nose and
throat dizziness nausea vomiting
and shortness of breath long
term exposure can lead to life
threatening chronic illness
including liver damage kidney
damage cardiac with mia and a
variety of dangerous cancers
given the history of
contamination and disregard for
local health and environmental
justice we cannot leave the
health of the San Juan watershed
and the people in communities
who depend on it in the hands of
the same corporation who because
of pollution in the first place
we need an independently
verifiable transparent and
comprehensive claim in order to
protect the community from
further harm so urgent please
vote yes on H. B. one forty two
thank you yes thank you next
person please.
Kristoff are you there.
Yes.
I have been in many is crystal
currently I'm the executive
director of a nonprofit called
indigenous like please and we're
based in McKinley county and
we're.
Unfortunately the home of the
grounds are the largest
radioactive spill into a truck
and from this experience we know
that clean up and and
comprehensive independent
studies are and if the city when
we're trying to remediate
Mines and so with that
comprehensive independent study
the plan well proposing shower
remediate and prevent
environmental contamination
impacts to groundwater with long
term measurable cleanup and
performance standards and the
also the independent assessment
address the probability of
adverse effects to human health
and community resilience so I
strongly support this bill and
urged committee members and
madam chair you also support
well he had.
A question from.
That.
I have I do have a few questions
first.
Mexico I have the why are we
requiring PNM to do some this
cleanup doesn't doesn't the
agency I mean and Department
apartment require them to clean
it up to a certain level before
that and then maintain maintain
that for so many years is that a
requirement.
Mr chair.
Who would.
I'm gonna say that when the
uranium mines were operating in
the fifties and forties they
were also under the similar
rules and regulations but that
they follow the clean up to the
letter no they did my people are
still suffering seventy plus
years later we do not want a
repeat of that that's why we're
having in the end and to rid of
for seeing the clean up.
And I understand that but we
live in a newer generation
where.
We can control make fans
Representative do requirements
on environmental cleanup my
comment use maybe next year we
come of the bill that to the
fireman Department and through
EMNRD that tightens up their
requirements and makes them put
money for cleanup and.
If it the problem is what we're
using this state money in the
state and contaminated the
company did and so the company
should be the liability issue
and on the clean up and we
should require that for another
fifty years or whatever long it
takes but you know.
There and they made money off
the generating station they made
profits Center shareholders it's
their leftovers that were.
and so I think we should look at
tightening that up as we move
forward have the HSD sit down
with the secretaries have
agencies figure out we really
tightened up some that stringent
stuff I I I understand I live in
Gallup you can go to the
Hogsback and still walk in the
cold and the uranium mining get
yellow cake can do whatever you
want with that but I think that
is some of corporate
responsibility to do that I
understand that we want to make
use this money to have hearings
in do that so what comes out of
these should be a requirement
that didn't get into the ETA
that needs to.
Tighten up and make them
fiscally responsible for that so
that's my only comment we have
do fast motion from Senator sure
second by Senator
Rodriguez we call the roll.
Senator is excused Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
The DS excused Senator share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods used Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz
eight two zero thank you and
thank you Representative and
Senator and I want to thank
Representative arena after
Penske for the work you've done
in this year co sponsoring this
bill thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam co chair.
Thank you should think Chile.
Yes he was in my office
yesterday.
And and I told them to address
me Representative.
Tell me dress me is not that
one.
Thank you.
Anybody that means the number
one Mexican in have a.
Senator Hemphill we do have an
amendment for this bill
so.
The amendment for discussion.
Second the motion to move
amendment for inspection
purposes
The one thing the man yes thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee so that man might just
increases the distribution from
a hundred and twenty five
million that that the House
appropriations
amended the bill to and.
It increases it two hundred and
fifty million.
Thank any discussion on the
amendment yes I do I just want
to make sure we're on the same
page I did just say it increases
that from one hundred and twenty
five because of the amendment
says hundred led to the Mr
chairman and senator at the in
house appropriations they
amended the bill so the rich and
all distribution was a hundred
million and they increased it to
five million so Mr Chairman were
increasing it to a hundred and
fifty million I see okay got it
all right.
Wait wait wait yeah as the house
floor amendment.
Try not tracking the house yeah.
Districts.
Thank you house
yeah I just we have a motion on
the amendment right the past we
had it for discussion of the to
pass on the amendment so we can
understand what your question on
the man sure.
Senator do you know how the
department feels about this
early childhood programs.
Of the bill the.
Mmhm Mr chairman I'd like to
also introduce my expert witness
Kelly and from LFC staff and do
you want to speak to them Mr
chair members the committee I I
don't focus be on behalf of the
agency but I will say that what
the amendment does do is
increased twenty five million
dollars to go to child care
assistance which was a priority
for the executive to increase
funding for but I believe there
is somebody from the department
the audience if you would like
them to work much for someone
and.
Mr chairman members of enough to
choose might either new and.
There was no there.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and green roommate
with the department and I I I
understand that this amount is
in house bill two and therefore
would be necessary in the
department does not object to it
thanks thank you we'll have.
Any objection conducting them.
I see none we're on the bill any
questions on the bill.
The US amended motion for two
passed by Senator.
Seconded by Senator Campos.
Call the roll.
Senator Burt is excused Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla.
Excuse Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods excuse to Senator
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz yes
yes eight zero.
Thank you Mr thank you members
thank you thank you will
probably have some more bills on
the agenda depending what the
floor does today to moral plan
on house bill two is getting
reviewed right now to make.
Sure everything is correct
there's no gramophone there's no
other errors up and so we'll
probably review house bill two
tomorrow and then
In the morning and come back in
the afternoon.
And and move house bill two
along.
Okay.
Tomorrow we may come back this
afternoon so if not we'll let
you know but tomorrow Saturday
anybody have any plans for
Saturday morning for the.
Senator Gonzales Mr chairman the
with your permission of notice
so we have some students that
walked in and maybe they could I
did want to tell us where you're
from.
Don't be shy.
Rode the bus from chaparral you
can be come on come on all you
come up.
Tomorrow you must start
reviewing stuff after.
Ninety
two
there are those where you from
and why you're here we're from
chaparral New Mexico and we
were.
We hear from NASA we were.
We're gonna be sitting on some
of the committees
in rictus observing and trying
around the state capitol.
Many else one.
The mission to make sure that
just like a conversation like
you're talking to another one of
your students.
Your god what's up
My name is Sophia and we're just
here from chopper New Mexico
we're part of a robotics team
and we competed with this
robotics and.
The agency.
What kind of robotics and added
you do in the robotics
competition
here robotics please.
Experts
yeah we place first in state
and.
We're just here to
also see really Madrid because
these are present to do so just
to see Williams.
The greatest which
Representative greater you guys
in levers next somebody's.
My name is Abraham corolla and I
mean it's great.
Methadone.
We have
Los crucis.
And they're all in middle school
yeah.
I just want to tell us.
What.
This morning.
Eighties seeking.
Next.
Between.
Tell us.
My name is Ellen.
From from from from the risk.
This is a joint to check.
I am going.
This.
What.
What.
Yeah the state.
What would make just give you
more money so you can have more
competition.
For a.
One
of.
It doesn't matter to us I feel
like this is a good opportunity
for younger kids to experience
how engineering is especially
for Hispanic kids
But it's a really good
experience to just learn how to
program and do will products and
engineer so.
Talk to.
So my name is integral Gonzales
and I just wanted to thank all
of you for funding.
The first giving us money to go
to Dallas it really really meant
a lot to us.
And thank you for giving us
money food we could compete in
that just as well and that is
active activities that we needed
so I just wanted to thank you
thank all of you guys come up
here and stand in front of us so
maybe take a picture you guys
posted to Instagram so we can
follow.
There are
You can forget about them.
Houston.
