An important part of the process
because we want to ensure that
all members of the Senate course
later on with the house of
representatives are given that
opportunity to ensure that the
resources that they are going to
allocate we'll have a fair
opportunity to not only be heard
but also to help justify if you
will the issues that they're
trying to address so the be
quite a quite a bit of
discussion as we move along but
at this time but I'd like to do
is to turn it over to miss done
Iglesias who is going to start
the presentation and she's going
to be going through if you will
of the rules what we're gonna be
doing how that process is going
to work and then from there
explain how we're going to be
working with each one of the
resources as we move forward
those that are non recurring and
those that are recurring as well
so again welcome to those that
are participating to those that
are trying to gather information
we will continue to work very
closely with you to ensure that
there is accuracy and
accountability and what we do so
Miss Iglesias please thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the subcommittee you have two
documents in front of you want
is the guidelines that was
approved by the full Senate
finance committee on the
submissions for the supplemental
general appropriation act and
the second document is an
updated list that includes a
follow up staff comments on any
individual items that were given
to you from your packet
yesterday if you made notes on
your packet from yesterday and
want to reference it the numbers
that are on here do call relate
I tried to make sure that they
do correlate with the same
numbers that were on yesterday's
packet so you could cross
reference those if you need to
but if it's okay with you Mr
chair was going to start with
reviewing the guidelines and
then we can go at page by page
on the spreadsheet I appreciate
that before we get started.
Without though members of the
subcommittee are there any
questions or any of the
suggestions that you may have
Senator Gonzales please.
Thank you.
To the new maybe just for a.
We're education the you have two
different callers.
Yes and maybe if you could tell
us that this of the absolutely
Mr chair Senator Gonzales I did
plan to go through that but yes.
Okay good well thank you all
very much so miss Iglesias will
proceed again with the
guidelines the schedule the
color coding and she is prepared
to go ahead and answer any of
the questions that you all may
have and of course as we move
forward if there are other
participants please identify
yourself as we move forward and
then help us with the responses
Miss Iglesias please thank you
Mr chair and members so
reviewing starting on the
guidelines that were approved by
the Senate finance committee the
checklist for the criteria of
items was to meet a minimum of
fifty thousand dollar threshold
this was not consistently
throughout all submissions
the second is to make sure that
partnerships also still abide by
that fifty thousand dollar
threshold all of which were
invited by in all of the
submissions by
the senators on this spreadsheet
the second or the third one is
to avoid appropriations to
specific locations that give a
localized versus a statewide
appearance this is a guideline
to it particularly for recurring
items to send to that make a
statewide appropriation versus a
local appropriation.
Yes Mr Senator wants.
Was please say that was kind of
specific to the reoccurring.
At the Mr chair Senator Woods
the non recurring yes Mr chair
Senator that that that point
that it says avoid.
A specific location.
Okay thank you and if I may just
as we go forward if there is any
other clarification to talk
about these things this is going
to go ahead and be the time to
do that because sometimes people
not only have the information
that we we get confused with
that information so we'll work
on a clarification the best we
can thank you Senator Woods
going back to miss Iglesias
please thank you Mr chairman so
in this again particularly for
recurring items you'll notice a
handful in your packet where
they have been identified as
staff that do send recurring
dollars to a specific County or
location I'm it is up to this
committee how you would like
your staff to proceed forward
with notifying Sanchez the
primary reason for putting in
this guideline was for things
that send to a very specific
location because this is a
supplemental appropriation bill
it is subject to line item veto
therefore that it is possible
that those specific locations
could be be towed out from the
bill or the the item could be
vetoed entirely so ones that do
a statewide appropriation are
much more likely to remain
within the bills but it is up to
the committee on whether or not
you would like staff to notify
Sanchez to take out those
specific locations or not so we
will wait guidance from you once
for going through the spread
sheet on those particular items.
Item number four on the
checklist appropriates to
funding to a state agency only.
this is something that will
address and was invited by in
the spreadsheet are in all of
the submissions or can be easily
rectified for those that didn't
quite write it down but it can
be done
the next one is does not
earmarked for a specific
business or a proprietary good
or service this is an issue that
will go through later once we
get into the spreadsheet another
is built on the needs of an
existing program for reoccurring
revenue this was one where we
ran into some issues in
reviewing these where there are
some creation of new programs
for recurring in these items and
again this is something that us
and staff would be looking for
your guidance as the
subcommittee on whether or not
the sponsor would need to
resubmit that and for a
different appropriation.
And then the last one is that
nonrecurring appropriation
should not imply a recurring
budget impact this is something
that you will see quite a bit on
your spreadsheet that a fair
number of the brick nonrecurring
appropriations would do things
like build up services for
certain types of programs or
agencies because that is
nonrecurring funding it's
entirely possible to send that
money for that purpose but more
likely than not those new
services would be implemented
and deployed four one fiscal
year only and then the
additional services would have
to go away because that funding
was non reoccurring so those
issues are flagged for the
committee as well.
For now I will go to the
spreadsheet and I'll explain the
color coding that we have here
and we can just go item by item
for the members.
Okay so starting on page one.
You'll notice here as we look
throughout the entire
spreadsheet most things if it is
recurring it's noted within our
on the left hand side of the
column and it has a little blue
item there to indicate that that
is a recurring expense all of
the first items we go through
the recurring items and then
we'll follow up to the
nonrecurring flagged issues are
in the staff SSE staff comments
column there will be orange and
yellow comments if it isn't a
yellow COVID it is something
that the SSC staff have flagged
as the potential inconsistency
with the guidelines or potential
issue with the language as it's
been submitted.
if it is all range then your
staff his still flagged this
issue but we have had a chance
to follow up with the sponsor
and get more information and so
if you have questions on those
we could follow up on those as
well for expediency as I go
through this list I will refer
to the items by the number that
is in the column and I will only
focus on the ones that have been
flagged but if you have any
questions on anything please
feel free to ask us and we will
answer as best we can.
So on page one item number five.
After following up with the
sponsor we found out that this
relates to appropriations in
Senate bill thirty one our house
bill forty six this would likely
be a contingent appropriations
since those bills do creates
brand new programs there for us
had conversations with the
sponsor to make them aware that
this appropriation could be fine
but if it were to proceed
forward in the need and in the
supplemental appropriation bill
in this bill on that it would
likely be contingent upon the
passage of that legislation in
order to create that program.
Please proceed Senator Woods.
So when we say that we don't
need to put that contingency in
the.
In the second column here.
Mr chair Senator ones that'll be
at the council service will give
them the directive to say this
is this relates to this bill
this bill creates the program it
likely needs to be in contention
appropriation the council
service will help us make that
determination.
Thank you this.
Continuing on to page two you
see items here that are in
yellow all of these are
directing recurring funding into
a specific location or a
specific County again these are
simply flat
per the guidelines it is up to
you on whether or not you would
like staff to notify Sanchez to
remove those specific locations
if not they can remain in the
bill but again
this is a an appropriation bill
there for could be subject to
line item veto on if there's no
questions on page two I'll move
on to page three professionals
Senator Gonzales playful Mr
chairman of I would suggest that
we would notify the
individual so little of its
flight.
I'm having a hard time hearing
you is your microphone on.
Yes.
The so so if I maybe for
we go back to Mr to Senator
Gonzales to go ahead and read
ask this question one of the
things as we move forward we
just need to be very careful in
terms of how we're identifying
the Sanchez and and and their
projects so I'm gonna go back to
Senator Gonzales who oppose the
question and then from there
miss Iglesias if you if you help
us to respond to that please
hold Mr chairman the I really
don't have a question that just
based on what to informed us
about the Miller caller quoted
B. L. that that's coming from
stuff the the my suggestion
would be is to notify the
individuals that are sponsoring
this to let him know that
there's a flag and you know
hello have a mark on the.
Miss Iglesias I know that you've
already started to to do that
see may indicate of what that
process is and what you're doing
when it comes to fighting of
those particular areas of
concern then I'm gonna go back
to Senator Gonzales and Casey
has some additional comments.
Yes Mr chair we we will make a
note that those issues have been
flagged and find a way to follow
up with the sponsors to at least
let them know that that issue
was flagged so they're aware
sure his point it means that
you'll go back to the sponsor
and an address that specific
issue is that correct Mr chair
that is correct thank you very
much that's fine Mr center
probably a please.
I think chairman I am second
Senator Gonzales is COVID there
but also had one of the
following full stop on another.
Piece to this so in the SFC
staff comments there are other
numbers and recommendations from
both LFC and executive
executive
The amount yet in in the project
available project is it is the
amount column Dawn or is it.
Is is there an opportunity to go
to what is also stated in the
staff comments.
Mr chair Senator Padilla that's
a fantastic question so thank
you for bringing it up in these
comments we tried to notify for
the Senate finance committee if
these items were are in the
junior bill but if they are also
in either the LESC or Executive
recommendations for
for House Bill to just so that
you are aware that those items
are there as those issues might
come up once we get house bill
two if those appropriations are
still on house bill two when it
comes over and they are also in
junior and those would be
additive the junior bill would
be supplemental to whatever is
in house bill two
right now until we get our house
bill two until house bill two is
passed out of House
Appropriations and then out of
the house
the items that are noted as in
the LFC recommendation are in
the current introduced version
of the general appropriation act
but those are subject to change
by the house appropriations and
finance committee I may not have
updates at this point and
whether any changes were made
but this is simply for the
information of the committee so
that you can know if other funds
have also been identified for
this purpose one of the other
points and I'm gonna go back to
to miss Iglesias but whenever we
start to go and see our
appropriations bills cross we
want to make sure that the
information is coordinated and
of course that if there are any
issues that those we brought to
the attention of both the house
and the Senate so miss this
is you may lose some of that
discussion that you're already
having to ensure that we can
streamline the resources that
we're going to be expanding.
Mr chair absolutely I'm happy to
share anything that I'm aware of
at this point.
So so Mister chairman I'm sorry
if I could just maintain my spot
on the floor so
This can everybody just look at
page thirteen of twenty seven
line one ten.
Is
the amount that was allocated
was three hundred and the in the
mouth SFC sent finance
committees that recommendations
LFC recommended recommends
increases.
LFC recommendation increases by
one hundred of one hundred four
point three thousand so is that
what what this four hundred four
point three thousand lined up in
language that we sent back to
the house floor.
Is it still remaining three
hundred and then.
One of four point three has to
be at somewhere else this chart
Mr chair Senator Padilla
so the the increase that is
there from the LFC wreck that
means currently and the General
Appropration Act for house bill
two there's a plan to increase
funding for this purpose by that
hundred and four thousand on
this supplemental GA eight would
add three hundred thousand to
that so by the passage of both
of these bills that four hundred
cumulative would be there unless
of course something would change
and house bill two as it moves.
So that makes that makes total
sense thank you Mr chairman I
wanted to follow one of these
examples all the way through the
understand how that works so so
the amount that we've allocated
moves whatever the the staff
recommended the the LFC
recommendations is that correct
center for the you're correct
yes.
all right great thank you I just
want to follow one of these only
extracts today thank you I'm
learning a lot Mr chairman thank
you thank you senator we
appreciate that Miss Iglesias
please thank you thank you Mr
chairman again as you're looking
through this there may be little
questions that you see that are
not flagged on the staff comment
section here some of these are
questions for staff to follow up
with with Council Service these
maybe drafting issues only
questions you know should we we
work the language for this does
it need to go to one specific
program or underneath a program
that is within a different
agency those are things that we
will follow up with with council
service so you'll see those
questions here but they are not
flagged for this committee
because that's something that
staff can do in the background
with council service and with
the sponsor if necessary.
If there are no more questions
on page two are will move to
page three.
Item number twenty seven were
able to follow up with the
sponsor this is an existing
program that builds on prior
junior bill probation it does
direct funding to a specific
location.
Because of please.
Thank you Mr chairman the done
item twenty four and twenty five
one million and one is of
Senator had a meal.
Then there for the same purpose
so is that correct the way they
are.
Our should be just be one.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales you're
absolutely right those need to
be combined so thank you for
pointing that out to us we have
tried in putting together this
to combine all items that need
to be combined as best we could
but if this committee notified
or notices any that do need to
be combined we'll be sure to do
that also will make a note that
those need to be combined.
Thank you very much Senators up
miss Iglesias please.
If they're not questions on page
three I'll move along to page
four.
There is a question on item
number twenty eight on whether
this is creating a new program
this is one that we were not
able to follow up with the
sponsor yesterday so we still
have an outstanding call out to
find out whether or not this is
a new program item number twenty
nine is a new use of this
existing purpose of the program
itself already exists but this
would be using that program in a
new way.
And then items number of thirty
two and thirty three our flag
because they send recurring to a
specific location there's a
question item number thirty
whether it should go to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration that is something
will follow up with Council
Service on so before we continue
as your meeting with the Sanchez
what type of reception are you
receiving regarding some of
these suggestions or or this
information absolutely Mr chair
members of the committee in my
conversations with sponsors that
I have been able to get in touch
with particularly around items
that are creating brand new
programs they understood that
the SSC guidelines were not to
create new programs and said
that if the the committee were
to send it back to them to
change the purpose of the
appropriation that they were
able to make that change so that
it would not be creating a new
program so the the reception
that we have received so far
from the comments we've had from
Sanchez is a willingness to work
with the Senate finance
guidelines and around with the
what the committee determines is
the best way to proceed forward
I appreciate that and then just
to let the the members know that
this is very informal today so
as you go forward and you do
have some questions or
suggestions we're gonna do our
best to try to respond thank you
miss Iglesias please thank you
and there are no additional
questions Senator Gonzales your
page for yes page more of a list
of school at school so on the
working copy for a height of
twenty million.
It's not tell.
If you don't have it highlighted
with a yellow and then on the
new one it is so it is that
because you came after and you
found it that it was.
Chair Senator Gonzales yes after
reviewing the list I notice that
I had not flagged one that was
because it was an existing
program when I first did the
review I didn't flag it but then
I realized and further review
that it is a brand new use of an
existing program therefore I
thought I should at least bring
it to the subcommittee's
attention.
One of the things that you're
gonna you're gonna hear often on
that is going to be that we're
going to continue to go ahead
and scrub the list so please
proceed thank you.
Moving on to page five.
item number thirty five
identifies a very specific
organization I have already
spoken with a sponsor about
reworking the language of this
that proposed language is here
in orange the sponsor was very
receptive to this and is
perfectly willing to work with
us and council service to get
the correct language in the
bill.
And then for items number forty
and forty one this is planned
for your attention it it does
send referring to a specific
location there is a note in here
the LFC is recommendation for
House Bill to also increase this
program statewide by the amount
that was listed but these would
send additional amounts to very
specific locations within this
program.
The state.
Mr chair Senator Woods please.
Okay so those are going to go
back to the sponsor and ask if
they want to re word this is
what I understand Mr glasses yes
yes Mr chair Senator Woods it we
can go back to the sponsor and
and notify them the question
would be whether or not the for
the question that I would have
for this committee is whether or
not you would require that to be
rewarded or whether or not we
would simply notify the sponsor
that this may be an issue and
then it have the sponsor issues
whether or not to leave it as is
or reward it I'm I would like
items from the committee on
that.
Senator was please I would I
would.
If I was doing it I would tell
them it would be a high
probability that this could be.
The the you leave it if you want
it but there's a high
probability that it will not go
through.
Mr chair that's my suggestion
point well taken anyone else to
respond to that one particular
state insurance.
Etcetera have.
Thank you Mr chairman Sir John
do you have suggested language
alternative language for that.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill
unfortunately in order to
achieve the purpose to get it to
a specific location do not have
suggested language on a way that
would do that without saying it
otherwise would that language
was look if it's left out it
will technically go to this
department for this program
statewide you could the sponsor
could follow up with the
secretary of the department and
say I've put this funding in the
junior probation is the intent
of that funding but then at that
point it would be on the the
department to implement in the
the way that it is intended
otherwise the language itself
just says to this department for
this program statewide I think
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Senator Hemphill
center was that's it all right
Miss Iglesias please thank you
Mr chairman thing on to page
six.
Item number forty five has
identified a specific
organization to which this is
being directed there is also an
outstanding question on whether
or not this is an organization
that already receives funding
for the department's it is still
in yellow because we have not
been able to reach the sponsor
about this yet but it is one we
will be following up on.
Things that we also need to
stress with the support that we
have with the outreach that
we're going to have with.
Agencies and others do we have
the required or necessary
person to continue to respond to
these because I'm sure once we
get this to the to the
individual sponsors they're
going to be other questions and
there could be additional
outreach so how how is that
being we're.
Mr chair Senator Campos you're
looking at the two who are on
this task and we're doing the
best that we can in order to
follow up with everyone myself
I've been contacting Sanchez and
being in touch Adrian I'm allow
our staff offer Senate finance
will be the main point of
contact for council service to
help with drafting and to also
get in touch with Sanchez on
questions I'm in any questions
that come up during the drafting
process we're doing our best to
reach out to everyone and make
sure that non slip through the
cracks but with it is just the
two of us.
Understood Senator Woods please.
Mr chair.
Districts straight to the
nonprofit.
And these contracts should go
out is a bit contract so I have
a real hard byrd  doing it this
way.
so.
To to keep government operating
as government.
we need to go to the sponsor
Intel on that point in my
opinion Sir.
It's point well taken the
sicknesses please Mr chair
Senator Woods that is exactly
the type of thing we're
following up on Sanchez to fix
that language so that no
nonprofit organization is
explicitly identified in the
legislation so for example if
you turn back to page.
page five item thirty five that
is an example of how
At eight initiatives to send to
a specific organization would be
resubmitted in the bill in order
to give on that entity
flexibility to contract for
these types of services without
explicitly identifying who that
would be.
So that we're following that
exact guideline.
There was plenty of taken very
public in here though rocks.
Moving but I'm checking the ID
yes I'll tell you one thing is
just like water in a bottle it's
it's going from one end to the
other I appreciate that thank
you Senator Woods miss Iglesias
please at thank you Mr chair
moving on to page seven there's
an item flag on number fifty
again because this is just a
sense to a very us specific
location but this is a
appropriation that builds on a
prior appropriation and the
junior bill here we have
language for what was in junior
bill last year if there is a
desire to use the same language
from last year
from the sponsor or to let the
language go as this is and I
think fund the conversations we
had with the sponsor that this
would likely be up to Council
Service on whether or not the
new language would be used or
the prior language would be used
so if I may miss Iglesias I want
to go ahead and Adrian if you
can help us a little bit
particularly with the the
language itself in something
like this do you have any
suggestions for clarification.
Mr chair in terms of the
language until I ate directly
talk with the drafter and
figuring out the the nuances for
recurring specifically in
situations where it might be
going.
Location
I can't provide you with anymore
information okay and I I'm just
going to go back to reiterate
our purpose is to try to get
this as clean as possible so
that it would be considered by
the by the governor for a
possible adoption if I this was
were to pass thank you Mr
chairman miss temple please
thank you for thank you Mr
chairman
My question is would it be
cleaner to just say to design
construct and plan
bicycle race in New Mexico or.
Just bicycle race I'm Mr chair
Senator Hemphill yes that would
be cleaner but again it would be
non specific to the location so
that it would require follow up
with the departments to say this
is the intent of this
To make sure that it goes for
the intended purpose so yes it
would be cleaner by leaving
the location out
but if the intent is for that
location that would require
follow up with the department
okay thank you Mr chairman done.
I'm wondering if maybe we could
just change the wording to of
road
road bicycle race.
Because I don't think there are
any other road races in in New
Mexico there's obviously
mountain bike races but this
might be the only or we could
say multi stage road bicycle
race.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill we can
follow up offline on that but I
think that that would be a good
suggestion thank you Mr chairman
and senator Hemphill if I may
one of the important things to
do is to follow up with those
that are involved and the reason
for that you do want that
commitment so that if it does
come to the appropriation if
it's going to go ahead and meet
it's intended to purpose so
thank you thank you very much I
think that any other questions
of the okay center probably a
place I'm sorry I I I thought I
heard you Kaufer wasn't too sure
what it was center for the
please.
I'm not politicians chairman is
not on mute and I'm just running
in circles inside my office.
Okay so any questions any any
thoughts.
No no just the ones that have
already thank you all right
thank you center for the anyone
else see no one else and Senator
Gonzales now.
Please proceed thank you Mr
chair and and just on the point
that you just paid in terms of
making sure the sponsors are
fully aware of any changes that
are made that's actually a
requirement from the council
service on the original forms
that were sent so that's another
thing that as we follow up with
every single one of the sponsors
for any change that they make to
the language to the agency for
the amounts any change that they
make they do have to sign an
initial there originally
submitted form so that's an
additional step of follow up
with the staff will have to do
to make sure that they indicate
on the form or they send us an
email so we have something in
writing that says they
understand that this change was
made and that they agree to it
and that we we will have all of
that documentation that we
there's no concern by any member
that a change was made without
their awareness this is a really
appreciate that because in the
past there have been situations
where the resources went for
another project and so with that
that in mind in essence what
happened was it wasn't the
Sanchez intent so it's good to
go ahead here that clarification
and I hope that every member of
the subcommittee caught that
because those are the kind of
things that in time definitely
serve where we don't have the
resources necessary to fully
fund the projects as we
intended.
Any other questions scene and
then moving on Miss Iglesias
please thank you Mr chairman on
to page eight this item number
fifty six I'm is creating a
brand new program I did have a
conversation with the sponsor
the sponsor was very agreeable
that if the subcommittee were to
send this back that that funding
could be allocated for a
different purpose.
Thank you please proceed I item
number sixty sends this plan
because it sends to a specific
location.
And we've already addressed that
so will absolutely and then if
there's no other questions on
page eight moving to page nine
at item number sixty nine does
create a brand new program that
was confirmed with the sponsor
again in conversation with the
sponsor that if this committee
decides to send that back and
require this be submitted for a
different purpose that is not
creating a new program they are
amenable to doing so.
Senator was placed on that
particular one.
You might tell the sponsor that
that money could go to the
cooperative extension service
this is a program and.
Of Lucia county at that
particular.
Research firm that deals with.
Nine then you.
Station.
Thanks very much station.
In so when with the corporate
extension service it would be
the department of agriculture
and not to Department that coach
it would be the and research
extension AgResearch.
Experiment station Mr LA you you
you have a point on that.
Mr chairman members of the
committee that perfect place
where the money would go would
be the agricultural experiment
station they do have a better
cultures to please not
appropriation was made several
years ago and we're not doing
the research and medical care so
the thanks for the special.
Thank you very much Senator
Woods that's that's.
Hello would you says Mr Hogarth
you're voting for the right
things aren't you.
Thank you just just real quick
as we move along that's going to
be another issue as we start to.
work through the list as we talk
to people that already have
existing projects
we'll do our best to try not to
convoluted this this process so
within that if you do not people
that are working on projects or
have some thoughts or ideas
regarding that that's really
work on the communication to to
try to go and see if we can
clarify some of those points
Miss Iglesias I don't know if
you have anything else on that
issue I'm not on that point Mr
chair.
but if there are no further
questions on these two pages
I'll move on to page ten.
It's ten item number seventy
five you will notice that it is
indicated out even though we're
going through recurring items is
now indicated as nonrecurring as
because it was a conversation
with the sponsor that the
sponsor had sent a recurring
funding to an item that was a
nonrecurring capital request
following up with the sponsor
they were able to revise their
form to send this particular
item to non recurring and then
take another item for a similar
for the exact same amount and
move that to recurring at a more
appropriate place which you'll
notice further down on this list
so that conversation has been
had with the sponsoring the
agreement has been had that this
item will now be a nonrecurring
appropriation.
Senator was what do you think
about that.
Mr chair the LFC says that's a
new program.
is that a new programmers are
not in the program is chairs is
my question Mr chair Senator
Campos and LESC might want to to
chime in but my understanding is
they were identifying this as
eighty eight something that is
not already done within this
agency and that is true but that
is because that is a capital
request so it's a brand new
thing it's not something that's
currently in the recurring
budget
and that is why we have asked
the sponsor to move this to
nonrecurring.
Thank you senator Miss Iglesias
please I thank you Mr chair item
number seventy seven has been
identified by LFC is a new
program
Sliq goes to a specific campus
within
NMSC you and my assumption is an
LFC might want to follow up is
that they currently do not have
these programs on this campus
with the LFC is that
amenable to to to to move
forward we can further research
but I are precursory research
issues no existing the committee
wants to continue that is up to
the committee thank you I think
the outreach to and indicate of
course that this is a new
program and see how we can go
and rectify this this issue.
Any other questions.
The line Miss Iglesias please
thank you Mr chairman being on
to page eleven.
There is an item here item
number eighty eight was a flag
in your documents yesterday it
is now flags differently in your
documents today that was from
conversation and follow up with
the sponsor this amount is
actually related to Senate bill
eighty thousand to eighty is a
appropriation bill that provides
funding to conduct research for
the possible adoption of the
Health Security Act it builds on
prior appropriations that were
made in order to fund research
relative to a possible adoption
of Health Security Act
the Senate bill eighty does a
total appropriation of one point
five million there are a handful
of Sanchez to have coordinated
together
to put funding for this purpose
this particular item was in
recurring there will other items
on the list that you will see
where funding was put in non
recurring so there is a bit of a
disconnect more in between
recurring and non recurring
funding for this specific
purpose reaches occurring for us
to go and continue to look and
see if we can clean that up yes.
etcetera etcetera was an
incentive for the or either way
I'll let you off the point real
quickly sorry Senator Padilla
Real quickly it this is for
study.
It should be a one time
expenditures I would think so I
wouldn't see what would be
recruit I reoccurring it should
be a nonrecurring in my opinion
Mr chair thank you thank you
miss Iglesias it any point to to
work on with that particular
issue Mr chair Senator was all
need to do a secondary look at
Senate bill eighty I do notice
that what part of the language
that was put here is the
language has to hire staff if
the intent is to actually hire
Full time staff who would be
researching this particular
issue that could technically be
a recurring expense
but it also has to contract with
consultants and therefore we
need would be an typically a
nonrecurring we can follow up
again with the sponsor I maybe
cleaning up the language perhaps
removing the reference to the
permanent staff and pass the
sponsor if they have room within
their other appropriations to
perhaps move this to
nonrecurring thank you miss
Iglesias and our backs Senator
Woods and and a center for the
assembly that's all I have.
Center for the a please.
Thank you Mr chairman so on page
eleven of a COVID as well as a
the question on a separate
matter so online eighty seven
that really does seem to me like
well first of all it's a pretty
hefty price tag I think it's a
paid consultant to I believe
that's to help determine the
best approach to procuring
Health benefits right I think
state employees similar to that
committee but that this is that
does seem to me to be able to a
nonrecurring items at four
hundred grand I mean if you
can't do that kind of work it
for four hundred thousand one
year study really is.
That seems a little off
community.
So what I would move I would
want to move that is
nonrecurring.
Because we don't really need to
go through the procurer the
consulting services of procuring
healthcare every year so I'm not
quite sure why we would I did
maybe every five years but not
every year.
Point Mexico access please Mr
chair Senator Padilla at have
followed up with the Sanchez on
this particular item one the
sponsor believes that a study of
this particular size and scope
would likely need to be
contracted at roughly a million
dollars there is also on page
twenty five line number two
thirty eight additional non
reoccurring funding that is for
the exact same item in attempts
to get to the the particular
announced that they think would
be needed to contract for a
study of the science I have also
talked with the sponsor about
the recurring versus
nonrecurring items again when we
put things in legislation and we
intend for them to be recurring
ultimately it is up to the
department of finance and
administration to score them as
recurring or nonrecurring and I
did let the sponsor know that
because this was contracting for
consulted to perform a study
that this would actually
probably be scored by DFA as a
nonrecurring expense and would
only go into this agencies
budget as a nonrecurring expense
the Sanchez were informed and
aware that that was likely the
case and we're perfectly okay
with that as long as that
funding would be achieved and
this year and next fiscal year
per the bill in order to make
sure that that study could be
conducted but they are aware
that that would not be scored by
DFA as recurring even if we put
it in the bill
and identify it here that we
need for it to be and on that
same point Senator was that
might be something similar for
item number eighty eight.
that you had identified.
So when we put something in the
supplemental junior
appropriation act anything that
are identified as non
reoccurring will be expended for
fiscal year twenty to though
that funding would only go out
in fiscal year twenty to.
if we put something listed here
as reoccurring it means that
that funding is available to
that department and they can
spend it in fiscal year twenty
to or in fiscal year twenty
three with the idea or the
intent being that those fiscal
year twenty three items within
become part of the reoccurring
budget however again it's
ultimately up to DFA to score
and decide whether something is
recurring or nonrecurring so
like on item number eighty eight
it's entirely possible that DFA
would say that is actually a
nonrecurring expense and so that
funding can be available for FY
twenty two in FY twenty three
but it will not be built into
recurring agency budgets part of
the reason that I make that note
is so because members only have
specific allocations so much
that they can spend reoccurring
and so much that they can spend
in line we occurring it might be
difficult if not impossible for
them to just move the funding
economic reoccurring because we
don't have room in that bucket
so to speak but the sponsor we
could make them perfectly aware
that this is likely to be scored
as a non reoccurring item even
though they have listed it with
the intent to be recurring here.
Thank you center for the please.
Okay when I asked that question
this call will come find a way
to get this done expeditiously
and also want to make sure that
we're not putting something that
is I don't see that being done
every year so just if you can
please keep that top of mind
when you for your thinking out
exactly where this is to be so
full stop on that Mr chairman I
did have another question on the
on this page on my items ninety
three ninety four is the
language I'm sorry to the staff
comments
on ninety four related to the
governor's a program for
immediate literacy.
Miss Iglesias please Mr chair
Senator Padilla I am unaware of
the answer to that question what
and the agent can answer that Mr
chair so the line item ninety
three is for a statewide media
literacy program that's an
existing program well line item
ninety four would actually focus
on a specific program offered
out of UNM I believe.
Okay.
Center for the.
Mr chairman that's exactly what
I was thinking is this is the
town's area.
I hi Mr chair I believe so.
Yes this.
What would be the would be
sending that money to the.
I I I do that if I may I'd like
to also ask your indulgence
conform to us center
consolidates because he has some
direct information regarding
that specific question.
This is actually perfect Mr
chairman I thought this might be
Mr Senator Gonzales program I'm
happy to hear.
Senator Gonzales please all Mr
Chairman you know the of this is
a house project and the reason
for going to public education
department would be is because
they're working with all.
With the school you know not not
to your amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman I was I
was really hoping that's what I
would here so that's great I
know that that group that has
pushed for this funding has
pushed for several years to get
that thing but we haven't funded
so that's really great this is
all coming together now I just
want to make sure it doesn't get
clouded with with the statewide
initiative and that it goes to
the intended purpose they're at
UNM houses in the local school
district
Thank you very much Senator for
the I think you Senator Gonzales
any other questions or points
regarding this one specific
issue seen and then I'm going to
back to Miss Iglesias please.
Thank you Mr chair moving on to
page twelve.
Item number ninety seven after
follow up with the sponsor of
was determined to be directly
related to bills that are
And up for consideration right
now during this legislative
session I did also notify the
sponsor that this would likely
be a contingent appropriation
since the at those bills do
create a diversity office within
the state personnel office that
this appropriation would be
contingent upon the creation of
that office through those bills
therefore if the bills were not
to pass the content The
appropriation would likely not
go through.
and the the sponsor understood
that item that we may need to
work on building on some of the
language that was there for the
purpose but that's something
that we can do with council
service.
also flag tier item number one
oh one this appears to be
eighteen at noon our PS Pierre
in new initiative for for this
particular agency we've not had
a chance yet to follow up with
the sponsor but do you plan to
do so.
Any questions please press three
thank you Mr chair on to page
thirteen there are no items
flags here but this does
indicate that the total amounts
that have been appropriated for
this purpose is within the total
funding amount that has been
allotted to the Senate for
junior bill appropriations so we
do have those correct totals.
Moving on to page fourteen
you'll notice that a
nonrecurring items are listed in
yellow on the left hand side and
it's a light yellow
You'll also notice item number
one seventeen this is the item
that I was referring to from
earlier that was switched from
recurring to non recurring where
there was a trade we do believe
that this would be an
appropriate move to a
reoccurring expense for the for
the Sanchez desire to do so and
have gotten signed off on their
important to make that change
again these were exact dollar
amount changes so it does not
affect the bottom line totals.
Item number one twenty two
in discussions with the sponsor
found out this is this is
directly related to house bill
twelve
house bill twelve does send
funding specifically to this
national not
Not necessarily to but it works
with this national nonprofit
organization to establish a New
Mexico program all of this
national organization
American service is a
he a nonprofit organization that
serves veterans across the
country the intent is to
establish a New Mexico
location for this.
it would be
Consistent well it is attempting
to do in house bill twelve we
may need some additional follow
up to see if a single one time
appropriation for this
particular purpose would
actually be sufficient to do
with the sponsors of the instant
tending on LFC has flooded
though that this would likely be
a recurring expense but this is
only allocating nonrecurring
funding to this expense
Mr chair this again even house
bill twelve.
It sounds as though it's a
direct appropriation to a
nonprofit which is a legal to
do.
In the state of New Mexico far
as I know so even though this.
Says even if it's tied to house
bill twelve I don't see how.
We can do that course I've got
my law degree.
On TV.
That.
That's that's what I think Mr
chair thank you very much and
we're going to go to some more
explanation but before we do
that I want to go to Senator
Diamond Senator Diamond please
thank you Mr chairman I just
expressed the same concerns I
would question allocating any
junior money to a nonprofit as
we know that's that's not
allowable and then under current
law I would question the
legality Dennis H. B. twelve
creating a nonprofit that would
be funded with state funds so.
By all accounts with that bill
passes or not there seems to be
simply out legality concerns
with that appropriation.
A common thing in terms of of
some of these things that we're
talking about so point well
taken thank you Senator Diamond.
If any issued any other
questions related to this I
don't see any.
Go ahead miss Iglesias thank you
Mr chair policies for that I was
just going to follow up we can
follow up with the sponsor
similar to other items that are
attempting to send to a specific
organization we can try to work
with the sponsor to revise the
language in a way that would be
allowable or instruct the
sponsor to submit for a
different purpose.
I'm going to unless there are
questions on page fifteen I'll
skip past page fifteen we have
not flagged issues
On those items.
Moving on to page seventeen
item number one forty two.
there has been
A request to re work the
language for this particular
item so that it will pair with
eighty appropriation that is
being made to a very similar
item this item here will relate
to item number one fifty two the
sponsors of these two items
realize that their language did
not line up and one of them one
of the languages did attempt to
send a specific organization so
we are working with the Sanchez
out we have identified here in
the call on what the language
change would be and those two
items will be combined together.
The thank you those were all the
items on sixteen and seventeen
so I will move on
to page eighteen we have.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair at on page
eighteen
It sorry we we got our color
coding makes that for these two
items of a for item one sixty
one this does sent to a specific
location and then for item one
sixty eight this presents to a
specific organization.
Up both of which will likely
need to be followed up with the
sponsor.
Thank you this receipt.
On page nineteen item number one
seventy six again descends
funding to a very specific
organization that will be
visitation providing grant
program for mentorship one we
would at least need to rework
the language for the
organization but we also have
questions on whether or not
state funding could be used to
Then for go to a program that
provides grant funding so we
have some outstanding questions
on that to see what we need to
do we know at the very least we
need to rework the language but
we may need to find an
alternative purpose for the
funding.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Moving on to page twenty item
number one ninety two
This item was identified by LFC
is a new program in discussion
with the Sanchez
there was identification that's
built on a previous junior bill
funding that was given to D. O.
H.
In last year's junior bill if it
were to be consistent with that
language the reference in
parentheses of course would need
to be stricken as well as
removing the all of the language
after that following through
that third line their
programming for use the
remaining language it struck it
would be identical to last
year's junior bill appropriation
have any discussions with the
sponsor on that one and the
discussion with the sponsors of
the desire is to do what was
done last year since this was a
junior
if there are no questions on
page twenty one I will skip past
that since we do not have
flagged items.
On page twenty two.
Item number two twelve after
discussion with the sponsor this
is creating a brand new program
this survey is not currently
done and the desire is to have
That funding to establish the
survey to collect the data that
is attempting to collect
it was it will be up to the
committee on whether or not by
establishing this new survey if
that will be allowed or if we
would like them to resubmit for
a purpose that is not creating
something new this is a
nonrecurring funding to do a
survey and doesn't have the same
types of concerns that creating
brand new programs for recurring
might have since this would be
one time funding to do a one
time survey it's up to the
committee to allow that there is
also a note here that the US
survey program in discussing
with the sponsor they do provide
student incentives to do this
survey but they have let us know
that state funding could be
entirely excluded from the
student incentives for those
programs they could raise other
funding in order to provide
those students ended so we have
no I. anti donation clause
issues and the funding here in
the junior bill would only be
for the expenses necessary to do
the survey.
The question.
Mr chair Senator Woods please.
I know that.
Fifty thousand dollars to do a
survey.
This extensive.
Some like it can't be done to
me.
I I have my concerns about.
Funding this.
They have three hundred thousand
dollars that they could put into
this.
If this was important I'd like
for you to go back to the
Sanchez.
And.
Narrow this down.
To the state a.
Very doable survey of fifty
thousand dollars survey of some
kind if they're going to do this
I have my concerns about it
being a new program.
But it's the Sanchez decision
whether they want to risk fifty
thousand dollars I guess and on
this Senator Woods point well
taken as we go forward there are
going to be these concerns and
there are individuals who are
listening and as we do move
forward I know that some of
these will probably raise some
additional liar so as we we go
for hopefully we can clean up as
much of this is possible so that
we possibly minimize if you will
some of the the between
information if it were to occur
so thank thank you point well
taken anyone else seen and then
going back to a Miss Iglesias
the sickness please thank you Mr
chair on that point for Senator
Woods for in discussion with the
sponsor we were also discussing
the request of the funding
information they do believe that
fifty thousand would be
sufficient when combined with
their other private fundraising
of sources to be able to do this
particular survey
but I will again follow up with
the sponsor just to make sure
because your your points are
well taken Mr chair.
On that point.
They've already picked out a
particular nonprofit that would
help fund this.
And basically just Mr chair
Senator was if I could follow up
now with the secretary of the
department this is okay.
Thank you madam thank you Mr
thank you for okay anyone else.
When back to miss Iglesias
please.
Thank you Mr chair moving on.
And to page twenty three.
Item number.
To fifteen this was identified
by LFC is a new program this is
something that will need to
follow up with the sponsor on
just to make sure that this
didn't receive any prior funding
and we have a suggestion here
and there maybe it at an
alternative location where this
needs to go into.
item number two seventeen you'll
notice that the language when it
says to the sit to sustain the
rent and utilities staff have a
question on potential anti
donation issues but that's
something the council service
can help us resolve if council
service determines that there is
an issue with that then we can
go back to the sponsor but
otherwise it Council Service
determines that this language is
not an issue then we likely
would not follow up with sponsor
on that piece and so if I may
not to go and speak for the
Legislative Council Service but
they'll be a pricing and members
of the potential anti donation
issues that may surface.
Thank you.
Please proceed.
Thank you Mr chair there's no
additional questions on page
twenty three.
Moving on to page twenty four
when I spoke earlier about
Senate bill eighty items to
thirty five two and two thirty
six AM after speaking with the
sponsors of these two particular
items do intended this to go for
the purpose of Senate bill
eighty
and have
I'd like more funding to be
combined for this purpose
there is a question outstanding
on
Senate Bill at two thirty seven
That we need to get back in
touch with the sponsor the
language is
directly
eight eight copy of.
The other Senate bill eighty
language that was in.
the recurring items for item
number eighty eight so the
language is exactly the same it
is sending it to the same agency
but the sponsor did not identify
Senate bill eighty is the
purpose and it's also different
from the language from the other
Sanchez who were getting funding
to Senate bill eighty so we need
to follow up with them to make
sure that we fully understand if
all of these findings is are
intended to be a consolidated
and then if they are we need to
have consistently which for all
of those appropriation so that
is something staff will be
following up on.
Senator Gonzales please.
The world.
The.
Mr chair just.
Thank Senator I was that we can
follow up with you right after
this to make sure that we we get
that correct.
Thank you please proceed.
Thank you Mr chair.
Moving on to page twenty five.
Item number two forty four here
is flagged for your
for your preference this does
explicitly identifying nonprofit
this is also an instance in
which this was an exact thing
that was done in last year's
junior bill the language here
from last year's junior bill is
copied over so it would be one
that explicitly identified
organization
that the public education
department does currently work
with but the organization was
specified in last year's junior
bill and a desire again is to
specify it in this year's junior
bill
But let me go ahead and go to
Senator Woods and then I don't
Senator Diamond that you want in
on this as well okay Senator was
pleased of.
Mr chair even though that was
specified last year with that
same language additional directs
it to a nonprofit which is.
Doesn't agree with our our rules
today so I would suggest going
to sponsor and.
And at least ask for re wording
and also let him know it's flag
that it would be stricken out of
the the bill.
Mr chair thank you okay good
Senator I agree Mr chairman I
feel like we are giving
A loophole tiered which these
agencies have to go out there's
procurement process is here in
which they have to go out for
bids for some of these contracts
and so to put language in there
is allowing him to circumvent
process the creation
transparency in government so I
too am a couple of that and if I
may thanks to that directive
because with that will continue
to work directly with the
Sanchez and again we're going to
be meeting and so we'll see what
progress we've made with some of
these if we haven't there might
be some other action will have
to be taken Senate wants us to
do you have anything else on the
you're fine.
Senator Diamond anything else
there okay thank you center
what's your okay the moving
forward Miss Iglesias please
thank you Mr chair following up
to page number twenty six.
Item number two fifty was one
documents yesterday and now has
an update in the comments
section for today I did speak
with the sponsoring this is
something that the sponsor
believes the state personal act
office already does this would
not be creating a new program or
a new function
and so I just want to note that
for your attention and then that
brings us down to page twenty
seven which is the end of the
document notifying that the
correct amounts that has been
allocated for the appropriation
bill is
what is in the requests.
Thank you thank you very much
for the presentation for the
work that you all are doing just
a couple of general comments
we're going to continue to work
to improve our capital outlay
process at times it may seem
like there's a quite a bit to go
through and again I compliment
the staff for the work that
you're doing and keeping us
informed that transparency is
very important in the
accountability of course as we
move forward is essential so
within that just to let you know
the intent now is to go back
continue to clean up if you will
of these documents and then at
the recommendations of our chair
and as a co chair or I'm sorry
as a as the chair of the
subcommittee what my intent
would be is to come back and
bring you up to date with the
the information that in our
findings so we'll be willing to
go ahead and do that but right
now what I'd like to do again my
compliments to the staff to the
people that are working on this
is to turn it over to you for
before I go to closing
statements to any questions that
that you may have of us and then
from there as the subcommittee
if there are some other
recommendations so we can
continue if you will with
improving the the supplemental
appropriations act that we're
creating any any questions thank
you Mr chair I think one
question more or less a
clarification I think I gathered
from our discussion here but I
just want to verify before we go
forward to move and speak with
Sanchez is that for particular
items we're in reoccurring it
creates a new program we would
like to notify the sponsor that
the committee would like to
stick with the guidelines and
not to create new programs for
reoccurring did I understand
that correctly.
That was my understanding and
that's the consensus of the
subcommittee thank you Mr chair
you doing do you have any
questions Mr chair
Committee my only question would
be in regard to the procurement
code right do you all want that
language in there.
As encompassing for everything
we're every agency needs to
follow the procurement code and
make explicit.
point you just want to go based
on sponsor responses and with
the sponsor would like to do.
The senator's office please.
Mr Chairman just on that point
though.
That's the wall.
There's no question.
They have to anyway.
Okay.
Thank you thank thank you very
much and I I think you heard
from of the subcommittee that it
it's the law but at the same
time this is the directive that
or the way that they would like
to proceed so I I really
appreciate that thank you for
the the clarification as we move
forward if we don't have these
questions and if we don't have
the communication it's going to
make it difficult and I don't
down the road what other issues
might surface but that's going
to be incumbent upon us to
continue to to rectify those
issues so that's fine there in
terms of other issue centers on
this place.
Of this Mr chairman are you
getting close to the close of
the yes we are I just want to
thank our staff I really do you
know I have worked with the
capital outlay for many many
years and you know you have
really put a lot of time and
really have helped to.
I think a lot of the members you
know it's also a big education
process you know of
understanding.
It'll also the more we do here
the the flows a lot better for
Legislative Council because you
know they really get you know
all of that you know to you know
if they have to have a lot of
interruptions school so the more
we do here we find it you know
it will work hello you know much
more of the efficient for them
but I really want to thank both
of you I really do.
Thank you senator Kelly a thank
you for being here.
Thank you and thank you all very
much LFC and and the other
individuals that are here I'm
gonna go to the other members
for any of the closing comments
anything that they would like to
ask that maybe they felt
surfaced after we we went
through some of this information
so I'm going to Senator Diamond
Senator Diamond please thank you
Mr chairman I have a two point
that like to make one is I'd
like to somehow is subcommittee
provide support in a little bit
of coverage for LFC staff as
they begin to gather the needed
information on here as we move
forward by Senator firm
deadlines so that so that
legislators out there understand
that they are simply trying to
do a job that we have asked them
to do and if they don't meet the
requirements I feel like many of
them it was clear what the
requirements could be and so
because they haven't met the
guidelines we're we're already
providing some sort of
flexibility here in allowing
them to make some last minute
changes but whatever type of
deadlines we we set here I just
want to be able to you feel
supported so that you're not
hanging around and again
requesting this information and
holding this process up and and
number two I also want to
address the HSD administration
and administrative fees on some
of this and I'm going to direct
you to a specific one of mine on
page ten of twenty seven.
One seventy nine I allocated
funds for FAA programs to the
Department of act and I've been
in communications with them who
will take zero percent admin fee
if I go to the college and I
know traditionally it is gone
through the college there in New
Mexico department of acted over
to the FFA office the reason why
I specifically avoided that
agencies because that particular
agency will take a five percent
cut from the funds were New
Mexico state won't I guess my
question is it would be nice for
legislators to know which
agencies here are actually
taking money off the top from
our programs because there are
there are agencies who said he
will be happy to be the fiscal
agent on that and can provide
that funding for your intended
recipient without any cost and
and as we move forward I know
that's a that's a heck of an
undertaking right now but as we
move forward I would like us to
consider coming up with the
number and capping those agency
fees I believe Mr Gonzales
shared with the story of an
agency that once took twenty
percent of his allocated amount
that he didn't know until he
followed up on the project I
would like us to consider
capping those agency fees at
some point so that's a point
well taken in terms of those
agency fees as they do fluctuate
one of the issues that we
definitely can consider would be
documenting that and pass it on
to the various institutions so
that they realize that well that
the will hopefully support our
efforts as we move forward
because what we want to these
resources to go to the
appropriations and specifically
education to our educational
institutions so again I was
there are points well taken I'm
gonna go ahead and call on on
the card is zero for a moment
please because I know a lot of
these particular questions do
surface when we're dealing with
questions and programs for our
agricultural program.
And New Mexico state so if you
have any comments levels at this
time Mr chairman of Senator
Diamond is this issue that we
have talked about before and the
administrative code does put a
cap on there for higher
education institutions so it is
an administrative code as to
what should be taken.
This way it's the same for all
institutions overall and I
believe that administrative cap
is a five percent.
Depending on the type of project
depending on the type of work
that's required and sometimes it
may very very thank you Mr
chairman I want to thank New
Mexico State University for even
though they're allowed a five
percent the not taking at and
they're very quick to distribute
that money directly to the
program without any cost to them
so thank you thank you.
The card for you you sit down
within that is there anything
that we need to do to further
expand that that particular not
only question but response to
that question so people
understand that what we're doing
is we have that flat amount but
at the same time what we're
doing is we're working to
definitely benefit the students
and in our overall operation Mr
chairman members of the
committee they administrative
code is pretty clear at least
for higher ed I'm not sure about
the other state agencies but
there is something written in
code all in a regards to that so
all of our finance officers
throughout the state should
build about that specific
language as part of training in
the future maybe that would be
something that we do need to
bring out because these are
points well taken especially
when we go and we have the end
of the old stories that that are
surfacing.
I appreciate your response thank
you center with please Mr chair
I would like to make a statement
as to to to give the staff sent
back up here.
I have no.
I don't think anybody on the
committee is judging any
program that is is donated to
here are are you know
appropriated to.
We're just trying to follow the
guidelines given us and the law
of the state of New Mexico we I
don't think anybody here judging
anything anybody wants to
appropriate to.
It's simply the fact that we're
trying to follow the guidelines
in front of us so and with that
I want to to back to staff up
when you have to go talk to the
sponsor then say this may not go
over this is something that is
the intent of certainly me and I
think the chair and in the
committee to just you know we're
just trying to follow in and
give some oversight so they will
be kicked out of the deal when
it goes to the council service
or what part goes to the
governor.
Are those to the the for the
Senate.
To the approved thank you Mr
thank you very much Senator
Woods point well taken and to
indicate what the staff is done
is they're not mentioning any
individual specifically so it's
color coded and so along with
that your support is definitely
not only welcome but again your
points that all of your making a
well taken we'll do our best to
continue to deal with that and
again the issue is how do we
comply how do we make this
better for the state of New
Mexico thank you senator.
Any any other questions points
miss Iglesias please thank you
Mr chair the only remaining
question that I have is a staff
distributed a notice letter to
you yesterday to get your
response that letter is what we
would distribute to members
taking it to their secretaries
for anyone that we have a
question to say we have
identified an issue with with
junior bill if you could please
watch out for an email from us
again because Council Service
does require the sponsor to sign
off on every single thing that
we are here to the weekend we're
trying to get a draft for Monday
of being able to do this via
email if possible will be
incredibly helpful to us I'm so
that will be is long as the
letter is okay with you for all
of the items that we've
identified here we will give the
letter to the secretaries for
each of the members and and
notify them that an issue was
identified if they could please
get in touch with staff to make
sure that we
can get that changed and ready
for bill introduction at ready
to get up to drafting
that would be appreciated just
wanna make sure that that draft
letter of looked okay tier
members of the staff in the
subcommittee.
Any any questions around no I I
have no questions of.
Then again if you need to list.
I don't know how to say this Mr
chairman if you need less money
name as a are you someone that
they need to would want to
contact on any of these
questions if if they don't.
have time to see you or anything
else and I would suggest the
chair anybody any member of the
committee of to get a better
understanding this we asked why
we have questioned with them.
I would suggest that those nine
three listed also.
but the but it has to have an
email back to you and the
council service.
To make a change.
That that's that's the end of
the story to make a change it
has to be.
A letter from them to say that I
want to change what I have done
before so that it gives Council
Service and the committee
protection of of.
The legal ramifications of
changing somebody's stuff.
Larry R. I was a kind of pulling
the the the members just by not
only for what you are saying but
as I looked around the room and
it looks like it's a consensus
let's proceed with the the email
of the letter and then of course
if there is some issues because
we are going to be inundated
with additional work regarding
this let's continue to handle
and see what we can do to to
rectify that as well so thank
you Senator Woods thank you
Senator Diamond.
Senator Burt it's it's a process
it's it's it's good to see you
again so we appreciate that
thank you Senator Gonzales
thanks to our LFC and LCS staff
to each and everyone of you
continue the good work thank you
Mr chairman thank you center for
the thank you.
