Been able to.
If the answer to that but we
have to look at capacity that
their package comes over is
committed to provide it's we're
gonna score see what's best for
New Mexico and into that that
way.
So.
Yep.
Senator Rodriguez gonna chair I
need to run to another.
Or whatever bills you get done
get done but it's not just the
ones we talked about.
All right.
And we have to we're gonna work
on that Senator that's a new one
after here Senate bill one.
Senator.
Thank you.
Senator is that all your your
bill thank you.
Senator Campos we have Senate
bill one eighty three County
Hospital and public safety gross
receipts tax thank you very much
madam chair members of the
Senate finance committee and I'm
putting this on right now on
behalf of Senator Bobby J.
Gonzales this is something that
he's been working on for quite
some time and of course the
intent of this particular bill
Allows class B. County.
Are counties with a population
of less than thirty five thirty
seven thousand and net taxable
value of property tax purposes
of more than the the million
plus less than two million to
impose a county hospitals and
public safety gross receipts tax
of five percent innocence what
happens with this this is used
at the local level it does
require a local approval and if
it does pass at the at the local
level at the county level
then the authorization of a
issue revenue bonds is allowed
and the use of this is for
hospitals and public safety
buildings and the remodeling and
renovating
many additions that are all
related again to the public
safety initiatives within that
particular area so madam chair
members of the committee on
behalf of Centerville and Silas
that in essence is what what
this bill does.
Thank you senator
that we have any one on zoom
that is for the bill anybody has
signed up at all your thank you
anybody against the bill on
zoom.
Okay we don't have anyone signed
up so committee members any
questions Senator Woods.
You know I really don't have a
question the.
I truly believe that a lot of
these.
Municipalities.
Should set their own.
Mill rate will come up and gross
receipts both because they know
what they're.
Particular area needs and if
their particular citizens are
willing to do that.
And they they get to vote on
that of voting on their there
county of their city
commissioners and they're more.
And in my eyes that is the
proper place local government is
our proper place the determined
tax rate this specially winder
Tax in their own cities.
So a condition of I agree with
this completely thank you
secretary anyone else from the
committee thank you I do have a
quick question and we're moving
fast because we have this other
bills to get to we have to be in
the on the floor well I want to
let me ask you this Senator did
you say it was for class they
counties under which would be
under how many what's the
population.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee it's
going to be for the class the
counties and you know so how
with a population of less than
thirty seven thousand net
taxable value for the property
purposes
But that's basically what.
Okay thank you senator.
Senator Padilla thank you madam
chairman Senator Campos so on
the on those lines so the year
two ago and I think we have to
come up in last year prevents
the county to do ace a
local attacks for themselves for
their hospital are we are we sh
so this is only the class B.
counties we're disability County
full so in terms of that and I'm
not I'm not really sure but I
understand that they would just
because of the growth in
population they're probably
going to be close to the class
state but I'll go ahead and get
the the numbers for you so I'm
not really sure.
And so by doing this madam chair
this is just be this set of
counties I want why would we
just authorizes for everybody.
So madam chair and of course
with that this will be very
specific in the sense that those
counties with this type of
population then what we'll take
that specifically under their
consideration why don't we do it
for everyone particularly
because we do have the different
classes of counties and within
that we're trying to do is to
help those that have requested
this type of assistance are I
would say that would at least
for now that primarily is the
reason why because class be
counties are are seeking this
type of assistance specific to
counties like currently Townsend
thank you madam chair and you
know I I grew Senator Woods I
think this is a great idea
just a this mean you have to use
it and I want to give some
counties don't even know they
have the ability to do something
like this I mean I've I've come
across piece legislation my time
up here that all the sudden I've
done something and someone will
contact you why were we included
that or is that something we
could do so then I'm not going
to stay in a factor or try to
amend or whatever this bill but
I don't know why we would just
allow everybody they don't have
to do it if they don't want to
thank you madam chair thank you
thank you senator all right I
don't have any other questions
do we have a motion for the past
Senator Senator work Senator was
moved to do pass and we have a
second Senator Padilla thank you
have a motion a second on favor
signify by saying aye opposed
yes thank you all right we're
going to move on to the house
bill thirty nine gross receipts
thank you senator Clemente
remember we're putting this up
we appreciate it house bill
thirty nine gross deduction for
non athletic special events and
this is a guy a ghosts is that
who is guy because of that it is
isn't there more than one are
there any and I have which is
put that up Senator and who is
he that guy oh during thank you
I just wasn't sure thank you
for.
They want to this.
Thank you can you set up there
for that thank you senator.
You madam chair committee.
House bill thirty nine this is a
bill that's really
The bill is really being pushed
by a and M. S. U. to help
recruit event special events to
the pan American center with
this is an extension of
something that the legislature
approved before I think it adds
a couple more years to it it
waves I believe the government
of gross receipts or something
that just helps us attract
special events to the pan
American center and and then
might help some other
type of centers like that but
NMSU's really big supporter of
this bill with that.
Try to send questions.
Thank you senator before we go
to questions from the committee
can I go to questions from zoom
because there are a couple
signed up we have
Philip Rowe bless from New
Mexico State University are you
here fell off.
On zoom and we have Scott
Bradner for New Mexico state
also on zoom.
and if not this sheet that we
have says you're for the bill
also to have the record on
record thank you very much and
then anybody against the bill on
zoom so we can make sure we give
the public an opportunity.
No one signed up and I don't
hear anyone so let's go to
committee Senator just a quick
question madam chair and thank
you for that this allows us to
be more competitive with you yes
you can as of a different tax
structure and so we loosen this
is actually to across the border
to in a pass of so this point is
on more of an even playing field
Zacharek Senator that's correct
okay that its owner thank you
senator are set a Campos.
You very much madam chair and my
question was going to be along
the same lines and again this is
a good economic development
peacekeepers in competition
whenever we're talking about
public events and most
importantly as we move forward
this definitely will will assist
Southern New Mexico so very much
in favor of this particular
piece of legislation thank you
madam chair thank you senator
Senator share.
Thank you madam chair and
senator I also in favor of this
I think that this is great
because other gross receipts tax
is going to come in as people
then stay in Los crucis source
around they will buy stuff they
will pay larger stacks they will
do all those other things I
think this is actually a
positive tax issue instead of a
negative tax issue and the
somebody that used to go to
events there but they don't have
anymore I don't go anymore I
think this is a good plan thank
you senator right I don't have
any other questions do we have a
motion.
Okay much
okay so we've got a motion for a
day pass from Senator Burt I
know you mentioned Senate second
from Senator Corman Hemphill
how's that thank you all right
Senator all in favor signify by
saying that.
Any opposed none passed thank
you senator all right we're
gonna move on to house bill
sixty two grant opportunities
council we have Representative
Dixon and have read our I don't
know they're here.
anybody knows about this bill.
Until we can put it up for them
anyone.
Let's see
for
Representative Dixon and
Representative Herrerra grants
opportunities.
Yes yes please if you want to
try Senator.
Yeah we can do is try and yeah I
know everyone is busy and
representatives are busy in
committee.
Thank you thank you for that.
Shares.
Go for and what we can learn
from this I do need a moment
madam chair.
Yes madam chair committee so
house bill six to creates a
grant opportunity council
administratively attached DFA to
by DFA and grant matters
including identifying barriers
to procuring and managing
federal grants best practices
for managing grants and other
grant topics as requested by the
DFA the council is made up of
the local government.
In the bill has the
appropriation but Senate finance
committee on a two million
dollars to the DFA for grants
administration and so sounds
like an administrative.
Element that with.
fit nicely with the FAA and help
pursue more requests for this
for the state or perhaps NGOs in
the state that part the the
study up on where.
Thank you Mr.
Why for this thing that.
What I have seen the.
Home.
What we're gonna do this.
Find out and earlier
I should watch audience also
just removing quickly smacked
but I'm going to do that
straight to the audience this
time do we have anyone that is
in support of this bill.
The support of the bill anyone
in opposition of this bill house
bill sixty two as amended.
Okay thank you members of the
committee.
Any
Anyone wishing to make a motion
Senator Senator share.
I know that the sponsors not
here madam chair
but I know that the the the
membership of this after I
started reading so three county
representatives three municipal
representatives three municipal
three representatives while of
other political subdivisions to
grant professionals one staff
member from council of
government one local.
Staff member of the New Mexico
congressional delegation.
Excuse me.
Of our current presenter can't
answer why any of those are
there certainly certainly makes
sense to me.
to try to have that kind of
group it makes sense to me to
have someone from the
congressional delegation because
of the the people in with the
federal money is most likely.
But some of these I'm just not
sure.
Through representatives of other
political subdivisions.
What is that you know what that
means of.
So anyway I just wanted to bring
those those points up the so we
made this big council of three
six nine.
Twelve thirteen people and
I'm not sure we need thirteen I
would think that a somebody from
the municipal league somebody
from the the counties of the
association of counties would be
better.
Thank you thank you very much
now we have some of the.
Representative Dixon you came
just in time to help us learn
and understand this better we
were trying to put it out for
you Senator Steinborn was
willing to try it but thank you
it was more about it right for
the for my delay so we're
talking about the council itself
yes madam chair representative
Graham.
Why is it this why is it why
does it have what many sure so
the the just to be clear the
role of the council.
Is to provide the feedback and
the continuing gathering of
information so that we can make
sure that DFA with the grants
administration that they have so
they have staff members that are
now helping our state agencies
and soon will be helping our
local entities
compete for federal grants to
the role of the Advisory Council
is really to make sure that we
know what our political
subdivisions municipalities with
the folks on the ground need in
terms of do they have the tools
to make sure they're managing
their requests correctly.
you know are there gaps in their
technologies their
availabilities what are the
things that DFA can do better to
support them and then the
matching grant Fund.
Is the piece of the puzzle where
a lot of times are smaller
municipalities or counties don't
have the those funds set aside
and they may need them in the
short turnaround and can't rely
on their budget capital outlay
in order to get that.
So Madam chair representative.
I understand that we need to
that we need this or needed but
it certainly useful specially
the smaller communities that we
just don't know.
But when I'm looking at this.
So three county representatives.
Is that one from San Juan one
from Lee and one from Bernalillo
orders at fifty three from the
we're we want this to happen so
right now the way that we have
it structured is to try to make
sure that we're capturing the
needs from small medium and
large so it's one Representative
from a small County one from a
medium and one from a large
population County and then
similarly one representative
from a small municipality a
medium sized municipality and
large municipalities.
The manager is Representative I
see these are appointed by the
governor.
I'm trying to get this straight
in my head so if you're talking
about a really New Mexico with
the population of probably less
than two hundred now I don't
know.
thirty thousand thousand two
hundred people and seven hundred
people Harding County.
Eight six six okay.
Not many in the city of Raleigh
the capital of which.
It's got all two hundred of.
Is it also runs big city agency
girls the the counties are.
So less than half the people
actually live not on a ranch.
Thank you see how they don't
know anything.
on the other hand Bernalillo
knows everything.
it's for trying to trying to
figure out how to help people
just in this county thing and I
don't I don't have a.
We have a solution I'm answer.
But it might make sense to me
that we put out through the
socialization of counties and
through the municipal league Hey
guys.
Come talk to us in and we can do
this
as a this is better for needed
effort than than three.
Representative some counties and
three representatives
municipalities.
But if the league if the league
was the appointing people
municipal league with the with
the association of counties I
thoughts going through my head
how do you make this up.
They are less partisan and then
the governor it doesn't matter
who the governor is.
so I do like the idea of a
congressional delegation but
again.
CD three is different than CD
what which is different than CD
to.
with different needs.
So.
Is is is the.
Member of that staff member of
that.
Somebody from CD three might
know about oil and gas and CD
two but they don't know anything
about Albuquerque and try to
ignore Albuquerque if they
possibly can.
So it probably vice versa.
I'm and madam chair
And senator.
Pardon me one of the reasons for
including a member of the
federal delegation is because
historically the congressional
delegation has had a delegation
office and so in theory and I
recognize sort of the political.
Hi and partisan thanks for
mentioning but
In practice one would hope that
whomever is serving as the
representative from the federal
delegation would be able to
serve as a liaison between our
state and the delegation office
which does work for all of the
districts in madam madam Mr.
Madam chair.
Chair now.
Would it make more sense for
that to be a Senate.
Of Senator as opposed to
congressional delegation because
the Senators.
At least in theory represent all
of us in the congressional
delegations represent a third of
us.
Madam chair Mr chair Senator it
could but as I mentioned all
five of our members of the
congressional delegation
typically have been part of
the delegation office.
All right Representative can you
tell me what what other other
political subdivisions what we
thinking there.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
that's a wonderful question that
came up on the house floor and
that could really be a sec is
land grants it could be school
districts anything that falls
within that however
we did need to constrain it to
Entities that do not that fall
outside of the.
You know that do not fall within
the entire nation.
Issue okay so the.
Madam chair of the whatever they
don't okay.
It'd be a the kids.
Whatever they call those things
in in the middle of Albuquerque.
Mr chair Senator I don't
actually I don't know the exact
answer to that my suspicion is
knows that they need to be
recognized political subdivision
if if kids have governing
councils are part of recognized
as such as post.
Mr chair I am not opposed to the
concept I just want to think
about that council and in who
really makes it up and what
their purpose on the on the
council is thank you Mr.
Mr chairman of all I didn't have
to I don't have to speak I was
just going to go your chairman
yeah thank you thank you I don't
know if you want me to pass it
back on to you so thank you all
continue that with that in mind
is there anyone else in here
that has any comments or
questions and if not do can we
have a.
Thank you senator.
The question real quick
Representative thinking in terms
of I kind of listen to Senator
shares comments over there and I
don't think it's a bad
suggestion
I don't like to then cross
chamber built I just really
don't like to do that because I
don't want to slow you down at
all but did you give any
consideration on page two of the
lines one through five run
through for maybe just from each
congressional district or
something and then that would
allow for how we redesigned
districts to do given that any
thought of.
No in each one of the
congressional districts that
the municipality twenty
municipal districts
Representative I thank you madam
vice chair and Senator we
actually did not of the bills
drafted prior to redistricting
and last year during its first
drafting phase we did consider
congressional delegations but I
think that we wanted to ensure
the most sort of geographic and
size diversity and so that's why
we went with this particular
permission.
I think that works small medium
and large I don't have an issue
with that but I just wanted off
of that is just thank you thank
you senator thank you any
anymore questions or comments
and so you did have one thank
you senator just.
Just a comment madam chair thank
you my microphone to work
in the end this follows along
with the senator shares on of of
questions or thoughts uh the
municipal league and the
association counties no every
county every municipal building
and little to the nth degree and
that probably gonna save a lot
of time by knowing which
communities will need a little
extra help in these instances so
it's not specified in here but
it does say County the state
municipal if you're gonna have
someone from those organizations
they can probably expedite your
workload by knowing where you
need to apply these things
where.
There's enough infrastructure to
to get along without it so just
a comment one anything madam
chair and I want to this gonna
pass I wanted to be as
productive as possible so thank
you madam chair thank you
senator for the points and for
now I don't recall if before you
came in because they were trying
to put it up for Center Starbird
if we ask for public comment
anybody for this bill house bill
sixty two anybody against in the
audience all right do we have a
motion Senator.
The motion for the past two
years and the second a sermon
also in favor signify by saying
aye opposed fast thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Dixon thank you
very much and once again I
apologize for my delay all right
thank all right.
I'm very about it.
We're gonna go to the floor and
yes and.
Forty.
You'll be forty percent.
One.
Or
Okay.
