In the let's see everyone.
Senator Burt and Senator Diamond
Senator share.
Well thank you Mr chairman and
good afternoon everyone it is a
pleasure to be here
Senator Billboard district
thirty three of Carroll County
Lincoln County Chavis county
living Alamogordo and and it is
a balmy twenty four here I think
right now son's out and maybe
some of the snow's going about
the way so we had about four
have five inches
So unlike the some some amount
in parts of the state that were
subzero and a foot or something
like that or not but anyway glad
to be here Mr chairman thank
you.
Hi everybody Senator crystal
diamond Senate district thirty
five which is that the big hill
Sierra Luna had although
internet County and
representative Senator Burt I
say and and Santa Fe over the
weekend I think you guys got a
lot more so down south and we
did here so I'm going to stay
warm and travel up safe thanks
for thanks for joining us
everyone.
So bill sure state senator
district one which is Farmington
we did have a little bit of of
fluffy snow fluffy sunshine that
fell on us most of its melted
now.
Senator Pat Woods
great where you counties
district seven.
And the with this.
The world we're having rolling
blackouts etcetera like to
program right now but.
Goalie it is what it is.
Blackouts.
Etcetera what if they have a
camera black out of might help
us.
Senator Hemphill you want to go
ahead and introduce yourself.
Sure thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
people joining us this afternoon
I'm Senator Siah Correa Hemphill
from Senate district twenty
eight from Silvercity Senate
district twenty eight includes
Grant County catching County and
most to Sikora County I look
forward to this afternoon.
Thank you Senator Campos did you
get back on with us.
If not
we'll skip him in I don't see
Senator Steinborn or Senator a.
Candelaria with this yet.
Just double checking.
They're not there that I can see
so I'm senator George Rio sent
from Gallup Kinley and San Juan
and symbolic counties we were
the warmest place in the state
so we all put our banana trees
out for the first time ever
Gallup is usually the coldest in
the state so I hope you guys
enjoy it and and like shoveling
snow not my favorite thing to
do.
So with that the our state
auditor to
As lucky number sevens today and
ends of
Cologne you want to go and
proceed with your presentation.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee it is great to be
with you today on this seven
hundred and seventy seven day of
awesome at the office of the
state auditor it's been an honor
and privilege to serve with each
and everyone of you in the upper
chamber of course is very
distinguished Senate finance
committee I am joined today by
just a few of my team members
that that take I level
engagement in this budget
process I've invited them to
join in if you don't mind I'll
take the liberty Mr chairman
madam vice chair Mister chairman
members the committee to
introduce them quickly that is a
leading with our director of the
government accountability office
Stephanie out Warner chase is
with us her beautiful daughter
was not able to join us he's got
a new board wonderful daughter
and I was hoping to bring her so
that you all would be even more
Warman receiving my presentation
but I guess she's napping so
that's director Taos we also
with us are.
Our chief financial officers
with this mean under Muscat EDS
who's joined us today to see
animals.
Our of financial affairs and lot
of Montoya who also works at
dealing with our budget and our
processing of all that is
financial I'm also joined today
by my general counsel tremendous
member of our leadership team
Jesse guy a gross and I think
that is the
that is my team there at this
point we're gonna ask a agency
must get any us to share screen
and I'm gonna just give you a
little bit of an overview of our
office this is the first time at
least in the last couple years
we've been invited to join you
here the Senate finance
committee so we're very excited
to be able to share some
thoughts with you and then
present to you our budget which
is a reflection of five percent
reduction let me on the four
percent prior reduction and just
very straightforward request
that we've put together and
madam vice chair Rodriguez you
will appreciate we've just got
to slides so it's nice and easy
I'm not too much to review in
advance because I know that we
were scheduled I think we sent
our slides on Thursday or Friday
as soon as things got schedule
but it's still a very short
period of time for you to review
our item so with that.
We don't know if you're able to
share your screen they'll be
awesome Mr chair members of the
committee I am unable to share
my screen I don't know if I
could have screen sure access.
I guess can you do that for her
and then us state auditor we
also have your presentation in
front of us in our files so if
you want president and chief are
go ahead and you can start and
then we'll catch up I'm not sure
what that add that the issue
should be I believe that all the
participants should have their
screen sharing privileges
enabled.
if you'd like to send your
presentation to me quickly I can
share it for you.
To rific thank you very much I
know that this screen sharing is
disabled on my access as well it
says that the operator has
disabled screen sharing for
everybody but never the less let
me let me stay focused and we
have several agencies are
getting ready president Mr
chairman members of the
committee let me just at a high
level let's you know we have
several divisions at the office
the state auditor of course we
are the state's accountancy firm
and that is really led by our
finance division which maintains
our auditors are CPA's are
certified fraud examiners lots
of interesting and very very
important credentials in that
division we then have the
government accountability office
which is led by Stephanie Taos
who's with us today and that of
course is all our recyclers are
fraught advisories and our
outreach to the public and
community it is really one of
the forward facing divisions in
the office of the state auditor
then we have probably the most
well known at least to the
public not to this committee but
to the public will be our
special investigation division
this was the division was
established by current Attorney
General Paul that us in order to
allow the public to engage with
our office as you know our
mission is to fight waste fraud
abuse and identify that and then
routed out and send it to the
proper authorities for potential
prosecution and this is the
division the special
investigation division that is
the recipient of all the
interactions through the product
line when folks call with
concerns this is the division
that really runs point to track
down and potentially investigate
any and all of those concerns of
which any given year we received
anywhere between three hundred
and five hundred complaints
contacts or concerns from the
public regarding.
Public of public funds and use
their up.
We also course have our
administrative division and
let's see then under that I hit
every division we've got.
I think that's pretty close and
that those are really the
centerpiece centerpieces of our
office of the state auditor now
if we can now that we are able
to share thank you Mr sue
operator thank you maybe on the
Muscat EDS for putting that up
there and again we just have
this covers five plus two more
and we'll go straight to that
next slide which shows you
really kind of a high level what
this budget request is all about
we received two recommendations
as usual one from the LFC one
from the executive we
respectfully ask this committee
to send out of the executive
recommendation there is very
little light between these two
recommendations which was very
assuring and and
affirming for the work that we
do at the office in order and
the idea that we were very very
conservative in our budget
request this year there's a
there is less than eighty
thousand dollar differential
between the executive and the
LESC recommendation but the
distinction is very very
important our office when we
have a budget of just a few
million dollars those dollars
make a big difference and while
the overall budget doesn't
change the revenue stream it
does in terms of that eighty
thousand dollars so and that is
is that in our office as we
conduct audits through the
office of the state auditor we
generate some revenue this
executive budget allows us to
determine what audits our office
will conduct more appropriately
to base those decisions and
those selections.
On risk in need verses revenue
generation currently we have
about eight hundred thousand
dollars in our audit fund that
we draw down off of every year
and this allows us to continue
to maintain that fund in a way
this service at least for two to
three years in the event
emergency we have been able to
maintain our services as the
state's accountancy firm over
the course of the last two years
to clear the budget crisis and
now during the COVID nineteen
pandemic I relate relying upon
these different revenue streams
so that's the distinction
between the executive and the
LESC recommendation that you'll
notice there and again that's
only really on the audit fund.
Verses it general fund revenues.
So let me just say that in terms
of sources you'll see them lined
up there on the right hand side
of that slide we have the audit
fees with the general fund and
the fund balance and the vast
majority of our budget really is
driven by salaries and benefits
that is the vast majority of the
overhead that we have at the
office of the state auditor and.
For us we are one of those
agencies much like the attorney
general's office in a couple of
others where we require highly
skilled and credentialed
employees in order to do the
audits that we conduct in house
an overview.
Nearly one thousand audits and
agreed upon procedures on an
annual basis obviously when
you're talking about highly
credentialed individuals in a in
a market that is got near zero
unemployment prior to coke COVID
nineteen because very difficult
to stay competitive but this
body as funded us in the past in
a way that has allowed us to be
very very aggressive in our
recruitment and we've enjoyed
some success now our goal is to
maintain those recruits because
as you know it's a lot harder to
train new individuals and it's a
lot more costly to the taxpayers
to keep the great talent that we
have already at the office of
the state auditor and that's
what we try to do with this
budget.
If we look at the three hundred
category let's couldn't go to
the next slide I think this the
next slide is really kind of a
beautiful representation of
what's happening with our budget
and this particular budget
request for FY twenty twenty two
I'd like to direct your
attention to the three hundred
category this really is our our
request to fund critical
professional support services
and that includes both legal
services and in a time when we
have additional exposure for
Cybo cyber security we've needed
to increase of our budget
allocation to cover.
This is for our contractual
obligations and requests and so
we're doing everything we can to
be proactive in this regard the
the thing that I will say that's
been beautiful about COVID
nineteen is is because all of
our state agencies to Prewitt
and OSA the offices state
auditor has been no different
I'm gonna look at the senators
that are on this committee I see
such a beautiful representation
of rural New Mexico and when I
think about the boot hill when I
think about you County I think
about all the folks that had to
go to our audit training every
year and who put in for mileage
we put in for hotels and all the
overhead associated with travel
so they can comply with our
audit ruling come get our
training on that annual basis
well during the time of COVID
nineteen as we talk about cyber
security OSA pivoted we
collaborative with the New
Mexico cited CPA's and we were
able to deliver the order real
training a hundred percent
virtually saved tens of
thousands of dollars in agencies
expense in all thirty three
pounds we had over nine hundred
and twenty individuals
participate in our training last
year virtually at near or two
zero expense for each of those
agencies and governmental
entities that we are we're very
very proud of that and we
received just great feedback
from folks saying that look you
know it's great to be able to
not have to be on the road not
after incur that expense and
again to be even more efficient
with our time in government so
we appreciate that everybody
working with us to execute on
that but is and it is a source
of pride for us and we
anticipate in the future we will
continue to offer our our rural
training virtually even post
COVID nineteen what we're able
to come together again this will
be a great saving opportunity
for our governmental entities
all over the state.
We look at the four hundred
category this is this is kind of
a pain point for us many of you
know when I look at the again
the representation you're very
familiar with our local public
bodies are small local public
bodies that have worked with the
office of the state ordered in
the past on our grant program so
that we could find a grants to
have audits conducted or agreed
upon procedures conducting for
the small governmental entities.
And that fund we were able to
ask you and you did fund that at
a hundred thousand dollars in
the past but we had to severely
cut that this year
And the challenges is that when
you make capital outlay to these
small public bodies and
governmental entities they have
to be complied with our rural
and if you make those capital
outlays in their non compliant
and not they're not able to
capture and deploy those funds
for capital outlay and so this
is really kind of one of those
pain points for us is that we
did reduce our small public body
requests.
By eighty two thousand dollars
for FY twenty twenty two also we
were able to significantly cut
our
Vehicle expenses and
expenditures and cut our our
travel expenses and we
We're pleased to be able to do
that but certainly that doesn't
come without an inconvenience
and.
We certainly understand that
during this time when the budget
is tight and uncertain mothers
we need to do everything we can
to do our part and we have done
so with this budget request for
twenty twenty two I would just
just close by saying that we do
have and then under if we could
Finish sharing our screen there
and I can get back to seeing all
these wonderful.
There we go thank you.
Appreciate that maybe I'm not
you know what I'm the only other
data point that I think is
important for you to know is
that we do have about a sixty
percent vacancy rate right now
of course we do have a amended
if they can see right but we're
very pleased with that as it is
a slight reduction from years
past and again we've been very
aggressive in terms of
recruiting highly skilled
professionals like Miranda who
joined our team since the last
time we testified for our budget
and then we've also been able to
maintain great team members like
Jessie and Stephanie and Laura
who also joined us today in
Laura's got the longstanding I
think with our team Laura is one
of those products of the great
internship program some of the
senators on this call of heard
me talk about before that I'm so
committed to.
It is so challenged to fund
during these times we've got two
employees that came through our
internship program both Laura
and Benjamin Romero from
Valencia County is on board with
us now as an employee Ms and
internship program is super
helpful super important and an
awesome way to embrace our young
college students and our next
generation of civil servants in
government so with that Mr
Chairman madam vice chair
members of the committee I'm
pleased to stand for any
questions at this time thank you
for the opportunity to present
on this seven hundred seventy
seven they have awesome at the
office of state auditor.
Well thank you say other and
maybe are I buy a lottery ticket
of the seven today.
And see what happens our miss
Nichols our analyst you have
anything for you at.
Chair members of the committee
no matter covered it very well
thank you recommendations are
very close overall eight
thousand dollars different but
the described the LFC
recognition provide slightly
less general fund revenue and
more from fund balances from
their audit on and we do
recognize that potential
detrimental fact that over
reliance on the is.
The.
I think there's anything else
The
recommendation the fund balance
at the end of FY twenty two
would be about a hundred twenty
six thousand dollars and yet
they recommendation it would be
about a hundred and eighty nine
dollars.
She would stand out of balance
and more.
And I think that's really
everything you know Simon Miller
at yes.
Yeah at thank you.
So I mean you have anything to
add Mr chair members of the
committee I know the auditor and
Allison covered everything but
thank you for having me and I'm
here to answer any questions if
you have any.
Thank.
Senator Burt go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the prime thank you for the
report always good to see you I
I just really appreciate
specially folks who work in
state government always being in
a positive mood and and usually
with a smile on your face and
make your staff could tell me
some of the stories but I'm
hoping that's the way it usually
works in the auditor's office I
just a couple quick questions
you should vacancy why is your
about sixteen percent what does
that equate to in numbers if I
could ask.
Mr Chairman Senator Burt
representing those three great
counties I will tell you that
I'm missing my pistachios from
my road trips there on my way in
and out of Alamogordo I stopped
twice usually once on the way
and once on the way out in the
thank you senator.
That really equates it let me
give you the exact numbers if
you don't mind it is six
classified vacancies I am the
financial division one in the
administrative services division
and then of course I have my.
To temp.
Vacancies that that don't really
calculate but those are the
hundred eighty day non benefited
positions that we try to go
with.
In terms when we are able to
have the intern program with the
budget.
Permits thank you thank you Mr
chairman and and Brian just.
Re familiarizing myself with the
auditor's office so
how many people total do you
have in your your department.
So so we have about thirty nine
positions Mr Chairman
representative about thirty nine
positions in the office of the
state are lower is that is an
accurate number.
In your muted so I want to go
ahead and ask you to unmute and
give me that exact number or
Miranda either one Mr Senator
it's thirty FTEs.
These I'm sorry chairman
senators thirty eight FTEs plus
the two internet have positions
that's where I had the thirty
nine I apologize Mr Chairman
representative for.
And and
over above your I I get to your
you your honor dean constantly
Farmington in portions of the
state to.
How many I guess the determine
the special on a twenty of
requests to look into say a a
municipality or county or
something like that how many
special audits on an average do
do annually.
Mr chairman senator Byrd that's
an excellent question I don't
know that there is a average I
will just tell you that we are.
Careful and judicious in terms
of the number of special audits
that we designate and really
that's because our initial
investigation has to rise to the
level that we believe that it's
in the taxpayers best interest
to put the burden on that
governmental entity to pay for a
special or forensic audit on any
given occasion certainly since
I've been there
I be fearful to guess.
Director Miss may have a sense
of that but I suspect that in
the last year we have a
designated.
Probably about six special
audits.
Well I am not was necessarily
looking for our number but just
can't get it
an idea of of workload and what
you do and so you know in this
age of of transparency and
compliance and making sure that
there's a system of checks and
balances in place I just wanna
say I appreciate the work that
the auditor's office does that
to you and your staff do on a
regular basis and to.
It is much goes on in the state
and as we have found out being
in the legislature
you know thirty eight positions
that's I guess that's when
you're full up as well
just seems like a lot of work
for that number of people but I
know we have a competent staff
so you just all the questions I
have Mister chairman and and and
the structure thank you very
much you for your work in your
report.
Mr chairman senator Byrd thank
you very much I appreciate that
and of course there are a number
of investigations ongoing
anymore any point time that kind
of run point on any of those
concerns are coming in from the
public when it rises to that
special audit that's a much
different ballgame and we're
we're very very judicious and
and use those for very special
occasions or special concerns I
should say medications I and
then the last thing I'll say is
Senator Burt.
I would encourage you have not
seen yet to look into the great
and now highly acclaimed they've
received about three or four
awards national and
international awards for the
documentary the Sheffield family
has rolled out regarding some of
the history there and terra
county and on the project that
they're if you haven't seen that
documentary occurred you see it
it's a great gold star for New
Mexico I I have not but I've
heard about it and I need to
spend some time to but they get
up and look at it so thank you
for the tip you bet thank you
chairman thank you Sir.
Thank you senator Byrd
state auditor thank you
appreciate your time it's always
good to see you again and.
All that water to get with all
sevens in.
Meeting else let us know.
Thank you thank you chairman
members the committee it's
always a pleasure to be with my
fellow constitutional officers
I'm glad I got to go first I I
follow in the footsteps of the
distinguished Attorney General
and the life of service treasure
I can Berg and the incredible
impactful work of our incredible
secretary of state Maggie
Toulouse Oliver so thank you
members the committee I always
say available to you and I work
for you and it's not to be with
you today thank you very much
have a beauty in you did very
well for your first time and for
the state Senate finance.
Thank you.
Attorney General I think you're
with the sins is do you want to
go ahead and begin your
presentation.
Our Amanda do you want to go
over here.
All right good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is Amanda Dick
Peddie fiscal analyst with the
legislative finance committee we
also have brain child is analyst
for DFA returning general agency
three zero five I'm the Mexico
Attorney General requested a
five percent decrease in general
fund revenue across its to
programs and increased budgeted
revenue from the consumer
settlement fund by two point
three million or eighteen point
two percent the LFC
recommendations fully supported
the agency revenue request bring
overall increase of about three
point two percent the executive
recommendation okay general fund
revenue last with the FY twenty
one operating budget and
increased budgeted revenue from
the consumer settlement fund are
requests and Matt HSC when they
heard these budgets adopted the
LFC recommendation but did
instruct representatives Latta
brown Sweetser and Anderson to
assess the six hundred eighty
two thousand dollar difference
between the recommendations in
an ad hoc committee.
That is where the section for
request I will know for members
of the Attorney General has
quite a number of special
appropriation request which you
offered last week including six
point four million dollars for
taxes versus New Mexico water
ation
the Attorney General Attorney
General Balderas and his team
highly provided the agency adhoc
committee with an update on
taxes versus New Mexico water
litigation and some details that
we think are in your packet on
page three it was missing that
I'm happy to be back out.
And with that Mr Chairman with
your permission I can turn it
over to Attorney General Hector
Balderas.
I need their.
Sorry about that.
Thank you Amanda and Mr chairman
I appreciate the opportunity to
share a few words this afternoon
I know you're all very a very
busy but I excited the to take
the opportunity and and just
provide a quick a quick.
position of support we we feel
very blessed at the NMAG office
we think that the
recommendations are fair and we
try to do the most we can with
any of the resources that you
all invest in our organization I
would like to maybe just
highlight a couple areas of
concern for thought from the
committee the first is that of
COVID traditionally has impacted
other agencies like department
of health who have been at the
forefront of some of those
pressures but the New Mexico
attorney general's office has
also been severely impacted
we're very proud that we still
take an increased level of calls
from citizens but more
importantly we have continued to
litigate both criminally and
civilly very aggressively even
though they're been limitations
on our staff
but one area that the Senate
finance committee might consider
in throwing us a little bit of
support and resources is the the
state's litigation some of the
contentious issues that have
been before the legislature in
terms of policy decisions are
executive power a lot of that
litigation behind the scenes has
fallen on the steps of the
attorney general's office and so
between an increase of calls
that we're getting from consumer
protection sedition issues at
the back end of our law office
we have had to litigate numerous
numerous cases whether was the
health order or monitoring some
of the the other issues
involving COVID a lot of times
it was our lawyers that would
have to litigate the state's
position and we sometimes are in
favor of where the electorate is
that sometimes we might have
been somewhat in opposition but
I want to commend our staff we
generally.
We're not in line for any
supplemental funding but we do
have before you I think a an
initiation of about five hundred
thousand that would go to
various litigation and law
enforcement and just demands
that your own communities have
had we've been trying to be
responsive to those needs during
COVID and as you know we don't
anticipate that we're going to
be out of the woods.
Very soon but just something for
you to consider in that regard
the second regard is in terms of
the overall appropriation.
We support
your recommendation and you
looking closely at where you
would like us to emphasized in
the coming years some of your
priorities for some of you it's
public safety in rural areas for
others you'll probably want to
someone involved in the public
school transition with safety
issues involving students so
really
I was elected I'm I'm grateful
that I I believe you you do a
great job in investing in our
office
now that's the operational side
of the budget I will also ask
these wonderful committee
members to consider our special
appropriations very closely a
lot of times where the backstop
of some of your great ideas in
the legislature one of them that
we're watching very closely is
there seems to be a lot of
discussion around immunity.
Up for public officials and for
public servants the other one is
there seems to be a lot of
discussion about police reform
and and police accountability.
I believe that before the
legislature has its final say.
That there is already a
direction much like the
corruption model that we've
built at the office many of the
the issue significant issues in
your communities involving
officer involved shootings or
complex litigation issues are
already falling at the steps of
the AG's office and I will.
This honorable Committee
especially because finance is
policy that there are many
initiatives in the legislative
floor that will have a profound
shift in our caseload for
instance the officer involved
shootings have very little
fiscal analysis tied to a lot of
the ideas and I only have twelve
prosecutors to prosecute child
abuse political corruption and
many other type of criminal
cases that we step in for dust
when they don't want to take on
a certain subject again amount
of litigation we take some of
those tough child abuse cases in
our school districts but I only
have twelve prosecutors and so
with dust and lawmakers want to
shift the responsibility with
the the Attorney General
primarily investigates and
litigate officer involved
shootings
we will need a scan significant
fiscal analysis and FTE review
now me being proactive to all
lawmakers and not really turning
down that responsibility we have
a in an ad hoc way asked the
Legislature to consider four
million dollars appropriation
that
even though we're not talking
about the specials today the
extraordinary litigation is just
a.
A credit card we are
or a concept of you investing in
our goals resources before the
bills hit and I just thought I
would be proactive because we've
always tried to be attentive to
the state's needs and so that
wasn't supported and it made me
more detail but as district
attorneys and more lawmakers
expect the AG's office to
prosecute those complicated
police shooting cases
I just don't want that to
unfairly take away from other
services and so we we throw in a
few requests like that in some
of our specials I could go on
about some of the the more the
more toward issues I'm gonna do
for my time to the honorable
Committee K. are specific
questions but want to thank the
the committee for being I
believe generous and finally I
will I will show up on a.
Speaking to you all as former
colleagues and and finance
specialists I will say that
sometimes I've I've been on
orthodox in my litigation method
I've tried to promote a one
common litigation system that we
don't
we're very aggressive criminally
and civilly in our litigation
and I just want to highlight the
work of the AG litigators and
the the the senators who always
kind of believed in our model
you had good questions for us
but I do mitigate rather
aggressively in the water
litigation is another example
but we are having a banner year
in revenue recovery and I know
that's important to all of you
and I want you to know that are
litigation model is finally
paying dividends that's not why
we litigate to create revenue
but there are a lot of bad
actors out there and and I want
to commend the Senate finance
committee for you know sticking
through us throughout the years
but we are having a record year
in terms of revenue recovery on
lawsuits
against bad actors and we hope
that we will continue to to peak
so that you can reinvest those
dollars where you see fit so
with that Mr Chairman all showed
up in our defer to some
questions thank you.
Thank you us state under I don't
see anybody's hand rabies.
Any questions for you chairman.
Your chairman go ahead Mr
chairman.
Ways that Senator Campos.
Senator Rodriguez.
There are some else Senator
Rodriguez go ahead and Mr
Chairman can you hear me.
Senator Campos we can hear you
sound you can hear us.
Senator Rodriguez I guess got
it.
Can you hear me OK yeah now we
got you.
You want me Campos you can hear
me okay yes we can.
Okay that's fine and I I'm just
going to go ahead and mute and
we'll go from there thank you Mr
chairman.
Senator Campos we can hear you
loud and clear you're good to
go.
No please go ahead Mr Chairman
Senator Rodriguez go ahead thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
very much Attorney General
Hector about death we appreciate
you and your staff very much I
think you the years how much
responsibility you have any
cases you get with such limited
resources and you somehow make
it happen I did not realize
however that you have only
twelve prosecutors you know I
really I agree with many more
staff members for the amount of
workload you have
I know you also work very
closely with the state engineers
office to
to work together on this water
medication that is happening is
been going on for years and that
that's a big job in itself when
you have these big water
litigation cases requires an
enormous amount of resources I
just have one question and I'm
happy first of all let me say
before I ask my question that
you raise questions the special
appropriations because we find
we have a lot of legislation
getting through the legislature
are there is very direct impacts
to certain departments and in
your case you're going to get
quite a bit of an impact
financially resources when that
these pieces of legislation
passed so I can understand your
proactive thank you for that
I just have one question because
you have only trial prosecutors.
Or or what determines what cases
you'll get at the state level
versus the district attorney for
example sometimes we see the
district attorney get the pacer
to buy their referred to the
Attorney General how does that
happen in who makes those
decisions I know you get a lot
of cases the how many about that
Mr Attorney General.
Mr Chairman Senator Rodriguez
that's a great question I think
traditionally the AG's office
used to just receive cases where
there was a conflict from the
district attorney we do have
primary jurisdiction as well in
human trafficking and some of
the crimes against children
cases I have first priority
sometimes if we develop a case
we the DA will not fight just
for those type of cases
a couple years ago I I did get
into kind of a fist fight with
the district attorney and I
asked the Legislature to
consider giving me primary
jurisdiction on first degree
child abuse cases the most
egregious cases there was a case
of a dead child found in
northern child's County there
was only a river Allah there was
us there's been several that
that.
Our young children are murdered
in their own can you Santa Fe of
Senator Rodriguez there's been
some horrific murder cases in
the DA's office is very busy
however as of increased a
targeted approach to prosecution
we now get more cases were
invited in by dust to do some of
the complex white collar
corruption cases that
where are now a priority for us
and there have been times when I
wanted to do a first degree
child abuse case I did ask for
some of the officer officers
that were murdered.
As a as a as a result of a about
deprivations killing officer
Webster in Albuquerque I ask for
those cases so Senator it's kind
of first line of cases is
whether or not we have primary
jurisdiction second is whether
there's a conflict but because
we have turned our office into
litigators and and really being
offenses we have I would say
I've outgrown the size of my
division by just having twelve
prosecutors now it's starting to
really affect us as dust are now
asking us to do some of the more
complicated police shooting
cases and so I just said that as
a flag of our warning and
request in your all your
leadership in may be looking at
the criminal prosecution
Division and growing that
proportionally to where you want
us to focus our case.
Thank you explanation I noticed
the arms settlement increase are
the basis because I want to see
how they are referred to the
thank you for explaining that
you're right we have to be back
we can't just depend on what
prosecutors and and I want to
get this done I know that your
water regulations that you have
gone all the time takes an
enormous amount of time Tania
rules it's been wonderful making
the presentations a lot of the
work well I don't want to dwell
prosecutors and talking about
she probably is but I know they
are on she had knowledge work
love to stop I think it's time
that will be the call of the
pandemic the time that we see
things changing and work Brian
more more happening throughout
not only here in Santa Fe that
we start looking at their needs
for the department the way the
matching so thank you very much
for and that's all I have Mr
chairman.
Thank thank you Senator
Rodriguez Senator Campos
of this.
In can you hear me OK yep we got
you okay.
Thank you very much I appreciate
that Mr chairman of course
members of the Senate finance
committee my apologies for the
technical problems that that I'm
having.
Mr Agee a couple questions that
particularly related to some of
the topics that you're talking
about earlier and one of them
being of course with the
oversight.
dealing directly with the our
corrections department
particularly with the private
prisons and then the second part
of that question deals directly
with the issues that you're
talking about when it comes to
law enforcement in this you will
the issues that we're dealing
with their.
If you can share a little bit
more with me in terms of.
What your thought process would
be in terms of
the private prison oversight on
coming from your office if
that's not the way to go
possibly you can offer some
suggestions.
And I know a lot of it does tie
in directly with the answer
school approach and that's why I
bring that up at this time and
again it's so it's good to hear
from you but if you can help
with that I really appreciate
that thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman a circle that's a
great question I we've been
monitoring closely the
legislature in your your role
in.
Of trying to predetermine what
what direction does the state in
Mexico want to go as relates to
corrections I will say the way
we handle corrections at this
point is we staff some of the
correctional functions merely on
an advisory role so if the
of the state corrections need
some guidance we can find some
type of legal guidance of course
we also review some of the
contracting very basic though
very
very surface level where I've
seen an increase in though where
this administration has relied
on us more Senator Campos is we
are still litigating some of the
Duran consent decree and I lost
we we have finance some of that
support is we have taken some of
our extra money I don't want to
say that we have extra money for
this committee but there's a few
medical sometimes line around
our budget and we will
retain us just supplemental
council on a very limited basis
when some of our lawyers are
very but I I would say that if.
if there is an increased role we
definitely would want to work
with Senate finance staff
directly we are not built to
handle the increased compliance
or oversight load we we barely
duct tape right now some of the
litigation needs and I'll give a
good example with the ACLU sued
the department of corrections to
let out all the inmates because
a COVID we took over that
Supreme Court litigation and
were I use the term duct tape
because that is kind of
sometimes how if we don't have
the resources right away we have
to take resources from within
our budget put together a on a
team that's built from the AG
person sometimes will have to
hire an expert to and then
sometimes we try to keep it
under sixty thousand so I don't
have to get in some complicated
procurement we've been lucky
thus far to have the expertise
in house but the Senate is
considering putting some type of
More complex compliance which
which we wouldn't disagree with
however direction you want to go
we would definitely have to do a
needs assessment to make sure
that the right person is in
place of the AG's office and
that's kind of Senator comes you
hit the nail on the head that's
kind of what's happening with
the police shooting everybody's
talking about giving that
responsibility the AG's office
without really looking at the
person that's involved so if you
if you're gonna increase our
duties we would just want to
meet with you we're not weighing
in on whether we should or
shouldn't that's that's a
question for all of you we were
I respect your thoughtfulness in
the process I can see the
Legislature wanting the AG's
office to provide more oversight
and we would go in that
direction we would just need a
little bit of help with your
check book.
So Mr chairman again I I really
think you Mr Agee for not only
response but the ongoing
willingness to to support and to
participate as we move forward
and we all realized it's going
to take the the additional
monetary.
Station if you will in order for
us to to pursue that one of the
other issues deals directly with
the internal auditing and
oversight that does it for our
private prisons and within that
as part of your role is is there
a smoothed communication or is
that something that we also need
to take a look at what I'm
looking for more than anything
is the amount of resources that
this make Tate particularly as
we have these pieces of
legislation that are making
their way through the through
the session and that being said
it's not necessarily just that
we would address the issues with
foresight indicated the cost is
it means that if we do apply
that we could be in the
situation very quickly are we
not only need that your school
expertise but the resources to
go along with that that's what
I'm trying to get out
particularly with the Cisco
accountability that we're
talking about today.
Mr chairman and senator that's
why the
that litigation fund that kind
of savings account I think I
call the credit card we don't
spend it unless someone just
unanticipated issue comes up
that would be a way to bridge
rather than come to you and ask
for permanent investment if you
how the ability to spend some of
those consumer protection
dollars we brought in in in some
unanticipated litigation or
issue analysis that would be one
way that if the Senate decides
to take swift action in an area
like corrections are even like
the marijuana issue by all means
the the savings account approach
of just doing at least one time
money is a very strategic of
opportunity for all of us
because it allows us to be ready
without having to make that long
term commitment beyond one year
so I would ask Senator Campos
that the unanticipated
litigation might be another way
to help us but without knowing
all the issues that are going to
be finalized in the session.
So justice finally again thank
you Mr Agee's for acts for the
response and
but I would hope that members of
both HSD enforce Senate finance
would consider is that we do
have those resources available
particularly with the check
legislation that is going
through and I'm sure that as we
do finalize the session that
will probably be there be some
pieces will be assigned and that
being said that.
Almost immediately I believe
that we're gonna need the staff
resources so
age about that just maybe we can
do is have a conversation
offline to start talking about
that what what that may cost.
Just in this meeting very for
but this could happen what could
happen in the near future really
appreciate your responses in
your candid agency in terms of
the issues that we're facing
today thank you Sir.
Thank you Senator Campos Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman just quick
question
Mr stern general I
I was wondering how long's it
journey thanks for turnaround
for attorney general's opinion.
Mr chairman senator woods
It just depends on the the issue
there's something that we have
dropped the ball and you
requested something well means
of will will call you right
after this hearing so it just
depends I've heard I've seen
some last as long as.
Two three years and I've I've
seen as get out opinions within
three to four months so I.
I would maybe ask you to if you
need me to follow up I can
definitely.
Looks like we need to work on
something this is what maybe
you're referring to.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you.
Thank you Senator Woods.
I don't see anybody else on the
list
I want to ask you some about.
Whatever happened to the to the
problem we had when the state
was trying to buy masks and and
PPP.
And could we see that company
that pretty much for this for
three million and we get that
three million back or we have a
that to gauge how Mr chairman I
I I'm trying to recall I do know
let let me let me share with you
what I can remember and then we
can do some follow up on the
your reference to maybe a civil
lawsuit I don't recall that
we've taken civil action other
than we were part of the without
trying to get caught up too much
between the state because we
represent the state and the
company I remember us assisting
a little bit in the return of
those materials
but I let me see let me share
with you what I do remember we
are still working on a criminal
case with the state of Colorado
because some of the fraudulent
activity it was involving
Them making representations to
the Colorado state government as
well and so I have worked with
the Attorney General so we have
an active criminal investigation
related to that transaction
The chairman is referring for
the rest of the committee there
was an initial couple
questionable transactions early
during the COVID response in
which the state of New Mexico
purchased many masks and the
issue was we believe that the
time that there was an
allegation that the company
was misrepresenting the quality
of the mask.
That was purchasing number one
and then number two there was
some questionable activity that
once the masks
Got to New Mexico the company
just wanted their money and was
not responsible for ensuring
that the masks were of the
quality level that was to be
purchased
and then number three we were
caught up in evaluating some of
the practices and how are we we
deployed it special agents to
the scene
we took somewhat control of the
of the contraband of the time
and then we facilitated the
return of that product and I
think there was a cancellation
of some of those for future
purchases but the chairman is
asking a question you know for
the money that we were out.
how we pursued civil remedies I
don't believe Mr chairman we
have but I will look into that
real quick
but we are not and our criminal
cases still active because I
believe there would what was
definitely probable cause.
That some of the company numbers
agency used letters documents to
secure sales and also
potentially may have
misrepresented transaction so I
don't think we've pursued a
civil remedy Mr Chairman but I
know that we're still actively
investigating crime.
Thank you and then the you know
I know there's a settlement from
the gold king and mine spill and
they settled with those
landowners up there along the
New Mexico have they received
anything.
For their portion Mr chairman I
I do know that it wasn't a final
settlement was a limited Party
but all all that my W. on it
you're on mute just kind of make
sure I don't miss your what what
parties remain we still need to
settle on collecting.
Mr chairman Mr Attorney General
you're absolutely correct it was
a limited settlement that only
resolved the environmental
issues so no to correctly answer
your question the individual
parties have not fully settled
all of those claims but the
environment department did in
conjunction with the attorney
general's office was very
limited portion of the cocaine
mines.
In.
Madam.
It is internet agency are who's
representing the landowners
through your agency.
Mr chairman Mr training general
training general's office is
only representing the state
interest we are not representing
the intentional landowners are
handled separately that are
working in conjunction with the
Environment Department of
private privately Representative
not by the attorney general's.
Channeled through the virus are.
Okay thanks and then Mr Chairman
general.
Where are we really in this
Texas New Mexico lawsuit I know
there was recently some
settlements.
I believe on on the Pecos I
correct me just tell me where
we're at so I I know yep Mr
chairman great question of.
So we are we're trying to fight
the battle known to funds the
federal court house this in
mediation
I believe we're still far apart
we are doing the best we can to
negotiate we are fully
authorized my staff to pursue
settlement or resolution at the
same time we're in a pickle
because we are.
We're not bluffing with Texas or
the federal government we are
prepared to go to trial this
summer so the special master has
is working kind of both.
Both process used very furiously
I'm really proud of the team
because I think that because
we're using aggressive modeling
scientific modeling
the the credibility with the
special master at has grown
considerably and I think that
he's very aware that we have
filed Office of motions that we
are ready for trial but I am not
ruling out a mediation
at success at this point I will
keep this committee fully
briefed if mediation is
successful but I I I would
anticipate that we won't know
for another month or two
Whether or not
The special master's able to
move the trial docket but.
for the purposes of this
committee's leadership.
For many years now I think when
I heard this case were now
you're six and my administration
but this case started
A couple years before I even
became Attorney General and I
know every year I can do this
committee you've been very
generous investing in the Texas
New Mexico litigation I would
only ask the chairman and the
membership here that though this
year is different only because
this is no longer a dress
rehearsal and this is no longer
preparing for litigation we are
trying to get the best deal
possible for the for the state
LCS.
What I'm sorry I'm sorry Mr
chairman I was just wrapping up
what I was kind of giving you
the the lay of the land that the
one thing that I can I can
import of this committee.
for every dollar you invest now
to me it's a strategy to try to
reduce that liability amount
that I inherited and many of you
were on the cusp with me when we
took this case over that many of
you thought that this was a
billion dollar deficit to New
Mexico and that's the way I
approached it that I inherited a
case where we were building out
funded and outmanned in by the
federal government and Texas and
Texas indeed did take I mean the
federal government did you can
detect the side of taxes but I
can assure you now
we are suing them for some of
their on regulated conduct in
taxes we are demanding for
investigation and accounting I
don't want to pay one more than
what is owed to taxes and so we
have them on their heels and it
was this investment from this
committee that has been generous
but I I I I want to give the
Chairman a lot of credit and and
the numbers that have been on
the committee for quite some
years I know I sound like a
broken record but this is we are
now in the face finally we've
been preparing for to try to
drill down that billion dollar
deficit or liability that that
we were also scared of to try to
reduce it down to of a theory
that New Mexico only owes what
New Mexico owes according to the
law not because taxes over
drills their side and needs more
energy that they need to take
our water so we have been very
scientific very offenses and
but what we're now in the the
the the phase work for every
dollar that we spend now I
believe it's the settlement
reduction strategy so that our
liability is only built on what
we truly not what Texas is now
demanding a lot of what Texas
alleged in the beginning.
Was big style Texas bluffing and
now we're in mediation in the
court of law where we're I'm
showing my cards in there
showing there's and I really
believe our litigation
strategies has shown that you
guys are all doing a good job
preserving Water New Mexico and
yet they have no rules and
regulations and groundwater
pumping right through under
Clovis poor Tallas Hans and so
we went on offense and so what
whether pays dividends are not
will be briefing this committee
very soon but this is no longer
dress rehearsal we any support
you can give us Mr Chairman now
I think it was you that famously
said that
That if I need more lawyers that
we should be out number Texas
lawyers to New Mexico lawyers
and I'm not asking dollar for
dollar match taxes but I just if
you'll consider just making sure
we're properly resource I can
tell you that that were really
doing a good job reducing any
liability for Texas for New
Mexico farmers and and
businessman here misstatement
Sicko.
Thank you and I think that's
very key is never never go to
trial or to mediation is about
twelve lawyers on your side.
And.
Hopefully the outcome but it's
kind of an oxymoron where
southern New Mexico our farmers
down there are sided with Texas
because they know there's more
water it in the northern part
where the water comes from.
Is going to change so I I agree
with you may I may call you back
visit with you a little bit more
Senator Diamond you have your
hand up.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate it thank you Mr
stepdaughter it's good to see
you I appreciate your
presentation and Mr Attorney
General thank you for joining us
as well I have a quick question
we see several bills this
session and even in years before
for the creation of
all much ombudsman within
agencies and it really seems
like people are concerned about
the cycle of the internal
appeals process within some
agencies including a CYFD PED
and several others my question
is is there a simpler way or
more effective way to appeal an
agency's decision outside of the
agency.
Mr chairman Senator Diamond.
Yes
That's a great question I I I'm
I'm hesitant to answer in the
sense that I I would rather give
you.
A couple specifics if if you can
point me to an agency I what the
way it affects ages always into
areas that because we what
usually happens is after
citizens complained to all of
you or they eventually make
their way to us as well we tried
to get a better undergarments so
if if agencies are looking or I
should say lawmakers are looking
to strengthen accountability HSD
and are using a budget inform I
would always recommend in the
bill to to rely on analysts to
somehow maybe involve us in some
just name us in some part of of
reviews specific of supposed
specific outcome but for
instance we take auto dealer
complaints and if we weren't
named in the statute we would
have jurisdiction to look for a
lot of those things so so
sometimes were involved like the
department of health but it's
been an aging does not go to us
they don't respond to us we use
our Medicaid fraud division to
try to sometimes bully the
embodiment or sometimes ask the
right questions but a lot of
times how you mandated use
office depending on the level of
accountability is one area that
we would work with you on
and then secondly I it would
just depend on the issue that
you're trying to target
in terms of so it just there's
different examples but we can is
there something specific agency
specific agency that that you're
referring to.
I'll tell you I'm I'm actually
caring that's been built myself
I just wonder if rather than
creating legislation that
creates these full time
positions if maybe it would be
more effective if we were going
to the eight AG's office
directly
when when somebody's appeals
feel like it's just a cyclic are
you know it's it's it's not
being heard of there's no
resolved within the agency how
how do we address those concerns
outside of the agency and so
maybe we are maybe we shouldn't
be creating this positions
instead and we should go just
directly to your officer or
maybe like you said we should
create the positions we should
just include joint statute to be
part of that resolution process
was Mr Chairman Senator Diamond
so are you referral can you give
me the example of the appeal
related to see what the just so
I'm I'm gonna make sure I
understand the area of need I
guess if there's any let's let's
say I'm gonna get some
hypotheticals but if there is an
appeal within CYFD from foster
families maybe and and they feel
like they're not getting any
resolve inside the inside the
agencies I know that there's a
bill that's been introduced to
create a position on but
physician for that I guess my
question is before support
something like that is will
there be any resolve in this as
well I'd like to see it also
include your office to make sure
that that that that the concerns
are getting addressed outside of
the agency so I I Mr Chairman
center I have a better
understanding now what what is
it you're asking I would say
that we.
We have to be careful that like
so I don't have jurisdiction
over domestic or family
relations so when a judge or
CYFD makes a an administrative
decision to call a child in
foster care put a child in
foster care where I would love
to work with
with you potentially where I've
been of very frustrated is not
only a budget in level but we're
I think that
their decision or their
potential
case management form or lack of
case management sometimes puts
the physical or mental emotional
safety of a child.
And I have we've already had
legal battles between us and see
what the where I believe they
have a duty to disclose.
To law enforcement certain
information that they believe
should remain confidential under
federal law so
I as someone who's been trusted
with public schools and she was
if the in not keeping their role
to their side but so where these
cases of some times been so
mismanaged that a child becomes
in danger where my internet
crimes against children or or
other units could have saved the
child so to speak we we did have
have the jurisdiction so I I
would I would recommend if you
don't mind I can have our team
engage you and we could kind of
figure out what what we would
recommend but overall we don't
have jurisdiction and not that
does become a problem.
Maybe we can all have a
conversation with you offline to
see where we can go with that
thank you I appreciate your
time.
Thank you Senator Diamond of to
the general I'll have anybody
else on our list so we
appreciate your time and your
presentation today thank.
If you need anything just let us
know thank you.
Thank thank you.
Thank you madam secretary in
Europe next and.
Alison you want to start off.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee and I'm also calls
he adolescents are secretary of
state.
When
of seven
analysts say so just briefly
the recommendations that FY DFA
and Alex recommendations both
provide significant increases in
general fund revenue
the that's the one percent for
LFC and fifty six percent for
DFA and that's primarily for
cost increases secretary St
anticipated allocations program
The LFC recommendation provides
an eighty percent is general
fund revenue from elections and
executive provides an eight.
K. and then find about one point
six million in fund balances
from the federal help America
vote act
and those much increases as I
mentioned are primarily for
anticipated costs
the secretary of state is due to
region recent legislative
changes is responsible for
holding local elections in even
numbered fiscal year is and
secretary of state is also due
to legislative changes
responsible for reimbursing
counties for election costs
system of their their major cost
areas for their elections have
increased
going for the stables in two
elections in even numbered
fiscal year us regular local
election in a primary election
and then I general election.
Years and then.
Recommendation support a
federally funded network
administrator position in
elections well.
And then for the administration
and operations program the
executive recommends a flat
general fund budget and LFC
recommends a two percent
decrease in the general fund
budget
and budgets increase the revenue
by twenty thousand dollars
recommendation includes funding
to reduce the programs are
funded vacancy rate as of
November the FY twenty one
operating budget had about a
hundred seventy thousand
vacancy savings in that program.
And just I know that HSC has
adopted the LFC.
and I'll turn to Simon.
At health professionals thank
you for thank you.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee again my name's
Simon Miller and I and an
analyst with DFA just to echo
what Allison said both
recommendations provide for a
pretty significant increase in
General Fund but that increases
largely for the November twenty
twenty one consolidated local
election which has never been a
part of the sectors secretary of
state's budget so that's why the
thank such significant increase
from on both the LFC and exec so
with that I will turn it over to
our secretary of state thank
you.
Madam secretary thank you Mr
chairman thanks to Allison and
I'm and they are really
wonderful to work with and that
we appreciate our relationship
with them and
With all of you I'm also just
that quick hello to my Senator
Senator Rodriguez at Senator at
Nancy Rodriguez.
And that congratulations on your
new role Mr chair and looking
for to working with you in this
capacity I'm it would be okay
again around because our insurer
slides wonderful I'm so at just
quickly moving on to the second
slide here is a quick outline
and the keep folks are in our
office on that presentation
today it'll just be me and
Veronica Alvin who's that the
second bullet there are CFO we
are if you haven't already
received a copy of this
presentation you will see all
have all of our contact
information for everybody in my
office I'm we have completed the
twenty twenty election cycle
last year we had a total of
three statewide elections at the
regular local the primary and
the general and and at that
first ever local election
resulted in eighteen percent
turnout which is much higher
than the single digit turnouts
we've seen in previous local
elections are we saw record
forty two percent turnout in the
primary at the forty two percent
wasn't a record per se the
number of voters that turned out
as well as in the general
election we had a record number
of voters turning out I'm and
this is despite the fact that we
were operating our elections
like everything else last year
at under the auspices of the
COVID nineteen pandemic which
was a tremendous challenge for
election officials across the
state and across the country I'm
so I'm really proud of the work
that we did there I and it was
you know the election ran
incredibly smoothly incredibly
well largely in part because of
the legislature last year soffit
to really a fund us to the level
and that we needed to be funded
to ensure that we had adequate
resources in addition to the
fact that we received federal
funding as well and to make sure
that we were taking care of the
COVID nineteen specific needs.
So next slide markup.
Let me address first we have a
couple of quick special
appropriation requests before
you all the first is our ballot
ballot box project fees to we
are we are ready at begin
undertaking at due to
legislation that was passed a
couple of years ago installing
and working with the counties to
install ballot boxes across the
state ballot drop boxes for mail
ballots this will be for any
absentee ballots mailed as well
as any ad now because we have
the local election act in place
any special local elections are
mandated to be conducted one
hundred percent by mail we also
have some precincts throughout
the state that are a hundred
percent election so as as our
vote by Neil and dissipation
grows this need for drop boxes
at becomes necessary so that
these two for this appropriation
request is three hundred and
eighty seven thousand dollars we
have completed an invitation to
bid on and we have a an
additional three hundred and
thirteen thousand dollars from a
special appropriation awarded
last legislative session again
which is for phase once we
started that the acquisition of
the boxes themselves before the
general election
the next our purpose special
requests for you is that a three
million dollar request for the
special election we are
anticipating are going to have
to conduct in five counties it
looks like you know again
depending on how the United
States Senate behaves and when
these are confirmations go
through probably add to the
middle or the end of may that is
an unanticipated costs of course
at that we are going to need the
funding to be able to conduct to
ensure adequate and.
Adequate management of the
election and again we'll have
five counties involved in that
particular special election next
slide room.
So I'm.
Because we haven't had a whole
lot of opportunity to present
before this committee although I
know Mr chairman you and I have
a lot of conversations over the
years about the secretary of
state's office budget
let me just give a little bit of
background for it for years and
years our office was underfunded
and it basically are funding was
put together through a series of
sort of piecemeal
as special appropriations
supplemental appropriations at
going to the board of finance to
get you know deficiencies
covered and things like that
so.
Our FY twenty two budget it does
have some new factors to
consider in and I know that both
Allison and Simon mentioned that
it so again it in even fiscal
years as in FY twenty two there
will be two elections for sure
we we don't know what else may
pop up but again that regular
local election in November that
has consolidated all the
nonpartisan races so units pull
and school boards and things
like that as well as the primary
engine that occurs in the same
fiscal year and then an office
school years we have the general
election in November but that of
course is a huge a huge
undertaking I'm next slide.
So our budget request therefore
looks a little different and is
significantly higher in FY
twenty two I'm and you know
again this is sort of a picture
of you can sort of look at how
our our budget has has sort of
been piecemeal together over the
years but these are all real
costs and so when we come to you
saying you know this is that
this is money that we need for
the office it's not because
we're trying to do like to
fancier extraordinary things we
are trying to meet our mandates
under the current are
requirements of state statute
and so this particular site sort
of walks you through on how
we've been able to fund
elections in the last couple of
fiscal years and this year Sir.
Next slide.
So again this additional request
is the record the ad direct
result of legislative changes to
the election code in twenty
eighteen and twenty nineteen the
twenty eighteen change created
the regular local election which
is great policy for the state
it's great policy in terms of
participation and consolidation
of elections making everybody's
lives a lot easier
but now the state is responsible
for the cost of that is both
house and Senate mention but the
twenty nineteen change provided
that a newly created election
fund will pay the cost of
administering all statewide
elections that's all action so
primary general special special
congressional what have you that
is now a state responsibility
and that was particularly for
site I think especially as folks
didn't know we were going to go
into the COVID nineteen pandemic
and that are that are at county
local governments we're gonna
take the incredible hit that
they've taken on in terms of
their revenues so the state is
basically going to be needing to
find the costs of these
elections and and that shifts
the burden from the counties to
the state so that budget request
from our office is six point
eight million and that that's
the difference for FY twenty two
next labor income.
and and let's talk about what
those costs are and it did again
that caution from counties and
states about is what I already
mentioned includes poll workers
same day registration clerks
office supplies postage
publications and in some cases
the random polling locations
those of you from Bernalillo
county no for example that early
in county has really had to
utilize sort of private
locations in a lot of ways to
make sure that there's ample
access across the county and
those leases cost money on and
and a lot of times those leases
have to be made for multiple
year terms otherwise those
renters will just wait until
they can have a more permanent
at tenant right and so and there
are requirements in the election
code that require them to look
at these rental spaces so there
there's a lot of reasons behind
this that is that is that are
good for voters and good for
election ministration but it
does have a costs.
Next slide.
I'm so we understand that staff
is prepared our budget and
attempted to get us close the
request we need any and again I
can't I can't think Allison
Simon Act we understand that is
it it's a significant increase
in a time when budgets are being
reduced instead of increased
although I do understand we have
some good news on the fiscal
front today but there are some
specific concerns we'd like to
address and I don't know what
each B. two is going to look
like yet when it comes over from
the house I need the same
requests to AGFC and so you know
if it doesn't come over with
some of these fixes we are going
to be us on this committee to
help address some of these
issues for us before it goes to
the governor after her
consideration so first and
foremost neither recommendations
support the status quo staffing
in the administration program
that that's a challenge because
we will be looking at for
allowing potentially or having
to terminate at current staff if
we can't at make that
If we can't make those salary
costs I'm DFA is recommending an
early twenty percent vacancy
rate which we have continually
asked reduce that's just a
tremendously high number and
this doesn't allow us to hire
needed staff to manage increased
demands placed on the office and
and I'll give you an example for
any of you who had anything to
do with filing your ad campaign
finance reports this year we
moved to new system our office
was absolutely slammed with
calls and we had at sort of a
huge struggle responding to
those calls at least in part
because we're still sort of As
staff to a level that doesn't
support the demands of the
athletes I'm the flat
recommendation eliminates a
budget for network support
business filing system support
and production of the blew up
the blue book is something my
office is mandated to produce
and yet we haven't had the funds
to be able to do that for a
while now.
it doesn't allow for published
relate at published rates for
audits or for do it support
services I'm we only have twelve
positions in the election
program and we operationally
cannot afford imposed vacancies
there I and the election
recommendation only accounts for
the local election again we
appreciate that we have the
selection Fund now and has to
provide for all elections in the
state and again in the same
fiscal year would we will have a
statewide primary election so
we're already looking at having
to come back to you next year to
ask for a supplemental in order
to cover that gap which is
problematic right I mean the
fact that we can come to you
today and know that based on the
recommendations we already are
not going to have enough money
to be able to pay their bills in
this next fiscal year that's a
problem.
I'm next slide okay operations
and administration our our
program request here is similar
to what it's been previously we
continue to request funding to
fill a vacant positions and
given the additional lection and
Administration of those funds we
are in need of telling more
elections I. T. and finance
positions in order to manage the
workload more effectively.
so lastly I'm again are FY
twenty two budgets and beyond
expect a higher nor for the
election budget as discussed in
and the reasons discussed these
are legislative mandates not
things that are just would be
nice to have although I I always
feel comfortable coming to ask
you offered for those kinds of
things knowing that they may or
may not be is in the works these
are our absolute direct needs we
do need dedicated funding for
elections moving forward
and and I should mention that in
addition to the request that we
make of the state I am
constantly working at a national
level as well to bring in
continued federal funding for
elections particularly as we're
looking at things like election
security I'll let you know just
as cybersecurity in particular
at is is a is it and national
interest particularly as a lot
of the actors that right now
elections are international we
can't fight those on a state by
state piecemeal made basically
we do need the support of the
federal government we have
received already significant
support in the amount of one
time grants and tools and
resources from the DHS FBI and
other intelligence agencies were
very grateful for our federal
partners that would be really
helpful and that the costs that
I keep advocating for
In particular I'm currently
serving as the president of the
national association of
secretaries of state so I have
this opportunity they have this
bully pulpit we we don't need
you know millions and millions
of dollars every single year but
we do need a dedicated source of
funding to help the state I'm in
making sure that we can meet the
needs I have of our cyber
security and other systems in
any other federal mandates that
might come down moving forward.
and again this request is not an
expansion I think that's the
thing that I really want to
leave this committee with you
know we're we're not asking for
money to do nice things we're
asking to be able to fund the
very real mandates that we have
before us and as an office and
again if we can't get those done
in in this legislative session
for this fiscal year we are only
going to be coming back to you
at this exact same time next
year to ask you to fill that gap
in the meantime counties will go
on re unreimbursed and vendors
will go unpaid right these those
are the real consequences of not
having the the full funding
requests that we've asked for
this year I'm we do need support
and funding those positions on I
would I would almost put that
sort of it towards the top to
manage the workload of those
mandates and again I think you
all and sort of one case or the
other in trying to get what you
need for my office of sort of
experience the challenges of
that particularly in twenty
twenty and so with that Mr
chairman thank you so much for
giving me so much time and and
to give this presentation I
really appreciate you and the
members and I would be happy to
answer any questions you may
have and Veronica as well.
Thank you madam secretary
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary good to see you good
afternoon welcome.
Thank you for your presentation.
I want to start off by saying
that you know your office to me
is is one of the most important
offices of the state I mean it
is just so mission critical we
have a lot of mission critical
parts of state government but
you know the work the work you
do to ensure that democracy
first and foremost that we
expect.
and that all New Mexicans
expected Americans expect just
can't be understated I think we
see nationally how vulnerable
that can be quite frankly if we
don't invest in the systems we
don't invest in staffing
protections and just all the
things that you have worked your
career to provide to us in New
Mexico so first of all thank you
very much for the job that you
and your staff to to do that I I
certainly support giving you the
resources you need on a
consistent basis to have those
resources and be able to invest
in that I mean not short change
at a nickel and dime it would to
invest in a system that is
worthy of our democracy and and
in doing that so madam secretary
Mr chairman I I guess what I'm
hearing you say madam secretary
the bottom line is the funding
that you're asking for that may
not be in the LFC
recommendations are just to kind
of fund mandates that we have
given you it is that the message
I'm hearing on clear.
That that is correct senator and
Mr chairman okay and I
understand that to be the staff
saying that technical support
for your systems
the off year the consolidated
elections primary elections.
I ate I know first hand I'm sure
everyone on this call dis the
new system mandates of the new
upgraded interface you have for
campaign filings and lobbyist
will have to do and all of that
and I think that's definitely a
leap forward as far as a the
disclosure to the citizens of
the state be able to see that
that's a great investment but
obviously you have tech support
needs that are going to continue
with that so let me ask you a
question about the blue book.
Is the blue book out lived its
usefulness with the internet.
Forget.
You know Mr chair and senator
As as sort of but you know I'm
I'm forty five some solidly Gen
acts like and I think you are
Senator and and some others on
this committee but I don't think
it has I am open to trying to
talking about how to do it
differently in the digital age
but I will tell you I get so
many request my office all the
time all the training for the
blue black and there's just
something about it right just
having that sort of little home
of sort of New Mexico knowledge
and that speaks to a lot of
people okay well good to hear I
mean you know people can look up
all the staff but you get out if
I.
The day becomes obsolete you
know definitely you know I would
support not printing it the day
that we arrive at that point
yeah finally I I just want to
thank you madam secretary your
staff care fresco specifically
for working with me very hard
over these final last few months
to work on fine tuning more
transparency frankly with our
lobbying court here in the state
legislature and how that would
work with your system and course
I have a few bills to do that
but just understanding yeah how
those could be integrated with
your office if they pass just
thank you for your staff's
efforts on that your commitment
to that you know we all know
state government if they don't
want something to happen they
can block you all day and make
things different difficult in
your offices clearly committed
to good governance and that
means a lot to me and so
Mr chair so I have a hope we can
support what the secretary is
asking for the public's.
Right thank you senator Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you secretary for the
incredible work that you do and
your presentation and taking the
time today to join us this
afternoon I just want to say
that you and your staff did an
incredible job over this last
very challenging election season
so thank you for that work and I
just want to echo Senator
Steinborn comments that I
definitely support you receiving
the resources you need to
continue to do the incredible
job and keep the staff that you
have and all with a smile on
your face so thank you for your
service.
And just being such incredible
secretary of state we're proud
to have you here in New Mexico
thank you Mr chairman secretary.
Senator.
Thank you Senator Hemphill I
don't see anyone else on the
list madam secretary but first
of all I wanted to say thank you
for all your hard work during
elections during the COVID and
you know not everybody's happy
with the outcome but.
Where it is and so I think you
did a good job our great job I
have no complaints from from
anybody and so that's a good
thing.
and we just appreciate all your
hard work and is everything
you've done for us I do you on
your business side.
If they could can answer the
phones once in awhile that we're
trying to help me because we've
been trying to get in touch with
them.
For a couple weeks now on some
stuff because you can't navigate
the website and so that would
help us immensely if you could
get them to answer the phone.
We've called legislative and you
don't want in the morning and
recall that kennel one in twelve
oh one one oh one.
We just can't get anybody to
answer the phones are our calls
back Mr chairman and tax my
staff right now the now at that
the you need they need to call
you and I think my apologies.
Thank you kind of hit the nail
on the head of exactly where
we're asking what we are asking
for because and never you know
having you go through that is
absolutely and I know you don't
intend this intended this way Mr
chair but that that that is the
worst feeling I could ever have
is that we have a constituent
that is trying to get a hold of
us that they can't because we
are either understaffed don't
have any fund system that we
need to be able to make
constituent needs the way we
want to do so I I truly
apologize Mr chair have someone
call you right away and that
this is this is that thank you
again just.
The need that we're struggling
under right now Mr chairman.
Yes in my whole COVID is if I
experience it and I don't call
you reach out to to fix the
problem because I'm a legislator
and other people are
experiencing and then there are
frustrated and then I get to
spend twenty minutes in the milk
and eggs section of the grocery
store of of why they.
Can't get anybody the secretary
of state's office or detractors
license or whatever section of
the grocery store they catch.
So I appreciate that response in
it's not just meet some other
people that are experiencing to
stop thank you I appreciate
everything you've done for sin
and thank you for your
presentation today.
Thank you all so much we
appreciate working with all of
you and and look forward to at
hopefully cut covering this gap
at the four at age we need this
to the governor and and thank
you all again so much for the
opportunity.
Thank you madam secretary
US treasure I can bring a keep
on the state Senator I can
byrd .
Your our next and.
Mrs course you want to start or
stop.
Yeah thank you Mr chair what
just now sorry about that now
you're okay hopefully we have
any the budget for you all the
state treasurer requested three
hundred and three thousand
dollars or an eight percent
increase mainly for the
administration of the new work
in state program both the LFC
and executive recommend
maintaining the still budget
flat with FY twenty one and they
both match exactly to the key
the recommendations include
enough vacancy savings to fill
approximately two FTE to help
support the work in state
program it of course we've
reached a consensus on
performance measures I'll just
also add that the house
appropriations and finance
committee elected to adopt the
LFC budget although they may be
taking additional action on that
before it leaves their committee
and I believe we also have a Mr
Simon Miller here from DFA who's
there analyst as well if you'd
like to make it some additional
comments on thanks this mile it
Mr chair members of the
committee I don't have any
additional comments it budgets
are flat in are the same so not
much add there thanks.
Thank you treasure I convert.
Good to see you.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you traditional and and
also the shine
we couldn't ask for two better
analysts thank come to our
office that learned.
What our needs are and we
appreciate them very much and
senator
I'm hoping you're enjoying your
new job.
Has as we try to move forward to
this very COVID time one of the
most difficult things for me
today is happen to follow her
down secretary St giver her age
and it made me just feel that
much older
to follow the trail General had
trouble garrison also are under
troubling clone they bring such
energy my agent shows more
after those presentations.
We did send over and I think you
have my one page
requests there in front of you
in some of the highlights and
I'd like to point out.
Yes all investments our cash
management get service
responsibilities were all
managing exemplary fashion our
core business has been proven
manage
currently our fiduciary assets
have exceeded seven billion
dollars which is.
Achievement I'm actually a
record.
This time our investment
earnings last year hundred
seventy eight million dollars
that were distributed back to
the general fund our local
government investment pool which
is the one that we use for the
tribe's four counties for
municipalities that has that has
exceeded one billion dollars
this year and our online portal
we implemented that investors
are L. G. I. P. participants
your account access littering at
their fingertips yeah we're
quite we're quite pleased with
that.
Some of the things we're still
working on I'm sorry I know this
year are Mr chair.
As well as my own which is
financial literacy that was
appropriation that you gave us
two years ago and again last
year yeah I'm that is part of
our current appropriation
recommendations so I'm looking
forward to continuing the
financial literacy program I'm
we also have the able program
that we launched just three
years ago January twenty
eighteen we have to our
anniversary date of January
eighteenth we had six hundred
fifty four counties you are able
Program and that is a tax free
savings account for individuals
with disabilities and we're
quite proud of that.
We also through one of the staff
people that are working in the
able program has particularly in
terms our excuse me enter and
program we hope will begin at
the end of this semester is for
New Mexico highlands university
as we hope to carry that through
the summer and and next call.
I'm
again who use on today with us
as well as Sam Collins who's my
deputy treasurer
that you know findings were
identified in our last year's
audit I think that's three
audits and route it we haven't
had to provide and when I came
in there were several findings
that have just carried over and
carried over and Kerry and
refinance clear all that up and
I'm just very proud of Sam in
you for the work they've done
their.
with the passage Mexico we can
say that usual kind of mention
that.
That was passed last year and
again with no funding I'm we had
our first meeting back in
October of last year when once
the work was all appointed by
the different various people
that had appointments to work
and works we're hitting the
ground running and we're back in
front of you with Senate bill
one twenty nine that has some
changes because we had such a
bad start because of COVID
we're gonna need some
flexibility as we move forward
that program that's one of the
reasons that we have.
That we're asking for increased
our budget.
Yeah presenter you Senator we're
huge supporters to work and say
program
just remind you that sixty seven
percent of New Mexico's private
sector workers have no
retirement savings sixty seven
percent that's two thirds
and we all over to burst or.
Yes like we didn't see that on
Saturday
too much to my chagrin but we we
want to see that was working to
say programs you know forward.
Well pointed out will serve time
in they're both turn to currency
slack budget of the three point
six nine six on million dollars
but we're asking for an
additional three hundred three
thousand and that is for our
work in state program currently
we have one dedicated employee
to just work in state and
industry overwhelming her and so
we're looking to fill another
vacant position we currently
have over twenty percent you can
see I have thirty five FTEs only
twenty seven occupied.
Done a little bit of salt to the
wound agencies is that I have
retirement is going to happen
you earliest April it could be
postponed till may depending on
whether we can hire in that
position and get the track cross
training we but we also have two
resignations
and sorry say dem ladies thanks
John it's very difficult
currently with.
Staffing as difficult it is to
keep in place.
Virtual we're not working from
home anymore we're we're
literally leaving work
everybody's used
to doing two jobs and so that's
why we're asking two thousand
administrative positions so we
would ask that you give every
consideration for increased our
budget and what I will long
stand for any questions you
might have thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr treasure I don't
see anybody's hand up and so I
guess I'll start my questions.
on the working say programs
you're asking for for three
hundred and thirty.
And that for vacancy and the
costs associated.
What are the other costs
associated with that just so I
can get a comprehension.
Well we're working program it's
new.
and we're just starting to work
for work I'm the changes that we
have provided
Senate one line is just the
liability insurance of the board
that we're also looking for
consultant can actually help us
but free market.
that would be somebody on a
national level we hope.
Actually we actually right here
in in New Mexico I'm I know that
we have several investment
bankers the gallery to as local
banks from Los crucis is one of
our we had somebody from the
Santa Fe area I'm so we're gonna
need that type of expertise that
comes in because we feel it's a
conflict of interest if we use
my staff my investment team to
give advice to the work in state
program.
Since it's managed by.
Board yes appointed number eight
members by the governor the some
buyer
president pro tem our leaders in
the house and Senate dispose
Marty so those are some of the
expenses are coming and then on
the vacant positions we would
like to feel.
I'm sure one of them to help
with the.
Individual that's currently the
interim executive director for
work in state and that's a full
time employee in my office bad
employee as water great and a
lot of work with.
Savings started in their many
many years ago and then went to
regulation licensing and then
now and my office so I'm that's.
Yes your work and save program I
hope to the that answers
questions if you want more
detail I can them I know that
Claudia street is not on the
line right now that the Sam
whose first your device you're
going to need more Mr chair.
Thank you sure sure I know I
think that can answer my
question I think the only
question is is and I'm kind of
looking at here so the person
that does a tax free savings
accounts for the individuals
with disabilities they can't be
linked in any way shape or form.
but those saving savings
accounts or.
Because there may be are paired
to be a conflict and interest
want to separate us we want to
separate I'm we don't want any
thought of the.
And so I'm two investment people
but I currently have the next
page if we have more funding I
would like to express third
person into our investment
program we've only got two
using them and then try to have
them working working state first
of all I'm drawing from from an
agency that is already
overwhelmed
in just meeting timeliness and
as you can do as you can imagine
with interest rates literally
one basis point in some areas
while working at the gap there's
a tristate markets I'm so yes to
answer your question is is I
fear there could be.
I thought of impropriety
instructor with work and say.
Center and that's what we're
trying to separate.
I think.
From my perspective we'll try to
get you all the help because
that helps.
Our pair up are you are being
when they have other investments
savings for live in I know that
and you know my kids trying to
get them to save and that goal
to make a dollar twenty years.
Becomes a challenge when they're
young and like to invest and in
apps like Robinhood in game
stop.
Get rich scheme that.
Comes and goes like.
I appreciate that and will look
very hard at that and and see
what House approach does for you
and then see what happens on the
Senate side when we get to.
Thank you for your presentation
let me just double check I don't
have anybody's hand raised even
though you hold a whole lot of
cash for the state.
And cities and counties
I think people don't realize how
much money you have in the
treasury and how much you
protected New Mexicans several
years ago when more trouble.
And I appreciate that maybe a
lot of people don't know that
you did protect a lot of New
Mexicans you do the right thing
I think at the end the day and I
wish you the best on the state
investment council.
And so I appreciate that so
thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you.
Many.
But the members of the committee
Tomorrow we're gonna start
hearing we should hear house
bill eleven should be on that
calendar
I know that there is some
amendments that are being talked
about I'll try to get those out
as soon as we can.
And and for those of us on
Friday and those committees I'm
gonna have John reach out to you
and waiting and said that
structure up for Thursday.
I did add to our agenda at the
call of the chair.
In case there's something that
we need to.
look at immediately a run up and
fix.
It's my understanding that we're
gonna be all in person maybe
around the first of March but
I'd like to start sooner and I'm
trying to get that by leadership
when we get House Bill to over
that way we can really start
looking at that get the junior
built out of our way and on its
way to the house
and then I want to circle around
with a couple of you doctor
bills that you have in the
committee Senator Diamond
Senator Hemphill center time and
and I think Senator Gonzales I
think I have something for you
Senator Woods I talked to you
earlier someone circle back up
background with you guys to make
sure where we're at on those
bills
And so I'm trying to get our
committee members just so you
know.
Few bills out of our way in and
down to the floor on their way
and go from there.
Any questions.
Senator Steinborn that my wife
loved you texting on Valentine's
day.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman I'm not sure what
that means.
You are doing your money yes
thank you.
For.
Thank you.
Valentine's day to you Mr
chairman.
Yeah my Valentine said happy
Valentine's to use texting.
All right thank you guys
appreciate it thanks.
But.
