Senator Padilla can you send a
text message sent to.
I mean that and now sits on the
floor yesterday for them to be
here at nine thirty in.
If the governor is going to call
special session over guns we're
not gonna have any gun bills
today so gonna wait to see how
that plays out I don't have time
in my life for special session
so we may roll over the gun
bills today of we're gonna come
back after the session will here
and then
so we'll start with senator Tom
and
Good morning.
To have this completed Senator
Gonzales complete excuse for
health reasons and and that sort
of go along with the other
members are sent Allman short
sweet and to the point.
That's that's me.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
good morning and members of the
finance committee for a place is
going to have the opportunity to
present Senate bill three oh
four which appropriate milk
eight million dollars to fund an
innovative non credit short term
but came to C. N. M. as you know
Mr touch share employers are
requiring fast agile and
relevant training for existing
and upcoming job openings this
funding will potentially serve
hundreds of additional students
this program is not covered by
the opportunity scholarship
repeat this program is not
covered by opportunity
scholarship this bill can
funding will help support the
development of new training on
offerings as employers and
unemployed workers in the state
emerge from the the COVID.
Pandemic.
This is.
The Mr chair
this funding will potentially.
The potential server thousand
additional students over four
year period.
Similar of programming at C. N.
M..
Has resulted in over seven
hundred years for jobs and
technical fields such as
software development web
development digital media
production and status science.
Mr chair if.
One year after graduating the
average deep dive coding
program.
Thank you it I think come can
increase by forty seven percent.
Resulting in an average salary
of fifty thousand dollars.
Over three hundred companies
have higher deep dive graduates
including local companies such
as are just twenty one smart.
cone technologies of whom time.
Mellow of in rural sourcing as
well as global companies
including Google and many other
New Mexico and Canada as well as
New Mexico government agencies.
So this the.
This is a great program
It's really an economic
development program.
And the.
Reasons so with me Mr chair is
Khalid executive director the
CNM ingenuity.
As well as Andreas scenarios
which then who is a senior
director of this CNN integrity
ingenuity programs there with me
a.
This morning to answer questions
and.
And then have given up with
opportunity to make some
comments if they so desire.
And we have several folks in the
audience would like to make a
brief comment thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Senator you have any
comments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee addresses notice which
then senior director of
workforce training programs at
CNN.
today to advocate for this bill
that will expand workforce
training specifically for
critical industry sectors with
the skilled workforce shortfall
including technology
transportation then.
You may be wondering why
traditional higher education
programs aren't enough to meet
workforce demands according to a
very recent study by.
Not to be credentials are
growing in popularity with nice
person.
Can't stand at years and seventy
six percent of employers more
likely to hire a candidate who
is our new one.
Taking two to four years to earn
a degree could be much more
expensive and increasingly
irrelevant to obtaining a good
paying job however workforce
training is not a replacement
for these but it's added to the
skills learned in our immersive
training programs are eligible
for college credit to see you
three for prior learning a range
from three to twenty four credit
hours over the past eight years
nearly a thousand individuals
have completed our xcelerated
technology programs over seventy
five companies have an important
bodies graduates earnings total
nearly fifty million dollars an
increase wages if I have the
time and literally tell you
hundreds of amazing success
stories our intention is not to
replicate or replace existing
funding streams the opportunity
scholarship funds traditional
degree pathways but not
workforce training programs the
workforce innovation opportunity
act covers tuition.
Many gaps remain in many New
Mexicans were not eligible for
funding to cover tuition for
programs such a CDL for the
could prepare to be a semi truck
driver in just a few weeks or
coding boot camp where they can
prepare to be a software.
The outcomes are expense in the
in the economic impact is
significant the opportunity to
change places with federal so
thank you for your time.
The one talking.
One one.
Is.
Right.
This is our.
On the morning chairman members
of the committee that Roosevelt
with the New Mexico rural
electric cooperative association
and we've had an opportunity to
work with C. N. M. Rio Rancho
and see an image in unity over
the last four five years we've
had a an agreement with them we
have a natural training you are
there we have transformer
training we have underground
training overhead training
climbing school training and so
CNM ingenuity is doing some
great things with their students
and when we are conducting this
training we incorporate their
students that are in the
partnership and actor program
into our training program so
they get some really valuable
training so we stand in support
of this bill because of the
trades and the training and and
the great things that CNM
ingenuity is doing thank you
thank you yes ma'am we have
anybody Ms.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
still in creating it I am here
to support Senate bill three oh
four I am from with rock Arizona
which is on the Navajo Nation
them I'm a tribal member I live
in Rio Rancho have lived there
for the past thirteen years with
my husband and three children we
own a software development
company called techno solutions
LLC which we started in twenty
fifteen in twenty eighteen I
graduated from a CNM ingenuity
deep dive coding boot camp and
since then I've been able to
develop websites
I've been working with tribal
organizations even on a project
regarding language preservation
we I recently worked for the
governor tribal ceremonial and
you know amended my technical
skills there so I just wanted to
offer my support for the program
it's helped me to quickly re
skill and
improve my company and my own
professional development thank
you that that many.
I can't hear what we're gonna
have one person that can't hear
stand up and testify.
Senator Rodriguez is gonna.
Out of the system is from
Albuquerque.
Representative.
All so we can hear you yeah.
I think that hello my name is
Roberto Chavez and I am from CM
I am a student Representative
with the commission for students
at seeing them and I support
this bill fully and you know the
allocation of those resources
and I fully support seeing them
and how much the help the
students
in their workforce training but
you know it's really a great
impact on the economy and see
them to so much work for
community so I just want to
share my support and have a
great day thank you we'll take
one more.
Step up to the Mike in in the
same name and.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Chris overcome
the founder and CEO of a company
called build robots were
headquartered in Albuquerque for
a tech company we have twenty
New Mexicans that are doing
really interesting rewarding I
paying work in robotics I'm a
strong proponent of this bill we
essentially as most of you know
traditional learning is not a
great fit for all of our young
folks and there's many through
whatever lay learners not great
for a traditional classroom
environment that are being left
behind and programs like C. N.
M. A. Judy provide those those
young folks opportunity to do
and and become rewarding
contributors to our to our
community and have built robots
we hired suffer developer's
Technician field service
technicians other technicians
they're building robotic tools
and systems and and those people
would not have had opportunities
other than having a boot camp
type environment to learn and
then become it and now there are
paths that really rewarding
careers so thank you thank you
and just because the time we and
we'll take one more.
Sometimes you guys drive from
Albuquerque somehow and we we
kind of get a Russian because we
got so many bills and we only
we're only gonna be here for
another hour that thank you very
much Mr chair members of the
committee my name John as well
I'm a resident Albuquerque the
current chair of a the workforce
board the central New Mexico
which is us and all Bernalillo
Valencia towards counties and
and deep coating graduates and
others from the short term
accounts insanity are a key
component of the workforce
development businesses need
people naturally and and these
graduates fit right and I'm also
the founder of the five coding
boot camps which was then
acquired by the NM and on the
CEO and founder of a co founder
of a software development
company in Albuquerque and the
life changing stories and just
to be clear someone can come in
with no experience and three
months later be in a job that's
paying fifty K. plus and within
a few years making upwards of
six figures and there's nothing
else I can do that that kind of
upward mobility that quickly so
we appreciate the support that
everyone's already given and
this will really boost the
chances of hundreds and up to a
thousand more New Mexicans so
thank you very much.
Real quick.
I do apologize because sometimes
I don't I get to moving fast and
people driving distance and and
I just want to be fair but but
we are limited time thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee
members John bills president of
Mexico digital which is a
digital marketing consultancy
base in Albuquerque after twenty
five years of to digital
marketing leadership at the
corporate level with companies
like Nestle Ford Motor Company
American Express in others I
wanted to bring that capability
here and moved here to build a
business and I've been able to
do that my also mentor start ups
and activated them another part
of CNM ingenuity and serving the
board Presbyterian plan and
explore.
but my biggest love is helping
build this capacity traditional
marketing which I have been able
to do with CNM ingenuity my
business the next additional I
have actually hired CNN
ingenuity graduates from the of
digital media program and the
digital marketing program which
I helped to start a new version
of their I've been able to bring
of those that talent to bear
against my business working for
clients in Singapore Santa Fe
and all over the country so it's
extremely valuable I could not
find the talent I could not
build the talent anywhere else
and so that's why I support this
bill.
Thank you we have anybody on
zoom in we have anybody in
opposition in the room.
Russian from committee members
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for your presentation thank
you senator Clemente UP so
Mister chairman I actually had
an opportunity to be at the
facility where this work is
being done it is is truly
outstanding I think to the
projects I looked at I'm not I
don't have any doubt they're
gonna wind up being very
successful start ups out of that
operation number one number two
I happened to be there that day
that they were going to crash a
satellite into a asteroid or
something and and we're watching
Center comment are left I guess
he I wasn't interested I don't
know but
So we're kind of the satellite
we were with he was driving the
sale it so we were tag teaming
it that day but I will say that
I I've never seen like as much
roll up your sleeves and they
were just using Google wire
bubble to you know the the
public rappers and everything
they could find all the supplies
Mr chairman I could find and
they were just doing all these
really amazing things so this is
something that we should truly
be investing and and and helping
start up.
Share this.
Chairman I just want to thank
senator Tom and and everyone for
being here today in training is
something that we lack in so
many areas truly I think in all
schools and in all universities
and and that community colleges
I think we can go wrong in
continuing to train our students
in different areas and I want to
just thank you for that whenever
someone unless we have other
people I wanted to make a motion
to have okay questions thank
you.
And we're gonna explain emotions
yes everybody extent yeah what
does it cost person can occur
and what is your capacity
thank you for that question Mr
chair for two million expert
witness.
Yes members of the committee the
the capacity under this funding
would allow for approximately a
thousand more learners
potentially more depending on
which courses folks choose to
take over the over time the most
expensive courses cost
approximately ten thousand
dollars but there are some
programs that are shorter in
duration they're approximately
four thousand dollars.
and given that its workforce
training that's the full costs
associated with providing that
training as there's no hire its
subsidy for work for string.
Thank you so very from ten
thousand to what.
Floor to ceiling.
The floor is likely
Twenty five hundred and the very
top of the ceiling the for
example the line workers program
which is currently sitting at
thirteen thousand.
For two thousand and and where
is your greatest number I'm
trying to figure out a number
here and may have you call me
with Adrian in the back what is
your greatest number that you
get.
Truck drivers at.
The five hundred what is the
greatest number of that student
population.
The gentleman yield
the single largest number of
trainees in a single training
program is CDL and we expect to
training a little over two
hundred and forty tractors this
year
across the different programs
which is a program Senator
Padilla referenced we will train
approximately two hundred people
this year.
And that's in a three month
program correct.
So maybe longer so maybe short
that's right the the longest is
twelve weeks the shortest is
four weeks.
At I'm I want you to go back in
the back to me with a drink
because we're gonna trace drugs
cell numbers
Because I think this is this is
really critical right and the
now the numbers two hundred
fifty truck drivers in the
program is is quite a few that I
needed about four five.
In my business and it's just
it's hard and and my kids I made
them get their CD els and it's
hard for them to to drive a
truck and even me drive a truck
with their short drive on the
Sunday or something
so Senator Rodriguez will ready
for a motion.
Well let's explain the motion
before you go there you so we're
at the point in time in the
session center you don't need
this bill because a program
exists right and rather you
chase the bill through the
roundhouse we're gonna put this
in the budget at a certain rate
we're determined capacity right
now and so that's why those
numbers are are key in
interesting to me know that so I
will entertain a motion right
now thank you Mr chairman and
senator Tom and as you may be
aware bills like these will come
in here and if the money is
going to be put somewhere else
or does not exist it is
temporarily table doesn't mean
it's against anything that you
did but since the funding will
be there at least to a great to
some extent that's why someone
to move for temporarily table
which is the protocol.
Okay.
Motion the temporary second by
Senator Padilla
any objection to.
It's the second meet with Adrian
hope okay nine zero.
Seven.
Senate bill one would do that
but this one.
Thank.
Senator
Thank you thank you Mr.
We have you have numbers here
Representative stand up because
I they're in their own lane in.
Yes.
good Sierra you have any
questions internal answer phone
in the back thank you thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee.
a on twenty Senate bill or house
bill one twenty six.
oppose the positive cable.
You should talk about like this.
Thank you.
Along the top the list kids
graduate.
In that case will accept a
motion Mr chan.
We can do that.
Short and sweet.
That we're gonna start I way
right thank you Mr chairman so
house bill one twenty six is
amended is the high school
graduation requirements bill so
we're moving from twenty four
credits to twenty two credits
one thing I want to emphasize
and my co sponsor Representative
Lane will explain a little bit
later there are few aspects I
think are really really
important so
what we're doing in some of
these credits is.
Although we're reducing the
amount of elective credit for
students I would say that we are
opening up space within each of
the requirements for students to
explore their individual
interests so for example English
credits stand up for and three
of those need to be in sequence
so think English nine English
ten English eleven however that
fourth required credit could be
of anything related into English
so thank journalism creative
writing things there
math we're staying at for same
thing you're gonna have some
that are required and then some
that are at the students liberty
social studies is another one
and I'm a social studies
teachers so this is near and
dear to my heart we're moving
from three point five credits
over to four in the same thing
three are spoken for US history
world history government
economics and personal finance
is embedded into the standards
of economics however that fourth
could be anything if you want
take psychology you can't
sociology you may take it
And then we have for electives
so you can have pathways in
these if you're interested in
languages this is where you can
take classes as a student but
overall Mr chairman and senator
is is that we're trying to open
up modernize and really capture
student interest and engagement
because one thing that I can at
the high school level is
engagement the other thing we're
embedding within the standards
are career technical educational
communities and expanding those
opportunities
and all turn it over to my co
sponsor thank you Mr chair and
and I'll be bringing such.
the issue of going on a twenty
four to twenty two enough for
two so
just on the point of taking the
the credit requirements from
twenty four twenty two if you
look at the top ten performing
states in our in our nation from
educational standpoint only one
requires twenty four the average
is actually twenty one and a
half which were still above and
nothing within the bill prohibit
schools from going higher so for
example Hobbs they require
twenty six they're free to
continue to do that so that
changes this just freeze up
students or they don't have to
check the box for artificial
elective they can do something
like workplace learning go in
off campus do those kinds of
things.
With regard to algebra two
We are only currently one of
twelve states that requires us
to to as a high school
graduation requirement
only fourteen percent of
employers require outreach to
level math
the the bill still requires all
need to be offered at each high
school it just what it does is
it puts in the hands of students
that yeah if they want to pursue
college that's fine go to
algebra two pre calc route if
you are interested maybe in the
trades and you can substitute
one of the math of core
requirements for something like
a CTE mass so in really the
theme of the bill is to put more
ownership in the hands of our
students and to put more
ownership in our local districts
there are there are there is one
new component to this bill as
well it creates two of local
district credits so each school
board will vote on and implement
what they believe is best for
their local districts so you
know I I feel like I know what
what the needs are for aspect
but I may not know what the
needs are Los Lunas so that this
provides a little more
individualized approach to our
educational system as well and I
think when we give our students
more buy in at the high school
level into their education
result in them being in the
classroom more being more
motivated to actually study and
get things done so thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you we'll go to the
audience nobody on soon anybody
in support.
Want to get two or three
standing here all the time it
anybody travel any distance that
we need to hear from first.
This not.
One more we can hear from side
stand disparities but here we
from here so now I'm back on
that
again I'm getting somewhere
along the way for not Mr
chairman I would never want to
do that to you thank you members
of the committee stand around
for the superintendents guess
what we were included in this
discussion.
We work with this group as we
try to come up with good
legislation that sort
counterbalanced we're trying to
do new and different career
technical education no we've
been doing in the other
academics we believe this in
fact doesn't prove that came it
doesn't keep them but instead
changes the specter of what the
classes may be offered important
last point.
Local districts will still
likely enforce more credits did
you see in this I don't believe
that lines table changing heard
Hobbs one of my old districts
they've they've not reduce the
twenty six credit requirements
so Mr Chairman shares I'm sorry
he just left of members the
committee we sense full support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you your next Senate
realize we don't have a chair
here okay thank you very much
you're next madam chair members
of the committee Matt Paul from
public charter schools of New
Mexico we also stand in support
of the bill having more
flexibility for our schools
allows us to focus on our
mission specific education and
so that reduction in credits we
think will empower our schools
to be able to to serve their
kids in the way that they they
they wish to do so we appreciate
the sponsors for their work and
support the bill thanks.
Thank you very much all right do
we have anyone against the bill
here the public okay you want to
come up and state your name
please.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Chelsea
Canada and I am the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce the chamber
respectfully opposes the bill in
its current form we support a
high school diploma and
experience that makes our
students college and career
ready unfortunately though we
appreciate the intention of this
bill today versifi student
pathways to graduation we cannot
support it for prime or
primarily two reasons it removes
removes algebra two as a
graduation requirement and it
removes two semesters of a
foreign language as a graduation
requirement by removing these
courses from the requirements
for diploma we will be putting
students at risk of not being
accepted into our state's
flagship university UNM which
currently require both we don't
have enough counselors to make
sure students fully understand
the life impacts of their course
selections we urge you to vote
no on this bill and seriously
consider its unintended
consequences thank you.
Thank you anyone else in the
audience anyone on soon.
Important okay thank you very
much can we go to committee
members Senator share had his
hand up first and Senator
Diamond Senator Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair.
For a long time I thought that
the state ought to mandate
fewer.
But not but still have a number
so whether the number twenty
four twenty two hundred
seventeen doesn't matter what
the state out of mandate half
for two thirds of those.
We look to local communities to
do the rest.
Part of that is you can learn a
lot of of math if you learn how
to weld.
you can learn a lot of math is
an auto mechanic.
You don't think you're learning
math but if you're gonna do we
those properly you have to learn
math and so I I that's why I
think that we can.
We control a lot of us the same
thing which is going to write a
report on what you just did to
the to the automobile.
You have to.
Be able to write so I'd I I
think this is a fine first up I
don't think it goes far enough
because we had a mandate that
we're going to do a certain
amount of math a certain amount
of history a certain amount of
English let local communities to
the rest.
For the work force for that
community so.
Hello for you you know I don't
want to.
Okay have Senator Diamond next
thank you madam chair thank you
the sponsor of the bill I I
heard about this bill this
morning on on the news and
actually to tell you I don't
think they did a very fair job
of exposing this it it almost
not is that the legislature was
lowering the bar for two for
these high school students and
and after presentation doesn't
do that at all what this bill
does is it allows flexibility in
more local control to to
implement whatever kind of
graduating requirements they
want and I think that
Representative Lane you started
off perfectly said look our top
ten performing states are are
requiring lower credits and so
clearly we cannot say that by
adding additional credit somehow
we're going to remove ourselves
from the bottom though the list
so what let's let's do anything
the other top ten performing
states are doing so I will
support it because I want to
support the bill so thank you
guys for bringing forward.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chair and wraps and
Mr leader welcome to the
committee thank you comments and
questions number one algebra two
good riddance
Yes
it's it's good to know it's it's
it's certainly an elective for
those that intend to use algebra
to rest of their lives and I
with the institution well
okay number two the serious
questions there was a comment
that was brought up about
college eligibility and tracking
with UNM.
And I don't know the specifics
but I just want to ask the
question has that is that
tracking is it is there anything
to that or in the works to make
sure that these online.
Mr chairman and senator
Steinborn yes and I went to that
a couple different ways so
currently and I think there's a
bit of a misrepresentation
currently in our graduation
requirements we do not require
two years of a language so this
is staying true to that but if
you look at the elective there
is a pathway for languages other
than English also if you look at
the first part of the bill that
is graduate profiles are.
Profiles of the graduate I
should say this is where we're
involving the community on what
they want to see in a graduate
we had some awesome
Examples from Aztec and they did
multiple for different career
and University College pathways
that's something we hope that
students communities school
boards will adopt what they want
to see in a prospective graduate
and then through
the the
Now I'm losing the term the
profiles for students that they
have to complete with their
teacher yearly.
They're able to track with their
counselor with their teachers
their progress toward their goal
to make sure that if they want
to go to the university of New
Mexico and there's a language
requirement that they're on
track to fill that if they're
looking to enter a career
technical field nursing welding
any of those that they're taking
the appropriate classes if it
calls for algebra two then
taking algebra two because it'll
be available there okay thank
you for that and Mr chair
Representative leader the
government in finance I want to
ask about this house floor
amendment and putting financial
literacy in with government.
We talk a lot about the
importance of financial literacy
and it is important to teach our
kids and so I guess kind of a
two part question how are we
meeting fully integrating that
into these new standards and by
combining it with the government
requirement are we diluting one
or both effectively would you
kind of speak to the financial
literacy and all that in in
chairman and Senator Steinborn I
want to say that the amendment
that was put on the floor was to
expand the name of economic so
currently in the new social
studies standards the name rates
economics and personal financial
literacy so the class that I
teach and internet type school
and there are twenty five in the
new social studies standards.
Finance personal financial
literacy standards and I think
of it in the way that if we're
going to teach students how to
be responsible with their money
different ways of investing
money then we also need to have
kind of a macro view how does
the economy work right how does
the stock market works what are
factors that affect the stock
market so that they can come
back to their personal finance
lessons in how that person we
may affect the decisions that
they may I will say Mister
chairman Senator Steinborn the.
Economics and the government
class we're keeping those
basically the same it's about a
half semester each but I will
say is an educator that teaches
these classes I try to integrate
because I think we all know as
policy makers and many people in
the audience that government and
economics are very much
integrated and woven together so
I try to make it as a one year
class to teach both while
showing students the interplay
between both subjects Mr chair
while just to check on that with
the new social studies standards
that went into effect really now
from K. all the way through
twelve financial literacy is
being taught at each grade level
in grade grade level appropriate
ways and that's new I'm so when
you talk about Mr chair Senator
we talk about that's something
that every kid needs to learn
our state it it's happening now
which I think is is a motion to
change and there's there's some
studies that show that if you
teach it.
Through that approach rather
than just a standalone class in
high school is actually much
more effective and that's what
New Mexico's doing now.
The ticket to a better
negotiating their allowance.
As thank you guys for your for
your good work on this bill Mr.
Questions.
And parents get involved in
their kids education.
and life struggles but if we
don't start.
Just like on I understand we
understand.
It's.
Thing that I think should come
next how much online high school
has that story.
The online because that's kind
of the future of learning as a
moving the colleges a move on in
life you're able navigate you
know meeting in New York in New
Mexico putting all the stuff
that's going to have to change.
Cations just.
To think first of all the
sponsors of the bill because I
know you've worked very hard on
this we visited on this in the
house chamber wall back
Representative Romero and you
know that one of the things I
find that's very important here
is that it gives the students
some by in students want to know
that they have some flexibility
that they have decision making
ability and that is going to be
respected as to what they're
going to take for example one of
the one of the points you made
Representative or
representatives both is that you
know given the students some
choice for that one of the
electives maybe even more as
they're moving along the process
you know we all know that things
change our interests change the
pressure many times changes us
right and sometimes you just
feel like this is too much for
me I want to do something
different but it's still
education and it's about how I
proceed in life and prosper in
life and so you know I very much
want to give you commendations
for your hard work and in
looking to to find a balance and
a consensus on this whole thing
so Mr chairman I move it to
pass.
And
okay well the water somebody
else doesn't do passed motion
placement services.
Okay thank you called the right.
Yes.
couples excused Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Yes yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods here's Senator
Rodriguez yes there are many of
us yes.
S. is nine two zero.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chairman I do have a bill that
is looking at dual credit
possibilities for distance
learning it was tabled and House
Appropriations if this committee
were interested to put money
toward that pilot I would
certainly accept it thank you Mr
Representative there some LFC
REC bills are in your committee
that house out
will be forward looking cutting
anything you need is those bills
will move all right thank you Mr
I'm just Representative Sarinana
is been sitting here for a while
for those of you that didn't
hear I guess we're going to
special session over guns so
we're gonna hold off for a
little bit before your gun bills
and and Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Morton suite.
The only way the things okay so
thank you Mr chairman we're here
to present house bill one eighty
one which is national board
certification
this bill that's more toward
basis the highest level of it of
certification a teacher or an
educator can get on this bill is
trying to extend the
certification to counselors they
were there any certify but we're
trying to bring them into the
The funding formula counselors
and educators who have gone into
administration would like to
continue and that their stipe
and also on.
The first.
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I will also keep a
very short my name's John to
return with a have to New Mexico
and just
in response to some of the
comments by chairman knows
earlier the national board
certification is something that
is meaningful and measurable on
outcomes are reading and math
for students so this bill in its
attempt to modernize the way
that the state of New Mexico
treats but the the units
provided to people who achieve
this certification in the
classroom and for those who take
those skills into administration
rolls into our schools as we
learn more about educational
process is we know that a good
administrator that knows what
good teaching is and knows how
to recognize good teaching and
those types of skills that is a
benefit to the school community
itself so I'll stop there and
Sanchez thank you we'll go to
the audience anybody in support.
we heard from stand in the I
don't know who sends would have
come out we'll take for two or
three.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee Mike do
Rio the education director
department director at the
Landel foundation we stand in
strong support of HB want anyone
this bill will help achieve
equity for the salary
differential process to ensure
that every New Mexico New Mexico
educator that is completed the
demanding and B. C. T.
certification process is
recognized for it is a common
sense bill that continues to
reward educators who have
completed this rigorous process
even as they continue on as
teacher coaches principals or
superintendents Mr chairman
members of the committee we know
that we need to recruit highly
effective principles this bill
would remove a to sit
disincentive for nationally
board certified teachers to
consider moving into areas of
administration for these reasons
we are to do pass thank you.
Members of the committee my name
is Alan Bernstein president of
the Albuquerque teachers
federation and for twenty years
a national board certified
teacher it was almost ten years
ago when and nationally board
certified counselor in
Albuquerque public schools came
to me and asked why she was not
eligible for the same
differential as the teachers
were and I looked at the bill
saw that the language needed a
very subtle change to be more
inclusive and I hope that you'll
support this change almost ten
years after she brought the
issue to me in the first place I
think it would benefit a lot of
educators and their students
thank you thank you we don't
have anybody on zoom.
Anybody in opposition.
A question from committee
members.
Senator what.
Thank you Mr.
Representative.
So you're talking about a
staff and for this.
What kind of strife and are you
talking about Mr Chairman
representative Madam
representative thank you Mr
chairman and Senator
I'm I'm initial teacher and we
just get a state been every year
annually it's between depends on
the district but I would make
about seventy seven thousand
extra and that's part of the
incentive to get this done but
this certification is a very
rigorous process so anybody gets
it through it is has really
achieved amazing and and learn
everything about the their
practice does that help.
What I'm what I'm wondering
there's not any funding listed.
In my FIR and evidently there's
a fun question or would be in
Senate finance former chair a
out that's the question I was
asking you know you're expecting
if we don't put money in the
budget for this and pass
legislation then the school
district needs the cost of this
out of their budget and I'm sure
so most have surpluses that they
could do that with but I was
just wondering.
You know the dollar figure per
head teacher thank and they
should be worth have use that
just that particular dollar
figure in mind it is time for
that Mr chair and representative
thank you Mr chair and senator
woods currently national board
certified teachers as the
current statutes written receive
a one point five unit
differential and that's based on
the final student unit value so
this doesn't appear as a
traditional line item but rather
as districts report how many
National Board certified
educators they have in their
district the report that to the
PED and then the PED disperses
those funds to the district so
Mr chair and and Representative.
One point five on the schedule.
Our schedule three tier what
would that be what would be that
dollar amount.
Mr Chairman Senator I know I was
making about seven thousand.
Okay okay Mister chair I believe
quit thank you thank you
Russians from committee members.
There was a motion.
Motion for two passed by Senator
Steinborn second by Senator via
We call the roll.
Colorado.
Okay so.
Yes.
Their compasses excused Senator
Diamond.
This is excused Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez.
Senator Munoz yes eight to one.
Okay in the past thank you
representative Lente Younis
thanks
Senator Steinborn made the
motion.
Senator Padilla second.
Right.
you may be failing math and
Senate finance Representative
Lente thank you Mr chairman
thank you madam vice chairwoman
committee members good morning
the purpose my statements this
morning by saying that you
should have it updated FIR from
ECECD in your folder stating
that the
That there is no fiscal impact
to their to their department
related to this bill but none
the less than you begin by
stating that house bill one
forty eight amend the early
childhood education and care act
to authorize the early childhood
education and care department to
enter into inter governmental
agreements with tribes if
requested by a try for the
purpose of funding and
administering relief tribal
early education and care
programs further more would
allow I tried to use its own
culturally and linguistically
relevant standards assessments
and evaluations and doing so
with that Mr chairman and
committee members I stand for
any questions thank you I can go
we have to we have three people
four people listed in Mr Warren.
Well there's one.
Two million Bernadette and Rick.
I am good morning Mr members of
the committee Ellen Warren on
the budget because of career
pathways and advocacy for the
Landel foundation we stand
strong support of this bill the
CCD Department has done a good
job of partnering with tribes
with this this bill will do is
actually put in statute the
requirement that the CCD
Department enters into these
agreements but currently it
recognizes the the authority
that tribes have to put in place
their cultural and
linguistically relevant
standards and the important part
about this is that we can't
really predict what future
administrations are going to do
they might in fact a future
leader might choose to not enter
into agreement with tribes or
may put in stipulations that
would actually make it
impossible for the tribes to
actually use the funding without
undermining what they're
choosing to do for their
children we have a history of
impositions on tribal
governments and tribal
communities and tribal schools
that have forced the loss of
language that a force the loss
of culture this bill actually
help tribes to partner with the
state effectively to maintain
the early childhood systems that
they choose to develop for their
own communities really this is
an issue of local control so we
stand strong support energy to
pass.
Thank you.
Tell me say in the.
He acted conditionally and
steady in secretary for you CCD
so I have first hand knowledge
of working with tribal
communities and the ideas and
the importance of
passing this bill because there
are vital to the services and
tribal communities that
otherwise would not be available
to them being so will be in the
school system's been overwhelmed
by services that
they cannot get providers to
their communities but also with
the C. C. D. as part of our for
our five year strategic plan so
we're always looking at ways to
strengthen our relationships
with tribal communities so I
have seen the positive outcomes
of these agreements I've seen
them in progress I've seen them
in process and I've seen the
amazing outcomes of what they
can do for our twenty three
public transportation time New
Mexico so I strongly
In support of the bill thank
you.
You work for the agency I do you
to read the comments or
questions.
good two more a permanent or
who's gonna go Rick.
Hello.
Chairman and committee members
names Bernalillo hardy with
animated vote we are in full
support of H. B. one four eight
as a parent I'm very excited
about this bill following the
outcome of the housing Martinez
this bill is a good way to take
a step forward towards the best
packed practices and evidence
based interventions by
collaborating with tribes and
pueblos
to address the inequities of our
educational system thank you and
thank you for this thing
chairman.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
former governor Rick be here
from the promoters suki.
We are one of the tribal
communities that have entered
into an intergovernmental
agreement with ECT ECT and we
request the committee to support
this bill because it's truly
providing resourcing for our
young children.
One specific I have a
granddaughter that this in the
program I have a daughter that
runs the ECECD program at the
Public Sikki and seen that
opportunity for children we
encourage the committee to
support this bill to again
putting a seat for the future
generations in our community and
when we're looking at data we're
growing our young kids and most
importantly again our
relationship with Landel
foundation again with keris
learning center to develop
language and curriculum
development for our community
and as a previous language
teacher I see the need for the
future of our community because
language is very important come
in the components of song.
Dance it cetera as we move
forward in our ways of life
so you were encouraged committee
to make it to pass on house bill
one forty eight thank you and
have a good day.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman and I think this is a
very real good morning
Representative just and others
just because we have entered
into a collaboration effort
through agreements many years
ago and this year just follows
that path I thank you for that
if we're going to continue the
good working relationship and
meaningful consultation with the
tribe's you know allowing inter
governmental agreements is a no
brainer this is how we get
things done how we work together
to further early childhood down
education intervention so I've
been management support Mr
chairman Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and and everyone
is here thank you Regis so when
I that created the department of
early childhood education and
care he was very important me
that we have an Assistant
Secretary for native American
affairs and it was also
important that the role
not be sitting just inside of
the Public Education Department
I wanted a dedicated individual
in this department as well so
I'm glad that this is moving
along with I guess I'm I'm
trying to figure out is this.
It's just.
Is there anything the
legislation we created the
department of prevents this I'm
just trying to figure out
exactly what we specifically no
I want to help you with what
what are we trying to get out
here when I created the
department we that's why we
named a native American
Assistant Secretary so is there
anything that prevents this in
the original Senate bill twenty
two we created the department Mr
chairman and and senator you
know but by all means that there
is no the first actions are go
going on right now we would
question whether or not their
support the fact we have a
Assistant Secretary is is
amazing but the fact is that
administrations change and the
point is that if we can get in
statute so that if and when the
the administration's do in fact
change address and and and
involve that we can still have
this insurance in statute that
it will always be here is that
we there's no question about it
going anywhere else Mr chairman
and and Representative thank you
I think that's a good point when
I created the department we did
it through legislation is not a
constitutional Department so
this is probably a very good
idea to make sure that it
wouldn't turn back at any point
with regard to the funding Mr
Chairman representative do we
have any inkling that that
funding is not moving the wait
should I just maybe that's for
the Assistant Secretary
we've had Senator Judy and in
progress right now act
agreements so this is all across
the state and I reached out to
all the published tribes and
nations that don't have a
current IDA because each one of
them has needs so we're setting
up consultations a spring to go
out and creating discussed our
priorities along with this
secretary Groginsky and deputy
secretary
Nicholson to see if
Ways we can help them because
each of them has their unique
needs and it's not the
department telling them ways we
can help them but they're asking
they're telling us how we can
help so there's been no
challenges and and reaching out
and helping them to identify
those needs and letting us know
do tribal leadership everything
goes through their tribal
leadership we do know that there
was fourteen changes of
leadership this past year so
that it's been a slow delay the
once we get that rolling I don't
see it the land I'm spending
this funding down but also one
thing that I've done while I've
been in office is to reach out
not only to the tribal
communities but those working
any entities resources services
that are being provided to
indigenous students and
especially in urban areas
because there is a high need I
was really
Appalled that The New Mexico
school for the deaf has a third
of their students receive
services that were indigenous
families and children and so
I've actually reached out to all
of these entities to include
them in this
Funding should so thank you Mr
chairman and representative
madam Assistant Secretary so but
the only question I have left is
when I created the department it
was really important we clearly
defined early pre K. pre K. and
then even before that home
visiting how is that
How does that tie in with what
we're doing here so to make sure
that all three of those
components are available on our
tribal lands as well yeah so US
these ideas are being spent with
some of them haven't been to
other mental health consultation
I think women Navajo has set in
place early intervention is is
really important for our fit
program there you see CD but
also within the IG's we were
sure to ensure that these
findings are spent for ages zero
to zero to five so when they're
telling us their needs and
priorities I have sent back some
Some enquiries about well you
know this is great but how is
this going to return zero to
five so I have held
these letters to some sort of
accountability and how it's
going to directly affect
children zero to five so as far.
I'm trying to think of some
services that are currently
being done we have some.
Preschool agreements in place
that I have have T. P. T.
specialist coming into the
program to provide services for
the preschool age children we do
have some of the agreement
specifically identified to get
children ready for kindergarten
so school readiness was a
priority as some of these ideas
of place so we are ensuring that
it's hitting all all the ages
and and areas that we need to
with an early childhood thank
you Mr miss my last question do
you have any data there can you
share any data that tells us
what percentage of of
for the home visiting what is
the adoption percentage like not
adoption of the uptake or the
you know the folks that are
actually what percentage are
actually utilizing home visiting
services on on our tribal lands
I don't have my whole mind
rangefinder with me but I want
to say that it's a significant
amount and it has been
increasing mainly in part
because of the fed Department in
itself has been growing so we do
have a tribal liaison within
each of those departments and I
if you give me a couple minutes
I can get that that it to you Mr
chairman you've just got to me
whatever you can have courses
Act appreciate that there is
data the key word to use was
increasing and I'm really happy
to hear that because it was the
it was slow going in my district
you know a very tricky you know
historical traditional part of
New Mexico there was very slow
up tick and and and grasping of
home visiting with what the
gonna come into my house and do
what you know right but that
wasn't I know that's not exactly
what they do but so can you just
give me that at some point thank
you Mr chairman and sure that
there is a tribal liaison
a motion each of the departments
in the CD and we meet monthly
and I ask for these these
answers I ask for this data so
we are stabilisation system that
tracks the status so when they
go from home visiting to pre pro
our preschool program for pre K.
program so we are stab wishing
that system and I am all about
system so the next time we have
it and then having a memory so
thank.
You Mr chairman appreciate the
answers Representative you.
Senator thank you Mr chairman
thank Representative Lee Lente I
was simply going to ask you
about the assistant director we
also have another member of the
public stated they were already
entering into tribal agreements
and so my question was also what
why do we need this and I think
that your explanation to Senator
to do is just saying is one of
codified in statute that there
doesn't seem to be a violation
but she wanted in there I can
understand that I created the
department I would not have
missed that and that oversight.
we I I understand your it's was
answered my questions answered
thanks.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Mr chairman can
you tell me if they will be in
your reports with performance
measures that will come back to
the LFC on these particular
inter tribal operation
agreements.
Mister chairman Senator if I
could have this is a great
secretary that's the question is
hoping to be so in and my
appointment I have created a
quarterly reporting for these
ideas so they are reporting as
far as a narrative as well as
data how many families they
serve share some success stories
because those stories are not
necessarily
Reflected in data like numbers
are great the last numbers and I
know you love numbers but the
narrative part of what it what
impact it's made in these two
communities is is is very
important to me as a person so
we've got we've we've establish
a quarterly reporting form that
the contractors have to send
back to me I summarize that and
I I give that to secretary but
as well as the completion of
these IDA is there are required
to do a yearly report so in the
in the interim I'm collecting
collecting collected collecting
but at the end of the year this
goes into the final employee
with ECECD as well.
Your question think that was a
yes Mr chair.
Okay thank.
I can
the
That means yes.
I don't really have that I I you
know in in your the W. secretary
assist system the secretary said
on tribal a Navajo Nation in
tribal areas it's a desert for
early childhood.
How we can fix that problem.
From New come to because you've
got young people that have kids
and New Mexico anybody knows
anything new come to Shiprock is
thirty miles right.
Crown Point to standing rock is
twenty miles right how we can
fix that problem on tribal and.
Kids because they deserve the
same as anything else any other
kid and I don't see the
secretary putting our money
where our mouth is insane she's
going to stop those those
deserts of.
fairly childhood education I
mean I can keep going on from he
said Rehm of pine hill right you
go out to Santo you go to by the
you go to other chapters I
represent and you don't see it
as an one office I know of in
Gallup in and been by there a
couple times and nobody's ever
there.
and that's only one I know of
that in McKinley county serving
from there to Farmington right
and they say there's one
Farmington that's supposed to
serve Gallup there's not one
there so how me me me what take
this message back at some point
I mean they're going to put in
the budget requiring her to do
that and requirement to have a
number of facilities on all
tribal levels on all in.
And for sure to do it or she's
going to have to get off the
stick and get it done because
just focusing on.
The one in Santa Fe that we went
south for school lunches if you
haven't seen that that's the
nicest facility I've ever seen
for early childhood every kid
deserves that and when we see
leadership non push non tribal
kids or kids of color or
anything and they don't have
them in there the south valley
is banning kids you name it.
a poor non Hispanic kids for non
native kids when they don't have
those facilities because there's
no one pushing their that's what
relief child's about is to get
those lower kids those kids from
poverty to get the help those
parents and and that's what
early childhood about for me
that secretary is got a got to
get off the stick and get this
stuff done sure we can have
agreements but at the secretary
doesn't push the tribes and
pueblos C. I want these
agreements but then I also want
to place a center.
Somewhere right.
Members just to get a new name
yes in those in those bubbles
then and she's failed us because
this agreement will have someone
from the top down question down
into those areas where poverty
exist Santa Theresa in the south
you know you can go on and on
but if she's not gonna push
right.
And then we're never going to
accomplish those.
The agreement great but pushing
people to get that done and
pushing people to to get those
open and adding people in those
facilities in rural New Mexico's
is really important to me so
with that can I have a
Motion.
Second Mr chairman thank motion
by Senator Padilla second by
Senator ring is we call the
roll.
Senator Burt yes.
Google is excused Senator
Diamond.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes there are
many of us yes that's is nine
zero nine to thank.
The chairman and Regis and this
nice lady thank you okay.
Sent all our center so if you're
gonna be quick ascension boxes
over there.
Center I'm I'm as quick as you
want me to be of the of two
minutes on your bill.
There are two amendments
on this bill It is very
basically what this bill does is
suspend licenses for three years
for initial licenses coming into
New Mexico the one we've got a
couple of places where we've
taken out some of the agencies
one of the management I believe
does that the other removes the
funding in top working with
secretary Trujillo indicated
that if we take out a couple of
these groups that
A budget is not necessary for
this she can handle it entirely
within her group.
You know however you'd like to
handle those amendments but by
removing the the funding it's no
longer necessary coming through
here you have the amendment
value by three point two five
point one yes.
The.
And so let's move this motion
for discussion purposes second
the motion and the second by
Senator Rodriguez to move a
Centers souls amendment for
discussion purposes out of.
Your amendment yes one explain
real quick yes with this does
first the changes takes the
Appropration off of the title
page then on page six line seven
takes out architectural act
group.
and takes out several of the
ones down through let's see the
line twenty and takes out a
couple of those which are fun
they are licensing separate from
the department of licensing and
Eight seven.
Winds ten to twenty does the
same takes out a couple of other
ones and by taking out funeral
services utility operators and
the appropriation than this no
longer has any agencies that
rely totally on their funding
from outside sources.
Okay questions on the amendment.
a motion about the amendment
some of Mr we have a motion by
Senator Rodriguez second by
Senator Padilla.
Any objection to the.
Motion.
Scene and then the first
amendment of the second
amendment we have is on page two
line line
okay have a motion for to drive
a man some of Mr chairman the
motion and a second by Senator
him health for discussion
purposes on the amendment all
this does is set sunset twenty
twenty six so we can review it
and the question on the main.
I see none any objection to them
and.
Actually Mr chairman if I may
interject for enrollment doesn't
it instead of twenty six it's
it's inserting in lieu all I see
is that a twenty four yes thank
you plan to make sure thank you
any objection to the men.
The pandemic twice then we'll
sit were back on the bill.
So you want to work are you good
what this does is out New Mexico
is essentially at full
employment right now but we have
a tremendous shorter's shortages
of providers in the healthcare
field and everything that it
mentioned the number of them
from respiratory therapists to
dental assistants to nurses is
New Mexico would for this time
frame to look at it is suspend
the initial license the idea is
to encourage people from New
Mexico to license in New Mexico
and stay here when we train them
but also people coming into New
Mexico is suspend the licensing
B. as part of trying to
encourage them to come to fill
these very high need areas it
does have a sunset on it so we
can review whether this is
something that has been helpful
and useful in filling these high
need areas if so we can come
back and extend it further on.
Thank you under the anybody in
the audience and support.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody on zoom two people in
support.
I will have to so that's part of
money soon.
You don't have a TV in
front of their.
Hello good morning my name is
Janet Popp good morning Mr chair
members of the committee I'm a
physical therapist in
Albuquerque and according to the
New Mexico health here workforce
report New Mexico needs an
additional five hundred and
twenty six physical therapists
to meet the national benchmark
for access to care so we believe
this bill will be one of the
solutions to alleviate the
problem and so on behalf of the
New Mexico chapter of the
American physical therapy
association we stand in support
of this bill thank you.
Senator also from the American
physical.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Karen lists are all and also a
physical therapist and
a member of the American
physical therapy association New
Mexico chapter and we feel that
this bill will help to encourage
our new graduates and people
coming into the state to start.
In up on their first
if first licensure and work
within the state so we do feel
that this will help retain our
therapist in the state so we
stand in support of the bill
thank you.
Thank you questions from
committee members Senator.
So Mr chair this is apply
equally to somebody just coming
out of.
Whatever school of or from
people that are.
The license in Georgia but you
showed up here said.
Mr chair Senator it applies to
their initial license in New
Mexico even if there were
licensed in Georgia even if they
were license if they have to pay
for a New Mexico license this
would cover it because we think
that's a benefit to New Mexico
to have them here.
Right thank you Mr.
Mr chair Senator souls I
appreciate what you're trying to
do and I'm gonna support your
bill but I think this is I'm
reading here on first time
licensees not Thomas are still
saving four hundred a year a
Dennis seems to be the highest
listed fifteen hundred podiatry
five hundred nutritionist one
fifty I I agree that anything we
can do to encourage these people
to stay here but this does very
little to retain providers New
Mexico when we're when we're
passing paid family medical
leave mandatory minimum wage
when they can't afford their
mandatory malpractice insurance
now because they can't even they
can't even get it here in New
Mexico this isn't retaining our
our.
Health care providers by any
means so I'm gonna support your
bill but I don't want
legislators to think that by
supporting this bill they're
doing a lot to help New Mexico
providers when we're literally
driving out of the state saving
up a hundred fifty or five
hundred Bucks a year I'm all for
it but that's not what's driving
and it's certainly not what's
going to retain and I appreciate
your efforts thank you.
Thank you any other questions
can have a motion from the
committee voted to pass Mr
Chairman motion for two passed
by Senator Hemphill second by
Senator Rodriguez.
we call the roll Senator
Montessori you go.
Yes.
Senator Campos is excused
Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator Woods yes.
Rodriguez yes senator Munoz yes.
Eight zero thank you senator
thank you all for your time.
Senator what she wants to the
table and.
Yes.
Well we're gonna go to the we're
going to go to the floor if we
have to the gun bill this
afternoon we're gonna hear the
gun bill this afternoon sorry
almost eleven four sessions will
deliver thirty Mr chairman.
You got forty five minutes
Senator once you're done wisely.
In the I I gotta go check and
see if I have a divorce lawyer
hired because we're going to
special session and I'll tell
you I came in here to do my
personal work this morning about
five forty five alive call me at
six thirty in asked me when we
are getting divorced.
And I asked her why and she said
because the governor called a
special session and so if you're
partaking in and misery is going
to be together during the
special session I better make
sure that my have a good divorce
lawyer lined up as we have grown
their gun bills during the
special session the problem for
you Senator what started hired
me so.
Well you didn't answer the phone
at five forty five this morning
otherwise I would probably
engage when I don't know how
good a lawyer with a ten years
and then a retainer for ten
years.
If you were.
I move to table.
Any objection to this motion.
Well you know what I don't think
we're gonna have this bill
either because of I'm not going
to get it out good outcome in
court.
Join this morning Mr chairman
Chief Justice of the New Mexico
Supreme Court it's my honor to
be sitting alongside her we are
presenting a bill to this
committees heard before this
bill passed you have passed the
house and Senate just this last
session there was a veto by the
governor no good explanation was
given for the veto we're
confident that the governor will
sign it this time around the
fundamental purpose of the bill
is to try and improve our
judiciary I've been practicing
law for thirty years.
What I observed and I think all
of this data of bears out is
that did the judiciary we have
is not the judiciary that we
deserve and should have which
are frankly people with a great
deal of of experience and the
top of our profession and of the
reason for that is the salaries
to a large degree the the best
example I can always give us a
very simple statistic when we
have judicial vacancies that for
that the trial court level the
court has a power levels and
Justice bacon is at the
appellate level shears appeals
but we need when you look at the
judges who do the trials and the
last time we had a vacancy Dona
Ana County center some weren't
we might have had one or two
applicants for a vacancy in the
applicants are usually people
that our public defenders our
district attorneys who are
earning maybe seventy or eighty
thousand dollars a year so for
them to get to where the
justices are making our judges
in our Macon salaries an
increase but we're not getting
the people that Apraksin lot ten
twenty fifteen thirty years.
M. the the easy illustration of
this is when we have a federal
vacancy on the federal bench
here in New Mexico will
oftentimes get forty or more
applicants for that one vacancy
and we're getting in response to
those vacancies on the federal
bench the best of the profession
really the top lawyers in fact
you all probably remember judge
I'm sorry now judge I guess the
judge Garcia judge after judge
Garcia's you'll probably
remember the governor's chief of
staff Matt Garcia who's been
with us for years is now on the
federal bench the there's a and
and our huge appetite and and
efforts to try to get on the
federal bench that doesn't
happen with the state pension
the simple difference is two
things really one is the
election process they don't have
to go through the federal level
we're gonna attack that later on
but the big one salary and so
what this bill does simply is
high trial court judges in New
Mexico at the highest level in
other words that Justice bacon's
level the highest level of our
state Supreme Court justices to
the very lowest level of the
federal system which is a
federal magistrate and that
seems to be at the that the
minimum where we ought to be out
and try to create that that
competition for thank you for
the best and brightest lawyers
of the state so well if you'll
allow me Senator Rodriguez and
windows to but the Chief Justice
speak to the bill as well to.
Yes thank you Chief Justice
thank you chair members of the
committee and to our sponsor
here AS Senator Cervantes
pointed out you heard this bill
last year it's a little bit
different because it doesn't
include retirement fixes this is
really focusing on the salary of
the judges the lawyer level
judges in New Mexico.
I think a really interesting
illustration about this
challenge of getting people from
what we consider kind of private
practice the folks that are
doing contract disputes complex
injury oil and gas real estate
Water those kinds of folks are
not applying to the judges.
and it's because of the salary I
have spent a lot of my time as a
justice on the Supreme Court
trying to recruit individuals to
apply for the state court system
and now judge Garcia is a prime
example of that he has chosen
the federal path he was recently
confirmed and sworn in because
the salary for a trial court
judge in the federal system is
more than I make as the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court and
that trial court judge in the
federal system has no with
ministry of responsibilities
doesn't have to come and testify
in front of the legislature and
has a docket of two hundred
cases.
As a trial court judge when I
started I had twenty four
hundred.
Basis so it's less work much
narrower jurisdiction doesn't
have responsibility over a
branch of government and is
making more than a Supreme Court
justice so that's one and
creation of one having this
conversation another one is my
associate Attorney my outlook
clerk who is going to leave in
September to go into private
practice in a firm that does the
kind of work that we want to
recruit from her salary with
bonus has a brand new lawyer
will be about a hundred and
forty thousand dollars a year
just under that of the trial
court judge in New Mexico and so
if you look at partners in law
firms or if you look at season
solo practitioners.
They're not interested in
joining the judiciary because
they can't afford it.
I mean that's their calculation
is that they can't afford it so
the people that apply.
Are largely public defenders and
district attorneys and that's a
perfectly laudable place to come
from if you were going to be
working in the criminal justice
system but the vast majority of
cases and the big cases are
civil cases and we're not
pulling people out of practice
we don't get Senator serve on
this to come in and be a a judge
one of the many of them they may
want to chill the bill I'm sorry
no I think that would be amended
to put me on the bench the hell
out of your I think it's
probably the idea of my work.
Maybe but right now I would need
to meet challenges in recruiting
we had a nominating commission
this week.
In the chairs of district for a
trial court position in Gallup.
To our.
Where they
didn't sit on the commission we
can ask justice Thompson but to
applicants I sat on a commission
in Carlsbad last year.
One applicant.
And so what happens when you
have a one applicant process is
the commission really struggles
with is this person actually
qualified if they are will send
the name to the governor and the
governor and any governor does
this it's not just this governor
sends it back we shake the trees
as much as we can trying to
recruit people to do this this
hard job.
And we still had one applicant.
You want somewhere to get a
minimum of five people I think
you probably want a minimum of
ten people applying it really
jockeying for these positions
this is an important job in
order to.
So this is for us.
Treatment challenge and it's a
perennial recruitment challenge
we believe after a lot of hard
fought and study over the course
of the last several years that
tethering the met the
metropolitan court and higher
judges to the federal system
will help in advance this
recruitment challenge one of the
other features of Senate bill
two that I think I'm I feel
pressed to mention is that it
also excludes the magistrate
court judges from this this
process.
And there's a couple of good
reasons for excluding them from
this tethering to the federal
magistrate court salaries first
we don't struggle to recruit
magistrate court judges when a
vacancy occurs there is at a
frenzied
and hard fought battle to secure
those positions
in those positions with the
exception of a Dona Ana County.
Don't have to be lawyers so we
have folks coming from the
education background law
enforcement we have a lot of law
enforcement folks that apply in
the running for magistrate judge
and so it's a significant salary
increase for folks coming into
the magistrate addition and
they're being paid of a pretty
handsome salary for the that
that position but they hold at
this point which is a hundred
and seventeen thousand dollars.
so it's tethering us to the
federal magistrates
as a healthy first step in in
trying to.
Sure some of the recruitment
issues that we have and it is
also suffering the magistrate
judges from that structure
because we don't suffer the same
recruitment challenges as we do
with the lawyer trained judges
in New Mexico.
Thank you thank you thank you
justice all right
We will go to the committee and
in just a minute can we go to
the audience first and see who
is supporting this bill.
If there is anyone thank you you
want to come up briefly for one
no okay what one person does
stand up and state your name
thank you.
Might want to come up here for
the web please to the right.
Yeah right yeah that's good
there yeah so it's for public
thank you.
My name is Melissa canal and the
District Court judge in Colfax
and union counties and I came
down here from Representative
tone today to support this bill
mostly because.
I know how hard it is to even
get lawyers qualified lawyers to
common practice in the rural
areas that I work in and I know
that that's often the case in
many other rural areas and if
it's that hard to even get
lawyers to come it's even harder
to find qualified of.
Lawyers to for to apply for
judge positions when they come
open and to retain them as well
because as as many judges know
once were
appointed there's it's of course
an honor to serve as a judge but
sometimes the novelty wears off
because it's a pretty hard job
and you know maybe attractive
when there's higher salaries
elsewhere and less stress and
less of a crushing caseload to
move to another position out of
the Judiciary so I'm just
speaking on behalf of my rural
area other rural areas that this
boost in pay will help recruit
and retain qualified judges in
these areas thank you thank you
very much anyone else okay
anyone opposed to this bill.
Anyone on zoom.
J. thank you very much and I'll
defer to committee members
Senator Woods thank you madam
chair and senator I notice in
the FO are they expected to be a
one five five four one million
statewide that I'm assuming that
is salary only and so.
Would you happen to know off the
top here is kind of what percent
the benefits packages of that
order is a benefit package
included in that.
Mr madam chair and senator I
believe we look at the end of FY
every look at the second page
the first the second full
paragraph you'll see the total
insists totally impact the
operating budget five point one
but that the salary is of that
is four point one million
dollars so Mr Evans here to
confirm what I'm saying but I I
believe that the the the the
number you're relying on center
includes the budget associate
budget.
In this paper confirms a.
Okay and Mr chairman.
Senator I had confirmed it with
the LFC also we wanted to make
sure that it was all included in
there was no loophole anywhere
we for god or something through
this fast pace so it is in
there.
Thank you very much yes so that
thank you thank you senator all
right anyone else who would like
to to say anything here for the
committee all right second okay
there's a motion for it to pass.
Yes and I think that and the
second here by Senator Padilla
but I think it's chairman just
wanted to be here is C. just
outside the door because we need
to can somebody get in please
thank you I didn't want to move
on with the vote because I know
he he wanted to be here for the
final vote he just had to step
out if you do just give us a
moment we will process.
With this and as we go on and
wait for senator Munoz let me
just say thank you to Senator
Vontaze who has incessantly work
to get this bill through
and as I have said many times
before the finance committee
every member from several years
ago it is truly embarrassing
that we have salaries this low
for the workload that you have
the positions that you hold the
responsibilities that you
continue to take on and there
really from here you for
retirement eight times when we
were talking about your
retirement and everything we
just have not had good packages
for our judiciary so I'm very
happy Senator that you've got it
to this point again and you're
to be commended for that and of
course the justices for working
very hard on this too but I'm
happy that it affects all the
judicial system not just one
area because they're also
underpaid so I do appreciate
that if you bear with me let me
get see if there might also not
we're going to have to move to
the final.
He was the heading thank you had
a motor control.
All right so there's a vote here
motion the second all in favor
signify by saying aye.
Anyone opposed okay we're not
going to roll call because there
was nobody opposed here's
there's nine two zero so you
