Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, uh, we're behavior
health providers that represent
a diversity of specialties and
geograph geographic regions
across the state.
We appreciate the opportunity to
come and share with you today
about our thoughts on the
behavioral health system and
Uh, also to share our support
for your legislative efforts to
fund impactful and sustainable
behavioral health funding. I'm
Philip Houston, I'm the
executive director and founder
of Carlsbad Lifehouse. We
provide
Um, a wide range of services
including we're one of the first
certified community Bayville
Health centers in the state.
We do a lot with substance use,
with detox, rehab, sober living,
and outpatient services. And we
also have just this involved
contracts with uh Eddie County
Detention Center probation in
our drug court.
I also have uh Doctor David Lay,
who's the executive director of
New Mexico Solutions and the
president of the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Association.
Their works primarily in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe doing
community-based behavioral
health.
Including therapeutic foster
care and assertive community
treatment and Stacy Romero from
PMS. She's the director of
behavioral health and integrated
clinical Services statewide.
They operate a network of FQHCs
federally qualified health
centers that provide behavioral
health in most of their
locations and Aaron Hourihan,
who's the CEO of uh Child Haven
who works in Farmington and
Gallup and provides mainly
children's services.
Uh, first, we want to express
our appreciation to this
committee and to the legislature
for the strides we've taken in
the last few sessions uh for
funding behavioral health.
That support's been invaluable
to us and allowed us to expand
and create new programs. Uh, I
know for Lifehouse we received a
$1.6 million dollar rural
healthcare delivery fund grant
that made it possible for us to
become one of the first CCBHCs
in the state.
For the first time to set up um
behavioral health mobile crisis
in Eddy County.
That funding helped us improve
access to our services.
Our wait lists went from about
252 years ago to almost zero
now.
So your support is definitely
impacted our community and
changed lives.
Um, despite those recent
efforts, uh, timely funding.
For new and expanded behavioral
health programs is still needed.
Funding staff capital equipment,
training and all the other needs
is often a limiting factor in
our ability to grow our
programs.
If delivered effectively,
funding like you're proposing,
uh, could definitely help with
an array of needs, building our
capacity as a system.
From children's services,
adolescent services, housing,
residential treatment.
Uh, many more areas.
Behavioral health is a, a vast
field and the challenges that
the individuals that we treat
face are varied and complex.
Uh, the treatment of behavioral
health has to encompass all
areas of an individual's life.
It's not just their mind, it's
their body, their spirit, their
finances, relationships,
housing, employment.
And many more, um.
As you guys know, there's been a
lot of attention on the
intersection of behavioral
health and the justice system.
Um, you know, it's important to
note that individual behavioral
health diagnoses are much more
likely to be victims of crime
than perpetrators of crime.
Um
Many individuals that are
entangled in the justice system
would be best served by
engagement with behavioral
health services and the
comprehensive and
transformational support that
our agencies provide.
Um
But we really feel like the
greatest impact we can have is
in having a robust cradle to the
grave, behavioral health system
that provides quality timely
care at all points in someone's
life.
If there's an unmet behavioral
health need that contributes to
someone being engaged with the
justice system. That's the
result of the failure of many
other systems and processes
along the way for them to get to
that point.
As we approach strategic
planning, it's important to
create pathways that connect
folks from the justice system to
behavioral health treatment.
But our greatest impact and our
best return on investment will
come from funding all elements
of the behavioral health system.
Especially those that provide
quality community-based care.
To engage people long before
their mental health or substance
use causes them to intersect
with the justice system.
This means that services for
children, adolescents and young
adults should be a focal point
of strategic planning.
Funding a continuum of crisis
care funding CCBHC's
community-based behavioral
health.
Building pathways between
schools, hospitals, first
responders, and behavioral
health providers.
So that we can recognize
behavioral health problems early
and begin treatment more
quickly. It should be a top
priority.
Uh, any strategic planning
process that overlooks.
These areas in the whole system
would be remiss.
With respect to the judiciary,
there are many bridges that need
to be built between behavioral
health and the justiceism.
Uh, we do believe that if
executed well, the, the current
plan could help with the
communication and understanding
between those systems, but there
is often a disconnect between
the realities and each system.
And there's much room for growth
that would benefit both systems.
The needs of our state are
diverse, uh, the resources that
are available are different in
each locale.
timely focused regional strategy
and funding are an important
missing element from our system,
getting regional buy-in from
diverse stakeholders should
increase awareness of behavioral
health and help align resources.
Some recent efforts to improve
behavioral health in our state
is inadvertently fragmented the
system when funding is, is
scattered around unstrategically
in various directions without
alignment. It can compound
workforce shortages and
duplicate efforts.
If we simply pay social workers
in one area, one department, one
part of the state more. It just
shifts the workforce around and
doesn't really uh solve the
problem. And so we have to find
ways to fill in the gaps and use
funding to fill gaps in a way
that doesn't cannibalize other
parts of the system.
We think it's important that
effort should be given to
leverage funds that can be
matched federally by other
grants.
Incentivizing additional buy-in
from municipalities and counties
uh to reward that buy-in.
We should encourage creativity,
uh, to leverage funds through
Medicaid, MCOs, matching grants
and other areas.
There's great value in regional
efforts, uh, but we have to be
careful to align them, and align
with statewide strategy and
projects.
Much of the technical
assistance, much of the
expertise that we need to
execute in our regions requires
being aligned with state and
federal resources.
So in conclusion, this funding
is a helpful and supplemental,
um,
Injection into our system if
it's well targeted and well
implemented can expand our
programs and access to care.
It is only a part of the puzzle.
We have to continue address
statewide challenges like the
difficulty in collecting claims
for MCOs administrative delays
and starting new programs, the
administrative burdens of the
credentialing rostering and
auditing systems reimbursement
structures that inadvertently
incentivize the wrong thing,
optimizing the rules and scope
of paraprofessions and paying
them sustainable sustainably.
We support this effort to inject
targeted regional funding into
the behavioral health system now
and in the future and encourage
your support of it as well.
Uh, we believe, like I mentioned
earlier, that the most critical
solution to addressing the
behavioral health system and all
the many areas uh that it
impacts is to have a robust
cradle to grave system that
provides timely.
Quality access to care.
We thank you for the opportunity
to be here today and we'd be
happy to answer some of your
questions.
OK, uh, David, you next.
We stand for questions, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, and the committee we,
um,
A health providers across the
state thank the uh legislature
for all of this support, um.
I've been in this career for
well over 20 years. We've never
seen behavior health at the tip
of everybody's tongue, the way
it is now, um, and, uh, we want
to grow and expand the system
just as much as you and your
city in Mexico citizens want us
to.
The challenge with behavioral
health is that the system has
evolved over time. It has never
developed in a planful kind of
way, um, New Mexico being New
Mexico, our behavioral health
system is really built on baling
wire, chewing gum and duct tape.
Um, we don't have a lot of the
infrastructure that
Um, our health care system
really needs to be able to uh
provide effective services
immediately in the time and
place where it's needed um to
grow our workforce, uh, to
collect data to show you that
the that these interventions are
working. All of those things are
growth areas for us as Phil
mentioned, you know, the
Connections to the
administrative office of the
courts and the justice system,
um, is tenuous, um, and
oftentimes community by
community varies, um, many folks
that are heavily engaged with
the justice system that have
serious mental health issues are
not engaged in services and we
struggle to get them engaged in
services or keep them. Those are
some of the things that are
gonna be roadblocks for us
ahead. The, um, you know, Senate
bills 12 and 3, offering uh
Um
Changes, plans, um, to those
structures and systems.
We think um move us down the
road. The, the thing that I
think all of us want to make
sure everybody understands is
that these are very, very
complicated person driven
systems where changes will take
time.
And uh one of the things we've
struggled with lately, certainly
the legislature and our state
government has increased funding
for behavioral health in, in
robust and, and, and appreciated
ways.
However, these systems can take
1 to 2 to 5 years to really grow
and mature to be able to access
and use those funds. Um, I know
that there have been, you know,
some concerns from the state
like look why don't we have more
behavior health? We, we've
increased your rates, but it can
take 5, 1015 years to develop
and train the kind of staff that
are needed to access this.
So that's the, that's the one, I
think caveat that I think maybe
health providers are asking me
to make sure that you all
understand is that these changes
take time just because our
system has been so neglected.
Thank you.
Stacy or uh Aaron, you want to
add anything else?
And, and I tell you to discuss
the bill, but we have some
amendments coming on the bill
that I think you need to see,
cause everybody says, how are
you gonna vote on the bill and
like, well, until it's in front
of us, we don't know, and we see
the amendments, but I think you
guys have had a lot of input on
that and so.
I don't know who Stacey are you
Stacey or Aaron?
OK, right.
Chair and members of the
committee. I represent San Juan
and McKinley Counties and our
population is primarily uh
Native American, and with those
populations, um, I, our agency
specializes in children's mental
health and the child welfare and
it's um
Really important to realize that
the level of trauma that people
speak about also involves the
historical trauma that families
are dealing with and so it will
take many generations to be able
to uh work with folks and uh
build that trust. We work with
children as young as 3 years old
and uh grandparents, uh, raising
their children.
And so the need is vast.
And it, uh,
is imperative that we have this
consistent sustainable funding
to be able to grow the system
that these gentlemen were
speaking of. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and committee
members, thank you for the
opportunity. My name is Stacy
Romero and I'm the director of
Behavioral Health.
First Presbyterian Medical
Services, which is a FQHC
throughout the state, including
San Juan County, Sandoval
County, McKinley County.
Um, just to echo what everybody
on the committee has said. We
appreciate the funding and the
efforts made for behavioral
health.
Prevention is extremely
important in dealing with you
and helping them with their
issues is imperative to use this
funding towards that as well as
Helping us as providers develop
new
Um, therapists CSW's, peer
support workers, incentivizing
individuals to be able to
provide those services in our
most rural communities is
necessary, as we've really lost
the face to face interaction at
that point. So anything that
would help us increase face to
face services for our rural
locations would be needed, as
well as expansion of CCBHC and
working together as a system is
important as well.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you.
There's a couple of things when
we started out.
Uh, I want it to work.
We want it to work.
Quickly, you can't force people
to be out, but.
If you have the services and you
have the staff and.
And everything you need, and I
want the funding to go out
easily. And so those are the
three things that still need to
happen.
Senator Gonzalez has a question.
I want you to think about that
cause we're kind of gonna do a
round table and not really.
$000.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
So how much do you go into the
schools.
We do have some school-based
health centers that we run, and
we also have a school-based
program.
In our Santa Fe County where we
have therapists designated to go
into the schools and provide
therapy services for those that
choose to engage.
We also have a same day suicide
risk assessment for those
individuals in that county that
could be replicated if needed.
So Mr. Chairman, is that
happening um statewide?
Um, right now that's happening
in Santa Fe and we are beginning
it in um
Torrens County as well.
Mm.
Uh, add in if it's OK that um we
got a grant from BHSD around
June of last year to start
adolescent.
Substance use services in our
local schools and we've added
that recently, so there's a
great need for that in in many
communities. Um,
More funding for that is helpful
in, in finding pathways that
make that work well, what we've
found is that the students that
need the substance use treatment
often.
Aren't able to use it until
they're kicked out of the
school.
Uh, because they miss out on
educational hours if you provide
that before then and then after
that, it's very hard to engage
them and their families. So
there's some systemic issues
that make that hard, but I know
that it's something that our
agency has been working on in in
conjunction with BHSD and we've
actually made some good
partnerships with our school
through that.
Senator, it's a good question.
I, I will be the uh uh.
slight negative voice though,
um, this varies community by
community and district by
district, um, in Albuquerque, my
agency, I used to have 11
different therapists that were
working in 17 different schools
in uh APS and there was an
administration change and a
change in focus on behavioral
health and we got driven out.
We're not providing any services
in the schools, um,
unfortunately there's no
statewide kind of plan around
this, again, it's district by
district.
Um, and it can change on a
moment's notice.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chairman, for
example, say, um.
Saaso wanted your service.
What would they have to do?
So, I'll tell you what our
experience was like in with the
Carlsbad Municipal schools.
Wait, wait, you have to be
honest with us, right?
You, you can sit there and
chuckle, but I mean if we, if we
can help fix this stuff, but if
you're not honest with us, then
we're gonna be like, well, why
didn't you tell us that before
this happens a lot, I mean,
sure, I mean, we're, we're,
there should be no retribution.
Let me make that clear on, on
you making a statement that
fixes things. Startup funding,
clear goals, um, time to make
work and some commitment.
Um, it's very difficult for us
to bring in staff or develop
staff or move staff into a
community when things might
change next month and we're out.
Those are the things that um get
in
get in the way of being quick
and responsive. Now, there are
strategies in in some other
states.
That are using CCBHCs, for
instance, um, they are able to
use tablets and have remote
services be a stopgap while
we're starting to build things
up.
Nobody in New Mexico right now
is really doing things like
that, but those are some of the
potentials.
I said one of the frustrations
that we all have, the schools
often hire therapists and social
workers.
They go into the school and end
up not really doing
Therapeutic work, they end up
doing more administrative work.
And what happens with us is I'm
competing with the school that
has
The state-based retirement
program that has summers off and
they're able to pay at least as
much as we are, um, then I get
calls from them to say, hey, we
need to have a kid that's in
crisis and you need to give him
therapy because they don't have
time in their schedules to do
the therapy. And so that's one
of the places where the
workforce issues are really
fighting against us trying to
make a better system and help
get care to the kids.
So, um
Something that they would need
to be worked out to make those
systems work better, I think.
in closing, uh, Mr. Chairman, I
guess we have quite a ways to
go.
Especially if we want to see
something statewide.
Thank you.
Thank you send it in there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank all of you for what you
do. Um, I'm from San Juan
County. I know San Juan County
and McKinley County. We've
worked on this for the last 5
years, very, very hard, ladies,
both of you know, um, so it,
it's one of the things that,
that's close to my heart, I'm a
retired school teacher. I really
appreciate what you're trying to
do in the schools.
Um, what kind of tracking
system.
Do you have for individuals.
That have
Have had your services. Do you
track those, for example, if a
school
You know, leaves Pillai and
comes to Aztec High School. How
do we, how do you track that
student so that the incoming
school knows what's going on.
When it comes to behavioral
health services, um, again, uh,
because the system really just
kind of evolved. Um, we don't
have
necessarily um a coherent
comprehensive system that would
track the services or needs of
that kid when they move.
Two different community,
however, you know, each agency
is gonna have their own internal
medical record, etc. One of the
things I would say though is
that Beaverheal is now over the
past couple of years, growing in
capacity of partnering with
synchronous, synchronous is the
New Mexico Health Information
Exchange, uh, provider that
creates a comprehensive health
database on individuals
receiving health services in New
Mexico. Paper health was kind of
left out of that, but is now
catching up. The behavior health
Providers Association for a
couple
years now has been
Funding through through support
of BHSD and uh hopefully the
legislature this year where we
are helping providers to now
create the ability to put
behavioral health data into the
into the HIE and get it back
out, um, at a comprehensive
level in theory, um, Senator,
uh, the, um, uh, if that child
moved from one community to
another where there were
different labor health
providers.
The Baver health providers would
now be able to access um what
services uh or information is in
synchronous about that child's
baby health needs, um, and the.
outcomes of prior treatment,
hopefully to continue that now.
Um, that is a work in progress,
but we're seeing really
remarkable, uh,
Responses and results out of
that.
Right, thank you. uh, Mr. Chair,
just a couple more questions.
So, let's step out of the
schools for a little bit. How
How do you get the message out?
I, I know in San Juan County and
incKinley County is the same.
How do you, how do we let people
in the community know that these
services are there. I I know
that's one we've struggled with
in San Juan County, um.
How do you promote it? What kind
of monies do you spend on that?
We do have internal marketing
that we've
Done for all our um programs
within our organization. So
we've had to hire a marketing
team, a team of two individuals
that we staff full time that
does that. The other thing I
would say is we have a regional
director in each one of our
regions that meets with local
community members and local
stakeholders on a regular basis
to let them know what services
we have available, and that's
probably seemed to work more
than anything for us.
So, Mr. Chair.
But how do, how do the people on
the street, how are they getting
the message? I mean, that's my
real question, I think, um,
cause I know what you guys do in
the community and it's
fantastic.
But how are we getting a message
to those individuals that
that need the help.
Yes, sometimes we're walking
down the street with some of the
flyers that we have and just
introducing ourselves and
allowing them to know that the
services are available.
So do you work with the police
department? We do police
department, um.
Local fire departments and just
try and let people know, and we
do just the door to door kind of
stuff for ourselves as well,
just so they have a face to
connect the service with.
All right, thank you. Last
question.
chair because I know we got lots
to do.
How do you, what, what are you,
what are your agencies doing to
retain.
Your new hires.
I mean, you're, you're talking
about a pretty stressful job.
What are you guys doing for
them?
To to retain them.
Senator, um, Mr. Chair, um,
excellent question. This is hard
work. Um,
We are bringing in more and more
young folk and supporting them
to advance in their careers, um,
the
Historically, behavioral health
was thought of as, you know, a
therapist and a psychiatrist.
Now in community mental health,
we recognize we need case
managers and we need peer
support workers, we need
coaches, we need a lot more
paraprofessions, but those folks
are coming in and they want a
career. So one of the biggest
things that we've been focused
on is
Growing our own expertise within
those folks and supporting them,
for instance, with tuition
reimbursement for them to pursue
nursing degrees or counseling
degrees so that they can keep
advancing in there in in their
career and hopefully stay with
us as they advance and and
develop those additional skills.
That
has been, I think, one of the
most successful strategies for
us in terms of retention, um,
many of us tap into federal
programs or state programs
around student loan uh.
Mm
student loan repayment programs,
housing, funding, etc.
Those are really
administratively challenging for
agencies to to to get into, we
want more of those and actually
some of that I think is some of
the flexible funding that we're
hopeful could be available in um
in these bills supporting
agencies are struggling with
things like retention to have
some flexible funding to offer
additional benefits or support
to staff to stick around.
All right. Thank you. Thank you
guys for coming in today. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. How much
of your time is spent dealing
with the state grant process.
a day.
So
We deal with a variety of a wide
variety of funding streams, um,
to try to get new programs
started to pay our folks better.
It's varied depending on
You know, which program it is.
We, we've had some of the grants
I mentioned earlier, like the
adolescent IOP grant was very
smooth and easy, and we got the
funding delivered quickly, um,
right now we have some federal
grants that we can't even get
to. Um, and so it's, it's very
depending on the grant program.
There's not really
Uh
A consistent system with that.
Some of them have been
cumbersome and some of them
have.
Cause delays in funding and
others have.
And hypothetically, like what
would, uh, an additional
$100,000 due for each of your
agencies in the course of a
year.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
Having an infusion of dollars
such as that would certainly be
able to help us stabilize if
this was recurring funding and
uh it doesn't help us. We do
apply for grants every year, and
that makes up over probably
10, 15% of our budget.
However, if um we don't have
those recurring, then we aren't
able to increase salaries for
those practitioners, those
therapists. We need to be
sending them to trainings. Um,
they don't all come out of.
Highlands University with the
ability to know what Medicaid
requires, and so we're teaching
those things to our people, uh,
we also have the higher level uh
clinicians who are supervising
them, and that's really the key
to this whole process in growing
our therapists, um, and to sort
of address the earlier question.
I think we're still waiting on
funding that is was specified
for that clinical supervision,
um, a year ago or 2 years now.
And so the process through state
government is very slow, and it
does um make it hard to be able
to plan for the future and to be
successful in this field.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and you
know what strikes me this
morning is we're told that
mental health is the main focus
now, um, of this session, and
obviously we know the importance
of it statewide, but a week or
so ago when we talked about
electrifying the state, there
was not an empty seat in the
house, and I'm shocked and thank
you all for being here that we
don't have a standing room only
situation here, um, and correct
me if I'm wrong, Mr. Chair,
there's about 11 states, I think
around the country that allow
for charitable.
Donations via income tax
rebates. So I've, I've
introduced Senate Bill 304 that
allows for that in New Mexico. I
think Arizona's had it since the
90s, but it helps the taxpayer
direct where their income tax is
going in an individual filer
would be $500 a joint, joint
filing is $1000 but that's why I
asked what would even $100,000
do for your organizations
because it allows us to say as,
as a body of citizens.
Yes, this is important to all of
us, so, um, thank you for the
work that you're doing, um, and
I hope that we garner a lot more
support for your efforts. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, uh,
Understanding now your, your
point, I think.
Agencies spend so much time and
so much uh uh so much money and
effort chasing dollars, um,
particularly, you know, through
managed care reimbursement
through grant reimbursement,
etc. um, that, you know, we have
to pay people to remember to
send emails that we haven't been
paid because it's gonna take, I
don't know, 10 emails or 15
different spreadsheets before
we're finally going to get paid
on this and this and this. So
Having reliable um financial
support.
That um supports us to be there,
um.
Most of us don't have funding
that supports us to be there.
We, we have funding to do this
and do this and do this, and we
don't do that, we don't get the
money.
If our community wants us to
have behavioral health capacity.
To be there when somebody needs
support.
Then we need money to be there,
not to chase this or do that,
the kind of funding that you're
talking about, I think would
potentially offer communities
the ability to say, hey.
Lifehouse is really important.
We want to make sure that some
of our community money is going
there, so they're there when we
need them, even though I don't
need.
today.
I think we'd be strongly
supportive of that senator.
Wonderful. It's good to hear
thank you
Mr. Chairman.
Three things that we usually
don't get paid and reimbursed
for.
Marketing, getting the word out,
grant writing and coming up and
doing things like this are all
things that we have to do to be
successful that are outside of,
uh, I mean, even when we have
programs like CCBHC where we
have to turn in our costs to
calculate our rates. Those are
all things that get excluded
from what we can be paid for.
And so I think it's important if
we want a system that runs
really well to figure out how we
can get funding into those other
elements like David was saying
that often aren't paid because
it's not giving a specific
service to a specific person.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. I don't have any
other questions.
Um
So I'll lay out the plan, so
we're gonna try to go over house
Bill 12, and 3 tomorrow.
And then get everybody to review
the amendments and get comments
and then try to maybe see those
on.
Wednesday here on Wednesday in
and see what happens if there's
a drafting issue or gonna make
some changes, it may be
Thursday.
We're shooting for Wednesday
just to give you guys a heads
up. We, we want it to function.
If you're not honest with us,
cause I know.
We got kind of tasked with this
whole 123 thing. I had to learn.
in
person with ADA and a learning
curve is pretty tough to handle.
And so we wanted it to work for
you and we want the funding to
work for you and we want to get
the access. You can't force
people into treatment, but we
can.
Put the pieces in place where
it's easier and, and you have
money to do your jobs, and so
that's, that's our goal at the
end of the day, and not do it a
year from now.
I mean, I think one of the
amendments you put in there is
We're going to start looking at
this in Maine.
So how, how do you feel about
reporting that?
I mean, reports are going to be
what they're gonna be in May,
you're probably gonna say.
We're gathering information or
something, but
When it comes to July or August,
we expect movement in there,
right?
In their reporting issues in
And the accountability, right?
In, in order to do that, we've
got to understand your strengths
and weaknesses right now.
And so
Any comments, or I mean, until
you see the amendments tomorrow,
and we get, that's why I want
you give him a little bit of
time, then come back and, and
really see where we're at to
make sure.
Mr. Chairman, I'll just say I
think we all have great ideas of
more things we can do in our
communities, uh, but until we
know what the funding would be
and and things that it does. I
mean, there are things we're
ready to start doing right away.
But
I'll, I'll use our detox program
and example. We spent a year
getting the funding.
We got it up and running, and
then it took us about 2 years to
get it fully accredited and, and
recognized by the state and, and
then it's taking an additional
8, 10 months to get a single
Medicaid payment for it, and
that's cost us about half a
million dollars to get that far.
And now we really have a program
that's running well. We've
increased our retention rates
and completion rates, but, you
know, that's a 3-year process
and we're, we're going fast
doing that and so uh quick
movement is something we're
ready for and we want, we want.
encourage it, but the time that
it takes to, to deliver at, and
then we have to
Be able to track outcomes and
get data takes even longer and
so we have to be ready to go but
also realize that to get good
outcomes and good data is gonna
take some time. And so,
It's, we don't want to slow down
that process at all, but we
can't change lives that much
faster than
Then, then the pace of the work
that we do. And so there's a
balance there between between uh
a rush and, and realist realism
about
The impact, the timeline of the
impact that we have to be
realistic about as well.
Well, and I don't know how, I
don't know if we can fix this in
that, right? But putting
timelines on the agency to to
make sure that they respond and
You know, they're gonna come
back and say, oh yeah, they put
in an application, they missed 5
items. You've gotta go back and
now they send it in, it's 2
items are wrong and and a back
and forth bantering, but I, I
don't know how we put a
requirement on time and just
say, you know what you have.
30 days to respond to get this
permit issued.
Otherwise
Find another person that can get
it done in those time frames.
It may not be all them, it may
be some of you guys too, so the
blame's gonna be where the
blame's gonna be.
Uh
I don't know if we can do that,
but
I think Phelps and them are
tracking comments in here, so
we'll.
Look at that.
OK
Thank you.
Yeah
Now we got all the alphabet A O
C D O H H C A P D.
HEB2YFD.
Um, I see a couple of them here.
Yeah
Tell me what CD stands for.
OK.
We may need some more chairs up
here or that you guys are gonna
have to.
How do you want to start us off,
carrying the courts or the first
you want to start off you and
Mr.
Mr. Chair, I, I think they defer
to you, um, if the courts would
like to go first. You're the
chair, so let's just start with
you and, and then we'll go to
DOH and then.
shift around. You don't have to
sit in those chairs if you don't
want to.
Ah, well, good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee, I've seen a lot of
you lately, um, I actually spent
quite a bit of time talking
about behavioral health, uh,
from the healthcare authority
and and Carrier Mijo, uh, just a
reminder cabinet secretary of
the Healthcare Authority. Um, so
I, I don't think I'll repeat the
full presentation. I did that
during my budget hearing last
week, so you all had an
opportunity to see that, um, I,
I think I probably just like to
begin by saying thank you, uh,
we are, uh, really.
Grateful for the attention
that's being paid to mental
health, uh, services by this
legislature, by the leadership,
um, a real reflection of the
need to come together in our
state to do a better job, uh,
and I would also say that we
have a strong system but not a
perfect system. And so we are
Uh, sorry, there's some
background noise here. Uh, so
we're really appreciative of the
investment. I'd also like to say
thank you to our providers, you
know, we can't do anything in
the behavioral health system
without them and so really
appreciated their feedback
today.
Oh
sorry, for some background,
um, and so we really, I just
want to say thank you to them
and I'm very grateful that when
they see Medicaid in particular.
Um, I also want to just say
thank you for the huge
investments in the provider rate
structure, um, our reimbursement
rates for Medicaid behavioral
health are now, um, probably in
the top two states of all states
in the country, so we're paying
150% of Medicare, uh, for all
mental health services except
for the ones that don't have a
behavioral health, uh, mental,
uh, Medicare equivalent.
And so, uh, work's still being
done to sort of amp up those
rates, but our rates are, uh, at
the top, uh, in the country and
that is resulting in some
provider growth. Um, I won't, I
think I will just basically say
that in terms of the uh
behavioral health package. Um,
there are a couple of things
that we want to make sure are
sort of front and foremost uh in
folks' minds, um, two things I
wanted to raise. One is I think,
you know, the agency is really
eager to hear from the courts in
terms.
of how the infrastructure will
be built at the local level, uh,
to really build this robust
regional healthcare system or
for behavioral health, uh, we
know that today that probably
doesn't fully exist and so we're
really eager to hear about how
that will happen. Uh, many
states do have regional
behavioral health systems with
really robust community-based
mental health uh structures
that, uh, New Mexico doesn't
necessarily have everywhere
today, so we're really looking
forward to hearing more about
that. Um, and then the second
The thing that I'm really
focused on as we think about uh
making reforms to the mental
health system, uh, really
involve the people who might not
be interacting with the courts
and the judiciary, uh, so we're
really focused on children, for
example, uh, particularly
children in state custody,
making sure that we are not
sending children out of state
for services that they should be
receiving in New Mexico, um, my
agency is very focused on
individuals with disabilities.
Uh, we see a growing need, uh,
for mental health services for
individuals.
For example, on the DD waiver
program, uh, and, you know,
those are people who would not
necessarily go through the
courts or through the criminal
justice system at all.
Similarly, our elderly
population, we are having a hard
time placing some elders who
have serious mental illness, uh,
or substance use disorders that
need long term care services at
the same time. So really trying
to think about what the robust
system and that safety net's
gonna look like again, not a
population that would
necessarily be on the radar of
the courts and judiciary.
Um, our agency is really
proposing and really grateful
for um alignment uh in terms of
infrastructure and the building
out of crisis, uh, we're also
very focused on building out
peer support, uh, we have
proposed adding justice liaisons
in every region, we hear the
need for a better regional uh
planning efforts, so we're
really proposing putting our
behavioral health services
division out in regions and kind
of building that infrastructure
that way, um, we are wanting to
provide more provider tech.
Technical assistance and I think
um one of the things that we
think is really important is
gonna be uh an investment in
navigation and in no wrong door
approach, uh, part of what we
noticed today is that um there
are services in many
communities, but folks just
don't know how to access them.
And so we're really uh proposing
that we amp that up and make
sure that we build out that no
wrong door system of care, um,
as a reminder, our agency spends
about $800 million on behavioral
health system.
Uh, behavioral health services,
we serve 300,000 New Mexicans
and provided 4.3 million
behavioral health visits in
calendar year 24. Uh, that
represents a lot of year over
year gain in behavioral health
access to care in New Mexico.
Uh, and I don't know, I just
wanted to repeat that New Mexico
is currently 7th in the country
for providing access to uh
services for individuals with
mental illness. Um, but that I
think I'll turn it over to uh
any of my colleagues who may
want to make a statement this
morning.
Short and sweet.
Valentine's Day is coming.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Gina De
Blasi. I'm secretary designate
for the Department of Health.
Uh, thank you for this
opportunity, um, you know, the
Department of Health is
definitely a touch point for
behavioral health services
across the state of New Mexico
we operate facilities, um, one
in Albuquerque, it's turquoise
lodge. We offer in intensive
outpatient, uh, treatment. We
have an inpatient adult detox,
uh program and inpatient.
rehab.
Um, we've got the New Mexico,
uh, rehab center, and that's in
Roswell, where we also uh
provide um inpatient medical
detox and impatient residential
treatment. Um, we are working on
a certificate certification of
adult residential treatment, um,
in our Roswell facility. We also
operate the Sequoia Adolescent
Treatment Center in Albuquerque,
um, it's a 36 be residential
treatment center for youth, um,
mainly boys.
And
um we have the um New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute in
Las Vegas, New Mexico, and
that's where we have our
forensics unit, adult site unit,
and our care program where we uh
service some um a small number
of children out of that facility
as well. Um, I wanna do put a
plug in again for our uh New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute expansion that we're
looking to do um in Las Vegas by
operating in.
collaboration with the county of
$4 million startup expansion to
operate the facility that has
just been renovated in Las
Vegas.
Um, additionally, outside of our
uh treatment facilities, we
provide harm reduction services
across the state of New Mexico,
um, we also, um,
We are working toward expand
access to medication or treat uh
assisted treatment. Currently,
we are piloting a couple of our
public health offices, uh, for
dispensing medical assistance
treatment, medication-assisted
treatment, excuse me, um, but
currently in our public health
office 36 of them. We have um
access to medication-assisted
treatment through um
Through uh prescriptions and we
work closely with the Department
of Corrections to ensure that
um,
You know, individuals coming out
of criminal justice system have
access to that.
We also have an office of
alcohol prevention out of the uh
Department of Health.
Um, and we also operate some uh
mobile units, and we appreciate
uh with the initial, um,
Behavioral health package that I
was looking to fund uh some of
our mobile health units, uh,
with staffing, and that's
desperately needed. We also
operate a hotline and um
So we do believe that public
health offices across the state
are now that we have got
operates 56 of those are at
touch point in order to provide
the necessary behavioral health
services across the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee.
Um, maybe we'll swap seats and
who wants to go next, whoever.
You guys pick.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Alicia Tafoya Lucero. I'm the
secretary for the New Mexico
Corrections department and I'll
just briefly talk about some of
the services we offer and people
we contract with you all heard
from me recently, uh, but in our
facilities we do provide uh
substance use treatment with
providers, but we also use uh
inmate peer educators that we
are educating with the help of
the people at HCA and Opry and
also
The, the people that UNM Project
Echo, uh, in the community, we
have a lot of relationships with
transitional living centers and
require that many of them
provide behavioral health
services to help people
transition uh into the
community, um, in total we're
spending somewhere in the
neighborhood of about $20
million a year on behavioral
health services for people on
parole in the community and
probation as well as people that
are incarcerated. I think I'll
leave it at that.
and let you all ask us
questions, uh, in the event that
you have any, thank you.
we should take it.
take their money and
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
senators. I'm Elizabeth
Hamilton. I'm the director of
Children's Behavior Health
Services at CYFD.
Um, so Secretary Casados
unfortunately was not able to be
here, so I am acting as a
prophecy to really talk about
children's services in the
state. And so something that I
just want everybody to to
remember is that our children's
behavioral health services is
not just focused on our kids
involved with protective
services. We actually focus on
all of New Mexico's children.
And so over the 500,000 children
in New Mexico, we are focused on
trying to build providers, um,
network in partnership with
BHSD DOH.
And all the
The other secretaries here. We
also are the licensing entity
for children's services, so part
of the behavior health services,
we also have our licensing and
certification authority and so
we are in charge of licensing
and certifying all of our
children's services such as
residential treatment centers,
treatment foster care, um, group
homes and also all of our
emergency shelters and so we,
that plays a big part of what we
do on our daily basis as well on
top of working with our
community providers to ensure
that behavioral health services
are being met for children. And
so that is something that we
have been doing for the last few
years on top of also having
programs to try and work and
address the behavioral health
needs of children and protective
services custody and we also
work closely with our juvenile
justice services at CYFD to make
sure behavioral health and
mental health needs are being
met for those children who also
become involved there. Um, and
so that was just a reminder that
we are very focused on all
children. We also work across
the board with
With um healthcare authority as
well because we also have
addressed the needs of the
adults that are.
Providing care for our children
as well. So thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Mariana Padilla. I'm the
secretary designate of the
Public Education department. Um,
for the public education
department, I will say that
behavioral health needs of our
students remains a priority for
the agency, um, and funding to
support our, our students in in
K-12 schools is critical. Um,
this issue directly impacts
students' ability to learn, how
they
interact with other students
with school staff as well as um
outside of the school system.
Um, 1 in 5 students has a
diagnosable mental health
condition, yet fewer than half
of those children actually
receive support for behavioral
health needs.
Um, half of all mental health
conditions begin by the age of
14 and 75% begin by the, by the
mid-twenties.
That means that um many more
students.
Children and youth in our
country are in need of
behavioral health supports, then
we really realize.
Um, schools often are the first
place where students uh receive
mental health support.
However, um, according to
national surveys, most school
administrators don't really feel
prepared to support the
behavioral health needs of
students.
Um, in our efforts to improve
academic outcomes for students,
we really must address
behavioral health needs.
Students, um,
Who have
Um, anxiety and depression and
other sort of behavioral health
needs often have much higher
chronic absenteeism and their um
proficiency rates and graduation
rates typically are lower as
well.
Um
The public education department
did not receive any funding for
behavioral health supports for
schools for this fiscal year,
the funding that the department
has currently um are a couple of
federal grants that the
department paid for.
Um, last fiscal year, the agency
did receive an appropriation to
support wellness rooms, the
establishment of wellness rooms
in schools. However, we did not
receive that funding uh for this
current fiscal year.
Um, some of the programs that
the department is able to
support utilizing our federal
grant funding which will um
expire in the next couple of
years include our well-being
survey, which is conducted um in
schools and administered to
students.
Uh, peer to peer support
programs.
Restorative practices trainings
for school staff.
Um, school-based mental health
providers.
As well as um some wraparound
services in schools and so these
are really administered through
many grants to schools to
support these programs.
Thank you.
Maybe we'll swap seats just to
make it, and I don't see, is
anybody here from ALC uh Office
of the courts.
straight off.
Hello, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. I'm Stephanie
Rodriguez, higher education
secretary, and as many of you
know, a lot of the services at
the higher education department
provides for mental and
behavioral health are actually
funneled to the higher education
institutions themselves, their
research and public service
projects, the largest
beneficiary being the University
of New Mexico's Health Sciences
Center, uh, through those
appropriations. Another thing to
know with investments from
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham
and the legislature.
almost $5.5 million has been
distributed to higher education
for direct student services in
the realm of basic needs, which
also includes mental and
behavioral health services. Um,
many of our students utilize the
988 crisis mobile app that we
have at the state of New Mexico,
um, we became more involved with
it in a post pandemic
environment when a study came
out and showed that over 60% of
higher education students across
the nation.
Experience mental and behavioral
health crises during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Although that
number has decreased over time.
We have still spent a lot of
time and resources in supporting
that app and the services at our
higher education institutions
across the state.
I think that's pretty much it
that I'll share for today and
I'll be available for questions
within this committee and
outside of the committee as
well. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, members. Thank you.
Questions from committee
members, Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning. Good to have
everybody here with us. Um, I do
have a question though for Ms.
Anaya and, uh, is that your last
name? Education department.
Padil apologize.
drummer's ears, they, they, uh,
conjugate things, yeah, but
yeah, there you go, yeah, you're
mean, you're not an eye either.
OK, I'm just kidding. All right,
this video.
Um,
so I, I'm really interested in
school-based health centers, and
it seems to me
I could be wrong, an area that
we're maybe not paying enough
attention to when it comes to
behavioral health for just such
crucial vulnerable population.
So would you kind of just
summarize.
How many schools have a, have a
social worker in the school.
And
What we're doing to try to get
to 100% is 100%, should that be
the goal?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, school-based health
centers actually fall under the
Department of Health.
But I can't, I'll turn it over
to secretary designate in in a
second, but I will uh share that
we have, um, about 78
school-based health centers in
the state, and about 52 or under
contracted through the
Department of Health.
As my understanding
Um
As far as counselors, uh, New
Mexico does not have
In statute a standard for the.
of
Uh, cases that a counselor
should have. Overall, we have a
deficit of counselors in the.
In order to
The national standard for school
counselor caseloads. It's about
250 students per counselor.
And we are, are far, far below.
That national case of uh
standard.
So I'll go ahead and turn it
over to the secretary.
See.
Chair, Senator Steinberg, thank
you.
Um, my
Apologies I neglected to mention
school-based health centers in
my introduction.
Um
Yeah, so just your.
Or we added 6 brick and mortar.
School-based health centers, um.
Yeah,
We subsidized school-based
health centers out of the.
that help
for those that apply to the
Department of Health and those
that are subst subsidized, um,
in, in fiscal year 24, it was
59.
We're looking to, and we're
participating adding 5 more of
his fiscal year for a total of
64.
We got many
schools without bricks and
mortar but would um
uh supported by access to care
via telehealth and
Um
So, Mr. Chair, um,
Then Secretary I, you know,
speaking to schools in my
community that had them in
bricks and mortar and then went
remote office hours, they, they
told me that system really is.
Far less desirable.
And that kids don't get the help
they need is when they're
in-house, um.
So I'm just wondering, you know,
see a lot of head shaking, maybe
there's agreement on that from
your side of things too, Mr.
Chairman, I know you guys are
fired up, and I appreciate it
about improving our behavioral
health system. I, I wasn't here,
but I was listening to some of
the comments made by the
committee on other panels.
I don't know. It seems like this
is an area where we should also
be throwing some shock and awe
kind of funding, because I think
our kids are definitely in
crisis. Maybe, would you say,
Mr. Chair, panel, that kids are
having higher levels of
behavioral health.
ICC is the adult population,
would that be a fair statement?
Sure, um, Mr. Chair, said
Steinborg.
I can't say it's more than the
adult population because the
adult population is much higher
than our children population,
but I will say there are
children are experiencing more
and more crisises since the
pandemic and so I also think our
children are also uh developing
the ability to speak their
crisis more and not keeping it
internal as much as they had in
the past and other generations
and so they're really expressing
themselves more and more and
actually asking for help. And so
I think that's where
We really have to figure out how
do we make sure that they know
how to get the help and they're
able um to address and and
identify the right people within
the systems that they're in,
which is such as the
school-based health centers.
Sure. Thank you. And um,
Mr. Chair secretary Thea.
secretary, um.
You'd mentioned that we are
below the national average of
students per social work or
whatever, but I assume that's
because we're very rural.
And we don't maybe have the
densities as
I don't know, I'm just throwing
that out there. Or is that a
reason why we don't have more,
or you just kind of pointing
that out?
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
um, it is not an issue related
to rural versus urban. I think
it has to do with an issue of
just the number of providers
that we have in the state of New
Mexico and then the other thing
that I mentioned New Mexico does
not have any statute, uh, a
standard for the, the case loads
of counselors, which would then
require us as
Um, as a state to invest more in
counselors within our school
systems.
Yeah.
Um, Mr. Chair, secretary, how
much, so you said we're adding 6
more.
Health centers this year is that
the plan is that funded or is
that what we're trying to build
this coming year with money in
the budget.
draft budget.
So the fiscal year 25, it was,
um, another 5 in last fiscal
year it was 6. So, um, it was
funded in fiscal year 24.
And 25.
But if we wanted to do
additional, we would need
additional appropriation and
funding to do that.
Thank you. And last question,
Mr. Chair, second to last
question. How many
How many short would you say
we're at? I mean, what's
I mean, what's the delta of
where we would like to go as far
as what we would like to fund in
a perfect world.
Mr. Chair, Senator Seimor, I
mean,
I think that our shared sort of
perspective is that they should
be in all middle and high
schools in the state that would
be ideal.
Um
Good answer.
We would all probably agree. Um,
how many, how many schools are
there? I mean, our school.
How many, what's the number of
how many schools.
I guess.
Mm
900. We have about 60, 50.
50 to 60.
OK.
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
roughly, so the the numbers that
I provided were those that were
supported by Department of
Health, there's roughly about
100 across the state. OK.
Well, Mr. Chair, colleagues, I
don't know how we want to go
about doing this, um.
And this is always, you know,
this is kind of your wheelhouse
high schools have
center, yeah, yeah, I had them
in Donana County and then they
lost their provider somehow or
another, um.
It went kind of remote. But
anyway, Mr. Chair, it'd be good
to put this on our radar and
somehow move on a trajectory of
mapping out what a comprehensive
system would look like and how
we could get there. I don't know
what your thoughts are on that,
but I just think this is super
important.
And I mean, you know,
The challenges our kids are
dealing with now, I mean,
addiction with these devices,
um,
Social pressure, suicide,
whatever, school violence, I
mean, it all flows through kind
of early intervention. So,
Um
Yeah, I'd like us to do a lot
more and, and, and it sounds
like having a bill where we put
in standards would be one way to
force the state kind of down
that direction.
So maybe we should introduce a
bill that does that.
Just as a conversation table
setter, but I think we need
funds too, and I, I'll just
leave with this, Ms. Chair. You
know, it sounds like maybe for
every single school, maybe it's
not perfect to have someone
there for some reason. Maybe
it's kind of a hub and spoke
system where we try to get most
of the way there. So obviously,
there's some planning that has
to be done, um, and maybe we can
put in dollars to do planning.
Look at this and to do planning
over the next year.
And then really get our arms
around this as a goal, as a
really great goal.
Help our shape. So welcome
anybody else's thoughts on that.
Thank you all so much for the
work you do, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinburn very quickly, so, um,
in addition to setting the
standard, it's also about
building the, the workforce and
so I just want to make a plug
for uh programs that really
start in our secondary schools
that are building that
behavioral health workforce, uh,
through work-based learning and
CTE programs that have a
behavioral health focus and so
we have those programming,
expanding those types.
of things, build the skills of
students while they're actually
still in school, but it also
helps ensure that we're building
the workforce for the future.
Great.
Thank you.
steroids.
We're kind of focusing on 12,
and 3 for tomorrow.
OK, Mr. Chair, I understand. Uh.
The problem
The problem, sir, is this.
You know
We got a society.
That is
It seems to me the societal
norms are changing.
Mm
And we want to spend a lot of
money here.
Behavior health.
Can anybody define it.
Can anybody define this is
right, this is wrong.
Can we draw a straight line to
say to someone.
This is right or this is wrong.
And so my problem with all this
is.
Is that
We've got such a moving target
here, we're going to say, well,
that's OK in this situation.
But not OK in this situation.
Um
We've got some laws on the books
that says
If you do this, it's against the
law.
But then we go to the court
system and say, well,
You know
Maybe not.
So,
I've got a real problem with the
whole deal. I don't, I, I had
some questions, but
I don't know, I'm just, I'm
pretty confused on, on.
What we're trying to do.
How can we
Ask someone to go to counseling
when, when, you know, all of a
sudden they, they reacted to a,
a situation.
And we don't know
All the background to all that
reaction, and then we go down
and look at all the background
and say, well, I might have
reacted that way.
And I don't have any questions,
Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm waiting for
further discussion. I, I want to
thank all of y'all coming in
here today, trying to explain
this to me.
Because
You know, I'm kind of old
school.
And uh
Things were much more black and
white to me than
I guess the rest of the world.
So I have a problem.
Understanding some things. Thank
you for the opportunity for me
to say nothing.
Welcome to the club, Senator
Tobias.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I know
that we have provider shortages
around the state. So is there a
state strategic plan where these
workers will go because for
instance, I know that CYFD only
has 7% of their social workers
that are actually licensed
social workers. So as we find
these potential um employees,
where are they going first? Is
there some kind of
I don't know, schedule. Am I
making sense? Like, are you all
gonna take them all? Are we
gonna have competing agencies,
how many of these licensed
social workers is CYFD going to
get versus you all, there should
be some kind of cooperation and,
and I think alignment and how
we're gonna do that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, it's a great
question. I think for a long
time to come, there's gonna be a
lot of competition over a
workforce, uh, and, you know,
there's, they're needed
everywhere. Uh, I wanted to call
your attention, um, I can't
recall if, if you were in my
budget hearing, our agency, the
healthcare authority is doing a
gap analysis for all adult
mental health services, um,
where we are actually projecting
sort of the actual need of
individuals for certain services
who are not getting served
today, um, and I would envision
that whatever infrastructure
investments the state makes
would kind of follow that sort
of need so that we would develop
a plan that kind of aligns with
what the real need is and where
people are needed, so, uh, we're
gonna need some people in rural
areas and that may mean we have
to do, you know, something in
the reimbursement space around
like rural differential to
attract.
Providers, um, we're trying to
do a lot of work, uh, and we are
actually getting some providers
from our neighboring states who
have come here uh to provide
services, but I think, um, we
would need to develop a
strategic plan for mental health
that kind of goes in line with
the gap analysis so that we know
exactly where that workforce is
needed, uh, which is something
that our agency is working on
today.
So how, how do we from a state
level, Mr. Chair, make sure that
that those conversations will
happen and that maybe there's
some kind of official finding
and in a system in place to make
sure that those providers are,
are directed in a timely manner
to the agencies in the regions
around the state that need it
the most. Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, that's a great
question. We are, um, so we will
have completed
the, the gap analysis, uh, by
the end of the fiscal year that
will be completed by June 30th,
um, I guess in an ideal
Situation, um, if the regional,
you know, the administrative
office of the courts, for
example, is working on these
regional plans, they would be
required to utilize the gap
analysis, uh, and so I would
suggest that there would be some
kind of guardrail built in so
that there's not duplication of
services that were really being
mindful of how to make a
sustainable service, which is
kind of hard in some of our
rural communities, um, and how
we're going to fund all of that,
so.
Uh, my suggestion would be that
be a requirement if there is a
regional approach.
So you know, I'm new here, so
I'm just baffled by maybe the
lack of guardrails and
accountability and detail, um,
an assurance that we get to
outcomes, right? That's where my
questions come from. How do we
get to the best outcome, so who
makes that decision. Make sure
that that happens what we're
what we're talking about. Is
there one person? Is it?
The legislative body like who
actually says this has to happen
this way. It has to be
structured.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobiasson,
um, can I just ask for clarity?
Are you asking in the context of
the behavioral health.
Bill package or are you asking
today in today's structure.
Well, just.
Both probably, right? Like if
we're Mr. Chair going to assure
that there are guardrails that,
that there's a goal that there's
alignment among agencies in the
state, which is the overarching
body, right? How do
How do we make sure that that's
infiltrated and
put in as like a requirement
with your gap analysis. Why do a
gap analysis if we don't have a,
a really strong strategic plan,
and we all agree this is where
we're going and how we're gonna
get there. So how do we assure
that that gets put into place. I
just, I don't really know.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobiasson,
um, so we do have a behavioral
health action plan. It's sort of
a 3 to 5 year plan. Uh, so we do
have that, that's, that was
developed in coordination with
across the agencies that have
behavioral health funding, uh,
hopefully that too would inform
uh the direction of the regional
approach. Um, I believe there's
language in the draft, uh, bill
for Senate Bill 3, that would
require the healthcare authority
to establish standards for
health.
We do that today. We are the
primary funder for mental health
services and so we are the main
tracker of all the outcomes and
sort of the entity that's got
all of the measures in place,
uh, for that, probably not
everything that we would want to
see today, but, um, I would
envision that our agency would
be the lead for that development
in the future.
So do I hear you committing to
making that happen. Uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator Tobiasson, yes,
it's our job to commit to that.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
syndrome.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and, and, and thanks for the
presentation, uh.
And
My question is, maybe more so,
not so much.
All the answer today, but
something that you might want to
get back to me is I know that
we, we have a lot of
organizations. I'm very
interested in your respective uh
work with tribal communities.
Who are those folks are those
organizations, you can just get
back to me, you know, the next
day or so because this
behavioral health is huge. I
just want to know from my
perspective, I think those that
are interested in our tribal
communities is uh these
legislators what is the outreach
to those communities who
working with, uh, and we just
wanna make sure that, that I
have a pretty good knowledge of
who are all the players,
organizations that are doing
work from each of your
respective organizations and so
forth. So if I can get that
maybe over the next couple of
days. I appreciate that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Adrian may have the
answer because we did tribal
collaboration one day and and so
he may, he's got a bunch of
feedback. They, they may have
that.
We may have that too
yeah, I'd like for them to
provide it because then I can
cross list with Adrian has and
see if everybody's on there.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Padilla.
Thank you, Chair and thank you
for the presentations today.
I'll be super brief. Um, I
guess, uh, is there a continuum
of someone like that interacts
with multiple areas of your
spheres of responsibility. Is
there sort of a continuum when
someone enters here, they, we
want to make sure that they stay
on track until they have the
behavioral health.
Services they need to exit all
of your wonderful work that
you're doing and move on in
life. I mean, is there some,
some document that ties the life
cycle of an individual and, and
they may come in at different,
doesn't mean they start at the
beginning of this the continuum.
If you have anything, if you all
put anything like that together?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Pat,
no, we, I don't think there's a
system that tracks someone
through the entire life cycle,
um, that is somewhat addressed
through our proposal around
robust navigation system and
maybe that's something that we
can really look at doing. I, I
do hear what you're saying and
there's, there's a bit of a gap
there in terms of um that
tracking to see sort of over the
lifespan, how, how, what their
outcomes are. So a great point.
I don't think the state has
anything like that.
Today.
Anybody else want to comment on
that, I think the linkages
program really it has a and it
brings them in and then gets him
assigned to Medicaid and gets
him like the snap benefits and
kind of tracks some I don't
remember. I know there's a
linkages coral. I know that
Santa Fe recovery is trying to
start running Gallup. They may
have one in Santa Fe, but that
may be the only thing that says
once we talk to you and then get
you into Medicaid and get you
into SNAP and get you.
Services that may be the only
thing that I know of.
Correct me if I'm wrong, there's
something. Thank you, chair, and
I think corrections had a
comment.
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, yes
I don't mean to call you but
it's all right. I, I answered
the corrections. Thank you. He
stands corrected. Don't, don't
call her a naya today.
So I just wanna comment for our
purposes that when a person is
adjudicated as an adult, we do
start working with them on
probation if they're not
immediately sentenced to prison.
We do track them through the
whole process of probation if
they end up in prison through
prison and after and we also
track them into that next stage
when they're receiving services
through Medicaid or healthcare
authority or whoever the other
entity is, uh, we do have a lot
of linkages with other agencies.
Although, um, our tracking is
really limited to that time that
they're engaged in the criminal
justice system, uh, although we
do also do work with CYFD when
there are people who are
incarcerated that have children
in the system, just wanted to
share that. Thank you, and I'll
I'll just stop now, but I, I
think it would be very helpful
to have sort of like a, I'm not
sure what you would call it, I
call it a continuum of life
cycle or whatever, um, because
you would probably learn a lot
from it, um, in terms of what is
the next.
logical step for somebody, so
that, you know, they don't
always um heal, if you will.
Uh, the, the whatever it is that
they're dealing with by just
interacting with one of your
areas, there's probably a
handoff that needs to be
suggested or or promoted with
that individual to get them to
the next step and
Period of their life before they
respectfully wind up with
corrections over there. So, um,
thank, thank you very much,
chair.
never been lost.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um
I guess my uh my thought and my
question is a little bit
different.
And uh more in line maybe with
uh Senator Woods.
And uh if you were to take 5
individuals and post some
questions.
You would end up like with 5
different responses.
And, and what I'm seeing is um,
well, what did we have before
and what do we have now and what
do we need?
And I see more at the at the
university level, you know, what
do we need to do to say stay
with what is needed.
You know, as far as classes,
curriculum, and also for
certification.
And uh one of the parts that I
also see that is probably.
You know, um, high is so there
was a program that was being
done at 3 different um.
Places
And uh this is where they would
bring individuals from the age
of like 16 to maybe 35.
That had completely lost their
ability to socialize because
they were so engaged with their.
Technology, you know that they
had lost their ability to really
just uh.
Be a person really, you know,
just uh so become so addicted to
the, the gadgets that we have
nowadays that uh this was to
break that and to get them out
to more into another path of
just that um.
Today's life, you know, being
able to talk to other
individuals, but all this is
where I'm seeing and and I do
see uh the point that Senator
Woods has. I really do because
like I say, uh.
You know, uh, there seems like
there's a lot of answers and
somehow we just need to like.
You know,
Or
the part of it is so.
I guess more focus and uh.
More into where we're all in.
Basically the same direction.
Mr. Chair, I can touch on the
higher education component of
that since 2015 we have
graduated over 36,000
individuals in behavioral health
and social work. Some of the
investments you have done are
the social work endowments, and
the year after implementation,
we actually increased
enrollment, or I'm sorry,
completion of social work in the
bachelor's level for one year,
but we saw more significant
gains in the masters level.
Something that we have noticed
also, Mr. Chair.
is not as many people are taking
the licensure exam after
completing their social work
credentials in the state of New
Mexico. It's really, really low
for the bachelor's level, it's
higher for this uh master's
level, um, 75% of those taking
it after they received their
master's degree do pass in
almost all of those students are
second time test takers and pass
after the 2nd time. What I will
say is what we're hearing from
the social work profession is
Our curriculum may not be as
aligned as we would like for
those to take the curriculum and
then be ready to take the test.
So in conversations with
Secretary Casados from the
Children, Youth and Families
department. We were actually
start taking all social work
programs in the state of New
Mexico and realigning that
curriculum again, we completed
that work in 2018, but there
hasn't been a revisit of that
since then. So we plan on doing
that so our social work
graduates can actually pass the
first time they test and we can
have more test takers in social
work, because we're actually
seeing a lot of them not take
tests after they graduate
graduate, they actually go into
other professions.
I guess so, Mr. Chairman, with
that, um.
It seems like you someone goes
into that app.
And then, uh, they don't want to
take the exam, there's to me,
there's something wrong.
You know, and so.
How do we work with that and how
do we fix that?
Because uh
When you take, uh, for example,
like the nursing program.
Anyone that graduates.
I mean, they're hired
immediately.
You know, and
I'll just leave it at that.
Senator Shindo real quick.
Thank you, just to follow up uh
to secure Rodriguez's point.
You, you mentioned something
about 36,000
can you explain?
You say that again.
Mr. Cherry, yes, Mr. Chair,
you're right. So since 2015,
2016 academic year, we've had
36,000 individuals, uh, graduate
with behavioral health or social
work degrees in the state of New
Mexico certificate to graduate
level.
The whole continuation, yeah.
What about at the undergraduate
and graduate level.
I have all these spreadsheets in
front of me, Mr. Chair.
And you look where you're
looking at your spreadsheets and
see how many actually took their
test. I have that number, Mr.
Chair. Would you like to know?
Let me give you that first
because it's faster and Mr.
Chair, Senator, I may have to
break it down graduate and
bachelor's degree level for you
an associate and send it to you
after with that mental health
work you asked about tribal
communities, if that's OK and as
far as the test is concerned,
Mr. Chair, let me pull that up
right now.
So for 2023 at the bachelor's
degree level, only 41 exams or
exam uh administered her
master's degree, it was
significantly higher at 284.
Now, as far as our population is
concerned compared to the
national averages, that's pretty
average. So at the national
average only 3000 bachelor's
level exams were taken at the
nation, a nationwide and 21,000
at the master's level. So it is
comparable to nationwide
statistics, unfortunately.
How many, how many graduated in
that number.
With their masters and their
bachelor's, that'll give us the
the difference of percentage.
Mr. Chair, I do have the
master's level. I'd have to
break down. Oh, and now I have
the best.
So for 2023, 185 at the
bachelor's level.
2024 or 100, so about 50% of
those students are taking the
test.
Less for the bachelors, so it's
actually
significantly lower.
The denser, uh, yes, thank you
for the information I was when I
said 36,000, I was like, wow,
that's, that's more uh folks
there.
We all jobs. I don't think we
have 36,000 openings for social
workers to be behavior health
therapist, but, but something
needs to happen, I think it's it
sounds like a lot. Seems like
we're investing, but if they're
not completely, we may want to
look at something, how we're
encouraging folks to continue on
because if you're just taking
courses just to take it.
I mean, I don't know. Yeah, Mr.
Chair, we're noticing it's a
licensure component that's been
difficult for our graduates. So
we're graduating students, but
it's that licensure component,
so something the deputy
secretary whispered to me is um
in a study that we're doing
specifically on social workers,
something that can improve that
our capstone projects. So
working with our students who
are about to graduate on the
licensure test, how to prep for
that, how to, uh, how to prep
for it and how to pass it the
first time is something we can
look to do that study will be
ready.
I, I believe spring or summer of
this year.
Senator Steinbor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
follow-up question to my line of
questions earlier. Um, in the
school-based
The school-based social workers.
Are they all government
employees or do we do any
contracts?
And what percentage would you
say would be of which kind.
Mr. Chair, Senator Steinborn,
um, the school partners with the
medical provider who provides
the staffing. They're not
government employees.
OK.
In all cases, pretty much that's
the model.
Like
Interesting. OK, so that's
important to know just in terms
of our approach, um.
We still aren't, I'm sure sure
the amount of professional
social workers in the field that
we would need to meet this
demand.
Or, or not. I mean, if we wrote
a check.
hire them to issue contracts,
would there be enough
professionals out in the field
to do this work. We have a
sense.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I think
it's gonna be dependent on the
gap analysis that the healthcare
authority is providing us in
order for me to answer that.
Um, so once that comes through,
we'll be able to provide you
that information.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Steinborn, I guess the other
thing is it really depends on if
it's urban or rural location.
Some of the rural school-based
health centers, for example, are
only able to staff up like 2
days a week, uh, and so they
rotate that provider around the
region, so it probably just
depends on the model and the
location, um, somewhat.
Mhm
Mr. Chair and Senator Simon just
to
clarify the question about are
they school employees or outside
providers, and it's both. So
schools do have school
counselors, we have about 898
statewide and total in schools,
but those are not uh necessarily
and rarely are behavioral
health, like clinicians. Those
are providers that come into
schools and provide those
services in school settings to
students.
Right.
And then it makes me wonder, Mr.
Chair, going deeper down the
rabbit hole like.
The difference between the
behavioral health.
Certified professional versus
social worker and what do we
need, you know, what is really
the need there?
Um
I guess I would just ask.
You all to consider if you're
not already.
Looking at this and like laying
out a plan that would move us
forward like I know that
sometimes you come to us and say
we want to fund 5 more, we want,
and we all agree, yes, we have a
great need. Let's fund those 5
more. But what I would love to
see, I think probably we all
would, is a plan to like,
A Padilla style moonshot to
provide social workers in every
school kind of deal. I say that
uh Senator Padilla champions
these big system-wide reforms
that are amazing, um, for school
hunger and other things, and
this is one of those deals. So
anyway, is that, could that fit
in your gap analysis or could we
retrofit it?
Collaboratively with the other
departments to say, here's here
would get us to the ideal.
And look at all the areas,
workforce development, just the
whole picture. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Senator Steinborn, I'll take
that back. Uh, so, you know, uh,
the healthcare authority's gap
analysis is primarily focused on
adults because we're the adult
mental health agency, but CYFD
is working on something similar
for children. Uh, so we'll work
on that together with them.
OK. All right. Thank you. Well,
I may be calling you
individually with some questions
and thoughts because
Because uh it's so important
thing, Mr. Chair. Senator
Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I think
with LFC isn't there an
appropriation for like a total
of $37 million to hire, to
recruit hire and train um these
workers over the next 3 years,
and is there a very detailed
laid out plan of how you plan to
do that.
Um, with those monies so that we
don't see money unspent or
reverted.
Let's see, Elsie's in the room,
you want to answer that?
I was
Mr. Chairman Senator, uh, I
believe you're referring to the
funding for children, youth and
families department to be able
to staff up in their child
protective services.
Uh, so yes, that money is in
there. That was their request to
be able to hire 100 additional
case workers uh to work in child
protective services and I would
Direct the details on how they
plan to do that to CYFD.
Thank
I don't remember your last name.
I'm sorry. It's, it's OK. It's
Hamilton, um, that Munoz, um,
and Senator Tobiasson so I am
not completely 100% aware that
would be a question that we can
get back to you some answers
from Secretary Casados cause my
main focus is the behavioral
health component of CYFD in
children, um, but I do know.
In conversations when looking at
the ability to staff up our
workers within CYFD. Yes, we are
working at, looking at social
workers, um, but we also
recognize the counselors that
work with us and other
professionals that are focused
on behavioral health, mental
health and development of
children, um, and looking that
plan.
As a whole.
Thank you and Mr. Chair.
If you're adding, I think it's
101 actually employees that
you're looking to add with that
money over 3 years.
What percentage of those workers
should be and will be certified
social workers.
And again, I will have to get
that information back to you.
I'm not privy. I'm not aware of
the complete plan and so I can
get those answers.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Let me just ask you
some questions, I mean.
I don't know, we're trying to do
it right, right?
all the secretaries here maybe,
I mean one maybe on 2 and 3.
In the amendments, so we'll go
over them tomorrow. I mean, do
you think we're really doing
this the right way. I mean,
you're the professionals. Do you
think we can achieve this?
In a time frame that moves the
needle.
Not everybody has, you know,
haven't answer, no worries, but
I mean.
That
not to put you on the spot a
little bit, Mr. Chair, but
that's OK. Um, I think, you
know, uh, secretijo addressed a
little bit earlier, the concern
that we have is the ability of
how we're gonna funnel these
dollars through the
administrative office of the
courts when New Mexico really
doesn't have an infrastructure
set up like other states with
county organized health systems
across the entire state. So I
think to develop those regional
plans, it's gonna be
Um
Interesting and, and I think it
would be a challenge and I, and
I think many of us here were
personally looking forward to
hearing from AOC this morning.
Um, definitely makes sense to
have the sequential intercept
mapping done by the
administrative office of the
courts because that's, that's
really kind of their focus
within the criminal justice
system, um, and then to also
reiterate that you know we need
to be thoughtful about everybody
else who are needing these
services, just not those that
are involved with the criminal
justice system, but also the
youth.
Um, and how we want to address
those challenges as well. So
we've, and thank you for
allowing us to sit down with
Adrian and and review, um, the,
the bills and provide feedback,
and I know that um we've, he's
been very attentive and
listening to us on some of the
components from the executive
recommendation that we really
need and um listening to you all
and some of the questions that
have been brought forward, we
recognize the really needs some
intensive.
Care navigation across the
behavioral health system, I
think that that is desperately
needed and missing, um, in order
to help people just navigate the
complexities of of trying to
access that care and move
through the continuum as was uh
brought up earlier.
Uh, Mr. Chair, yeah, thank you
for the question and I, I really
can't overstate how grateful we
are that you all are paying
attention to and this seems to
be such a priority for the
legislature, I think, uh, it's
really incredible to see that
kind of energy, um, I sort of
have, I guess I would echo the
same concerns or um just wanting
to wait and see how this would
shake out. I think we were
really eager to hear from the
administrative office of the
courts. um, I guess the final
point, I won't repeat
everything, secretary.
De Blassy said, but I do believe
very strongly that behavioral
health is a healthcare issue.
Uh, it is not necessarily
something that belongs in the
justice system exclusively and
so we're really trying to find
out how do these things interact
with each other because there
are so many issues, um, in terms
of the whole universe of people
that really need mental health
services who are really not
interacting with that system at
all, and so we're really wanting
to make sure that those folks,
um, that there's a strategy.
to address those access issues
and make sure that um those very
specific concerns are being
addressed in whatever plan the
state develops. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Yeah, I, I mean, our, our the
reason we did regionalization is
to stand it up rather quickly.
Not everybody's gonna interact
with the courts, but the courts
have the ability to regionalize
and gather those, and I'm gonna
use the 11th, right, Farmington
and in Gallup. I mean, they have
the ability to to regionalize
those and get them more quickly.
An agency.
You would just be underwater if
we tried to do this throughout
the agency. I mean, you people
were, I think they're have
available to attend and comment
and, and, and make points.
I mean, that's the reason we
went regionally because, you
know, you look at the far
northeast.
There's more cows than there are
people.
And you really regionalize
something.
And where do you regionalize it
at, and then
You look between Gallop and
Shiprock and there's really
nothing there in behavioral
health can happen.
In a lot of different places and
and so how do you, you make that
react?
I mean, we'll make sure they,
they give their comments maybe
tomorrow before we do the bills,
don't know why they're not here.
Uh, they were invited, maybe
they had a meeting. I have no
idea, but let's, let's hear from
them on, on how they
plan to do that. I mean, we did
put performance triggers in
there starting in May, right? We
want reporting, we want
accountability, says money is
flowing.
And it's not, you can't force
somebody to do something.
That you can guide them.
In the direction of speed.
And, and I think that's
something you want to sit cause
he's all sat here since Governor
Martinez had decimated
behavioral health and nobody's
really made a real attempt to
restructure the whole thing or
to try to reset it up.
In a way that
Regionalize it and may make it
work quicker. I mean, that was
my whole point of that question.
I mean, I hope, I think we're
doing the right thing, but I'm
not an expert. I hope we're
doing the right thing, but I'm
not an expert. I just need
action, right? It's, I'm in
business and I make 10 decisions
I make 40 decisions this
morning, you know, and, and we
just got to make those decisions
and move forward, you know, if
we don't try.
We don't know if we're gonna
succeed. And if we fail, at
least we tried.
And it may take some tweaking
next year when we come back in.
Hopefully we're starting to hear
a lot of chatter maybe about
July, August, September, about
things starting to happen.
That's my hope, right?
And give it a little bit of
time, but maybe they get one or
two things started and and so.
That's the whole goal.
Um
And and it's gonna happen
regionally because we just heard
before that the gentleman from
Carl's bed and when they, when
their providers are not in the
school, then they rely on them.
When they call them in to
provide.
Services in the school
districts, and so.
What we don't know is what we
don't know.
And so we just got it
We try and fail, at least we
try. We, we try and win, good
for us, good for everybody. So
thank you guys.
Um
They did lay a copy of, of
Senate Joint Resolution one.
Maybe I want to chat with you
one on one about that.
Or.
