Uh, representative Lentil. You
want to start us off?
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the time. Thank you.
Committee members all start with
house. Bill 30830 Wait. How
authorizes the issuance of
general obligation bond capacity
building $289.6 million,
including the costs of issuance
for four total bond issues.
Those have all been discussed in
the LFC process, and we all
voted on those in lfc as well
with that, Mr Chairman. I stand
for any questions anybody in the
audience and support
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody in
Nobody questions from committee
member Center Woods.
Just real quickly, Mr Chair and
representative, chairman. Tell
me
How these projects were picked.
There are no projects in this
Bill center. It's just creating
a fun.
No, no, that G 010 we're doing
Giovanni.
I thought we were doing all
right. All right.
Yes, sir. We're good, Mr Mr
Chairman and and senator how
they were picked as they go
through a vetting process by the
executive and RLC staff, And
then it's brought to the lfc,
which you're on, and so am I.
And so we go through those and
then we approve them there.
308. I just wanted to bring that
out that this wasn't just picked
out, uh, out of the air. These
were went through some kind of
vetting process. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Senator. They
they actually lfc and a bunch of
people go and look at buildings
and actually look at stuff and
then our long term and aging,
They score it right and and
Score the projects and then
select from the scoring sheets.
Any other questions on Senate
Bill 308 promotion second past
second Senate Rodriguez
Colorado
Oh, Senator Bert.
Senator Campos.
Senator Brantley. Brantley
votes. Yes, Senator Gonzales?
Yes. Gonzales votes here.
Senator Hemphill Hemphill votes?
Yes, Senator Padilla? Yes.
votes? Yes, Senator Scherer.
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods.
Yes, Senator. Woods votes Yes,
Senator Burst. Yes, Senator.
Bert votes? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes, Vice
chair. Rodriguez votes. Yes,
Ceremony knows German sports.
Yes. You have a do pass 8 to 0.
We are now on to the next one.
Where is
No way. Let's get this other
one.
One house Bill 134 education
Trust? Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you. Kelly
House Bill 134 in in hospital to
that This body passed yesterday
has $50 million in it that
establishes a couple education
Trust fund with that Mr
Chairman, Stanford questions
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience and support
Any
We're gonna want to do one or
two of you.
And, uh, I think this is all
worked out right Represent
Lindsay. This is creating the
fun. Nothing else. Absolutely.
Yes, sir. Okay, there.
Alright, let's get one or two
people.
You guys picked from yourself.
Come on. Up you go, Sean.
Hello, Chairman.
And members of the committee. My
name is Aaron Lee indigenous
policy advocate with NM native
vote here to speak in strong
support for HB 130 for this bill
is a critical opportunity to
increase Children's access to
culturally and linguistically
relevant education. 130 for
enables tribes to exercise their
sovereignty by supporting
teachers and educational
programs that have their own
background.
And how they see fit.
The trust fund will help to
retain educators who know the
language and bring an amount of
money and was tribes have never
had for culturally responsive
education It provides for future
generations, and we just support
one another in this endeavor to
do good onto our native
students. Thank you. Thank you
one more.
Good morning. Good morning.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
My name is Mark Mitchell, former
governor from the public to
Suki, and we wholeheartedly
support this bill, for all the
reasons stated earlier, and I
think it's time that we the
state starts moving in that
direction. Thank you. Thank you.
We have one person is in
Don't
All right. We have a name.
Richard, are you there on Zoom?
And then
there
Yeah, I'm there. Um, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name one minute.
Right, Mr. Mr Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is
Dick Mason. I'm a lobbyist for
the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico and we stand in
strong support of HB 134
important to pass. Um, this is
important to address past
inequities in education for
Native American communities, So
we standing strong support.
Thank you. Thank you. Anybody in
opposition? Mark? What do you
need?
Come on up.
Mr Chairman. I'm not in office,
Okay. Touch late 30 seconds
Santa Domingo Pablo and saw not
Afonso Pueblo and the Santa Fe
Indian school, and we stand in
strong support of the
legislation right? Anybody in
opposition?
None. Questions from committee
members. Chairman Move forward
Do Pastor What did you have a
question?
I'm gonna vote for it. Don't
Don't
Every year.
I want to make sure I'm pretty
sure I am and this appropriates
$1 million to a new fund, right?
This chair and
Mr Chairman, Mr. Chairman and
and and Senator. It appropriates
$50 million to establish the
tribal Education Trust fund.
Okay, so it was amended to 50
million and I apologize for that
because I did read that over
here. And this is a synopsis. I
read here is Ralph so it and it
also creates a, uh
Aboard.
To supervise, but the e D
distributes Mr Chairman and
representative PD administers
the dollars. The board is
comprised of the bubbles,
nations and tribes to discuss
the disbursement of that trust
fund once it establishes itself,
and we're looking at two years
down the road
So So, Mr. Let me get this
straight. The the board
determines the distribution.
Head, uh, administers money for
the distribution. Mr Chairman
and Senator. Yes, sir. Okay. No
other question. Thank you.
Any other questions. We have a
motion from center Would you
pass? We're gonna motion from
Senator
India second by. I think
Senator, Senator Gonzalez made
the motion right motion.
Cambodia. What your second the
motion second cultural
Senator Bert
Yes, Senator. Bert votes. Yes,
Senator Campbell's Senator
Bradley. Senator Brantley votes.
Yes, Senator Gonzales. Senator
Gonzalez votes Yes, Senator
Hemphill, Senator Hemphill
votes? Yes, Senator Padilla?
Yes. Padilla votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer.
Senator Stein born Senator Stein
born votes. Yes, Senator Woods
Senator would votes Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez? Yes. Rodriguez
votes. Yes, Chairman. Yas? Yes.
Your sports. Yes. You have a do
past 9 to 0. Thank you,
Representative. We're gonna
couples
Senator composing jump around a
little bit so, yes. So that
means we have come back in this
afternoon like ketchup and clean
up and all that. Thank you. Mr
Chairman, Thank committee
member, Senator Rodriguez.
your next
most hated bill in the capital,
Senator Rodriguez, did you
You're admiring my haircut over
there. What?
There we go. Mr. Chairman. Yeah.
Senate Bill 246. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. This is the annual
reauthorization bill that we
call Rio Bill and the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
this bill reauthorizes 253
capital projects that have been
authorized in previous years
from various funds. And, um
These are to extend the
reversion dates, expand the
language or change the purpose
of the original appropriation or
to change the administrative
agency. For example, these are
some of the things that get
reauthorized and a lot of these
projects got delayed due to the
pandemic. So we're having to
redo these now and you have a
chart by agency before you. We
are working to get the the list
of the chart by county and it
hasn't arrived, but staff is
working on it.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Senate Rodriguez. We do have a
committee substitutes. The
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 246.
Yeah, That's what I mentioned.
We need this substituted in here
or did you do have a substitute
So can have a motion. Yeah, as
soon as yes. Since we make the
motion. Yep. Yep.
Yes, we have a motion to have a
second.
Senator Hemphill seconds.
You have to tell us about the
service Tutut Bill now. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um
yes. And And as I mentioned, the
substitute includes 253 Capital
projects that have been
requested for reauthorization
for extension of time or
purpose. Or UM, administrative
agency, the usual annual bill
that we have to reauthorize
projects so that we don't lose
the funding.
And a lot of these projects were
delayed due to the pandemic and
the covid You know the situation
with the transportation issues
the materials going up and
whatever the cost, and so on. So
here it is before us again and
before you we have the list for
the capital projects that are
being reauthorized by agency. We
usually have it also by county
and that one is coming down.
The staff has not delivered it
from the Legislative Council,
but that should be on its way.
But all of these projects are in
here. Um and I just asked for
approval
queue.
Questions from committee
members.
Mr Chair, Senator Woods, you
know, lift.
Quickly, Mr Chair.
We've had a real problem with D
F a
Mr Chair and Madam chair. We've
had a real problem with D F a
sending their contracts out the
approvals out to do some of
these contracts to do these.
It's been a real holdup many
times. We've we've had these
These acceptance or these
contrasts go out so late in the
year, it's been nearly
impossible. They lose nearly a
year. Um
Do we think we're going to get
any better response from from D
F A on this?
You know this helps maybe these
projects but
We've got a whole another list
of projects coming up.
Any opinions on that. I know
it's not a good time to ask
opinions, Mr Chair and madam
last year.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Woods, and we are
hoping that as we continue to
express concerns about the many
projects that are having to be
reauthorized that it moves a lot
quicker. What happens many times
is that the entities the
receiving entities have not been
able to get the documents and
To get the project certified on
time and so on. And so D F a
many times cannot proceed until
the organizations that get the
funding submit what they need
and all of that has been
discussed thoroughly and, um
more than encouraged to get
these projects in. Get them out,
get the proper documentation so
that we can move quicker.
Uh, because otherwise this
continues to be a process that
it's just repeatedly the same.
Um, as you allude to that, Mr
Chairman, Senator Woods, So
we're hoping that the FAA can
proceed to issue these grant
agreements and get the documents
in. This is the what's called
certification done. Also,
together with the with the
organizations, there is a bill.
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods that
Establishes. It hasn't passed
yet, but it establishes what I
call a capital outlay, um, kind
of a division or bureau or
office. Whatever you want to
call it to be able to help. Kind
of like a clearinghouse at D F A
to help these organizations move
their projects along, so that's
where we are Mr Chairman and Mr
Chair on the same subject.
Can. What is the dollar amount
with this? The total dollar
amounts and Madam chair. Thank
you. Yes, Kelly can get me the
Mr Chair, Senator Woods. We
don't have a total dollar amount
on this yet. Um, because we just
got the bill recently and it's a
little more complicated than you
would think to track all that
down.
But we are working on it.
We will have that Mr Chairman by
the time it gets to the house,
the staff, um did not get their
re authorizations is my
understanding, um in and it
takes about three days just to
prove the reauthorization and
the language, let alone having
to put them in into this bill,
And so, um, you know, it's been
a pretty arduous task for them,
and they're working avidly to
try and get all this down. Um,
on that.
Mr Chair.
And madam chair.
Have the bonds already been
solar. The cash is available for
these projects.
Uh, we've been doing cash for a
couple of years, but it's is all
of the money.
In the house to do these
projects right now, Mr Chair and
Madam chair.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator.
And yes, the the funding has a
really already been appropriated
for these. It's my
understanding. Hmm.
Okay?
It's all my questions. Mr.
Chair, Senator Steinberg. Thank
you, Mr Chair. And thank you,
Senator and Kelly, um, how most
of these projects were extending
the time frame? How long are we
extending them before?
Okay, Mr Chairman, Senator, it's
usually two years, so that's
what they try to keep the
balance at its like a threshold
of two years because some of
these projects have had to be
real reauthorized more than
once, But that's where it's at.
Thank you. Is that they all two
years, Mr. Chairman Kelly, how
about you defer to kill him?
Ah, Mr Chair, Senator Stein
born, uh, any project in the
bill that is reauthorized for a
time extension specifies the
time extension, But the senator
is correct that
Um, the standard is two years.
Okay. Thank you very much, and I
saw some an MSC project just
mean mostly lost cruises. But
just since we have, doctor
Thanks. We're good back.
Thank you, Mr Chair. You're
extending them for two years.
Awesome. Missing on the sheet is
when were these projects
approved? How long have they
already had?
Kelly, can you answer that? You
have that detailed information,
Mr. Chair, Senator Brantley.
That also just depends on the
project. Um, the furthest back
that we saw that projects go in
this bill for original
appropriation is 18,016. I have
a hard time I'm gonna vote. No,
because I know this is going to
pass and it needs to
But as I sit here and Senate
finance and we hear really from
the direction of our chair, the
importance of getting this money
out.
You know, you're saying Well,
sometimes it's the local
government. Sometimes it's the F
A R experience in Sierra,
working with with Wesley at D F
A. We got money out very
quickly, and I understand that
there's some other projects that
aren't
I wouldn't sign any re offs from
my district this year. And then
when I look on here, and I see
that some of these are vehicle
purchases
I don't know how anyone can get
a vehicle purchased in five
years.
And and I'm only saying that
because it's some point we have
to say, like enough is enough
because we're sitting on on this
money and I don't know how we
help D f a get it. I don't know
if we bring the cogs in a really
like the way we're doing junior
money now to expedite that money
out, But we've got to do
something on Capitol outlay and
all and I'll start first with my
district by saying there's many
projects on there.
That they sat around and talked
about the details and prolonged
a project that should have been
shovel ready when it came to the
legislator, So it's frustrating
for everybody. Thank you Go
Senator Rodriguez for bringing
this forward. Thanks. Sure.
Thank you, Mr.
So, thank you, Mr Chair and
Senator. So you know, as I
understand that some of these
projects are very costly, and so
I'm assuming that it takes a
period of time to get all this
money together. Is that what
would hold some of these up?
Obviously, Mr Chairman, Senator,
Yes, that's correct. And then,
sometimes with an anticipated
Situations like the pandemic,
Things got worse. And so now
it's It's like piling up even
more. So we're trying to get
some of these out. Mr Chair and
and Senator I get. I'm just as
frustrated as Senator Diamond.
Brantley is on some of the
projects in my area, but I know
that it's a It's sort of a
mosaic and a hodgepodge of
getting all this money together
to get something done. Is that
right? That's correct. Thank you
for that. Yes, it is. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. I just wanted
to kind of call that out as some
of these are very large
projects. It might take several
years to get all of this money
together, but we we need to find
them to make sure that we have
enough staffing. You know, for
Wesley and his team to get all
this stuff when you actually do
have the money to get these
things done? Um, but we can't
let them languish. So maybe
there's something we could do
that. If a locality we've done a
third of it, or we've done a
percentage of it that the
locality needs to get to
Get their part together so they
can get this thing done faster.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Just
briefly on the situation,
haven't you do, for example with
vehicles and I fully agree with
that? What we're trying to do is
put vehicles for example in
specials instead of having them
bonded for all these years when
the vehicle loses its its equity
or value within a year or two
sometimes so there are there is
move more than one move to try
and get things improved with
these for these bills.
Thank you.
You know, next year.
I don't think I'm gonna do Rio
Bill.
I think it's time to draw the
line in the sand.
And just say
You guys gotta get ketchup
cleanup because we're going to
hit Kelly. What are you gonna
hit 8 billion this year?
7 billion. I
Capital. Um, Mr Chair. Total
outstanding balances have been
hovering around $5 billion kind
of across the capital Outlay
landscape, so
If we have another billion
dollar appropriations package
this year, we'll see some of
that money fall off, but
Baby be close to six.
So six that we're at six coming
in.
We did a billion that seven
Mr Chair? Yeah, we've been
hovering around five this year.
Okay?
I mean, the problem is we
created this monster ourselves
and the Legislature.
Is we throw money everywhere and
I'll use the Navajo Nation as
example.
They just do not have the staff.
And the back office to do all
these things and they expect
expect to send 100,000,200
million to the Navajo nation,
and there's five people doing
that.
And you do that to every city
and county, Right? Okay. Well,
here's this project. We don't
have an engineering Aleida, and
we don't have a
Construction or electrician in
Aleida, and we throw these
projects at people.
And then expect them to get them
done, and they don't get done.
Is this? This is 2019 money
correctly. Correct? Um, Mr
Chair. It's It's from a variety
of yours.
Um, so the there could be some
original 2019 projects in there,
but, um, sort of standard the
furthest back. I would say they
typically go as 2020 as I
mentioned earlier. There are
some that could have been
reauthorized multiple times that
go back further.
Yeah, And so just for people I
took some of my Riaz and never
moved and moved them to like a
road that the county wanted to
do.
And wouldn't into lighting that
they can get done right?
And and so
I just caution everybody, and
this is the last year I'm gonna
do Riaz. We won't hear that bill
next year.
So either it's gotta move.
Or we're gonna start pulling it
back. At some point. We got to
fix the problem that we've
created for ourselves because
everybody in this capital I
mean,
I capitalism? Worst thing I can
do I create winners and I create
losers, right?
They never create.
Real winners to build things and
fix the problems that they have.
I
Turn on the sprinkler, and it
gets a little green over here,
but nothing ever grows right?
And and then we come on into the
next project, and so
I kind of worked diligently with
my council delegates because
they have $8 million apiece. Say
Okay.
Are we going to do this Chapter
house and and come to find out
some of the chapter house is on
my list were already paid for by
the Navajo nation, and they
funded them completely. So
I did a pretty good go through
with my council delegates to
make sure that I match where
they were going to put their
money.
So that we can get it moving.
But
I think this is the last year
for y'all. I mean, how much did
the executive having Riaz Wesley
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee we had about 55
projects for the real So, um,
telling what dollar amount? Um,
I think at the time, it's hard
to say, because they expand
funding throughout the course of
the month, so
We didn't really get a total
dollar amount for that.
Okay?
I mean,
Cost overruns or cost increases,
not cost overruns.
We're also a big portion, and I
know in our capitalist
I think we did give our list to
the Senate. Our Senate list we
said back. Fill your projects
now, right? Get them completed
and get them moving.
I know that the executives
mentioned of next year.
Every capital project is going
to be a backfill project. No new
projects.
And I think we just have to
start toeing that line is
setting that stage because
I don't know. You know we could
take. You can take a billion
dollars right now in capital and
put it into the into the tribal
trust fund and generate money.
Or we could take a billion
dollars and just sit it in the
bank.
And make 1% of our money instead
of making 5% in the fund.
I mean, we have
3 billion in cash reserves. We
have
Roughly just call it 3 billion
in capital cash.
For the last three years sitting
there
You have $6 billion
Six times five is so you can
generate $350 million a year off
that money.
That's a lot of money to
generate, and we're just sitting
here.
And blinders on same
You know, keep doing the same
thing and hope for a better
outcome.
I think it's time to draw the
line in the sand. I know the
house is going to have the
Riyadh's next year, but he's in
the room, so I just
I did realize this year and I'm
gonna vote for it this year, but
I'm telling you, it comes up
next year.
We're not going to read here,
Riaz. We're going to draw the
line in the sand and say
We can't get it done and we'll
take that money and it's it's
cash and we'll backfill projects
that need to be completed.
So we can get stuff done so
I can't speak for everybody's
district. But I mean
So I can finish the sewer line
project in Milan, or I can
Finish the Chapter House and
Sensitivity or not, Chitti.
So I mean, we can do things that
were actually get Senator Bert,
you had a question. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Um, the I d number on
the list is supposed to
correspond with what's in the
bill. Is that correct?
Mr Chairman, Senator Kelly
siding number over last
correspondence.
Given the I d number Center,
Burke So you know they can start
looking for what? You're asking
The I d number is 203, which is
Chavous County.
Um, improvement and then I look
in the bill under section 203,
and it's an Espanola project.
Um, no, it's a L. C s. I d that
we're looking at all that Kelly
continues. Yeah, Mr. Chair,
Senator, Bert? Um, the idea that
idea on your chart I believe is
like the LCS system I did for
the Riaz, not the section of the
bill that it's in. There is a
lot of mistakes in here and I
know you guys take so much time
to put this together.
I just want to make sure
everything is matching up
correctly, because yet another
reason why we could get into
problems if we're not matching
up.
All the numbers are correct on
all the pieces of paper so
Thank you for checking on that
and clarification. That's all I
had missed year. Thank God. I
just
No, I don't. You got to fix a
problem.
You want to generate money or
just want to let it sit there?
I have a
Motion motion based center
Gonzalez second by center,
Hemphill
Call the roll.
Senator Bert
Yes, Senator. Bert votes? Yes,
Senator Campos? Yes. Compost
votes to Senator Bradley,
Senator Bradley votes No,
Senator Gonzales? Yes. Gonzalez
votes, Senator Hemphill
Hemphill votes? Yes, Center
Padilla.
Senator Scherer.
Senator Stein born Stein born
votes. Yes, Senator Woods
Center. Woods Boats. Yes, Vice
Chair Rodriguez.
Yes. Rodriguez. Yes, Munoz? Yes.
Sports? Yes. You have a do past
8 to 0 Sara Woods to explain
your vote. Yeah, I'm gonna voted
Yes, for this, but I want to see
the numbers.
Madam chair. I want to see the
numbers both for what the
governor wants to reauthorized
And and what?
The rest of these projects are
reauthorizing. I'd like to see
that on on the floor before we
vote.
On it on the floor. It uh or
Uh, probably won't vote for it
If I don't see those numbers.
Thank you. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Chairman, Senator we just over
to the Legislative Council to
see if they finished putting
things together and getting us a
chart by county and then the
numbers for them. Thank you.
Thank you. So the vote was 8 to
1. That's clarify that
It and I don't know who we gotta
fix that screen.
Because every word is completely
wrong. And sometimes I look up
and it was
Catch up, and it was the red
ketchup. Not kind of catch up.
You wanted to be.
So anybody's watching that
screens. It's very entertaining,
but it's completely the wrong
thing that said
I thought Representative Garrett
is with senator him Pill on
House Bill five.
Well, we'll see when we got to
get through. One represent
Garrett. The only reason you
jump to the line because I'm
your favorite senator. And I
think she was chair that is so
true, Uh, dreaming of this
moment all morning. So,
Yeah.
Who's gonna start us off. Okay,
Mr Chair and Committee. Uh, the
HFC committee sub Bridge B 58
creates a Workforce Development
and Apprenticeship Trust fund
makes annual transfers from the
trust fund of the public works
Fun and the Apprenticeship
Assistance Act, updates federal
and state language, and there's
30 million in the budget.
To fund it. And with that, we
stand for questions.
Senator Hemphill yelling that Mr
Sharon members of the committee.
I'll just add that this is a
great opportunity for people to
get skills and have a great
career who don't want to go to
college and support the trades
and helped to diversify our
economy. And with that, Mr
Chair, we stand for questions,
Okay, We're gonna go to the
audience.
So we have some other big bills
that we're probably gonna take
time on and then we were going
to come in and off the floor
today, So if you're on the list,
you're probably gonna have some
type of hearing today Represent
the queen and probably tell you
we're gonna probably get that
this afternoon because we're
going to go down and then come
back.
Save you a little bit of time.
Um
We have a few other ones. Um
Let's go to the audience.
Anybody in support.
Gonna get one or two. How many
we have on zoom one.
One or two.
You have to come up and talk to
the mic.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Excuse
me. Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Members of the committee. Brian
Condit, executive director of
New Mexico Building Trades
Council. We stand in full
support of this legislation in
your previous bill, you were
talking about capital outlay.
Delays are the dire straits were
manpower world today is really a
testament to why we need to pass
this. Thank you, sir.
Mr Chair and members of the
committee shared grown horse
with public service Company of
New Mexico. P and M stands in
strong support of this bill.
It's an important effort to
support our workers were proud
to partner with I B W on this
effort and supporting this
important, bill. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee Alvin
Warren with the Llano Foundation
was try standing strong support
of this bill. We have many
skilled trades job opportunities
throughout our state. This bill
will help improve access to
those jobs by providing
apprenticeship and training
opportunities for young people
And for people
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Philip
Ramirez here.
Um, I am speaking on Trump's
support of this bill.
As a signatory union contractor,
local union for 12 member and
former apprentice. If it wasn't
for this funded apprenticeship
programs, I would never had to
have had the opportunity to be
where I am today. By finding
these programs. You're helping
students that don't want or
can't attend college to be able
to provide a strong working
environment for them to be
successful in the
In the community.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody in
opposition? Nobody on zoom.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Woods. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Madam Senator, Madam
Representative. Good morning.
Better, Mr Senator C two
senators and rip to
representative, I think
Your secretary and the secretary
and expert witness introduced
Get confused. I'm easily
confused. I apologize.
Uh, the question I have
Oh, also went to apprenticeship
program, but I wonder Mr
President.
How have those apprenticeship
union apprenticeship programs
been funded in the past? I don't
think we've been finding them
through states funds have we
Mr Chair. I'll have our expert
witness and reduce yourself.
Thank you, Mr
Senator. Mr Chair, Senator
Woods. Let me walk you just
briefly through the
apprenticeship funding process
we have. Oh, I'm sorry. My name
is Terry Dhaniram, the cabinet
secretary for the Department of
Workforce Solutions to talk a
little bit louder thing. I don't
have my phone in this room
because they'll be texting.
Okay. How's that?
Better. Alright, Great. So we
have three sources of funding
for apprenticeship programs. One
is the Public Works
apprenticeship and training
fund. What the other is, Uh, the
Apprenticeship Assistance Act,
which is funded through $1
million transfer from the
Workers Compensation Act Fund,
and then we have a federal grant
Historically, these two big fans
have been in place for a number
of years.
Under the Apprenticeship
Assistance Act. We give $600,000
for related technical
instruction for any registered
apprenticeship, union or
nonunion. They must apply for
this funding on a yearly basis
and receive quarterly
reimbursements based on their
claims under the public works
and apprenticeship and training
Act, Um, this year we've given
out $1.9 million for the cost of
apprenticeship programs in the
building and construction
trades.
Again. They must apply for this
on a yearly basis, and it is
available to both union and non
union programs. The dynamics
behind this bill is that both of
those funding streams have
decreased over time in what
actually makes it to the
programs because their funding
level has stayed the same. But
the number of apprentices has
grown really quickly so under
the Apprenticeship Assistance
Act in FY 22 we were giving out
$2.58 per instructional. Our
In 23. It dropped to $2.47 per
instructional, Our fy 24 that is
now down to $2.01 set per
apprentice trip. Our and I have
those same numbers to show the
same dynamic happening in P.
Watt. So that is why just there
it is historically been funding
but as apprenticeship grows, it
has become inadequate.
Mr Chair and Senator. Um, sorry.
I was carrying a bill through
the house judiciary just now, So
I just got back so another what
This legislation is going to do
is it's going to bring a lot of
consistency to how we approach
this now, and it will over time
will reduce the burden and the
cost to the General fund
because, like we're doing with a
lot of other funds and a lot of
other monies that we have
Today. We're making this fund
available for the future in a
very consistent way to fund it
through through what you just
heard instead, before it was
sort of up and down extreme
highs, extreme lows at different
times and made it very
inconsistent. That's what made
it hard to actually certify
these workers that way.
Okay, So what? I'm hearing Mr
Chair and and
Distinguished group. What I'm
hearing is that one we are
putting 600,000 in
Three year
Through one fund.
Putting 1.11 0.9 million in
through another fund.
And there was a third fund or
this is the third fun.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods? No,
This would put money into those
two existing funds. We also get
some federal funding that we use
for outreach and technical
assistance to apprenticeship
programs.
And how much do we generally get
through that federal fund? Mr
Chair?
Mr Chair, Senator Woods That is
non recurring. This year. We
have, uh, $388,600, and we got
that through competitive grant
application.
And
And how much do uh
They contractors put towards
There's apprenticeship ones, Mr.
Chin, Mr Chair and Senator
Woods. They There's no direct
contribution from the
contractors to the
Apprenticeship Assistance Act to
the Public Works Apprenticeship
and training fund. Um
Contractors who are working on
public works programs have
projects have the choice between
either having their own
apprenticeship program or
contributing 60. Cents, um, on
the dollar for each, Um, Public
works project, and that's
already the case. This bill does
not change that.
There's so there's so much of
Our leaf.
Charge to go to that.
From the employees from the
From the Apprentice.
Mr Chair.
Him Does apprentice paid towards
His
Also
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods. So,
um, there are a number of
different players in each
apprenticeship program. There is
the apprentice themselves. And
then there is the program
sponsor. So any employer
association or committee or
organization that operates a
registered apprenticeship
program. We call a program
sponsor, and this is the entity
that assumes the full
responsibility for
administration operation of the
Apprenticeship program.
Uh, they can be. We have all
kinds of different program
sponsors in the state Associated
Builders and contractors, for
example, is a non union. Um,
program sponsor ironworkers or a
union program sponsor and then
Cooper Fire protection services
as a non union employer
sponsors, So they're all over
the board. Um and then the other
parties to an apprenticeship or
the participating employers, So
that's the person who's actually
hiring.
The apprentice of record and is
responsible for the on the job
training and then we have
training providers who might be
the sponsor the employer, an
educational institution. The
money from both of these
programs goes to the program
sponsor.
Okay, so the Apprentice does not
receive any direct funding,
Okay, let's get back to the
fund. We're talking about
setting up here.
Okay, this one here.
Will go to the actual school.
How How does this mechanical
deal work here? Uh, we can't
give it to
An individual.
So evidently, we give it to a
Apprenticeship school or we give
it to the 412 apprenticeship
school.
Ah, we give it to
Um
C. C. C.
For apprenticeship training.
Uh,
Tell me how tell me the
mechanics of that part of Mr
Chair.
Mr Chair senator would so this
bill does not create any new
fund. It just increases the
revenue stream to the two funds
that we talked about public
Works, Apprenticeship and
training fund and the
Apprenticeship Assistance Act
and, um, that money goes to the
program sponsors.
Maybe you better explain public
sponsor one more time for me, Mr
Chair.
Sure.
Uh, Mr Chair and Senator Woods?
Yes. So there are two existing
funds. The public works trading
an apprenticeship fund and the
apprenticeship Assistance Act.
Those, um, this This new entity
that's being created is going to
fund into those two existing
programs. So I think I may have
said that wrong in the sense
that this does create a new
fund, but it does not create a
new program.
And so the fund is basically an
expendable trust, um, that it
has currently $30 million in the
budget belt budget bill that
passed and so that money would
then each year be distributed
into these two existing
programs, the public works,
Apprenticeship and training fund
and that triple A
And it says that it in the bill
here or the analysis or
something, said it would fund
both union and non union. So how
feel me?
The nonunion part. I understand
the union part mixture. Tell me
the nonunion part. I'm assuming
it goes to places like CC C or
someone that has a trades
program that there
Doing? Is that am I correct on
that Mr Chair in Senator Woods,
So the all of the funding goes
out by formula and whether
you're a union program or not,
is not a factor in it about one
third of the apprentices in the
state are in non union sponsored
programs. Um, and those include,
uh you know, ABC, the Associated
builders and contracts.
City of farming tonight.
Associated General Contractors.
There are a number of non union
program sponsors that can apply
for this funding and do and in
this past year, um, just about
$800,000 of of these two revenue
streams went to non union
programs.
Madam, Check Mr Chair and
Senator. I just want to add. In
other hearings, Carla Kugler of
the ABC Association of Builders
and Contractors spoke in favor
of this as well. So I just want
to make sure that you do that.
Okay, but
Let me ask one quick question
that I actually read the bill.
In section 13 as a 50 million
appropriation House Bill two,
There's only 30 Million for that
was appropriation stripped
anywhere.
That stricken Mr Chair now, and
you're right. It is 30 million
In the budget already, I have
I'm working off for 87.3.
Appropriations has 50 million in
page 15.
And so we may need to strike
that.
Mr Chairman, it was stricken in
house appropriations. Don't have
we just didn't have Mr Chairman.
We didn't have the
The amendment here, so we wanted
to make sure we're on the same
place so I can give you the 202
number if you'd like.
I do not have an amendment from
the house appropriations. I
don't see what is. Okay, So we
have it here. Mr. Chairman. It
is 227926.2, and it was adopted
on February 1st in the house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee. I have it here If you
look at the bill with amendments
in context, it's stricken out
there as well.
Okay, Senator Brantly. You have
a question? I do, Mr President.
First of all, Thank you guys.
This is much needed. We've
talked a long time about how we
need to invest in career trade
and technical. And yet I'm
trying not to make eye contact
with my MSC president back
there, but we put a lot. We
still funnel them to higher
education and we still do that
in public schools, and we really
we really haven't made the
investment. So I applaud you on
that.
Madam secretary based though on
what you just described as far
as the funding mechanisms in the
beneficiary, can you confirm
that all of this has been vetted
by legal and that would that's
constitutional
Mr Chairs, Senator Brantley. Uh,
we've seen no constitutional
issues. Legislative Council
raised no no constitutional
issues. They didn't come up in
the house and these again these
programs that received the
funding has been in existence
for many years. Okay. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I also want to
ask you, it says in the F I R
that this House Bill five
relates to House Bill.
For the Apprentice and training
program contributions, which
amends the section.
Of the public Works of Princess
and Training Act to remove the
exclusion of streets, highways,
bridges, roads, utility or
maintenance contracts from
public work.
Projects that require employers
to make contributions.
I'm not certain how four and
five or late. Can you confirm
that five would be a stand alone
bill then
Mr Chair and Senator House Bill
four, was not heard It was not
Germany and and Mr Chair, then
it doesn't relate. This isn't
doesn't really correct. Correct.
It doesn't relate at all. Okay.
Thank you. And then my last
final question was we still had
to build it said there was 50
million. But you brought you
introduced this bill by saying
that 30 made it into HB two.
Correct. That's correct. Mr
Chairman and senator and then
the appropriation in the bill
was stricken in the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee of the amendment here
if you want to see Okay, thank
you, Mr Chair.
I didn't find striking the 50
million to 30 million other
questions from committee
members. Rodriguez. I don't know
any questions. Mr Chairman, I
want to just go ahead and you
can make it past me Ask you
something. I mean, this is
apprenticeship program run
through the unions.
What if a private company
I hire a lot of high school
kids, right?
And try to get him a little.
Working. Teach them some stuff,
right?
Or other than other programs are
available. What if you wanted
to, and this is a problem
throughout New Mexico?
There's no young contractors,
right?
Hmm. And if you don't develop
that group of young contractors
that
Earn a skill and a trade and,
you know, become a plumber and
You're going to keep getting
swallowed up and swallowed up by
bigger companies and bigger
companies. Unless you're in
small, rural areas. I mean on
the Navajo Nation. I think
there's one or two plumbers.
And there's probably
$50 million worth of work.
How can we use this to develop
those contractors?
Mr Chair, a contractor who wants
to engage with apprenticeship
has two choices. Uh, they can
form their own registered
apprenticeship program and their
standards, and it goes through
the State Apprenticeship
committee. It is a little bit of
a process, so what more
employers tend to do is to work
with existing program sponsors
and become a participating
employer in those programs, So
we're
Just now, for example, working
with the city of Carlsbad, who
really wanted to bring
apprentices on in a hurry. We
got them signed up as a
participating employer to some
existing program sponsors and
they're they're good to go. So
in rural New Mexico, that's
hard, right. I know some young
kids that went to college in a
Good sign off on their
contractor's license, and they
said, All right, you're gonna
you gotta work the hours
required for me to sign off and
then you can go take the test
right? And they have bachelor's
degrees and the real, make sure
it's twice as hard at me.
We have a limited amount of
plumbers have a limited amount
of electricians. That's part of
the cost increases in in
contracting.
Contractors in a job and then
they line up their jobs in their
book of work, and are their subs
lining up with where they're at,
and then they're falling short
somewhere, right?
And so
Yeah, I hope we can create this
in rural New Mexico, right Hope
San Juan College can use it
right?
Mr Chair. I completely agree. We
see that with all of the
employers we work with and one
of the things that the increased
levels of funding that this bill
enables, will will allow program
sponsors to be able to help
subsidize some of those costs,
for example, to travel to a
location either to come in for
instructional time and go back
home to do the work, or vice
versa.
And that Mr Chairman with the
setup of the fund, and it's
growing through our prudent
investor rules that you are very
good at helping us to put
together especially this year,
all the wonderful work that's
been done. The fund is just
going to continue to grow over
time and have additional
distributions and there is
actually a mobile training unit
for rural New Mexico. Mr
Chairman.
There's a rule there is a rural
training unit for rural New
Mexico and I don't know if you
recall, but I think you and I
were here the day that we went
to the mobile unit. It was
across the street and I drove a
semi truck off the freeway.
Proud again. Be pro. Be proud.
That is correct, sir. Yeah, And
so I I drove a semi truck off
the freeway. The and you, I
think.
Blow up a football field or
something when you're trying to
install electricity or something
or so that's an example of kind
of this unit being able to reach
out into further parts of New
Mexico.
Okay. We do have
One question. We're gonna make
sure that this
Bill's not veto a bill or or
strike language so center
On
Page 18.
It starts with making it making
and then I'm I'm sorry. I'm page
one line 18, it says making in
line 19 appropriation. The title
makes that
Governor can go through this,
and so do we want to fix that or
not, Mr Chair, my understanding
when I spoke to chair small
Um, they said, because the fund
would make appropriations that
we should keep that in there.
So that's kind of a detail that
we just need to double check.
the money's in house built to so
the money is funded.
If we want to make sure that
there's
I see I stalkers in the room, so
I'll probably link it up to the
executive. We wanna make this
deal. Non
Line honorable
He can strike making an
appropriation and I think chair
I think you're absolutely right.
I don't want this to stop. And I
think that they we've got plenty
of time to concur over once it
gets back to the house, so we're
going to check in. So they're
checking. Yes, Mr Chair.
whatever is the appropriate
thing to do.
We? We got a handout about when
you put it in when you don't put
it in,
I think maybe rolls listening.
Can he run down here for just a
minute? We'll just ask more
questions. Just sorry.
Rodriguez. Go ahead. Go ahead,
send around drinks process
because Adrian and I would just
talking and he's already
checking with Raul to see if it
needed to be. And if not, we
couldn't thank you, Mr Chairman.
I just
You know you that language in
there was a governor of Canada
scratch out what she likes and
what she doesn't like. That's
what reading the builders were
on top of it. And so, uh,
Role. Be down just a minute. So,
Madam secretary or
Representing Madam Secretary
Yoon. Ideal world. How many
apprentices? Do you think we'd
get out?
Mr Chair, So right now we have
about 2400 active apprentices
that is nearly double than it
What It was about a year and a
half ago. I think we could
double it again and get up to
5000. And there would be enough
work. There'd be enough projects
for folks to work on. There's
also interest in expanding the
types of fields There are many,
many apprenticeships,
apprentices professions that we
don't have programs here in New
Mexico.
So if we did that, as well, I
think doubling would be no
issue.
And then So what does it cost
like? Probably a little bit
different for each one.
What's an average caution?
And what's the largest class Mr
Chair? Just give me one second
to flip through my pages here.
So, um
The Mr Chair, the largest
classes I'm skimming this list
is the J A. T. C for plumbers
and pipefitters at 410
apprentices in the current
fiscal year, And then there are
a number of them that have in
the 300 range, including
associated builders and
contractors. JT for electrical
Northern New Mexico, independent
electrical contractors and
Southwest carpenters all have
between 304 100. I asked the
same question of my team in
terms of the cost, and they did
say that the there was no good
answer, because the the costs
range so much from program to
program and so I apologize, But
I don't have a good number for
you there. Okay, We did get a
response. We're good, not
striking that.
Mr. Chairman, You're right. Uh,
and the reason it would be some,
including bills requires making
an appropriation titles,
including bills that provide for
expenditures that fees and
that's why it would remain here.
Okay. I just want to double
check that we're
On top of that. Are there any
other questions from committee
members best motion from center
Rodriguez for a pass?
We have a second by center Stein
born cholera, Senator Bert
Just Senator Campos? Yes.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Brantley votes. Yes,
Senator Gonzalez
Gonzalez votes. Yes, Senator
Hemphill, Senator Hemphill
votes? Yes, Senator Padilla?
Yes. Padilla votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer.
Senator Stein born Senator Stein
born votes. Yes, Senator Woods,
Senator Woods Boats? Yes,
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes
Yes, vice chair Rodriguez
Rodriguez votes. Yes. Munoz
Sports. Yes, you haven't do pass
tend to zero.
That was close.
I thought the sponsors were
going to kill it.
We're gonna do house Bill 41.
That probably going to finish
this out for the morning.
As we're gonna go to the floor
about noon. I know this is going
to be a long bill. A lot of
questions.
He's not here.
Fire away. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee. Um
Hospital 41.
That's here. We can. You're
gonna pull that Mike close.
Is that a little bit better
Leave the room quietly, so we
can keep going. Thank you, Mr
Chair of members of the
committee. Is it better now?
You're good. They're not, um how
school 41 establishes the clean
field program here in New Mexico
under the bill, Uh, the New
Mexico Environment Department
will work with the advisory
committee, which is diverse.
A group of stakeholders
representing all kinds of
different industries.
To establish a carbon intensity
standard. That standard will be
used to create the clean fuels
transported the clean
Transportation fuels market, and
that applies only to
transportation fuels that are
produced and imported in New
Mexico. Transportation fuels
that are at or below the carbon
intensity standard.
Generate clean fuels credits for
transportation fuels that exceed
the carbon intensity standard
Those producers or importers
have to go to the clean fields
market to purchase a credit if
they'd like to use their fields
here in the state. Um, we
estimate that this program will
bring in, um somewhere around
$470 million in quick start
projects between now and 2030
1600 permanent jobs.
2300 construction jobs and a
$240 million capital investment
in production and manufacturing,
and this will also address
health issues in our state. Um
there are lots of pollutants in
climate impacts, uh, related to,
um transportation fuels
greenhouse gas emissions airport
pollutants like ground level
ozone and particulate matter one
in seven new Mexicans experience
of respiratory illness.
And that is not acceptable.
I'd like to end. Uh, in in this
with saying that, um there is an
issue that folks have brought up
with gas prices. Um, we believe
that this is fearmongering. This
there is no evidence that
programs like this and other
states have increased gasoline
prices. I come from a district
that is very poor. I certainly
would not bring a bill that
would have an impact on my
constituents and
New Mexicans with that, Mr
Chair, Madam Chair, I stand for
questions.
Thank you very much. This nice
lady next to you. Would you like
to say something like I didn't
get your name for the record?
Good morning, madam Chair. My
name is Michelle Miano. I am
from the New Mexico Environment
Department. And my last name is
spelled M I A n o. I have
nothing further to add. Thank
you. Thank you very much. We're
first going to go to the
audience. Do we have anyone in
support of the bill?
Okay, because of time. I don't
know. I probably let's do two at
a time. Let's do three for this
one, because there's so many
people here and so let's come
up. And you all just first come
first serve.
So thank you. Maybe. Oh, no,
Let's see. How about Yeah, let's
okay. Let's go with three year
and then we're gonna go to the
ones opposing the bill.
Hi madam. Vice chair members of
the Committee, Rico Gonzalez
with Al Paso Electric Week.
Standard Support of this Bill
Lee. Thank the sponsor for
working with us to give us
language that gives us some
opportunity to really understand
the value to our customers, and
they know that when you look at
entities like Rio Bravo fuels in
our territory.
This is an opportunity for
economic development in southern
New Mexico, So thank you. Thank
you very much next, and I wanted
to announce the results, so
three more on zoom. We will
allow that are for the bill. Is
that correct? Okay, three. So
let's continued Good morning,
madam Chair and members of the
Committee P and M. Sherko north.
Shirt Growing horses Public
service company did. Mexico PNM
stands in support of the House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for HP 41 as will benefit our
state on the long term piano
miss committed to moving towards
a clean carbon free feature in
this bill is a complement to
that this effort. We take the
sponsors and the department for
working with us on this.
All right. Thank you. Next,
please.
Aborning
advice care members of the
committee.
My name is Joseph, and that
doesn't end up native vote.
Participants. Um, thank you.
Representative Ortez and
Chancellor for sponsoring this
bill that addresses fossil fuel
powered transportation, which
contributes to air pollution and
greenhouse guys see missions in
our state. It is important that
we do everything we can to
reduce our carbon emissions,
especially in heart.
Two carbonized communities like
the four corners.
Compression feels here in
communities like mine on the
Navajo Nation.
We'll go. Thank you.
Thank you. You can finish your
comments, but we just wanted to
make sure that we Oh, thank you.
Okay, next, and we said three,
but I'm going to go ahead and
just allow the two that are
standing because my goodness
your legs and feet are going to
hurt from standing there. So if
you're quick, you can proceed.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair J. Santana's registered
lobbyists for the city of
Socorro.
Ah, we want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward. Right. Hi. Sorry
lobbyist. This squirrel We wanna
thank sponsors bringing this
forward and, uh, this was a
great opportunity for the small
communities. Thank you. Thank
you. All right, Jason, your
next thank you, madam. Chair.
Members of the committee, Jason
weeks registered lobbyists for
Amazon and Exxon Mobil. I'm
speaking in support for both.
Companies. Um, thank the
sponsors for bringing forward
all the hard work on this bill
has been much appreciated Both
Exxon Mobil and Amazon support
this bill, albeit for slightly
different reasons. However, both
agreed that this provides an
important alternative source for
low emissions that in the cost
containment measures in this
bill are of particular
importance. Both companies have
not zero carbon pledges, and
this will help them achieve
those zero net carbon pledges.
Thank you. We urged the
committee to move forward. Thank
you. Thank you, Jason. We have
three people.
People on zoom that are for the
bill. Um, Ken.
I'm sorry. Jonathan Harden.
Okay. Jonathan, are you there?
Yes, Madam Chair, you can
proceed.
Madam Chair members, the
committee and my name is
Jonathan Harding. I'm the
manager of state policy for the
American Biogas Council, also
known as ABC. We appreciate the
opportunity expressed strong
support for House Bill 41
Instead of telling you all the
reason the ABC supports this
legislation. We want to share
some information from one of our
members working in New Mexico
race line alternative Energy
Race lines, provider of
renewable natural gas derived
from anaerobic digestion of
swine manure. Cowan Sure they
have a three farm biogas project
between Roswell and Dexter, New
Mexico that is in the final
stages of construction
commission.
Owning. This project takes
manure from three dry lot
dairies and recycles that close
to the farms into renewable
natural gas or vehicle fuel. Not
every day we enter direct
interested in developing a
project with race line or other
developers. But these are the
kind of projects they will be
incentivized with House Bill 41
and the ABC and Race Line count
at least 100 other farms that
could have biogas systems built,
um
It's fortunate the economics
workout on this project without
house Bill 41. In this case,
race line is actually paying the
farms for their manure. A
million dollars a year for at
full production, but would
definitely prefer to have it to
Mexico. Clean people standing in
place for this and others they
would like to build with New
Mexico farmers. Thank you for
your favorable consideration of
how school 41 Thank you,
Jonathan. Next person, please.
Wendy. Hello. Hello. My name is
Wendy.
Hello. My name is Wendy at city.
I live in Farmington, Mexico,
New Mexico and a tribal member.
I think the committee for this
opportunity for a comment.
I live in the sound of Basin and
never nation, HB 41 is supported
by the 25th Neighborhood Nation
Council. I'm happy to hear
because of all the community
members can keep paying the
costs of respiratory illnesses
caused by emissions from fossil
fuel. We have an opportunity for
our tribe to utilize an economic
benefit for this opportunity to
clean transportation fuels as we
see with Oregon, California and
Washington, Washington Thank
you.
Mhm. Thank you, Wendy. Alright,
next person, Richard Mason.
Yeah, that was
members of the committee. My
name is Dick Mason. I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters took to
Mexico and we stand strong
support of HB 41 because
implement implementation will
result result in the reduction
of greenhouse gas emissions and
promote the development of
clean renewable energy sources.
And will reduce the air
pollution, so we stand in strong
support and urgent Do pass.
Thank you. Thank you, Dick. All
right now, is there anyone in
opposing this bill in the
audience? Okay. We're gonna have
let's have three again only
because of the time we want to
make sure we hear you. So, um
Brief on your comments as we
have asked everyone else. Thank
you.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee Howard
Hutchinson. I am chairman of the
separatist cause Soil and Water
conservation district and a
small farmer and orchard owner.
I'm looking at this bill, and
I'm
I'm wondering.
How small operators like myself
in the rural communities is
going to be able to participate
in the rulemaking activities.
With the complexities that are
inherent within the directions
to the secretary and two
The Environmental Improvement
Board on developing the rules
and the standards.
When did predictability in
communities.
We need predictability for our
economic development.
And this just put the big
question mark on future economic
activity. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Next, please.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Jim
Winchester. I represent the
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico. And
we've seen this bill obviously
come before this committee and
others for many years now, and
we do remain respectfully
opposed. Um, we do think that
this bill offers a fundamental
question.
Um, the very real estimates that
are out there that this will
increase gas prices anywhere
from 30 to 50 cents per gallon
and whether or not that is worth
it, as opposed to
The outcome, which we don't know
for certain will make any
difference when it comes to
global environmental protection.
Now we wholeheartedly agree that
reduced emissions a shared goal
by all parties or operators and
our industry are doing that
right now. But unfortunately
with this bill, it's a tax.
That will hurt those in poverty
and those in rural areas. The
most
For that reason we stand and
respectful opposition. Thank
you.
Mr Chair and Committee members.
My name is Tom Patterson and the
president elect of the New
Mexico cattle growers. Cattle
growers opposes HB 41.
To decrease the use of diesel or
gas in order to lower carbon
intensity of transportation
fuels. It is fundamental
economics that you either have
to increase the price of those
particular fuels or you have to
offer real competitive
alternatives.
Electric vehicles are not real
competitive alternatives in
rural New Mexico where we travel
long distances for our groceries
and our medical care.
And do not and will not.
Have access to electric charging
stations.
So rural New Mexico, including
our elderly and poor
Will have to pay the price
increase that's necessary to
reduce our use of diesel and
gas.
This bill is a regressive tax on
rural New Mexico.
We have the least problem with
pollution. Please oppose HB 41.
Thank you.
Can we have as anybody else in
opposition?
We'll take one on zoom, so we're
even three. We'll take one. So
that way we're even. Yeah.
Hello. My name is Crystal Curly.
Um, the executive director of a
nonprofit called Indigenous Life
Ways were based in Gallup, New
Mexico, and we strongly oppose
this bill HB 41, and it presents
false solutions to climate
change.
Through its clean transportation
fuel standard program, and
here's how the focus of clean
transportation standards that
neglects other crucial aspects
of emission reductions such as
and just industrial admissions,
and, um
And not having them have
accountability. Climate change
requires a holistic approach
that addresses all sectors are
contributing to greenhouse gas
emissions by concentrating
solely on transportation feels
the bill fails to address the
broader systematic issues
through our systematic issues
driving climate change. The bill
emphasizes on market mechanisms.
Such fast trading credit trading
credits.
And generating revenue from
credit sales, prioritizing
economic interests over
environmental outcomes. This
market centric approach may lead
to greenwashing and ineffective
mitigation strategies as
financial incentives does not
align which genuine emission
reduction while bill while the
bill mentions directing revenues
from credit sales towards low
income and over served under
served communities.
It's and it remains unclear how
these communities will be
prioritize and ensured equitable
access to the benefits of this
program without robust measures
to address environmental justice
concerns the bill risk
Perpetuating inequities and
exacerbating existing
disparities.
HB 41 offers false solutions to
climate change by
overemphasizing touch
technological fixes, neglecting
broader, systematic issues
prioritizing market mechanisms
over environmental outcomes,
locking equitable measures for
equity and imposing rigid
requirements that limits
Thank you. Yeah.
What to do. Just do one more to
Mars in
One minute. Let's try to get to
one minute.
Glenn my name.
You got me, right? We got you.
Yeah. My name is Glen Weichel as
a new Mexico based energy
systems and financial engineer
who ran data science at a hedge
fund. I've looked at this
California program that this is
based on in depth. There are
many problems with this bill to
name a few one. It subsidizes
large scale water intensive
water polluting factory farms at
the expense of smaller, dry land
areas in New Mexico.
Uh two. It provides incentives
for false climate solutions as
we just heard solutions that
don't really work like hydrogen
and carbon capture and
sequestration and third, the 65%
plunge in California's carbon
market prices last year
delivered windfall profits to
sellers of high carbon gasoline
while squeezing the makers of
clean fuels.
The bottom line. Is that
stopping the ramp down at 30%
carbon intensity is
irresponsible. Are ailing planet
needs a 100% reduction in carbon
intensity. The Earth's climate
systems are going through
irreversible changes. Now we do
not have time for partial
solutions. Why is it a partial
solution? Because that's what
big oil allowed so they can keep
extracting fossil fuels for
decades, while our planet burns,
the right solution is a direct
phase down of fossil fuel use.
Transition to zero emission
vehicles.
There is simply no room left to
compromise with the fossil fuel
industry. Please do not pass
this bill. Thank you for
listening.
One more and then we're wrapped
up.
Good morning, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. It's
Beverly. It single with dairy
producers of New Mexico. We
respectfully stand in opposition
to house Bill 41 while we
strongly support the digestive
project that was mentioned there
down in Dexter Digesters have
historically not worked in New
Mexico because of our open lot
dairies and the arid climate So
this legislation would almost
certainly raised prices for our
producers in one way or another,
because we utilize
transportation for feed,
transport and milk. Calling
these costs would
Following producers backs with
no way to pass them on because
of the way milk is priced. We've
already lost about half the
dairies that we have in the
state right now because of
regulations and because of low
milk prices, and so we have to
stop that bleeding right now. We
respectfully standing opposition
thanks again.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members,
Senator
Okay?
I don't know if you have that
amendment to see if it gets
stuck on there. So, Mr Chair, I
move.
Um
Senate Finance Committee
amendment to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 41.
For discussion for discussion.
We have a second
Okay. Combination of the woods.
Tell us what the amendment does
so
Mr Chair. This is a pretty
simple amendment. Uh, it it puts
the director of New Mexico
Department of AG, uh,
In in this mix of people, so if
we go to page eight, line seven,
so
Between distributors and local
governments, It simply adds the
director of New Mexico
Department of AG or the
directors, designee, So the
whole paragraph then reads prior
to the board promulgating rules
pursuant to this section.
The secretary Shall convene and
advisory committee composed of
stakeholders from in state and
out of state producers of
transportation, fuels,
transportation fuel
distributors.
Department of AG, local
governments, utilities, tribal
governments, environmental
protection groups, etcetera.
So it just puts our
Just puts our department of AG
in the middle of that.
Because of the biofuel
representative. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Share. Um
The Department of Agriculture is
absolutely welcome to
participate in the advisory
committee. We the the language
is open to other individuals. We
Very much encouraged the
Department of Act two to
participate, but
We don't We do not feel like
this is meant amendment is
necessary.
Okay questions on the amendment.
Seen none.
Well, I move that Do pass. Mr
Chair. Okay, hold the role.
And the amendment. This is a
motion on them and
You have a second
Second
And break. You have to raise
your hand really high, Senator
Bert.
Yes, Senator. Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost compost vote to
know Senator Bradley? Yes,
Senator Brantley votes. Yes,
Senator Gonzales. Gonzales votes
No, Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla. No idea votes.
No. Senator Scherer share votes.
Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. No,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. No.
Vice chair. Rodriguez votes No,
Chairman Yas get Senator
Gonzalez
Yes, people didn't know.
Yes. So let's table 5 to 5
correct back on the bill
questions on the bill.
Understanding Born
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, Senator
Later, Pro TEM, Representative.
Good to see you all, ma'am to
see you.
Um
I have some questions, You know,
Um some of the critics are
saying in in California it
hasn't reduced carbon emissions.
Can you speak to that?
Chairman chair Munoz, Senator
Sanborn, um, are indication. Our
data says that it has decreased
emissions. It's not just a
program in California. It's also
a program in Oregon that has
been operating from some time in
Washington State just adopted it
as well. It's not just
greenhouse gas emissions. It's
also co air pollutants as well.
So what? I'm sorry I didn't hear
the last thing he said. Excuse
me co air pollutants.
Whoever has that phone. Can you
turn that?
Phone off.
We're gonna wait for you to turn
that off. Thank you, Senator
Stein born. Go ahead. Thank you.
Um
Well, I guess we're gonna
Thank you, Mr Chair. I have
another question, which is about
the
The trip, the credit trading
And concern. You know, it's
funny when I see
Companies.
Who, um, who's industries do a
lot of polluting in favor of the
bill? It kind of like, that's
curious. What's
What's in it for them?
And maybe it's the credit
trading.
Um so I really wonder about that
part of the bill. Does it allow
people to get self credits for
basically, things are already
required to do under law for
meeting the RPS.
Ceremonious senator Stand born,
Um this program allows a lot of
the companies that you have
heard. Stand in support.
Accelerate what they're already
doing by, um, continuing to
generate clean their, um clean
fuel projects. They get a new
revenue streams through this
program. It's a program that
doesn't preclude them from from
participating in any of the
federal programs. It's just an
accelerant to what a lot of the
companies are already doing.
So I guess Mr Chair from an
accounting standpoint from a
carbon accounting standpoint
when the I P looks at this, and
they look at the fuel life
cycle.
Um
Yes, I want to make sure putting
in simplistically. They were not
double counting in a way, you
know that we're
We're counting for their
reductions in the RPS.
But then somehow
I don't know They're selling
this credit.
And in a way, we're not. I don't
know It's a It's a good thing. I
mean, obviously, if these
utilities and well companies or
whatever reducing their
emissions, that's a good thing.
But, um
I'm just a little curious about
that. I mean, do you want to
speak to that representative Mr
Chair, Senator Sign born. Uh,
yeah, I I understand your
concern. Those companies that
are creating the clean fuels and
participating in the market. Um,
cannot trade their regulatory
requirements for, um for credit
generation essentially
So they must. They must prove
that they are reducing their
carbon intensity of those fuels
in order to to sell the credit
on the market, But it's really
an incentive not you know, we've
got lots of sticks, and this is
another carrot.
Okay, Thanks. And you know,
another issue is the PRC.
So the PRC Um I guess oversees
the
Alright Energy Transition Act.
So and of course rate setting on
the P R C the way the PRC in the
way rates work is they get to
capture a rate for building
renewal for building
infrastructure.
So in a way
If they're getting credit, and
they're charging customers.
For building that technology.
And now we're simultaneously
allowing them to sell that
credit.
They're getting double paid. It
would seem like potentially
wrong on that.
Chair Munoz Senator under this
bill, what we have done this
year. That's different from past
years is where requiring the
Er than freezing.
There is not a single country in
the world that would not have
taken San Juan generating
station if we could have picked
it up and moved it there.
Because it produced so much
power and it did it at such a
clean level that no nobody can
compete with that. And yet we're
talking about here Technologies.
You know, and I don't even
disagree with these technologic
technology grow.
Let it grow.
Let it grow.
Let's do direct their carbon
capture.
If you've got a place to put the
C 02, you can take that direct
air carbon capture to wherever
you're building the wind turban.
Where if you're producing the
gazillion tons of Co two is you
is your process or produce the
concrete produced the steel.
And suck it right out of the
sky.
But you gotta have someplace to
put it.
And because you can't just
destroy the C 02. It's gotta go
somewhere.
And yet in the same thing, the
same session we all well know
it's unproven technology. We
can't
But here we're saying, Oh, let's
go ahead and let some technology
happened.
Mm.
No.
I know Madam Pro Tim. You've
never seen me.
I'll try to I'll try to mellow
out here so, but it does talk in
in in your bill on Page six
here.
Um
So we're New Mexico. Similar
permits and services to
implement in minister inspection
and permitting programs.
For on site Liquid waste.
Then.
Semi colon air quality
management, as provided in the
air quality control, radiation
control and establishment of
license and rich.
Registration and other related
fees, not
To exceed fees charged by the
United States. Noise Control
Nuisance nuisance abatement,
vector control, occupational
health and safety, sanitation.
So you got a bunch of stuff in
there that's already in here.
Okay, so this isn't new stuff.
Um
But we talked about controlling
things. All of this is control.
How do we not let any of this
stuff happened? Okay, now
It doesn't say not Let it
happen, But let it you don't
make it happen.
According to the rules of
whatever
We need to build that says,
Let's let's stuff happen.
Let's not hate a rock.
For crying out loud. It's a
rock.
We don't have to hate a rock.
We don't have to hate oil or
gas, either.
Because you know what backs up
all of the solar panels and all
the wind turbines natural gas.
You know what makes all of our
clothes the carpet on the floor,
the paint natural gas.
If you want to turn off natural
gas, and we need to go live out
there naked because that's the
only way that works.
Unless you're going to, you
know, go hunting critters and
where the critter skin
And frankly,
I don't think I've ever tried to
survive on critter skin.
I'm sure I have. But unless all
of your clothes are 100% cotton
or 100%, silk or 100% wool
They're made from oil and
natural gas.
We can't turn it off.
Unless we want to go outside and
freeze to death.
Then we can turn it off. So I'm
I'm just the whole thing about
how we have to kill oil and gas
just makes me nuts.
Because compared to what
Compared to what compared to
death. The other thing that's
out there. Everything outside
this building everything outside
of the city limit wants to kill
you.
Everything.
The weather wants to kill you.
The terrain wants to kill you.
The big large animals want to
kill you and eat you. The small
animals want to kill you and eat
you. They just do it slower.
Everything wants to kill you and
eat you outside of the city.
And I have been there.
I have experienced things
wanting to kill me and eat meat.
Because everything out there
wants to kill you and eat you.
Now, if you got your really
cool, uh
Close that you can go on a hike
with and they're all made out of
synthetic material, and you want
to sleep and camp out there for
a while. Sure you can for a
while.
Because you're going to pick the
right time of year that you're
going out there. You're not
gonna go out when it's too hot,
too cold. Whatever.
The weather wants to kill you.
Everything wants to kill you.
Fossil fuels make it so that you
can live.
Like we live today.
Fossil fuels make healthcare
happened.
Prior to fossil fuels.
You used to take a dirty saw and
cut somebody's leg off and then
you cut the next guy's leg off
with the same dirty saw.
Women died in childbirth because
doctors didn't wash their hands.
And if they did, they didn't
wash the towels and the
whatever. But now we have all of
this sterile stuff through
healthcare.
Medicines.
Almost all of our medicines have
at least some form of fossil
fuel in it. Maybe it's the cap.
The
Capsule part of it.
Sometimes it's the actual
medicine itself.
The ambulance, which is going to
take me away from here because
my blood pressure is getting up.
Operates on fossil fuel.
And when they get me to ST
Vincent's Hospital, everything
in that hospital is operated by
fossil fuel.
Why? Because we don't want the
power that the
It makes all of those systems in
the hospital to turn off.
In most of Africa, whatever
whatever medical care they have.
They get from turning on a
generator of diesel power
generator.
For an hour or so. And then they
turn it off.
So they do surgery with the
generator. They do all of that
stuff that has to have some
power for a generator. Then they
turn it off.
Which means you can't have
things like respirators.
Because they need power of all
day every day.
It's the same all over Asia.
It's the same in a lot of parts
of South America. And yet
We want to say.
No, We gotta kill that.
And the only thing that I that I
hear from all of the the
advocates all all of all of the
Where'd they go?
All of the environmental justice
groups clearly listed in your
paper. Environmental justice
groups is we have to do this so
we can end fossil fuel.
Obviously.
Obviously, I don't think that
can happen.
I also believe that everybody in
New Mexico everybody in New
Mexico no matter how progressive
you are, you are in the fossil
fuel business.
Because that's who pays
For the state's operations.
If we stop doing that.
Mr Chair.
We closed We we fire half of our
teachers. We have fire half of
our teachers right now We have
to close half of our schools.
Most of our rural hospitals
would be closed.
If he if fossil fuel happening
the rest of world but not in New
Mexico. That's what would happen
to New Mexico.
That's what would happen in New
Mexico.
Half of our teachers would be
fired.
We wouldn't be able to repair
roads. We put $500 million into
fixing roads this year.
That's gone.
And then what we end up with
Or beasts of burdens.
That's how we get around and I
don't know if any of you all
have been around.
Horse.
There are no emission controls
on horse. So if we want to
freeze to death in the dark and
transport in a horse our life is
missing. And while you can avoid
stepping in the
Emissions from a horse.
Other things step in those
emissions like flies and then
walk all over you.
And walk all over your food.
Walk all over your pillow. If
you're lucky enough to have
killed a chicken have feathers.
Hmm.
Mr Chair. I have to
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Yeah,
I'm not near the comic that soon
after share is
But I we're doing this for a
reason. I understand that.
But I'm trying to understand
what the reason is. So can I'm
trying to put all this in
perspective?
How bad is the pollution in New
Mexico?
I mean, compared to say,
Arizona, Colorado, Texas are
just our neighbors.
Are we bad?
Mr. Mr Chair, Senator Bert. Um I
don't know how we are in
relation to to those other
states. But I do know that many
counties in the state of New
Mexico and I'm sure my witness
will be able to expand upon
that.
What we know is that there are
many counties in the state of
New Mexico that have, um
That are out of attainment for
clean air. They they are. We are
polluting more than what the
cleaner act allows us to. So for
ground level ozone for PM 10 PM
five. This is particular matter
that we are out of attainment
and many of those counties it's
not just burning Leo County.
It's in many of our rural areas.
Uh, Eddie
Lee.
Sandoval County are out of
attainment. So there might there
might be an in a situation in
which you know, we need to take
really drastic measures to
reduce that ground level ozone,
So it is simply not true. Mr
Chair and Senator Bert that, um,
that we have cleaner air in
rural areas.
So, Mr Chairman.
So we know that Eddie Lee, where
they produce oil and gas. Uh,
probably is a
An area where the the levels are
up higher than normal.
What are the other areas where
they're up? Isn't it highly
populated areas?
Well, I mean, like Bernie, Leo,
Dona Ana.
Mr Chair, Senator Byrd. That is
also true. Yes. Dona Ana County,
Leo also have high levels of
ozone higher than what is the
state and federal standard.
Okay? And And do we know that
the vast majority of that Mr
chairman comes from
Uh,
Mhm fuel.
Exhaust from fuel.
Is that
I'm just again trying to put
this in perspective. I want to
have a clear picture.
Of why we're going to do this.
Champion, Senator Bert, Um, it
is to decrease emissions. I'm
sorry. Say that again. One of
the goals of this program is to
decrease emissions, But I would
say one of the even larger goals
of this program is to bring
economic development to New
Mexico and all of the clean
fuels that are receiving public
and private investments in
Um the amounts of billions with
a B. We want all of those
companies to come here to New
Mexico to set up shop. We want
everything from hydrogen fuel
cell companies, um, renewable
diesel companies. Everybody is
looking for a place to set up
shop for their clean fuels with
federal and private investment.
We want that investment here.
So, Mr Chairman, or are you
telling me that?
These companies have told you
That they are not coming to New
Mexico until we correct this.
And you have proof of that. I
mean, ceremonial Senator Bert.
We have met with so many
companies. And the first thing
they tell us is where they want
to locate who has a clean fuel
standard.
So is our Mr Chair.
Is our standard, the same as
Or larger than or worse than or
not as good as the national
standard. Uh,
In the United States, Um,
Chairman Senator birth There is
no national clean fuel standard.
So, Mr Chairman, what are we
basing this on? What's
You gotta have a benchmark
somewhere You can't just say.
Okay, That's bad, And this is
good.
So what's the benchmark?
That your basic business
Senator Moon? Um, Chairman knows
Senator Bert, this would be the
2018 carbon intent. The 2018
emissions inventory that we
have. We're going to put
together an advisory group to
set the carbon intensity. That
is the benchmark that you're
speaking of that creates the
clean fuels market.
So, Mr Chairman, this is a
national
Organization to put this
together or
Who made up this organization
that
Decided you're not on the
standard.
Chairman use, said, Um, Senator
Bert. There's no national
organization. Okay. I'm not
asking it correctly, then.
You just pointed you just quoted
a certain level of that.
What was the organization that
came up with that level?
Oh, it's our emissions inventory
at the New Mexico Environment
Department and the, um energy,
Minerals Natural Resources
Department. We have a climate
change task force that we
conducted an emissions
inventory. But that is an
agreement. Well, yeah, I'll
leave it.
So, Mr Chairman, So the
Environmental Department of New
Mexico has set the standard
Is that what you're telling me,
Senator Bert? Um, we have
calculated our missions. The
standard has yet to be set.
That's going to be part of the
rule making process.
Okay, But right now to get us to
this point, you're using some
standard to get us there and
you're telling me it came from
the environmental department. Is
that correct?
You know, Senator Bert? That's
part of it. But the carbon
intensity standard has yet to be
said that doesn't exist yet, and
that's what we're going to have
to do with the Greek model
analysis we were talking about
earlier.
Okay, I'm I'm still trying to
get there. So help me out here.
So, Mr Chairman, you're telling
me that
We haven't set the standard yet.
But we're going to correct
something that we don't know
what where the target is.
So explain that to me, I'm still
Lost here. Why we're doing this.
Because there's a certain
standard that you said the
environmental department didn't
come up with. We're gonna still
try and define that. So we're
doing all of this is
Starting to gel. We're running a
bill. We're going to set a
standard.
But we don't know what the
target is out there that we're
trying to hit.
Is that correct? Mr. Chair,
Senator Bert? That that isn't
correct. We have a baseline for
where we what? What The
emissions are in the baseline is
the 2018 carbon emissions That
is that we know that from enemy
D. We're using that baseline as
you know, one of the data points
as we develop the clean fuel
standard, which will be in which
really developed with
The stakeholders, you know,
using a model the great model
for, for instance, that will
help us determine what the
carbon intensity of a fuel is.
We don't know what the carbon
fuel standard is going to be yet
that is for enemy D working with
the stakeholders going through
the life cycle of fuel and
what's emissions what its
emissions are to help us set the
standard, But what we know is
this. We know that there are
Companies in Oklahoma and in
Texas and Houston that are
developing clean fuels already
and selling those clean fuels to
Companies in Oklahoma and in
Texas and Houston that are
developing clean fuels already
and selling those clean fuels
to in California, in Oregon and
in Washington, and they're
driving right through this state
to get to those places and that
is where they are participating
in the Clean Fields market.
The standard for New Mexico has
not been developed yet. We're
going to use
This 2018 baseline to determine
the carbon intensity while we
work with the stakeholders to
develop the market.
For those clean fuels that are
being produced in other places,
and hopefully here in New
Mexico.
So, Mr Chairman.
In those other places where
they're selling clean fuels. How
is that standard set did
Did those states environment
come up with that standard or
did the industry come up with
that standard or and if so, why
doesn't industry in the state
come up with the standards as
opposed to government imposing a
standard Mr. Chair, Senator
Bert? Sorry about that. I didn't
do that.
That was her, Um
MHM California standards
developed with the state of
California and industry and
stakeholders, So I think it's
really important to know and we
have it, you know, in in this
legislation on Page eight that
we're working together with the
stakeholders to develop the
standard together in including
industry industry is an
essential part of the developing
the clean fuel standard and
helping us determine what the
carbon intensity of a clean fuel
will be.
Okay?
I think we're getting there. But
I'm not. I'm not sure just yet.
Um, I'm again. I'm still trying
to understand.
The states had to set a standard
somewhere is that
When I'm understanding then, um,
why are we driving?
Clean tools from one state
through New Mexico to another
state.
And that state has said
Here's the standard that we
need. So that's what we're gonna
buy from this state here.
I am and my tracking. Okay here.
Um, Mr Chair? Uh, Senator Burke.
so those states have their own
carbon intensity standards. The
other thing I wanted to bring
your attention to where I think
there might be clarity is the
standards we're talking about
for the national ambient air
quality air quality standards.
Those do exist at the federal
level E p a sets different
standards for different air
pollutants.
And, um, we are not allowed to
exceed those standards because
they create health problems for
residents. We see that here in
New Mexico in many states and
what's going to happen if we
don't address those, um ground
level Ozone standards. Fruit
example is the federal
government is going to come in
and put more regulation.
On our permitting programs and
more regulation on our air
quality programs specifically
which is in my my group, and we
want to avoid that at all costs,
so kind of goes back to my
original question. Where we
doing this do we have
A larger percentage of our
population.
That has lung or harder
congestion problems.
There can be
Guaranteed to associate with
A fuel standard of carbon
standard.
Chairman knows Senator Bert Um,
we do not partition out. Um, I
cannot answer that as your
partitioning out, but it does
add to these
Respiratory problems that we are
seeing in urban communities in
rural communities. It costs
$3266 per person with asthma.
Puryear to treat that asthma if
we do nothing, we're going to
continue to burden our residents
with costs like that. That's
what we want to decrease well
and and I can certainly want to.
I don't want anybody to have
asthma, and I don't want to have
to
Have them pay $3600 a year to to
to battle that
Um
I'm still trying to understand.
Do we have a larger percentage
in New Mexico?
Uh, Enbrel capita than again.
Arizona, Colorado of people who
have asthma or or
Breathing problems.
Can you know Senator Burke? I
don't know what we do. What? How
we compare to other states. But
what I do know is that one
person in New Mexico with as
much as one person too many
giving the medical costs
associated with that kind of
condition.
Well, Mr Jim, that that's a
catch all phrase night. I'm
sorry. That one. I can't go if I
I don't
That gives me nothing. Nothing
to go on.
So I'm still trying to see
Why we're doing this. You you're
gonna have something concrete.
You gotta give me something
concrete. That tells me that
we're in worse shape than other
states or the national average
or something that is dictating
that we do a higher standard.
Then we go by right now.
Which I think is maybe the
national standard. From what
Your comments were
A little bit earlier were we
can't go higher than that,
because they'll come in and
enforce certain things on this.
Are we near that point? By the
way, we're exceeding that point
in many counties in New Mexico
so that the federal oversight
and regulation could happen any
day. Okay, so in other states,
do they have other
Areas where they're exceeding
that as well. I mean, what makes
us different and special
Mr Chair, Senator. We are
different and special because
we're New Mexico. We are
different.
What we know is this one in
seven new Mexicans have a
respiratory illness. This bill
will help reduce that number
because we'll be creating a
cleaner fuel and there are a
range of cleaner fuels, and I
think that's also important to
note here that there you know
that because we're technology
neutral. We're looking at
renewable diesel we're looking
at, um
More ethanol based fuels.
Electricity is also included.
But this is not an E V. Bill. I
want to be really, really clear
about that. So by producing a
cleaner fuel you will we will be
producing fewer pollutants that
will affect the health of new
Mexicans. I think that's one
thing you know to your point
about why you know why we're
doing this. You know, that's
Health reasons is definitely one
of them. But economic
development is another and
choice for the various kinds of
fuels that are existing here.
That's really why we're bringing
this bill to you today.
And it and I agree, you know,
the clear they are the better
people as long as it will be. I
understand that, um you said one
in seven new Mexicans have some
kind of respiratory issue.
So
Again so I can have kind of a
standard.
Do you know what that figure
Isn't say. Arizona, Colorado,
Texas New York? Yes, Chairman.
Your Senator Byrd. Actually, my
colleague just provided me with
this report. And this is all of
our data comes from the American
Lung Association. All of our
data comes from the American
Lung Association. Um, our
capital rate is actually higher
than California, which is known
for its smog and ozone problems.
and, according to the American
Lung Association,
Um, our cities like Albuquerque
and the last Cruces Metro area
are among the most polluted
cities in the country, Ranking
24th and 14th for ozone
pollution. US News ranks
apparently Newman New Mexico's
areas fourth worst in the
nation, Um, factoring in the
number of bad air days per year
and the number of number of
people affected so I know that
we like to have you know we have
blue skies. There's a lot we
don't see in our air that's
affecting.
Our residents every day. Both
health wise and, um, medical
cost wise.
Well, I I certainly know that
the traditional wind and turns
Well, I I certainly know that
the traditional wind and earns
Well, I I certainly know that
the traditional wind and turns
for New Mexico or from the
southwest to the Northeast, and
I can also tell you when I live
in Alamogordo, and I travel into
El Paso
Especially in the summertime,
but probably in the wintertime.
Maybe you can't see it as well.
There's kind of a brown golden
haze over war Is Mexico, not
throwing stones at our
neighbors? I'm just saying their
standards are dramatically
different than ours are, um And
so, um, you know, there's a good
chance that a lot of that may be
coming.
From Mexico as well.
But with that 1.7 standard, um
So what?
What
What do we need to get to if
it's if it's 17, and we want to
decrease that? Do we have a
target?
Mr Chairman, that were Madam
chair. I'm sorry that we're
trying to get to Madam Chair,
Senator. Not in this bill.
We, But we are the targets that
we're setting for. This bill is
to reduce. Uh, the
And the carbon intensity of a
fuel by 20% by 2030 30% by 2040.
Those are those are the targets
that are in this bill.
Okay?
Um
Well, I'm a little bit clearer
on that. I don't think that
we've we've
Kind of the benchmark. I don't
still see the real strong target
out there. I I do understand
that if you eliminate or
Lesson.
Carbon emissions. You will have
less problems theoretically, but
I just want to make sure that
we're not being targeted. Uh,
when Arizona, Colorado or
somebody else's when of line and
and you know, we're not I'm
still go back to
Uh, a figure that
Boggled my mind some years ago.
When two of the four
Power plants, coal fired power
plants in farming to non were
still operating.
And the E P A for the United
States of America, said they had
the cleanest air in the United
States.
I so understand when I hear
things like this, and I hear
things like that from the
federal government that weren't
supposed to
Supposed to go by, Um
It just doesn't compute with me.
So I'm trying to buy into your
program here, but I'm not quite
You know, grabbing on to
anything solid. So, Mr Chair,
Senator, we gotta move and all
that other stuff, but
I'm sorry, ma'am. Did you have
one more question? Uh, comment.
So, um, Mr Chair, Mr. Now, um, I
will shut up and we'll go down
the road a little bit, and we'll
do some more search. Thank you
for the time. I appreciate your
answers, Underwood's
Commission chair.
So Albuquerque is number four in
the nation for pollution is I
hear that right?
Plum.
Chairman knows Senator. Mr
Chair. I'm sorry. That would be,
um 14 24th.
24 for ozone pollution. That's a
specific kind of, um, air.
Potent.
And what your list there.
Mr Chair, Wood is lost Cruises.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, 14th.
2024 and 14th, respectively.
That's Albuquerque and Las
Cruces.
Okay, So you're telling us
today, Mr Chair and
representative, we pass this
bill. How long will it be until
Albuquerque and Las Cruces at as
that at the bottom of that list,
Mr Chair, Senator? I don't know,
because Queen Transportation
fuels are one part of you know,
um, you know, sort of a whole
array of pollutants and you that
contribute to poor air quality
transportation is one of
Them.
Okay. And what percent Mr Jerry
is transportation fuel.
Mr Tariff, Senator Woods. It's
um about a third of our
emissions.
So if we took all these clean
fuels and put them in use
mixture and representative
We would drop our cities down at
least
Third in the lift.
Chairman EOS Senator Woods. Um
this is just one program out of
many that we're doing at the,
uh, in the air quality program
to address our air quality
problem, And it is a problem.
Um, so we have, um, what we're
anticipating is lower medical
costs. That's really where we're
seeing a lot of the improvements
in the other states that have
this
Um, I think representative Ortez
mentioned earlier that Oregon
has seen $80 million decreased
health costs as a specific
result of this program. See, I
see And in. So how many more
doctors are we going to bring
into the state, then to help
with her medical care, Mr Chair
and representative, Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods. That is out of
the scope of this bill. I agree.
But you made the statement.
That we're gonna help with her
medical cost.
So it must not be out of the
scope of this bill.
Mr Misrepresenting ability
sounds like to me.
Mr Chip.
Senator Woods up. I am not, uh,
misrepresenting the bill.
But
This bill does not have anything
to do with bringing doctors in
the Oh, I would love to have a
bill that made that happen.
This is not that bill.
Okay, Mr Chair.
What would happen if we shut
down all industry in our state?
And just let commerce flow
through our state.
What would happen there?
Mr Chair. And what does your
model say about that?
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods. Our
model doesn't say anything about
that. We don't have a model that
is not at all. We go back to Mr
Chair and represent what kind of
model do you have?
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, the
model that will be used to one
of the models that may be used
to help determine the carbon
intensity of transportation.
Fuel is the greet model, which
is used by the Department of
Energy that looks at the life
cycle of fuel all of its
emissions from start to finish.
From the you know, drilling if
needed, If that's the kind of
feel you're looking at two, the
transportation distribution
Okay. This would
This would have to be a very
complex computer model.
Containing a modern tude of
known and unknown components
operating under significant
number of assumptions for
capital ations of
Fuel life cycle, right?
Mr Chairs and her words. I'm not
exactly sure what you're reading
from, So I don't know if I can
confirm or deny, but it is a
complex process for sure.
Well, you said you was going to
use the greet model, right?
Then, Mr Chair, Mr Chair Center
Woods. We may use that.
The department. Mexican
Environment Department with the
stakeholders, including industry
stakeholders may use that model
when determining the life cycle
of the carbon intensity. It's
not that one have you got any
other models in mind so we could
start doing investigations on
that.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods. There
are tons of models that we have
been, um been, uh
Working on with stakeholders
that they use every day for
their greenhouse gas emissions.
Um, calculations complex supply
chain calculations. Um, I would
have to get back to you want
exactly, but there's quite a few
of them used in corporations
around the world would be happy
for you to get back to me. Give
me that list.
And compare them as to how well
they're going to be reflecting
upon each other and might even
be better to run more than one
program at a time so that we can
compare and see if there's might
be, uh, difference in the two or
three or four or five. And, uh,
of course, This is a question.
Um
Because
Mr Chair.
This is a question because the
environmental department is
comes once in a while and tells
us
That their employees aren't paid
enough so
Have we got the right employment
designation for the people that
will take two to use this month,
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, Um
I imagine they do. But what's
important is that we have money
in the budget to ensure that
this program can get kickstarted
pretty quickly.
So, Mr Chair and and
representative right now we
don't then.
Mr Chair and Senator Woods with
your permission. I'd like for
the secretary to speak to that.
Yes.
Mr. Uh, Mr Charron and Senator I
know there's nothing more than
this committee wants to hear
from about the environment is is
our budget. Um, but with that in
mind, we have the employees who
are capable of doing this work
and we had in this special
appropriation that was
reauthorized through House Bill
two.
Ah, that will fund the the
employees in the work.
In this area, so there's nothing
other than that.
Reauthorization of that special
appropriation and then in the
long term, this program will
fund itself and and kind of,
give me an idea.
If you could.
Kind of what unemployed like
this would cost us.
Um, Mr Chair and Senator Woods.
typically an employee with with
personnel services and benefits.
You know, computers and travel
and things like that, somewhere
in the neighborhood between 9100
and 20,000.
Between again salary all in Mr
Chair, and that includes the
least cubicles and things like
that.
And
Can you give me a description?
Kinda. This is going to be a
very complicated program to to
enter
Information into, um
You know, like I was dating. I
think there'll be some things
that are just a shot in the dark
that we're gonna be trying to
enter into Sumption that we make
and we'll have to run several
models in order to change
assumptions a little bit and
then correct them as the truth
comes out to see if they feel
their assumptions.
So so.
Are you expecting to find
someone or do you have someone
right now? That
It's kind of in this
neighborhood of
120,000 employee.
Dollar employee
Mr Chairman, Senator would Yes.
We hired an economist who's
working on this for us now, uh,
took him from the vets and
really happy to have him on
board with us. So he's there.
And you just need one. Mr Chair.
Hmm.
Mr Chair and Senator Woods. We
did not say we need more
employees.
Um, we have employees who are
able to work on this under the
special appropriation that I met
referenced earlier.
That's that guy over there.
Special appropriations.
All right.
So
We were off the top of her head
We're talking about the great
model.
And, uh,
Because that is one that we can
determine the fuel fuel
lifestyle emission lifecycle
emissions.
And, uh,
We don't know if that's the
particular one we're going to
use, but I'm assuming we will
probably buy one of those
programs and and put some data
in it and see how it turns out
to see if it turns out the way
we want it to turn out. Is that
kind of Mr Chairman,
Representative and Mr Secretary,
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods. We
will settle on a model with you
know all the stakeholders
working together so that
industry has that regulatory
certainty.
That is really important here so
well, Well, I heard just a
minute ago. The I'm sorry I
didn't catch the name Mr. Chair,
Michelle Miano rhymes with
piano. She made the statement
that we don't want to be
regulated by the by the
U. S government.
Because it will really cost us a
lot of money.
Did I hear that right? Mr
Chairman and
Mr Chair senator was I was
referring to the potential
nonattainment status of sections
of New Mexico that would include
lots of people
telling us that, uh, when we
were talking about benchmarks
and how in Mexico was raided,
and then you said
Let's see.
You said, uh
That
It would really cost us a lot of
money if the federal
And we want
We want to avoid the law cost.
Yeah.
Mr Chair and Center, Woods. Your
question and Senator Byrd's
question If I could just say it
this way is to simply as
possible if we do nothing.
We will continue down this path
of going into a greater federal
sanction more costly permitting
for the industry that is sitting
in this room in your districts,
and that will be a point of no
return for a long period of
time. If we do something, like
pass clean fuels and address the
carbon emissions that are coming
in v O C emissions, NOx
emissions that are coming off
transportation fuels.
We have a chance to avoid. I
hope
The sanctions that e p A will
place on rural New Mexico and
urban New Mexico, for that
matter.
So
Mr Chair.
How about
New York state. What kind of
sanctions do you expect them to
take?
Mr Chair and and Senator. We can
go state by state, but I can't.
I have a full time job here in
New Mexico, and I don't focus on
all those others. But I hear
what you're saying. And what I'm
gonna do.
Many have. We have 2.1 million
people in our State York City.
I'm not sure how many people
they have.
But how this take awhile? Guess
Their ears a lot more polluted.
Than anywhere in New Mexico. Um,
would you accept that as a maybe
Miss chair? The secretary is a
Probably the case.
Mr Chair and Center Woods. I
don't know the degree in which
GPS sanction them.
Uh, so they could be in worse
air quality than we are but
again.
I'm focused on New Mexico's air
quality. Well, what I'm getting
at is is it's
Making threats that
That they're gonna come out for
a small fish like us.
When they have huge fish to fry.
Have a hard time believing that
There's several things that
That caused me a lot of heart.
I've got dairymen that have
Put together.
Digesters.
I've had, uh
You know a lot of times.
The market. Uh, they can't make
that thing break even
The market is not there.
To make it break even, uh, I've
had dairymen.
Put in pretty big solar
projects.
And about the time
That
That they'll glazes over where
it won't produce any more. It's
paid off.
So
Every time we talk about
You know, cutting carbon
It's a cost.
And a greater cost If we didn't
supplement everything we're
doing
But if you actually put the
actual cost to it
Everything we're doing so far as
kind of a band aid approach.
I know you're trying to do a
huge deal here. I think you're
trying to rope the biggest. Oh,
steer out there. I really do.
I understand what you're trying
to do, but I also understand.
What the cost of a tractor is.
I personally
How that affects me.
Hell, I I asked one of the major
Farm broadcasters, his his
mother lives in tune care, and
he was going to Europe.
To a big farm show over there.
They had the latest in the
greatest
And I asked her to ask him to
look at the electric tractors.
And see what see what they had
what was developed right now.
And the word that came back. You
said. I never got to him.
Well, it was a huge show and he
just flat never found where they
were.
But that also tells me
That there's not a lot of them
in production.
So whenever we do all this new
technology
I can't imagine the cost to it.
The trucking industry.
To go.
From diesel to electric.
I can't imagine the cost to the
very utilities that stood up out
here and I understand how
utilities make their money they
make their money selling
electricity. Why wouldn't it be
in favor of this right? No
brainer understood.
I'm talking about the guy out
here that's trying to make a
living and what he's going to
have to do to stay in business.
And
My friends across the all over
here.
You know?
Anyway, I personally
Can see what it will cost my
operation.
Just the change in technology.
Just detention. I'm also on a
electric co op board, and I know
what it's gonna cost to increase
the capacity of that grid.
And who pays for it?
You all know y'all smart people
These guys know, but I know you
know, because you're in the
business. You know, That's the
rate payer pays for every damn
thing that the utility does.
It's only place they can get
their money if they make an
investment the rapier pays for
if they have to increase that
line from that size to that
size.
It's a huge cost.
In the right pair has to pay for
it.
And then you're saying Well,
it's going to be a cheaper
source of electricity.
You might be right if you just
talking electrical cost.
And not the infrastructure costs
to move that electric That's
what's going to cost.
You gonna have
Triple The cost of electricity
is my guess.
And so when you start talking
about it's going to be cheaper,
all this kind of stuff.
I have great doubts.
I would love for you to model
that part of it.
To throw in the cost of the
utility costs to expand their
grids.
To to all your other
calculation when you say this is
a great thing.
Because
People out in the country.
Better that are burning propane.
From a tank right now.
If they have to start using the
electricity.
They're gonna have to do some
rewiring of that house. Those
meters are gonna have to change
out. There's a lot of stuff
that's going to happen that
I don't know what they are
considering. I'm considering it.
Just a meter pole. You know what
a meter loop cost?
A meter Luke. Cost about 2000
bucks now.
And who pays for it?
The guy that's getting
electricity.
Access to little little bitty
piece of this deal.
General question for them.
Are you considering those costs?
Mr. Chair? Are you considering
those costs in your model?
Mr Chair, Senator Woods? Yes, we
are.
You are.
Yes. Please tell me how bad it's
going to be done in your model.
I want to see how those costs
are figured. I would like to see
the utilities in the room.
Bring me the cost. They think
it's going to increase in their
grid because of PRC is gonna
need that Mr Chair.
Because the rates are going to
go up.
And it's gonna be a huge cost.
And I know I'm bad. You're in
the witness realized that I know
I know you're not to. I know
you're not to witness but you
know
I don't believe we're looking at
the whole picture here, Mr
Chair.
I don't believe we're looking at
the picture for the For the few
folks in the state that are
still in business.
Every time we turn around, we
put more costs on them.
And I just don't see how we can
have business. Stay in here.
We're told.
In this, uh
I was
Trying to make a question of
this, we're told
That
Clean fuel is made in Texas
transported across New Mexico
and soul in California. Did I
hear that right, Mr Germany,
Representative, Mr. Chair,
Center Woods. That is happening.
Okay? Tell me this.
Real simple.
Why don't they stop in New
Mexico and sell it here?
Mr Chair, Senator Woods because
we don't have a market that they
can participate in. Well, why
don't why don't why don't they
just set up a pump station?
We've got people in the room
back here that are willing to
buy it. They're already telling
us that they're willing to buy
it. Why don't we set up a pump
station and let them buy it?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods. This bill will allow them
to do that.
Do you know why we don't do that
in my eyes?
Because that feels cost a lot
more.
Then the fuel they can buy
somewhere else.
And the American consumer will
buy products. The cheapest
played saying bye.
He I walmart
WalMart at one time advertised
American products.
They do not criticize that
anymore.
Why
Because American consumer will
buy the cheapest products that
can buy.
Reason.
These clean fuels aren't being
sold into Mexico is because
you're going to raise the price
of that fuel.
To sell it because it costs more
to make
No.
Mr Chair, So it's a cost. Mr.
Chair is the cost and the
transportation
Mr Chair Center was I don't
know. I don't really understand
what your question is, but the
clean fuel is not more extensive
to make. They are participating
in the market in California
because there is a market there,
Mr. Chair and representative,
you're telling me that if if
they sold it cheaper than
gasoline that we have today in
New Mexico American, the New
Mexico citizens wouldn't buy it.
Mr Care Center was I didn't say
that. I think new Mexicans want
the most economical, efficient
fuel source that they can get,
and this bill will allow them to
do that. You're not. Maybe
you're not enough. Economists
understand the question.
The question is
It's clean fuels is cheaper made
than the fuels were doing today.
You're telling me chair? I'm
gonna quit after this. I'm not
gonna badger no more.
You're telling me
They're not buying them bang
that field into Mexico or
selling that fuel into Mexico
because
It would be
Cheaper than the fuels were
selling today. Higher price than
if you're selling today with
juicy chairman you, Senator
Woods the reason why the clean
fuels are cheaper in those
markets is because they can
generate credits from the Clean
Fuels program and makes them
very competitive against
petroleum products. So for
example, if you take renewable
diesel, the free market is at
work, so renewable diesel
companies and petroleum diesel
companies
For that product market is
competing against itself,
driving prices lower and lower
and so what this program will do
is create that market here in
New Mexico to have more options
and cheaper costs.
So we need the government. Mr
Chair, apologized.
We need the government.
To create a program to get
cheaper fuels in the state of
Mexico.
That's a question that's the
answer.
For the kinds for different
clean fuels options. Yeah,
that's what we create the market
that would lower all the prices
hope. I hope the newspaper cut
that
We need state government.
To create a program.
In order for clean fuels to be
sold into Mexico because they're
cheaper.
Right now.
Thank you, Mr President, Mr
President already missed here.
Madam today, Mr Chairman.
I didn't have one question We're
gonna follow up question, uh, at
the end and then send the woods
got on the role and I didn't
want to interrupt him, but, um,
we we talked about this being,
Mr Chairman.
Any economic move trying to get
companies to come here.
And I'm a little old school like
to live by the adage of trust
but verify.
So I have a request for you.
Will you send me
As soon as possible.
The names you be contact person
company.
Their phone number and an email
so that I can have a
conversation with at least three
of those companies. Sure you've
had a bunch of them. But at
least three of those companies
who have said that they'd like
to do business here in the
state, but they're they're not
because of this specific reason,
Mr Chair, Senator Burke. We were
doing that.
As we speak. Great. Thank you
very much. Appreciate your
cooperation, That's all. Thank
you. Just try to finish this up.
Texas didn't have a clean fuel
standards and they're producing
it.
So why do we need this bill to
produce it?
Mr Chair. We don't need the bill
to produce, um, to produce a
clean fuel. Uh, we need to build
to create the market so that we
create incentives for fuel
producers and importers to come
to New Mexico produce that
you'll bring their bring their
fuel from other places to
participate in the market.
Well, I am. You know, I made
biodiesel for awhile. My office
right?
And then oil got hard to come
by.
That's one diesel prices got
high.
So let me ask you this So then.
I think it's eco 80 or
something the yellow pump handle
at the gas station.
I used to have one of those
truck inks.
But now it's hardly even
available. You can look at some
of these stations, and it's not
available.
And that is supposed to be
cleaner fuel than
Yeah, but it's not available.
I mean, it's not available.
There's no law needed to do it.
People aren't buying. I think
that I forget what the engine
you had to have for that so he
could use an old fuels.
I mean,
There's no consumption for that.
Mr Chair that clean fields being
sold in places like California,
Oregon and Washington that have
a program.
And so then we're going to do
this.
They're gonna. I mean, this is a
tax credit bill. This is almost
like the spaceport again.
I mean,
You want to clean environment We
all want to clean environment
but the end of the cost. I mean,
he was just really effective
mean Senator Sheer was right. I
see people every day in Gallup
selling coal on the side of the
road selling wood, burning it
for housing, right? That's how
some people make a living. They
probably call that call from
farming to nor
Kayenta, Arizona. That's where
polls coming from these days,
right Gallop has their finery
that's completely shut down.
Right?
Commercial choice diverted the
oil diverted it to Texas.
Right? Not to Artemisia or find
me. Where it be cheaper. I mean,
We thought because we had a
refinery and gallop that it was
cheaper is actually more costly.
I just
The consumer is going to pay it
in.
I mean, I'm pretty smart
business guy. I can do the math.
And those guys out in the
audience know I can do the math.
I'm not gonna say what the math
is. If you're smart enough to
figure it out, you should figure
it out.
At the end of the day.
The people from Nash Chitty that
got to drive the sheep springs
to get grass or Newcomb or two
gray hills to get gas right.
They're gonna have a higher
price gas choice because
You say it's gonna be cheaper,
but the freight on that fuel
will be higher than anywhere our
fuel in northwestern Mexico now
comes from, I think Salt Lake
City.
Is where their finery for the
fuel is.
Yeah, it's somewhere right there
And you taller Salt Lake.
So that
That's a higher cost. I mean,
it's gonna be on your shoulders
and know when people say Hey,
can I borrow 50 cents to fill up
my car?
Can I borrow a dollar? Can you
help me get five bucks and
people were making choices on
their pay right now and so?
And then, uh, on the advisory
and tax force. Why don't we just
setting those up to make rule?
Are we just what we have to do?
an advisory in the task force
and all this
Parts to get to
The end of monopoly and win.
Mr Chair That is
I think it's important to
include industry and all of the
stakeholders and shareholders
working with enemy D and the E i
B two
Established the market and set
those rules.
I mean, we currently run fuel
from from there. Find reason.
Don't wear that oil comes from,
but it's run across the Arizona
line right a gallop.
And they redo the re claimed the
diesel and make gas out of the
fuel. It's all the low grade
stuff and it comes right back in
the Gallup.
The lowest grade to clean that
fuel up, right?
So I mean,
I don't know. I guess just shut
up. I'm just gonna get madder
and madder because at the end of
the day
Four people are gonna pay.
That's who's going to pay.
The poorest of the poor, instead
of giving them a tax credit to
buy a newer, cleaner automobile.
We're giving lawyers a tax
credit and
Firefighting dealing instead of
helping them.
Takes a mad automobiles out of
the market.
So it's cleaner.
We're counting by EBS, which
they can't afford.
And so we're shoving something
down their throat instead of
helping them fix what they have,
and you'd be surprised how many
people come in and work on cars
on the side of the road and
gallop, and it's just
That's the way life is, but we
need to make it better for him.
But this doesn't make it better
for Senator Gonzalez chairman. I
move forward Do pass. Thank you.
Second motion, but I got to do
the role because
She's fixing something.
So
Motion by Senator or center
Right center. Gonzales for do
pass, right?
Second by
Senator Padilla, Okay?
Robert
Senator. Compost? Yes.
Senator Bradley.
Senator Gonzalez? Yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Sheer Senator Stein,
born
Senator Woods,
Senator Vice chair. Rodriguez.
Yes.
And I vote no 6 to 4. You have a
deep pass. Hope I can do the
math in this committee.
Thank you, Mr
We're going to be turned. We're
going to go to the floor. I
think at noon we may come up and
clean up some of this. We got to
clean up the capital bill we
were waiting for what happened
