Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee sent a
bill 17 is designed to assist uh
and raising more funds for our
state with some matching
dollars. It is also, uh, set up
to assist our hospitals
throughout the state.
So
The new Mexicans rely on their
community hospitals to provide
the care they need, and this
bill will create an assessment
paid by the hospitals to draw
down additional matching
Medicaid dollars.
It generates 1.6 billion in
total funds.
No new general fund dollars are
requested favors rural
hospitals.
Rural hospitals will pay 19% of
the assessment and received 40%
of the disbursement.
40% of the total funds are
devoted to equality Incentive
pool based on performance
outcomes.
Assessment costs cannot be
passed on directly to patients
or insurers.
75% of the net increase must be
spent and reinvested in New
Mexico with me today are Troy
Clarke, the executive director,
president of the New Mexico
Hospital Association, and carry
Armijo secretary Destin it of
the healthcare authority, and,
um Mr Clark would like to make a
few comments and then
Um, Secretary Miho will delve
into the meat of it.
Yep. Yeah. Just
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Senator. Uh,
We have met several times
throughout the interim session.
It's no surprise to any of you
that we have had many
discussions around access to
care throughout our state, both
in rural areas and urban areas.
This bill provides an
opportunity for us to receive
federal dollars as senator said
phonics is explained without any
additional, uh, State General
fund request or asked by
utilizing some programs
programmatic changes at the
federal level to address those
access problems that we can
begin to get more care provided
closer to home.
Ah, for the members of our
state wherever that home, maybe
whether it's in a rural area or
an urban area.
Currently much of the care is
being filtered into our urban
areas, overloading those systems
because of the lack of access to
care within the rural areas.
We look forward to your support
of this bill as we look to
address that access problem, uh,
in what we think is a legacy
opportunity due to some changes
at the federal level, opening up
this opportunity for us, and
I'll stand for questions.
Get good afternoon. Uh, Mr
Cherokee for sponsoring this
important bill, And I'd also
like to thank the New Mexico
Hospital Association and the
many hospitals in our state who
came to the table to partner
with with us over the past eight
months to work on this
legislation.
Senate Bill 17 is going to have
an enormous impact on our
hospitals. All the healthcare
Delivery and Access Act is
modeled on existing successful
legislation here in New Mexico,
called the Healthcare Quality
Surcharge. A program that has
allowed the state to optimize
hundreds of millions in federal
funding for nursing facilities
that has helped to create
financial stability. That bill
has been so successful.
Senate Bill 17 does the same
thing for New Mexico's
hospitals, taking advantage of a
new opportunity allowed in
federal regulation to increase
Medicaid payments to hospitals
up to what's called the average
commercial rate. The bill
essentially charges hospitals
and assessment on their
inpatient days and outpatient
revenue. Those assessments are
deposited into a fund that is
then used as the state's share
to a
To optimize approximately 1.3
billion in federal Medicaid
matching funds.
The health care authority would
use those funds to increase
Medicaid reimbursement to
hospitals, entire portion of the
increased payments to quality
and performance bonuses. You all
have a one PCs. Um first, the
bill would create a stable
funding source for our rural
hospitals out of New Mexico's 28
rural hospitals, Eight are
currently at risk of closure,
and at least one is at risk of
closing its doors imminently.
These hospitals are critically
important health care access
points for new Mexicans living
in our rural communities, and
they also provide an important
source of economic stability and
jobs in rural New Mexico. This
bill will net about 1.1 billion
in new funding for our hospital
system.
Second, the bill will improve
hospital performance and quality
40% of payments made through the
program will be tied to quality
metrics, which we've been
working on with the hospitals
for a couple of years, and you
can see what those eight agreed
upon. Metrics are, um, for the
program. Rollout on the bottom
of your sheet. I'm really
pleased to point out that two of
those metrics are for behavioral
health, so we're really trying
to drive improvements in the
health care system.
Um third, the bill will require
that 75% of payments made to
hospitals will be reinvested in
the state of New Mexico through
work force expansions, salaries
for direct care Workers capital
reinvestment in the expansion of
new services that are not
available in many of our
communities today, such as
obstetric care cancer treatment
patients have to travel to get
cancer.
In closing. I want to reiterate
the seriousness of the financial
situation for many of our rural
hospitals in New Mexico, and I'd
like to thank them for their
patients. We've been looking for
the right solution for years,
and New Mexico now has the
opportunity to not only
stabilize our facilities.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Cristina Campos and M
administrator of Guadalupe
County Hospital in central New
Mexico. We are the smallest
hospital in the only real
emergency hospital in New Mexico
and I want to express 100%
support for this bill that will
help us be able to plan a glide
path to long term sustainability
for my hospital and other
hospitals in New Mexico. Thank
you very much.
Thank you.
How about now? Okay. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Frank Corcoran. I am the CEO
Seo efforts to hospital and we
are 100% strong support of this
bill. I also represent New
Mexico Rural health network is
11 hospitals and we are in favor
of this bill as well. Thank you.
Yeah.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair. Mike
Miller represent hospitals and
callous Lovington and hops
Covenant health system normally
and Roosevelt General, we are in
strong support of this bill. It
will provide sustainability and
allow us to plan ahead and
provide greater access for our
patients. Thank you.
Good afternoon. Mr Chairman,
Committee members. My name is
Kathy Elliott and I am the
registered lobbyists for Union
County as well as the town of
Clayton. This bill will allow
our hospital in Union County to
actually survive. We really
appreciate this being brought to
the floor and we appreciate your
support. Thank you very much.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Nathan
Busch. I'm the government
relations director at University
of New Mexico. Standard. Strong
support. Appreciate the sponsor
bringing this forward. This is
important to you and M not
because it affects us directly
because our state and federal
payments are handled through
different channels. This is
important to us because we are
currently running on average of
about 130% of census and
To the extent that our rural
hospitals can be high
functioning hospitals as well,
certainly help the overall
landscape for healthcare access
statewide. Thank you.
Anybody in opposition.
You know you want to tell us
about it or no
Okay?
Oh, questions from committee
members.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, senator and sponsors and,
uh, well, I am one of the
sponsors, so I'm fully in
support, but but just quickly.
The 1.1 billion net that you
speak of, Um how does that get
distributed to the various
hospitals? Is there a assuming
there's something equitable way
to do it? So we're not thank
you, Mr Chair and senator and
the Secretary designate is gonna
answer Mr Chair, Senator. Pdf um
The so they're the pool of
funding at 1.1 billion is
distributed. There's the 40%
reporting. And then as we get
data will will.
Performance improvements that
air based it is based on actual
inpatient and outpatient
discharges for Medicaid
patients. So those payments
Thank you chair and, uh
Senator and Madam secretary
designate. So the other does any
of this land in the trust fund
of any kind, or is it just every
year comes in and it gets
utilized, and then
Actually.
Thank you. Chair and Senator and
Madam Secretary, doesn't it? So
one Last question is I was just
running in circles whipping on
the Senate floor. Just I'm
trying to catch my breath. But
so you may have said this
already. But the other half a
billion. Where does that go? You
said your net 1.1 bill of the
1.6 that will come in. Where
does the other half a billion
go, actually does go back to the
hospital. Okay, that their
million if you take out
I think the President
Association want to comment as
well. I can add one comment. I
support secretaries agree
comment on that with one edition
that there is a current
supplemental payment program,
dollar amount of just over 100
million that gets rolled into
this, so that's the net increase
to the state is the 1.1 billion.
Appreciate that chair and and,
uh
And and all of you, So I just
want to say that this is a
pretty to me. This is like a
landmark thing that's happening
here because I I'm just blown
away at the hospitals would want
to just get behind this and make
this happen and make this happen
for us. So I just want to say
thank you to the association and
all your members because when I
was sitting next to Lily in the
other day at a giant event, and
she told me this
I and senator had asked me to
sign onto this bill with her. I
raced right back into the
building and sign my name to it
as fast as I possibly could. So
thank you for doing that. I
think this is great for New
Mexico. It's just really
exciting. Thank you.
Mr Chair and Senator. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I don't
think I have any questions. I
also like Senator just
Oh, okay. Okay. Yeah, I was just
gonna say that Make a comment
here and just say that Senator
Padilla mentioned this is just
really. I mean, aw to see how
creative you have been center
and staff. Um, very much
appreciate the fact that you're
being resourceful at a time when
that's how we need to be, um, so
that we can keep hospitals from
shutting down and people going
without any medical help.
And so, um, I What you're doing
really here is is just creating,
As you said, a more fun, a
stable funding source so that we
can count on that. But the most
beautiful thing of this whole
thing is that the hospitals
themselves have agreed to step
in and do it. Usually it's left
to us and we have to figure out
we're not always creative. But
in this case hospitals can come
in. Thank you, Senator
Stephanie. So it's been a
champion in this whole thing and
Many other areas of local access
for people and medical needs. So
I don't have any questions. I
know that Senator Steinberg
hopefully get the belt.
Understand this chair, Senator
Secretary. Um
Um It's really great that we can
do this for our hospitals.
And I just want to make an
appeal to you that we're now
having also a discussion about
making sure that hospitals are
also
Um, and the opposite
superintendent insurance,
working together to make sure
that all of our hospitals are
Accepting all the insurance
Provided by the exchange that
we're not turning people away
like we are in my community of
Las Cruces and that we're really
not turning people away from
life saving treatments that they
need.
Um and having to delay
treatment.
And there's some very good, easy
solutions out there to do this,
um, that we're going to keep
working on. And so I just kind
of say that and make an appeal
to the hospitals out there
again.
Happy to happen to support this
tool for sure.
And let's work together to make
sure that we're taking care of
the Mexicans.
That's why I have Mr Chair.
Thank you. One question real
quickly. Why is your name
included in this?
That's for that hospital. All
right. Can I have a motion? Mr
Chairman, Second pass by Senator
Rodriguez second base there.
Yeah, we call the roll.
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes?
Yes, Senator. Compal? Yes.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Brantley Boats? Yes,
Senator Gonzales? Yes. Gonzales.
Odysseus, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Perea? Yes, Senator
Padilla votes? Yes, Senator.
Sure. Senator. Share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
quotes Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Nice chair.
Rodriguez votes. Yes, Chairman
Yeo's
Germany all sports? Yes, You
have a due passi 11 to 0. Thank
you, Mr Chair and members of the
Knicks. She's no longer that
designates. She's the Cabinet
secretary.
She's no longer
Didn't you get? Not yet Maybe we
she scheduled Thursday now
scheduled for sorry, But here's
what I was going to say. Mr
Chair. This is bipartisan. I'd
love for anybody to sign onto
this bill. Thank you very much.
You forge my name?
Your stuff Could Senator shares
Do your direct aeration of
independence.
And your company, Matt.
Senator. We have an amendment on
on the Declaration of
Independence. I guess you're
amending the Declaration of
Independence. Yes, I am.
We're on Senate Bill 106 is once
a minute to move the amendment,
Mr. Alright, we're going to move
the amendment for discussion,
Thank you. I know senators, just
the process made the motion to.
Yes, the amendment for you know,
Mr Chairman.
This is 0.0000. Yes percentage
of the budget.
And it was just too much. I'm
gonna have to hire Senator Souls
Table in motion in Amendment 1
82.1, Senator, This is the
standard element or Senate
finance deal of strikes
appropriation, Okay?
You can ring the Liberty bell
When you're done center. It's a
friendly amendment. Tish
Canavan motion to adopt
Amendment
You don't need me here for
All the wrong
They want to vote running back
in a minute.
Senator Bert Yes, Bert Bhutia,
Senator Campos.
Senator Brandt be Senator
Bradley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzales? Yes, Senator Gonzalez
votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill?
Yes, Senator Hemphill votes.
Yes, Senator Padilla. Padilla
votes. Yes, Senator Scherer? Yes
sure Votes. Yes, Senator Stein,
born
Senator Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods boats? Yes, Vice
chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez
votes. Yes, sure. We're back on
the Bill. Center. Right. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair. So
this is the
This is a bill to set up a
commission for the 250th
anniversary of the signing of
the Declaration of Independence.
And most of us have heard the
first sentence of the
declaration of Independence. And
it goes like this when, in the
course of human events, it
becomes necessary for one people
to dissolve the political bands
which have connected them to
another and to assume among the
powers of the earth. The
separate and equal station to
which the laws of nature and
nature's God entitle them a
decent respect to the opinions
of mankind requires that they
should
Declare the causes which impel
them to the separation that
Is heard often.
The last sentence, though, is
rarely heard.
And for the support of this
declaration with a firm reliance
upon the protection of divine
providence, we mutually pledge
our lives, our fortunes and our
sacred honor.
So then the question is
What happened to these guys?
The man who signed the
Declaration of Independence.
What was the price of freedom?
Five signers were captured by
the British as traders tortured
and hung
12 had their homes ransacked and
burned to lost sons in the war.
One of the signers had two of
his sons captured.
Nine of the 56 5 and died of
wounds in the war.
What kind of men were these?
These were men who boldly wrote
their names on the declaration.
That lit the fires of liberty in
the souls.
Of men around the world.
24 were lawyers and jurists. 11
were merchants, nine were
farmers.
They were all men of means.
They were well educated.
Their security, their incomes in
their worldly possessions made
them substantially well off.
But they signed the declaration
of independence even though they
knew the penalty.
Would be deaf on the gallows.
If they failed.
They signed and they pledged
their lives, their fortunes and
their sacred honors.
Carter Braxton of Virginia, a
wealthy planter in a trader saw
his ship swept from the sea by
the British navy.
He sold his home in his
properties to pay debts of the
nation.
He died in rags.
Thomas McKeen was hounded by the
enemy.
And was forced to move his
family almost constantly.
He served in Congress without
paying
His family was kept in hiding.
Eventually he lost all of his
possessions and his reward.
Poverty.
Vandals or soldiers or both.
Looted the properties of claimer
Hall. Walton Guimet Hayward
Russell. It's milk. Middleton.
And at the battle of Yorktown.
British General Cornwallis
occupied the House of Thomas
Nelson Jr.
Very nice house.
Nelson went to General
Washington.
And told him to fire on his own
house.
His house was destroyed.
And all of his property.
And he died back.
Francis Lewis had his home in
properties destroyed the enemy
jailed his wife and she died
shortly after being jailed. Don
heart was driven from his wife's
death bed.
Therefore, they're 13 Children
fled for their lives is fields
and Gristmill were laid waste.
He lived in the forest and caves
before returning home.
To find
His wife dead and his Children
gone. Weeks later, he died of a
broken heart. Morrison
Livingston suffered similar
fates such with the stories and
sacrifices of the American
Revolution.
These were not wild eyed, rabble
rousing ruffians.
These were soft spoken men of
means wealth.
And education.
They had security.
But they valued liberty.
More.
Standing tall, straight and
unwavering, they pledged
For the support of this
declaration with a firm reliance
on the protection of divine
Providence. We mutually pledge
to each other.
Our lives.
Our fortunes and our sacred
honor.
And many of them
So this is this is the
declaration of Independence not
written on parchment.
When they signed this.
It lit fires of liberty
worldwide.
That almost no human ever had
lived under.
Almost all humans in all of
history, and many, many, many
humans today live under some
kind of bondage.
To the king.
Or the Prince.
Or whatever.
Billions of Chinese
Would love this and don't have
it.
Billions of other people around
the world would love this and
don't have it. America was not
born as a perfect nation.
And it is certainly not a
perfect nation today. But this
document let the fires of
liberty in the world and more
people live free today.
Ever in all of history because
of this document, and so what?
we're asking with this bill is
to create a commission.
For the 250th anniversary of the
signing of this document so we
can join
Almost all of the other states
and putting together a
celebration. To do this. The
money would go to the Cultural
Affairs Department.
One question.
How many
I believe that
Technically
They were all British.
Immigrants, not well, not until
they declared today. Yes.
I do not believe any of these
were actually not born on this
continent, but they're certainly
their families all were
questions from committee members
to pass second center share
second by Senator Rodriguez, You
call the roll.
So many
As amended, Mr First Amendment
was from Senator Ivey Soto in
cult Indian and cultural
affairs. He wanted the chair of
Cultural Affairs Department.
The
The chair of the committee to be
the kill your bill. Like
All the role. Bert Senator Bert
votes. Yes, Senator Campbell.
Yes. Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Brantley votes? Yes,
Senator Gonzalez? Yes. Gonzales
votes. Yes, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla, Senator by the
votes. Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator. Sure votes. Yes,
Senator. Senator Woods, Senator
Woods Boats? Yes. Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes, Chairman Yeo's
Yes.
You have a do past 10 to 0? I
forgot anybody in support
Anybody past center. Stay there
for your country Mac World
series when they introduce that
we do Rodriguez same amendment.
Discussion.
All second it
Emotionally second discussion on
the amendment. None recall the
role in new
Mr.
I moved discussions and so it
strikes the appropriation. Yes,
my understanding. That's what I
was given.
We do? We don't just does a
verbal amendment.
This is my verbal Amendment.
Proposes a friend of Senate
finance
The following amendments. Senate
Bill 189.
Page one.
On Page one.
Line 22 strike.
150,000 in fiscal year 150.
Wait, wait.
Okay?
What? This page one line 17.
The amount of
General from the general
different than the amendment
before which
Took out the appropriation so we
could have the language we were.
She was on a different line of.
Yeah, they gave me the prior
amendments. Okay, Alright, so
Okay?
So they amendment on Page one
Line seven. It's still an
amendment to remove the
appropriation, correct just a
different amount, so I moved the
amendment sweetheart, Senator
Bert Bert votes Yes, Senator.
Compost Compost votes. Yes,
Senator Brantley. Senator
Bradley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzales? Yes. Gonzalez votes.
Yes, Senator Hemphill.
Center. Hemphill votes Yes,
Center by the
Senator Scherer.
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes, Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes.
Yes. Germanos? Yes.
Chairman. Your sports? Yes.
It's been adopted. Thank you.
Anybody in the audience and
support
Anybody in opposition of anybody
on zoom
I think we have one person that
supports Connie Mack.
You have that video.
Hey, y'all. My name is Alex
Bregman. I come from the great
State of New Mexico. I just
wanted to give a shout out to
the Connie Mack World Series and
farming tonight. I played in it.
I loved it and if the state
could do anything to help
support it, I would really
appreciate it. Thanks so much.
We were supposed to have the
other one waiting on his agent,
but
Mr Cherry do have a picture of
him there at Connie Mack.
So that's Ken Griffey Jr He
played for Midland, which is a
team that shows up often.
And, uh, you know, eventually
became a major league
ballplayer.
All of fame. Yeah, kind of a big
guy. He's waiting on his agent
Question seen, none can have
emotions for adoption as
amended. Mr Chairman, Senator
Compost and getting by Senator
Burton Cotterell.
I didn't hear you read full
story.
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes? Yes, Senator
Campos? Yes. Votes? Yes, Senator
Brantley. Brantley votes? Yes,
Senator Gonzales. Gonzales Votes
Yes, Senator. Hemp Field,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla. Padilla votes.
Yes, Senator Scherer, Senator
share votes. Yes, Senator Stein,
born
Senator Woods of Woods votes
Yes. Ice chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes. Yes, Chairman
Yas? Yes, Jeremy. No sports.
Yes, we have a do pass 10 to 0.
Thank you.
Well, could you practice in the
back?
You're gonna probably into the
representative on that side of
Senator Hemphill. Senate Bill
six.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee Senate Bill 60
makes an appropriation to the
higher Ed Department for Suicide
prevention program. Um, and
we're going to start it at Santa
Fe Community College, but we're
hoping to expand it across the
state and the program ideally,
would be something either.
It would be Q. P R or something
similar and Q. P R. Is a program
called Question, Persuade and
refer. And it's a training
program where people who are
interested in coming and
learning how to have
conversations to prevent suicide
if they see someone struggling
with mental health issues whose
appear or
Family member. It's to empower
people to have questions to be
able to have conversations with
people to prevent suicide and
counselors or therapists to
provide the support that they
need. And the other great thing
about this program is there's
also a training component. So if
you're interested in
Becoming a trainer and going
back to your say high school or
your university and training
other people within that
institution to empower them to
have these skills. That's also a
part of this, So my hope is that
every single higher ed
institution would provide this
and we would get high school
students trained also, so they
feel confident having
Conversations with their peers
so we can make a big dent in
reducing suicide in our state,
And we all know that New Mexico
has a And with that, Mr Chair, I
stand for questions. I don't
have any questions. I just like
it. We've discussed this in the
past and through emails and
otherwise, and I thought it was
a wonderful idea. Thank you,
Senator.
Yep.
I think the funding is already
there, isn't it? Thank you, Mr
Chair. Uh, not a question. I
think it's a good program. I
just caution everyone who says
we're going to create a program
to go across the state.
Sometimes it goes across it.
Sometimes it doesn't. I just
want to make sure that we have
it on the record that this is
going to within a reasonable
amount of time has to cover the
entire state.
And what do we need to make that
happen? Thank you, Mr Chair.
That
Senator Woods.
Just quickly. It's just a
Oh,
A proven program. Mr. Chair,
Senator Woods. Thank you for the
question. Yes, it's evidence
based. Okay. Thank you.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. I want to commend
you for bringing a bill That's
not going to make headlines, but
it's going to make a difference.
Something like this will have
far more of an impact than a 14
day. Wait for a gun. This is the
kind of stuff that addresses the
mental health crisis. So I'm
actually disappointed. I hope
you ask for more. I hope
programs like this are expanded
not just at higher ed
departments but in high schools
is needed.
But this is the kind of stuff
that addresses the need instead
of grabbing headlines on issues
that are polarizing, So when we
talk about how we're going to
address things when we throw out
far overreaching proposals that
won't make a dent in it. This is
the kind of stuff that does make
a dent it needs to get more
attention and more investment in
it. So
Thank you for bringing it for
Senator. Thank you. Can I have a
motion?
Thank you. Yes. I think what we
do in this is temporarily tabled
The way is a normal process.
and, um and we're happy that you
have it in the House Bill. Two
already in the language will go
in, so I moved for a temporary
table. Rodriguez second base
center.
Senator Bert Bert votes Yes,
Senator. Compost? Yes votes.
Yes, Senator Brantley. Brantley
votes. Yes, Senator Gonzales
Gonzales Votes? Yes, Senator.
Hemphill? Yes, Senator Hemphill
votes? Yes, Senator Padilla?
Yes, Senator. Podia votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer, Senator share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods.
Yes.
Senator Woods votes Yes, Vice
chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez
votes. Yes, Chairman. Ah's yes.
Sports? Yes, we have.
Adopted the temporary table 10.
Thank you.
Senate Bill 239, Senator. Thank
you, Mr Chairman, and I don't
have my notes. I'll do my best,
um, explaining the spill. This
makes some changes to the
lottery scholarship and also the
opportunity scholarship.
Programs. So currently a student
has to take 15 credits.
This changes the requirement
from 30 credits a year and
allows them instead of taking 15
for the fall in 15 during the
spring, you can spread those 30
credits out to include the
summer as well, That's the
biggest takeaway. There's a few
other changes that it makes, but
basically what we're doing is
modifying the
Requirements to help better
support students and encourage
them, providing them the support
so that they graduate in a
timely manner and are able to
fully utilize the scholarship
programs to get their degrees
successfully.
And with that, Mr Cherokee, I'll
stand for questions. I think
Adrian is my expert witness. I
think he can. He's busy.
Counseling is busy, so I'll do
my best to be my own expert.
I'll be able to help you. Okay,
let me just add a little bit in.
So this is a problem with
lottery that you can't go all
year long That you just 30
credits. You're not able to go
year round to get those credits.
Even if you have less credits
This resolves the dual credit
issue within
Institutions.
A kid in Gallup, who graduated
with two associates went on to
enter Misu.
Was applicable for lottery
opportunity came along. He
wasn't allowed for opportunity
because he had too many credits.
Aerospace engineering degree.
And has a job offer from Austin.
You if you really want to
hamstring these kinds of kids.
Don't credit cap hours, right?
Um, students with disabilities
may not be able to go
Full time all the time being
exactly Mhm.
And so this allows that
flexibility.
Um
Questions or anybody in the
audience and support
Nathan.
Mr. Chair. I'll be brief.
My name is Nathan Bush
University of New Mexico. We
stand and support the appreciate
the flexibilities in the bill.
We know that this might put
increased financial pressures on
some of
The programs between lottery and
opportunity. But thanks to you
all in your foresight trying to
work on the higher Education
Financial Aid Endowment fund
this session.
Thanks for building that into
the larger framework of how we
can build in flexibility and
provide for sustainability in
the programs. Thank you.
Mr Chairman, JD Bullington,
representing the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
And the points you just made Mr
Chairman. What This bill is all
about. This is gonna hold our
high school students harmless
for dual credit courses they
take which, of course, is
exactly the reason that we have
dual credit in the in the first
place, so this bill is going to
ensure the state funded
scholarship opportunities really
work for students so they can
succeed in attaining their
degree and less time and at no
cost of them.
Anybody in opposition seem done
questions from committee members
Center Woods.
Um, Mr Chair. What is opposition
to this? What is the opposition
to this? There is none.
So it's a win win all the way
around the woods.
Um, I explained it. You know you
have a kids say that they
qualify for lottery.
And they want to go year round
to get ahead.
It takes 15 in the fall 15 in
the spring.
If they want to go to summer
school.
They're not allowed to use
lottery for that.
Okay to go year round.
Using the lottery or
opportunity, both
Before it was constrained by the
number of credit hours that they
could take in a year and take
eight. And then you take 15 to
the same point.
You're just you. Just me, Mr.
Chair. I think it recognizes
that not all 15 credit hours are
equivalent. So sometimes that
could be a really heavy load,
depending upon what those
classes are, and you might have
to reduce that amount and then
take some classes in the summer
to make up for that, But but
Mr Chair and Senator.
It's required to get a 30 hour
per year.
That Mr
Mr Chair and Senator Woods.
That's my understanding. It's 30
hour requirement per year or the
max The max that you could take
per year is 30 credits per year
per year.
And you could take some of that
during the summer. Then with
these changes, Mr Chair and
senator to make that 30 correct.
And the legacy student is one
that just keeps going to school.
Is that what that is?
Jeron, Senator.
I don't know how leg I don't
know how we define the legacy
student. But
Can you ask Adrian? That
We'll get one just second.
Well, I'm assuming I'm assuming
it's student that
Yes degree after degree after
degree after degree.
That's what I'm assuming that I
don't know.
Mm Uh, Senator, Senator.
You're not allowed to do that in
You're not allowed to keep
money.
Like a solution. Chairs center.
Woods, a legacy student was
already in school when they get
so it's just old language.
Okay, understood.
No more questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you.
No, she no other questions or do
pass by Senator Padilla.
Second day, Senator
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes?
Yes, Senator Campos? Yes.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Brantley votes. Yes,
Senator Gonzales? Yes. Gonzales
votes? Yes, Senator Hemphill?
Yes. Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla
DEA votes. Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator share votes? Yes,
Senator Stein.
Yes, Senator Stein born votes.
Yes, Senator Woods. Senator
Woods votes? Yes. Chair.
Rodriguez? Yes. Rodriguez votes?
Yes.
Chairman. OSCE. Yes votes. Yes,
you have a due Passi 11 to 0.
Representative lanes.
Replacement can get in there.
So we have a substitute bill.
You guys know about the subject.
Yes, sir. Hang up. You know, I
just
I don't like being cussed out.
Then someone
I asked to have a bill moved
around because kind of what
happened. Thank you.
Sold.
Senator Senator Laine lookalike.
Yes, Mr Chair. This is what
representative Lane will
eventually look like.
I used to be really skinny and
could run to roll through this
pretty quick center Senate Bill
148 it really, uh it faces out
something that we believe was an
error in our tax code, where tax
and rev kept a administrative
fee before they handed the money
back out to the municipalities.
And so with that alternate over
to my expert witness aging
Thank you, Mr Chairman, members
of the committee.
This is one of those bills where
there's a 3% administrative fee
on all grt distributions to
cities and counties.
This is something that was put
on back in the Big Mac.
In our conceptual problem with
this in the policy question we
have for all of you is when your
voters make a decision to
implement a referendum vote.
Or you are you're governing
bodies enact.
A non referendum item should 3%
of that go to the General fund.
This does not affect tax and
revs operating budget at all.
This goes straight to the
General fund.
So our concern is over time.
This really does that up the
tune of around 50 million a
year, it gets skimmed off the
top before it goes to local
governments.
So our big concern on this is
We would like to eliminate it,
but in a very thoughtful way,
there would be a two year
delayed, effective date, so it
doesn't hurt capacity and what
you all have to do in the
upcoming years and then slowly
phase it out 1% per year. Do we
get a complete repeal in 2028?
We want to be there very
thoughtful about capacity. As we
do this. We have lived with it
for 30 to 40 years.
We just want to slowly have it
phased out.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Let's see. Mr. Chairman. Give me
a second. That's true,
Yes. Go ahead, Senator. Fine.
No, it's just I just got to
subject to hear. So, Mr Chair, I
moved to table the original
Centerville 148 and move
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill 148 for discussion instead
of a do not pass. That's fine.
Do not pass.
Do not pass. 148 moves
Substitute second that yes.
Senator Bert
But yes, Senator. Bert votes?
Yes, Senator. Compost Compost
votes. Yes, Senator Brantley,
Brantley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzales? Yes. Gonzalez votes.
Yes, Senator Hemphill Hemphill
votes? Yes, Senator Padilla.
Padilla votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein.
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes.
Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Vice Chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes. Yes, Chairman
knows.
Chairman. Your sports? Yes. We
have an adoption for the
committee bill Question.
The the question. I have to get
up.
I represent curry.
When Union County, which has has
Clovis took him carry to Clayton
also have the Moines also have
Grady also have
In here the mornings, Grady.
Clovis.
Awesome. Greenville, our slogan.
Melrose and Hone didn't carry
see the missing Mr Chair. In
other words, he's being he's
being shorted $500,000, a year
ish, but the question I have Mr
Chair and and senator is this
We're transferring. Essentially,
we're transferring money from
the state back to the local
government. So, Mr Chair and
senator right now, when? When
the G R T s collected it all
goes to the state. Then it's
redistributed back to wherever
it belongs. The state is keeping
a 3% handling fee.
So this eliminates that handling
fee over time, so that the money
that the that the local
communities collected thinking
it was theirs gets back to them
because it is there.
I think that's what I said.
No more questions, Mr
So when Gallup when you come ask
me for more capital. You now
have 587,000 grants as now 100
and 48,000.
612 Alon 50. That's that's quite
a bidding center. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for that,
Mr Chairman and thank you for
your presentation and your work,
senator and staff. But, um, I
just wanted to say that the only
thing that confused me
initially, but it's been
straightened out is that it was
in parentheses. So we got Howard
City is going to lose in the
counties and all of that. We're
trying to scramble here, but we
understand it's a positive
instead of negative in this
case, so you may you may get
some questions on that. So I
just wanted to tell you
Thank you. Thank you. TRD
Secretary. That's her back.
There were good. It's pretty
pretty straightforward Prize in
some corner crying. No any other
questions?
Seen. None can have emotions
pass Mr Chairman of the House.
Second by Senator Wallace. Mm
Road represented Lane. How do
you write?
Um, Mr Chairs. As I'm allowed to
grow up and be a senator, I'll
vote Yes, long as I have this
man, but I can't. Yes, Senator
Burke votes? Yes, Senator.
Compost? Yes, votes? Yes,
Senator Bradley.
Senator Gonzalez Gonzalez votes.
Yes, Senator Hemphill Hemphill
Boats? Yes, center Padilla.
Yes, Senator Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer. Senator. Sure
votes. Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods? Yes.
Senator Woods boats. Yes,
Senator Bradley.
Senator Brantley boats? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Rodriguez votes? Yes.
Chairman Yeo's
Senator Stein born you're gonna
vote.
Senator Stein born boats. Yes,
it's good. Munoz. Yes.
Ceremonial sports? Yes. You have
a deep pass your living zero.
Thank you. Thank you. You can
become a center against
lonely old rep.
Word of caution to people.
Very good hearing.
The baby
I didn't
know.
Yeah,
Want to hear.
Oh, we're gonna meet tomorrow
morning at 9 A.m..
So make sure everybody's got a
briefing. So if we have got
questions that will know where
