Sinners to Monix. Good morning,
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. We're pleased to be
with you today on the meat
inspection bill, the committee
substitutes 0.4. There are 21
sponsors on this bill. There are
it's evenly divided Democrats,
Uh, Republicans, so it's a very
bipartisan bill.
This is to assist our state in
moving ahead with meat
inspection so that we can set up
the individual shops around the
state and not totally dependent
upon the USDA and we have many
supporters. We have the New
Mexico categories Association,
the Rocky Mountain Farmers
Union, the New Mexico Wool
Growers Association.
The restaurant association and
Farm and Livestock Bureau.
This bill would be supported by
the federal government. We would
receive funds from them to match
the funds that are already in
house Bill two. So this bill is
funded in House Bill two.
Already, if we keep the funds
there will also receive
additional funds from the feds
with me today is Belinda
Garland, who is the director of
the New Mexico Livestock Board.
She also happens to be one of my
constituents, and after this,
she's gone home to feed the
cows.
Um, one of the other sponsors is
the chair of this committee as
well as Senator Woods, Senator
Brantly and Senator Gonzalez. I
appreciate all of the support
and we're here to answer your
questions. But Senator Woods
would like to say a few words.
Um, Mr Chairman, I'd like to
note in the F I r. It says that
it do cook or it is in conflict
with
Senate Bill 51, which is
actually pulled
On the Senate floor.
The first or second or third day
of the session.
We are hearing Senate Bill 37.
So that is no longer a conflict
in Bill.
And yes, I'm sorry, Mr Chair as
Senator, Wood, said. Senator
petals Bill Senator Pirtle
signed onto this bill.
This. This bill essentially
makes it possible for us to
Have state meat inspectors to do
the same job as a federal meat
inspector.
But it gives us a flexibility of
deciding how many men inspectors
there are
To help with the demand we hoped
in.
To anticipate.
With value added agriculture.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience and support
Let's take and this is the meat
inspectors. Bill. Okay, Let's
take three in support.
Three or you jump up or
Mr Chairman, Mr.
You can pick that up and hold
it.
Mr Chairman and members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera. With
Mexico Farming Livestock Bureau.
We stand in strong support of
this bill. Our livestock sector
is valued at $2.32 billion, and
this would allow us to take
advantage of that and keep that
processing inside of the state.
Um, allow our constituents to
access local proteins and
support our local economy.
Mr Chairman, Committee members.
We want to thank the sponsors,
all of you for standing this
bill up. My name is Pam Roy Farm
to table representing family
table. The New Mexico Food and
Agricultural Policy Council and
the Rocky Mountain Farmers
Union.
Um, we stand in full support of
this bill. Focus on additional
things, which is New Mexico,
grown in schools and raised in
schools and senior centers and
early daycare service. It is a
market that is here to stay our
school districts and our senior
centers outstripped demand of
this program. We need it
desperately.
11 specific example. Roswell
School District. They're buying
$900,000 of New Mexico raised
meats in this just in the state,
and they're taking to their
local processing facility, which
is only one of the USDA
processing facilities. We need
more of these so that we can
actually support the programs
that will be with us for the
long term and feed our kids and
our seniors. Thank you so much.
Good morning, Mr Chair. My name
is Tom Patterson, a cattle
rancher from Katherine County
Serve as the president elect of
New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. We stand in strong
support and thank our byproduct
Hardison support sponsors for
this bill. Currently it takes
upwards of a year to get a beef
in to be processed. This measure
will cut that time.
It will bring more employment to
our rural areas.
And it will put New Mexico grown
New Mexico process be
In our schools, food banks and
our restaurants and on the
plates of new Mexicans. We urge
your passage. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody in
opposition?
Everybody's a carnivore. Today
we have one person on zooming
operate in support. We'll hear
from them.
I got about two minutes. Another
name.
Carlos on Tang.
If you're going to say the same
things that we heard Carla and
You can hear us.
Mr Chairman. It's very Santiago
on behalf of the New Mexico
business Coalition. Out of
respect for your time. I won't
reiterate the reasons why we
support this bill. It's good for
New Mexico. Good for the
community. We stand in full
support. Thank you. Questions
from community center. Gonzales
and I moved forward Do pass. Oh,
there's time Born. Did you have
a question?
Mr Chair. Good morning,
senators. You know, just reading
the F. I are talking about the
cost that are anticipated to be
borne out by enemy. He
Um, can you speak to that?
Are they funded in the chair
Senate around going to pursue
the director of the lifestyle.
So I apologize. Senator Stein
born I'm not quite sure I
understand your question. Or are
you asking is it funded because
there's no money requested in
the bill.
Yes, That's what I'm asking of
The Environment Department
estimates that they will need
1.5 FTE is at $161,000 to
administer the act. That's one
issue the African Mr Chair, I
would senator since that came
through, I would suggest that
our New Mexico Department of
Agriculture could assist the
Department of Environment with
some
Flexibility and funds because
the department of Egg is good is
the Livestock board is under the
Department of AG, so we could
work together on that.
I have another question. Um, It
also says in the ER that
Mexico will be eligible to
receive reimbursements for up to
50%, but it doesn't really
complete the thought. Who will
we receive that from?
Mr Chair, Senator. I alluded to
it, but we'll have the director
response.
So, Mr Chair, senators time born
In order to get reimbursement
from the USDA Food Safety
Inspection Service. We have to
enter into a cooperative
agreement with them. These nine
components have to be met in
order to who's going to give you
the funds.
So the funding will come from
the Food Safety inspection
service once we clear an audit
with them.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Senators will
we need a separate facility for
this? Or is this a staff person?
Mr Chair Senator, the director
Mr. Chairs Senator Stein born.
We will not need a building. We
will house a couple of higher
management people. We believe we
have room in our current office.
But these people will basically
be centered out of their homes
because they'll be stationed
around the states to work in the
plants.
Okay, Great. And will you how
many people will
So, Mr. Chair, Senator Stein
born. We're starting with about
six inspectors. Um, this is
actually a program you build
from top down and then as we
expand out, will be feeling more
positions. Okay, Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you. Uh, no other
questions.
Just real quickly, like meat.
Livestock inspector goes into a
processing plant.
And they have deer, elk or
anything else like that Hanging
there. Are they gonna put those
inspections on those animals to
or there are separate class.
Wildlife process.
So, Mr Chair, Senator, Mr.
Chair, I'm going to defer to the
director.
Um, Mr Chair.
We will have to follow the
current guidelines set by the
USDA Food Safety Inspection
Service. Wildlife has to be hung
and processed separately from,
um like bovine, for example, so
we'll have to follow those exact
same guidelines.
Okay, Those guidelines are
cleaning your meatballs, right?
Perfect. Okay. And then
I just the estimated three year
cost is is three or F T. E s in
the operating
To the feast set high enough can
sustain Mr Chair. This is not a
revenue generating bill. This
program generates no income.
This is totally government
funded nationwide. Um, what this
does is it provides economic
development for the state.
There's lots of opportunity for
businesses to become into
production.
From the processing plans clear
down to the to the ranchers out
to the retailers.
In future years. We may look at
maybe more costly than we
realized, ended up getting
operating, but let's stand it
up. I have emotion from center
and Gonzalez. I think a second
by
Senator Sheer
Clear.
Senator Bert Yes.
Senator Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost? Yes, Senator.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brantley. Senator Brantley
votes. Yes, Senator Gonzales,
Senator Gonzalez votes? Yes,
Senator Hemphill? Yes, Senator
Hemphill votes? Yes, Senator
Padilla? Yes, Senator Padilla
votes? Yes, Senator. Sure.
Senator. Share votes. Yes,
Senator Steinberg.
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes.
Senator Vice. I mean, Senator
Rodriguez votes? Yes. Excuse me.
Germano's
You have a do path was close to
zero. Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Members of the committee. Uh,
Senator Stewart before you jump
up there. I'm gonna have a
center. Hickey do his. He's the
only one that that's not in this
committee that has another bill.
Another committee.
Senator Hickey. We're going to
put a time clock if
You go to the extraordinary
extremes will
Here, Bill you Mr Chair and
Committee and presenting Senate
Bill 72. This is a replay of the
same bill last year, which put a
tax on We are on Senate Bill
116 that 72.
Tobacco fund is not a reserved
wrong number. Um, you made a
copy of the bill.
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
That I couldn't actually come
back at the end. I just got
something coming up right away
If you should be a short bill,
yes.
Uh huh.
Senate Bill 116 is, uh, the
relating to state reserves.
Essentially, as you know, the
tobacco fund when it first came
in through the settlement, uh,
originally was half was going to
General fund half was going to
the tobacco fund. Um because of
a lot of budget shortfalls
during the years. A lot of that
money was used in the reserve
was created in the General fund.
And they reserve earns interest
in
Uh, dividends, etcetera, Uh,
significantly less than in the
in the General fund. And
essentially, what This bill does
is it takes some money that's
now in a reserve and puts it
over into the tobacco fund so
that it right now is about 400.
some odd million and this would
allow it to earn significantly
more annual return. And so we
are requesting the bill.
Go forward to that. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Anybody in the audience of
support.
One. Come on up.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Mahesh
Sita, the American Heart
Association and we strongly
support this bill because we
have, you know, cut the budget
for tobacco prevention and
Education, You know, since the
past several years, almost from
10 million current levels of
3.4 or 3.5, while are waiting
rates amount.
Young people has increased
almost 25 to 34%. So this is a
huge problem and went after
addressing the education and
funding issues. So this bill
will address that we'll have a
study stream of
You know, funding to address
this issue, So we urge you to
pass this bill. Thank you.
Thank you any questions?
Uh, Senator Steinberg. Thank
you, Mr Chip Senator. Good
morning. Morning. Another one of
your great healthcare bills.
Um, question the fun right now,
So we transfer this money or we
Don't allow it to be diverted
into the General fund. So now
we're keeping more of it in the
tobacco settlement fund.
Um, is there an automatic
distribution of those funds for
the purposes of the fund? Will
this increase the amount of
money going out from the fund
for tobacco cessation or other
programs? Thank you, Senator
Stein born and Mr Chair. That's
a very good question that this
is a little bit of tricky
mathematics. Essentially when
the interest in this fun
outpaces the settlement on an
annual basis, then that money
goes to this.
So that that was a long way off
without this transfer, and so
that brings it closer to home
And eventually, then the money
will go into not only tobacco
and vaping, uh, prevention but a
number of other things that are
related to that and the
illnesses caused and just out of
curiosity, Mr Chair Senator who
makes the decision on that
decision will go back to the
Tobacco Settlement Fund
Committee. It's an interim over
the summer and that's also done
in conjunction with LFC in terms
of how it's distributed as it
has been district Cool, Alright.
Thank you, Mr X. Thanks, sir.
Thank you.
One quick comment.
New Mexico.
Has never really had a true
reserve.
We pull from this fund report
from this fund we take from them
Liquor nor the vehicle excise
tax and we use that in General
fund, And so this is one of the
last steps and setting New
Mexico as having a true reserve
that is cash in the bank.
I mean, if we took 3 billion, he
took 400 million off the top. We
29.2 reserve, right?
Which is 400 million, and it
makes a difference.
I don't know if a lot of people
know this but New Mexico with
bills that are in the Senate and
the House.
In 2 to 3 years will not have to
use ability to bond capital
anymore. We'll have cash
And and that's a big change.
Those aren't the
Cute, sexy things on TV that
that people watch. These are the
internal workings that when you
set up a business, this is a
business model that you're
setting up. I have a true
reserve. I'm setting myself up
so I don't have to go to the
bank and borrow money, big
projects, and his new Mexico
sets itself up for that.
These pieces have to fall in
place. One piece fails.
It won't work. And so these
things have to have a senator.
Key. Thank you.
Can I have a motion from the
committee?
Mushrooms, upstairs time born
for do pass and the second base,
Senator Rodriguez.
The cultural
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes.
Yes, Senator. Compose Senator.
Compost votes. Yes, Senator
Brentley.
Yes, Senator Brantley votes.
Yes, Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzalez votes. Yes,
Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill Boats? Yes, Senator
Padilla? Yes, Senator by the
votes. Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes, Yes.
Nice chair. Rodriguez votes yes
And ceremonials? Yes. 11 to 0.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator
Stewart. There you are.
How many I'm gonna hear like
five in favor of five and
opposition. Those were smaller
bills.
We have let me look at my zoom
list. So
So, Mr Chairman, I
I have amendments, but I also
have about five or six minutes
review of the bill. If you want
me to do that review of the
bill, then we'll move them
Amendments for discussion
purposes and how many amendments
do you have?
So if they're all technical,
you've had him for a few days
there. Nine small ones.
Nine small ones, and I have an
explanation for every one of
them. Is it one meant? Did we
have one Amendment one a minute.
One. Amendment nine. Yes, Yes.
Okay. We want to make sure they
don't have nine. Music. Really
Sorry.
Go ahead and send. Thank you.
So, Mr Chairman, I just want to
remind us how we got here. Um,
we've been working on this now
for four years, and in 22, we
set up a task force, So we had a
a
Task Force of business and
advocacy and labor. Um, and some
economists, uh, the bulk of that
work is in the bill and the
decisions that that task force
made.
Still remains in the bill.
So it creates a fund.
And his ministered by the
Workforce Solutions Department.
The fund is funded through
employee and employer
contributions.
The employee contribution is
point point, 5% $5 on every
$1000 of wages.
The employer contribution is
0.4% $4 on every 1000, but we
exempt 66% of our businesses
that have fewer than all of 66%
of these businesses have fewer
than five employees. They don't
pay into the fund, although
their employees do so that they
can benefit from that fund.
Let me just say up front that
the way this works as an
employers do not pay when their
employees on leave. They are
paid by the fund. So 66% of our
businesses will not
Pay in, nor will they pay their
employees while they're on
leave.
Thank you.
So let me just talk you through
the Bill, Section three
establishes the fund.
And the fund will also cover the
cost of administration and
outreach for this program.
We've designed it, so the
upfront costs which are in the
budget, I understand is 36
million.
There may be cost the second
year, but that 36 million will
be paid back 6 million a year
over six years from the fund
when it's up in established
Section three also requires, and
this is something new that the
Department of Workforce
Solutions conduct and third
Party actuarial Analysis by
January 1 2025 to ensure that we
are on the right path was
solvency.
Section three also outlined the
formula that we use every year
to ensure solvency.
That that analysis must be
reported to the legislative
body.
Section three also has a cap.
On any increases in premium
contributions that 0.1% of wages
in any given year. It's a dollar
for every $1000.
Section four outlines the
process by which the department
will collect contributions. They
begin January 1 2026.
We have a slow and and
purposeful, uh
Passed into this to give the
workforce solutions of full year
for rulemaking. We also have an
advisory committee made up of
businesses labor advocacy to
help with those decisions.
Section four outlines the
process of collecting those
contributions.
I just want to reiterate that
66% of employers will not be
required to pay into the fund at
all.
Sexual for also clarifies that
any changes to that contribution
rate will not change that
proportion of employees paying
55% and employers paying 45%.
Self employed individuals and
tribes can opt into
participation.
Or opt out.
It's really up to them.
Section four creates an
exemption from participation for
employers who offer and old
private paid family leave for
their employees. It has to be
substantially similar or greater
than what's offered. Employers
who have a wafer will not pay
into the fund.
Section five outlines the
process for applying for leave.
say high bar.
First of all you have to have
paid into the fund as an
employee for six months in the
previous 12 months.
The leave is for welcoming a new
child managing a serious health
condition.
Providing care for a family
member with the serious health
condition.
Or leave someone who's facing
domestic violence. They're two
very small uptake and other
states that do this out of
50,000 application. Only 13 were
for domestic violence and one
state.
Employees and self employed
individuals will receive 100% of
the state minimum wage, plus 67%
of wages above the minimum wage.
There's a cap
The cap for weekly income
replacement is set at the mean
wage in the state, so currently
mean wage the camp would be
$1046. That's the highest amount
that you could get.
So applicants are not required
to take the full amount of leave
concurrently. They can do it
intermittently. Think of someone
on dialysis who needs to take
off the day a week.
That minimum increments is eight
hours.
Section six outlines the types
of verification required of
applicants important to note
that regardless of the cause of
leave, there's a requirement for
a third party provider to
confirm the employee needs leave
and to establish the length of
time necessary. Section seven
outlines the employee's
responsibility to provide
notice.
To their employer when they
receive an approved application,
clarifies that the employee who
would be eligible for FMLA leave
must take it concurrently.
Section eight outlines
requirements for notifying the
department of the employee or
self employed Individuals return
to work.
It specifies requirements for
job protections. Job protection
provisions don't begin until
employee has been employed for
at least 90 days.
Section nine prohibits
interference and retaliation
section 10 outlines appealing
for adverse determination
Section, 11 was added at the
request of the business
community, preempting local paid
family medical leave statutes
Ordinances Section 12 insurers
collecting darkening agreements
are unaffected sections 1314 are
related to the rule making
process and has the advisory
committee.
Ah, we've included an additional
small business owner and a
representative with expertise
and benefits and leave
administration in that
Section 15 is just temporary
provisions. It lays out that the
fund will repay. Uh, what we
using in the first year
The funding from the state will
be initial hiring development of
at night. He system costs
associated with rulemaking.
So that's a summary of the
builders. Three points. I want
to emphasize, uh, so once the
initial inflicts implementations
completed and contributions
begin January, 1 2026.
The administration of Fund and
December December assessments
will be fully funded by those
contributions.
Um, I already mentioned the slow
ramp up. We want the rulemaking
to involve businesses and we
want full implementation. So
this really came out of that
first task force to, um, have a
timeline so that it would we
would take our time and get it
right. So July 1 2025.
The first contributions. No
contributions will be collected.
January 1 2026 rulemaking will
be completed June July 1 2025
January. 1 2027 would be the
Fund would be available for
applications. So, um, I just
want to reiterate that some
people think that employer has
to pay the employee while on
leave. That employee will be
paid by the fund. So, um, I have
with me Tracy McDaniel from the
Southwest Women's Law Center.
To answer any questions. Uh,
that is my overview. Um, I can
talk to a little bit more about
what we changed, although I
talked about that during it. So,
Mr Chairman, if you want to move
to amendments, I'm ready to
explain them to you.
Hmm. Hmm. OK, I have a motion.
Have a second
I have a motion to move the
amendment in the second. The
objection to moving the
amendment seeing then
He's going to pass out the
amendment. We want to verify the
tracking number at the bottom,
so we make sure
Correct And that is 868.1.
So, Mr Chairman, I actually only
have the amendments that they
made for the House bill, which
are exactly the same as the so,
um, if you will send me a copy
to make sure she's looking at
the same amendment, we are
before we get create confusion.
Yes, that's correct and explain
amendments. Yes. So for
amendments 123 and seven
clarifies and situations where a
temp where a company hires
attempt for people that the
employment leasing agreement who
pays its the attempt to pays so
essentially
Situations where an employee
leasing agreements in place
between the business and an
employee leasing contractor like
attempt company leasing
contractor pays the contribution
on behalf of that business. So
that's amendment 123 and seven
Amendment for strikes the term
by blood or a fit of affinity
from the definition of family.
It's too hard to explain, and it
raises too many questions and we
don't need it. We're taking it
out. Amendments five and six
change mentions of state
jurisdiction to in the state of
New Mexico. Um, it was feedback
from the Workforce Solutions
Department and she has approved
this changed and amendments
eight and nine just correct
drafting errors in the section
on eligibility to receive
benefits.
But
Yeah, the amendment. You explain
the amendment, so we shouldn't
No, I think Let me think for you
We're on discussion purposes, so
Oh, I wonder if we're gonna just
go to the audience first, for we
don't have to adopt them don't
have to adopt the amendment
first.
Before we go to the audience, so
the audience knows what the
amendment is. So let's go.
To the audience.
For those in support.
Of the amendment. No, no, I'm
still okay.
Questions on the menu.
Mr Chair. Uh, Pro TEM. Who? Um
Who worked out the amendment.
The amendments have been part of
our ongoing process of working
with the secretary and the House
on changes, So they're they're
all technical. We just sort of
left out what you have to do
when you contract with an
employee employee, Uh, service
like a temp agency. That's the
main one. We had left that out,
and the rest of them are pretty
well. Technical, Except for that
number two
We will all worked on these over
the last
Months, weeks, years. Yep.
Alright.
Senator Banana. Thank you. Chair
and thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
So on the on the amendment.
On item number two.
Part G.
So
I think it says this, but I'm
just verifying.
This applies to a subcontractor
that might be hired.
For a contractor.
Because it's really anybody
that's obtaining lease.
I'm not familiar with the term
least I'm I'm familiar with the
term.
Yeah. Temp agency and my expert.
Sure. So, um, Mr Chair and
Senator Padilla. Um, this
language is specific to a
certain kind of, um
It's they're called employee
Leasing. Um
Contractors, But it's not. It's
not like anybody that has a
1099. It's specifically for
these.
Businesses that least employees
to other businesses temporarily.
But they are the essentially the
primary employer for that
person.
Thank you chair, So I guess it
really would apply for just any
employment or temporary. I'm
used to the term temporary
arrangement. Um, so a
subcontractor than in this case
would also be employing
somebody. Yes. Would apply as
well. Yes, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Good morning, Senator
and your wonderful woman here
hardworking, I'm sure also, let
me just say thank you for the
continued endless hours of work
and days, months and years
already in this bill, and, um,
you know, sometimes we can't
find a consensus that pleases
everyone.
But I know that your efforts
have been there to do it and
many people working together to
get this big thing done, finally
called family medical leave, and
so I just want to say thank you
for ensuring in your comments.
You indicated that that any time
There is room making Now you
will have businesses. You will
ensure that businesses are at
the table.
To weigh in and provide their
input in the real making. That
is big because we do have to
have businesses have a voice and
that's what you're giving them
in your in your amendments, and
I just have at least one quick
question. Mr Chairman, Did you
say Senator that that you will
now
Require workforce solutions to
have a to consult the third
party. Actuarial analysis for
Yes, it's in the bill. But you
mentioned that was it going to
be done by 2025 or 26? I
couldn't remember what you
meant. Chairman January 1 2025.
Okay. All right. Thank you. I
just wanted to get it right
there.
Okay. I don't have any further
questions. Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Second
On the mental on the
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes? Yes, Senator
Campos? Yes. Compost votes. Yes,
Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantley votes No.
Senator Gonzalez? Yes. Gonzales
votes. Yes, Senator Hemphill?
Yes, Senator Hemphill votes?
Yes, Senator Padilla? Yes.
Senator Padilla votes Yes.
Senator Scherer, senator share
votes. No.
Hmm.
Senator story corn
Yes.
Senator Stein born votes. Yes.
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
votes No.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. Yes,
Airboats? Yes. And
Votes. Yes, you have a
Eight in the affirmative.
I might want to turn up. Greg
Peters your first zoom. I didn't
have my mic on.
In support.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
My name is Greg with
conservation voters. New Mexico
here to speak in strong support
of SB three. There are higher
rates of illness and cancer
rates in communities with higher
industrial burden and incidences
of climate disaster correlate
with increases in domestic
violence and violence against
marginalized communities.
We stand in solidarity and
support of this bill because we
believe it will help create a
more just economy for impacted
workers and communities. For
these reasons, we respectfully
urge do past vote and thank you,
madam. Pretend for bringing this
bill forward. Thank you. Let me
let me ask you before we keep
going this direction if there's
lobbyists on there
Probably hear from the same
lobbyist. Let's go to join
Dickerson.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee Joan Dickerson
with the veterans and Military
Families Caucus.
New Mexico is home to our 22,000
military members.
Over 21,002 company family
members and 142,000 veterans.
many of those family members and
veterans work.
This bill recognizes the value
of military working spouses by
including qualifying exigency
leave when their sponsor
received orders for deployment
and more broadly paid family and
medical leave is a benefit to
many states recognize, attracts
and retains skilled workers.
Mexico is one of only 28 states
that do not have paid family and
medical leave.
We urge your do you? We urge
your support on this bill and
recommended do pass. Thank you.
Rich Weiner, You're next.
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. My
name is Rich Weiner. I'm with
reboot our democracy, which is
part of indivisible New Mexico
and I and and the group stand in
strong support of SB three
Every other wealthy country and
the world has this type of paid
leave, and it's really important
upset.
That little our country doesn't
have a We can have it here in
New Mexico, like the other 28
states.
Um, this would allow, uh,
workers to, uh, attend to family
members who have medical
conditions, serious medical
conditions, births and deaths
and other really critical events
in their family. It would make
for a happier, healthier and
more productive workforce with
more productive, supportive
families.
It's really a win win for
employers and employees, and I
strongly support this bill. And
I thank you first sponsors and
thank you for this opportunity
to speak on in support of the
bill.
Thank you and go to the audience
in favor, So let's
How many do we have to get four
up here?
Yeah, just four.
You're gonna have to speak into
the mike and state your name for
you might want to move out of
that chair and let him jump in
there real quick, And then they
can just rotate through. That
might be the quickest, easiest.
Good morning Chairman Munoz,
members of the committee. My
name is Laura Martinez and I am
the executive director of
engaging in Mexico, a nonprofit
in Las Cruces serving the county
As a small nonprofit. We also
own a small business and I T
company.
Um, I am here as an employer in
support of this bill is
incredibly important for small
employers like us to have access
to these kinds of benefits for
our workforce. Um, this creates
stability and fosters a healthy
workplace culture. Also, we lose
valuable time away from our
mission. When we have turned
over this bill is a tool to
combat that This bill has been
carefully thought out and worked
on for years. Now better than
critique by stakeholders
statewide.
And has had numerous elements
modified over the years to take
into account both the needs of
new Mexico workers and
employers.
The bill provides a means for
long term solvency covers a
range of situations requiring
leave and of course, provides
protections for working to
Mexicans.
It's affordable. Under the
current provisions, I can cover
our entire team for about $1500
a year, which is the word of the
investment in my mind.
Um, in summary. We have to
create the kind of new Mexico
where families workers in the
economy can thrive at minimum,
That means creating a safety net
for one life's inevitabilities
happen. I urge you to crack to
pass this critically important
bill and thank you to the scent
Sponsor. Thank you.
Hi, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. My name is the West
Historic Cash and public policy
director at small business
majority, where here in strong
support of the bill last month,
which you've probably heard me
say this a lot. Um, we released
polling that shows New Mexico
Small businesses support this
bill 85% of them.
Um, I've talked to small
businesses across the state who
feel like this is really
critical to their ability to
compete, especially with the
larger businesses coming into
the state and pulling a lot of
work force. Um, from their small
businesses, I think in order to
maintain the culture and support
of the New Mexico small business
landscape in the state, we need
to pass this bill and help these
small businesses not have to
sort of cobble together
benefits.
Um to support their workforce
and instead remove that burden
by passing this bill. Thank you.
Hello. Buenos tardes, members of
the committee and chair. My name
is Alma Castro. I am a city
councilor in the city of Santa
Fe. But today come to you as a
small business owner. I am 100%
in support of this bill.
Currently, business owners are
accruing for every 30 hours of
work. One hour of paid sick
leave, and that is on us 100% as
a burden right now, If this were
to pass, we would be able to
share the burden with our
Our staff who is going to be the
recipients and also have the
state help us administer this
program where, right now, as a
small business owner and as
Community servant. I'm having to
do all of that work on my own.
So please consider this bill not
only for employees, but also for
employers. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. John Lip shoots
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. If l c I o we
represent around 40,000 workers
throughout the state, both in
the public and private sector.
Uh, just, uh, I want to thank
the sponsor for continually
working on this bill. Just very
brief history. We have been
invited to be part of this
process pretty much from the
beginning, and we very much
appreciate that much like
members of the business
community and
What you might hear from others.
This is not the perfect bill
that we had originally hoped
for. We have made compromises on
our end plenty of them to get to
this point, and we are happy to
do so. We need a good paid
family medical leave for our
workers. Some of our union
members do have these benefits,
But we understand that all
workers need to have this
benefit.
So we will continue to work to
ensure that a good paid family
medical leave program is out
there for us to utilize. And,
uh just one final plug that
with, you know vacancies both in
the private and public sector.
We definitely believe that this
bill will help address those
needs. So thank you very much.
Good morning. Yeah, deep in
It's good to be here. My name is
Janice Petersen. I'm from jail.
McKinley County and mentioning
and Yoshi always come to our
community is really grateful
that we see you sometime there.
But then payment come pill is
really gonna help us. Our
community, not just nap, but our
future kids or future grandkids,
and that's why I really strong
support this. I really need to
have this. Continue on with our
support. Because if this was pay
medical leave was here in the 20
years ago, it would have been
really helpful. But right now,
everything is so hard to get,
especially with the economy wise
so
I strongly support this. And for
your, um they can see you have
work. We need to have your
support to but thank you. And
you guys have a good day.
Cat.
You got out of line. He was in
line, So let's finish up with
him in front of me before, but
she left.
Word. Seven. If she gets back
in and he's he's done. Okay.
Well, thank you, Mr Chair, Mr.
Chair. Members of the committee.
My name is Lansana, policy
director for the Center Pacific
Policy in Stage four cancer
patient on Monday. I had a
procedure done to remove a tumor
in my lung in hopes of
qualifying for clinical trials.
My last resort as my cancer
continues to spread.
While anyone facing such a grim
prognosis would be traveling
across the world or spending
their life savings on Corvettes
and goods. I'm here today to
advocate for paid family medical
leave, Although I've been
tempted. I know that Sanibel
three is the difference between
a mother sitting alongside her
two year old battling leukemia
or whether bereaved parents can
take time to grieve the tragic
loss of their child.
Opposition talks about the
unintended economic impacts
should this bill pass, But we we
currently have our Children
dying alone and asking parents
to sell their Christmas presents
to afford their medicine. This
is the reality that I face when
going to the cancer center and
talking with families just like
mine, and I somehow feel
privileged in hearing their
stories.
Despite having been conscious as
the doctor told me to hold my
breath while he bore a needle
into my chest and lung. I still
have the capacity of using what
breath I have left in standing
before you and asking for your
support for Senate Bill three in
cancer patients like me.
You've been standing in line.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
member of the committee. My name
is Nick Mason. I'm a board
member and a registered lobbyist
for the League of Women. Voters
of New Mexico and the League of
Women. Voters of us have made
strong statements in support of
paid family and medical leave,
and they've urged state leagues
to speak out and supportive
legislation. So I'm speaking
strong support of SB three and
urge your support and give it a
do pass. Thank you very much.
Thank you. We're gonna go and
opposition. We're going to zoom
first Paul Guest.
Your next. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. Can
you hear me?
Yep. We got you.
Alright. My name is Paul Gassing
and president of Rio Grande
Foundation Public Policy
Research Institute, working here
in New Mexico and public policy
issues relating to the economy.
We do have concerns about this
legislation. But mostly it's
focused on
The idea that we're raising
taxes on businesses and workers
alike to fund this program at a
time when we have a $3.5 billion
budget surplus available to new
Mexicans. If we are going to
institute such a program in the
Legislature, there are many
different ways that we could use
Those resources currently
available to
Create this program. There are
concerns and, uh, regards to
this program about the
sustainability of the trust
funds or the fund that would be
made available to
Institute this program over the
years in the future, and that is
a concern as well. But there's
no reason to foist a tax
increase on businesses and
workers at a time when New
Mexico government has so much
money available to it. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Larry Sauntering.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
members of the community. I'm
Larry Suntech, speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico
business Coalition.
We oppose Senate Bill three
because New Mexicans are already
dealing with the financial
strain and inflation.
And an additional 0.5% of their
wages will only make things
worse.
Employees need every cent that
they are paid to provide food
and assess cities for themselves
and their families.
The cost of ramifications on
businesses are too high as well.
When you consider there still
struggling with inflation, a
lack of workers and previous
mandates of paid vacation under
the Healthy Workforce Act.
The sponsor mentioned a task
force and New Mexico business
coalition was a part of that
task force from the very
beginning.
And we have opposed this Paid
family Medical Leave act from
the beginning, but you won't
find that probably in the notes
that were provided by that task
force.
We did a survey of the business
community not only New Mexico
business coalition members, but
two or three other associations.
About pfm l A and an
overwhelming 94% of the
respondents were adamantly
opposed.
Again. I don't think you have
seen that in the information
that was brought forward from
the task force.
This bill. We appreciate the
fact that judiciary to oversee
the financial stability is being
considered. But that doesn't
change the fact that this is not
sustainable, and it will
Ultimately result in increased
Taxes on employees and employers
in the future. We encourage you
to say no
To SP three. Thank you.
We'll take one more from the
Internet.
I think I think Carol right up
there and
Carol will let you in real
quick, so
Unless your chair and members of
the committee My name is Carol
White. I'm the CEO of the New
Mexico Restaurant Association.
I'm here representing a
coalition of 18 associations and
chambers that have been working
on this issue. Over the interim.
We formed a group after
realizing that the business
community was being left out of
paid family medical leave
discussions.
Our members strongly opposed SB
three while the intent behind
paid family medical leave is
commendable, our coalition
believes that the legislation
may have unintended economic
consequences for our working
families and businesses and
could be improved with
alternative sustainable
solutions are coalition members
are the associated Builders and
contractors. Lost Cruises
Chamber of Commerce. New Mexico
Cattle growers Gallup Chamber of
Commerce, New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce Santa
The Chamber of Commerce Hispanic
Chamber of Commerce.
In Mexico Hospitality
Association Associated
Contractors of New Mexico
Greater Albuquerque, HOTEL
lodging. New Mexico.
homebuilders Real Rancher
Chamber of Commerce, Dari
Association of New Mexico, home
Builders of Central New Mexico
Rio Grande Foundation and
cardamom.
Thank you. Um, those in the
audience is support. I think we
had seven the last time so
In some, I mean in opposition.
Seven of
People.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Terry
Cole. I'm the president, CEO for
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce, despite the mini
cordial conversation, Senator
Stewart and I have had on this
bill, and with all due respect,
I am here today in opposition to
SB three. Here's our business
concerns it imposes a new tax on
employers and employees.
That we believe could escalate
and create continuing fiscal
challenges. The bill needs more
guardrails to make abuse more
unlikely, and it harms small
businesses by allowing so much
leave every year for such a
broad range of purposes and
circumstances absorbing
vacancies. Finding temp employs
its small employers who will
suffer. Mexico's economy becomes
more corporate.
Unless unique.
A different approach focusing on
maternity leave to support
mothers and keep them in the
workforce is better on all three
fronts. Lower cost impossible to
abuse and easy for businesses to
plan for. We urge you to vote
against the bill today. Thank
you very much, Mr Chair members
of the committee
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Terry
Garcia. I'm the owner and
operator of Amigo Automotive
Group in Gallup, New Mexico.
I consider myself in a small
community, A very small
employer. I've got three
corporations. I employ 170
people.
My people, though, are skilled
employees. And let me tell you
what the impact this bill will
have. I'm going to use my three
stores. I have three master
mechanics and my service
department. One for Toyota, one
for Chevrolet, one for style
Entous.
If I lose a
Master mechanic.
I cannot provide warranty work
for anybody that brings a
vehicle into that shop.
That eliminates my service
departments completely. I could
do an oil change, but there's no
warranty work for any of your
vehicles and those manufacturers
I can do.
The other skilled employees are
my finance representatives. I've
spent thousands of dollars,
sending them to federal
Trade Commission and compliance
training for privacy laws.
I've got six employees over the
three stores.
That are certified in compliance
training.
And I'm gonna ask. Would each of
you like me to get a piece of
paper and write your name
address? Social security number,
date of birth and income down.
Because those people have to be
specifically trained for your
sensitive information in the
city of Gallup, New Mexico and
McKinley County. We don't have
skilled workers lined up to
replace them. If I lose a
finance representative, and I
lose a mechanic
There's no way I can keep my
doors open. I cannot legally
under the federal rules follow
the guidelines and compliance
issues I'm required to have
And if there was skilled
mechanics or master mechanics or
other employees that I could do
the trainings to I would have
them. I I agree. We do need paid
family medical. I'm in support,
but I'm not in support of this
bill. It's too vague and there's
too many consequences and
there's too much time.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Members
of the committee. I'm Jim
Copeland, executive director of
the Association of Developmental
Disabilities, Community
Providers.
Our members provide
developmental disability waiver
services, early intervention
services through the fit program
and also I C f I I'd services
are association does not oppose
the paid family medical leave.
We do oppose the employer
contribution. That contribution
is not included in the current
reimbursement rates, and it's
also not included in the fiscal
year 25 reimbursement rates.
Providers have absorbed the
healthy New Mexico Workplace Act
and the state minimum wage
increase with no increase in the
reimbursements they receive.
These providers for the most
part or 100% dependent on the
Medicaid rates they receive with
no opportunity to increase their
revenue.
The $10.2 million that you folks
so generously appropriated last
session for cost of living
adjustments for rdd providers.
We've not seen a dime of that
money yet.
There are federal changes that
will impact the cost of
providing DD services in New
Mexico. There's potential
litigation that could also
impact
Dramatically these services. I'm
certainly willing to work with
the sponsor to try to work out.
Options for our Medicaid
providers, But we contract with
the state of New Mexico. Our
rates are set by the Department
of Health and the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services,
and we have no opportunity to
increase those rates.
We're willing to work on some
possible amendments. But at this
point we just can't support the
leave as the bill as it stands.
Thank you for your time.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Rob Black.
I'm the president and CEO of New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce. Um,
I want to think that the
The bill sponsors for the
proposed amendments today or the
amendments that were accepted
today.
And and I share. I think many in
the business community share
understanding.
That
Paid family medical leave. Bill
will not make you pregnant and
it will not give you cancer.
But a good one will help you
manage for that.
So with that in mind, I joined
at the request of the speaker
delegation that included
includes Tracy McDaniel, who's
the expert today for three day
summit at Vanderbilt University
this November on paid family
medical leave, looking at best
practices of how to implement
these plans around the country.
I would have that plan. We
believe that there is a better
way to move forward that doesn't
impact those social safety net
businesses that were described
by the previous speaker, because
we do believe that this bill
does that it undermines not only
disability services.
In home care and hospice
services concerned how it will
impact our early childhood
services. Those are all
dependent on contracts by
governments that aren't required
to offset these new additional
costs. We also heard from a
mechanic or somebody who runs a
mechanic shop servicing.
You could do that with a dentist
as well. For Dennis loses a
dental hygienist. There is a
cost that they lose. They may
lose $150,000 in revenue over
three months because they can't
do those teeth cleanings that is
skin in the game for those
businesses understanding still
that we need to be able to
accommodate for those those
individuals to take care of
their families.
So we believe there's a better
way to do this. That was what
came out of HB 11 in the house
this year. Um, we believe that
there's more appropriate way to
do this. That's more financially
viable. We're concerned this
fund will go under.
Or then you have to raise taxes
and state of Washington is the
example of that They've been
paying benefits for four years
in the state of Washington.
They've raised taxes every
single year.
In 2022, the state of Washington
had to supplement their fund
with $200 million to keep it
solvent were concerned that this
bill takes us down that
direction in New Mexico. There
is an important role for paid
family medical leave. We believe
there's a better alternative
than SP three and ask you to
oppose this, bill. Thank you.
Mr Chairman, Senators. My name
is Jerry shallow and president,
CEO of the Rio Rancho Chamber
and we stand opposed to SB
three. The while the bill and
paid Family leave Act is needed
in New Mexico. This bill is way
too broad and will create an
adverse impact to a number of
businesses as well as employees.
This is coming out of the
employees. Net check.
So whatever they get, this is
coming out of their net, not
their gross as in some other
benefits out there. In addition
to that many venison is's
throughout New Mexico have
already experienced a large
increase in costs. You can
imagine.
Talking to our businesses in the
community occupancy and
insurance expenses up 18 to 27%.
Employment expenses already are
up 22 to 25%.
This has an adverse effect. In
addition to this, you're going
This has an adverse effect. In
addition to this, you're gonna
increase it with this bill.
Also
If you can imagine in the state
of New Mexico, you're looking at
$250 Million to $500 million
coming out of the state of New
Mexico because of the shortfalls
in different ways, so that
includes state employees,
colleges, universities, state
contracts and, plus the large
deficit that will occur if only
6 to 10% of New Mexicans take
advantage of that.
That means 90% are not taking
it.
And that just 10% puts us into a
huge deficit.
In addition,
One other piece on this is the
insurance community has not been
consulted on this at all
Throughout the process, this
product already exists in the
private market space.
And insurance agents and
insurance companies throughout
the state. New Mexico already
offer a version of this that
employees and employers can buy.
They can either do it together.
They can do it separately. A lot
of employers already offer it.
Employees matter of fact, if you
go to certain carriers out
there, this product costs less
with an insurance carrier than
it does with this one, and the
employee gets to make the
decision if they can afford it
or not, rather than being forced
to afford it, so this creates
all kinds of challenges, in
addition to it as a former
insurance agent in the state of
New Mexico what I will tell you
is actuarial services are done
before.
It's approved by the legislative
body in the state of New Mexico
or any of the other states. The
reason is is they have the
expertise? We have not consulted
anyone on this bill that I have
seen.
When, actually, um, experience
that can tell you truly how much
this is going to cost based on
their experience in the state of
New Mexico.
So with that we encourage you to
say no to this to SP three.
Thank you.
Chairman Moon rose members of
the committee. My name is Kathy.
Um all I'm the CEO for the New
Mexico Hospitality Association
As Carol White mention, we've
been part of an alliance of
associations from around the
state have been working on this
issue for months and some of us
for years, and it continues to
be our position that we strongly
believe.
There is an important role for
paid family medical leave in New
Mexico, but we continue to have
serious concerns about the
structure of that of this bill
As it stands, um and I'll just
touch on a couple of those. I
know you received some emails
from our industry members across
the state over the last couple
of days. I encourage you to to
consult some of their specific
concerns.
But the industry concerns
continue to be the long term
viability of this fund the way
it's currently structured, and
Rob touched on some of the
challenges that other states
have seen that have had this
program in place for a longer
period of time.
We also have concerns about the
the burden NIST will place on
workforce Solutions. That's an
agency that's already working
really hard to catch up with
some of the past programs that
have been implemented recently,
and we have serious concerns
about how they would be able to
take this program on um and
oversee it efficiently. And
then, um, I think the biggest
issue for our industry and I'm
sure again you heard from some
of our industry members.
Is that most of our hoteliers
are small businesses and, um
Especially in the rural
communities, and I know those of
you that represent rural, um,
districts. You know that there
is not necessarily a pool of
employees out there. So if you
have to replace someone for a 12
week period in a rural
community, where are you going
to find that workforce? Where
are they going to come from, And
that's not just for specialized
skills services That's just
employees in general.
So you're gonna have to either
rely on overtime, which is an
additional expense, which has
not been addressed by this bill
that the employer will have to
absorb or you're going to have
to contract expensive temporary
services from out of your region
So again, based on those reasons
and others that I know you've
heard from the industry we urge
you to to, um
Say no to this current version
of this bill, and we pledge to
continue to work to find
something that works for all new
Mexicans. Thank you.
Really?
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee, uh Billy Gala
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce, President and CEO. I
would just say that we are in
opposition to SB three for many
of the items just stated, and
the only thing I would ask is
that
We have heard from almost 300 of
our member businesses, and
they're telling us that SB three
will force them to drastically
cut staff to close their doors
or to close shop and move their
businesses across the state line
into Arizona. We are considering
legislation that harms small
business here we would ask that
there's a better path forward
and we would support paid family
medical leave, But we do not
believe that answer lies in SP
three.
Thank you.
Thank you. We're back on the
bill. Questions from Committee
members Center move to table.
Right. Tabling motions, not
debatable.
We have emotion for table.
None. Discussion purposes. Can
you need a second on the table
in motion?
The second from
Senator Brantley.
We call her Senator Bert?
Senator Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost? No Senator.
Compote votes. No.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Brantley votes Yes.
Senator Gonzalez. No.
Senator Gonzalez votes No,
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill votes No,
Senator Padilla No.
Senator Podia votes? No.
Senator Scherer.
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. No,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez. No.
Vice chair. Rodriguez votes no
and chairman knows
Yes.
Chairman votes Yes.
659 table back on the Bill,
Senator Hemphill Blitz first.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. I want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward and
All the many years of work
you've put into this and getting
many stakeholders to give their
input. We know that New Mexico
is high rates of many health
issues like diabetes, chronic
liver disease, respiratory
Death rates, and we've also had
the highest rate of alcohol
related deaths for almost 30
years, all indicative of the
trauma and poverty that we have
sustained here in New Mexico for
generations.
And also suggests because we
have low workforce participation
rates that we're not doing
enough to support our workforce.
Um
We also need to recognize that
everyone in our state is
negatively impacted by the
trauma.
That people are subjected to in
the state. Whether it's because
of
An overburdened and burning of
our health care system.
Substance use disorder rates,
low worker productivity, and we
really need to do more to
support the people of New Mexico
and our workforce.
30 years ago, when I had my
first teaching job, I had a one
year old who I had to leave
every morning with the
babysitter, and they went to
playground. One day she was
pushed off a slide.
Broke her hip.
I was in a falls, Spyker cast.
This was one year after the
federal unpaid family Medical
leave took effect That allowed
me even though it was difficult
financially. I was able to care
for my one year old who is in a
full body cast.
Until the end of the school
year. Just it was 22 weeks, but
I was able to care for her with
my sick leave. And then once
that was exhausted, I did take
some unpaid leave to care for
her. We know that women are the
ones who do the majority of
caretaking.
And they are the most negatively
impacted if we do not provide
that support. I've heard a lot
of businesses expressed their
concerns about how this is going
to affect them. My question to
to you, Madam Pro TEM is what do
businesses do now? Do they
expect if you have a cancer
diagnosis to show up at work if
you have a child
With, um, cancer. Are you
expected to show up at work?
Regardless of who you need to
care for a year after my
daughter broke her hip, I had my
second child who was diagnosed
with a rare genetic syndrome
called Rothman Thompson
Syndrome. We knew he was at risk
for developing
Osteosarcoma bone cancer, very
aggressive form of bone cancer,
which he was diagnosed with at
four years old.
He lost his left leg. He had 18
courses that chemotherapy.
He was
Subjected to neurosurgery. He
was in a halo for a time I had
to do daily growth hormone
injections I had to do nightly
due to two feeds in spite of
being the breadwinner for my
family had to navigate all of
those signs. I have four
Children have always provided
for my family.
And if we can do better by
providing the support that women
need, I think we're going to
have a more robust economy.
Our businesses are going to be
able to find employees and every
single person in New Mexico is
going to benefit from that. I
don't think this is something
that people are going to abuse.
We want to be productive. We
will all want to be doing
something that is
Beneficial to society at large.
And and so I think you but what
are you hearing? Mr Chairman and
Madam Prothom from businesses.
How do they, um, support their
employees at this point if
they're faced with some kind of
serious health issue, or a
family member that they have to
care for
Mr Chairman, Senator Kray,
Hemphill. Thank you for that
question. And thank you for
sharing your story.
So in this interim, we really
focused on small businesses. Um,
we reached out to 350 small
businesses in New Mexico.
And pull them about what they
do, and if they supported this
so interesting note, the
majority of them are not in any
of the chamber of commerce is
85% of them. Support this 80% of
them try to offer some type of
parental leave, although it's
financially difficult
So, um
This is something that small
business support the ones we've
talked to 350 through the small
business majority Opinion poll.
I think you all have gotten that
so people do try to cobble
together things. I think it was
Senator Bert, who talked about
one of his businesses how they
allowed paid family medical
leave.
It's difficult to do it across
the board.
And you know, when I hear people
say, Oh, well, I've got three
people.
That can do this. I can't lose
any of them. That says to me is
that people have to go to work
sick. They have to go to work
and can't take care of Children
like you just mentioned. Um they
have a baby. They can't take off
the three months that that's
really required to start a baby
into this world. UNICEF.
Says. We should have six months
full paid leave form beginning
mothers. We want that mother and
father to learn how to take care
of the baby involved with that,
baby, so
Um, I just think that people
want this more than you hear
from the business leaders and
that they're not really in touch
with everyone.
So they continue to say 12 weeks
is too long. 12 weeks is the
maximum in every other state.
The average amount of leaf is 6
to 7 weeks. Yes, there will be,
uh women or men who want to take
the full leave. Thank goodness
people care about babies like
that.
Um, but that's not the usual
amount. Um, In addition, states
like Washington that Mr Black
mentioned they've just decrease
their rates and the reason for
the last four years they had to
increase them. So they started
at 0.2% it that wasn't solvent.
We've looked at the 14th states.
There's even more now and taking
the best from them, and we've
had actuarial studies on this
bill done by both deeper.
The pure of business and
economic research and the U. S
Department of Labor, the women's
bureau who works with all the
states on this issue, so we
think what we have is good,
solid for everybody we put in
the actuarial studies
requirement. Uh, cinnamon Yas
mentioned that
Last year.
So I'm afraid that what happens
in many businesses it they just
can't. They just don't provide
anything. And so people quit.
You know, we only have 47% of
our women in the workforce if we
had paid family medical leave,
the economists say, we have
47,000 more women in the
workforce. No, we We have 750
teachers that we don't have this
year when we talk about not
having people everywhere. This
is one way to help people.
Stay in the workforce.
I have the constituent. She
called me up when I started this
bill, and she said my daughter
six years ago after graduating
with a master's degree, moved to
California because they had paid
family medical leave. She's
still there. She has two young
kids. She's at the same company
She withstood the layoffs they
made.
So this is a good business
policy. That's what we're
hearing from other states where
there might be
Other things like less childhood
trauma by allowing people to
bond with that baby as long as
they can possibly can. We're not
offering enough of its salary
replacement so that people are
going to stay out as long as
they can. We're just not doing
that. So, um, I believe this
bill will address folks and I
believe after a few years when
they have the kinks worked out.
That businesses will will like
it and that will be something we
can be proud of it. They will
help people like you who needs
to take off. Thank you, Mr
Chair and Madam Protest. Um, and
as a mother who had to take six
weeks of unpaid leave when I
had, um, my last baby number
four. I can tell you if we
really care about reducing child
to trauma in this state. We care
about the well being of
Children. We will make sure that
all every single woman in
Mexico has the ability to
receive pay because nothing is
more traumatizing.
Than having to take unpaid leave
and not knowing if you're going
to be able to keep paying your
mortgage or pay for food, and
what that impact is going to be
on your family, So thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Or madam protein.
Um, thank you, mr Chair.
Here is this is gonna go
forward. I moved that Senate
Bill three.
Be referred to Senate Judiciary
Committee.
Um, through our committee report
contingent upon the
Committee's
Mr Chairman.
I
I want to say that I
Been here 12 years and I don't
think I've ever heard that
motion.
I'm just, you know, I want to
make sure that we're treating
the sponsor and everybody
fairly.
Um
If it were made on this side for
some other purpose, I would ask
the same question. I've I've
never heard that motion made in
I should
I could be wrong, but I think
that's also we might be stepping
in the authority of the majority
leader who makes committee
referrals and usually new
committee. Referrals are made on
the floor and not in the
committee.
So just another thought to
consider.
Probably more appropriate venue
to have that
Hmm.
I'm looking to her lawyer.
Mr Chairman made a motion that
That it be that the committee
report reflect that this be our
committee report reflect that it
be
Recommended did it go to Senate
judiciary? I think there's
precedent for us to put things
anything else.
Mr Chair. Maybe we could ask
Legislative Council
Anyway, So that's that's all I
that's all I'm
Asking is that our committee
report reflect that it
That it be forwarded to Senate
judiciary.
Let's check
so
So I've made a motion to
mischief.
I would really suggest because
we're gonna be talking about
this for a few minutes that we
ask Legislative Council. We can
get an opinion on that. And
maybe let's put
It just seemed like the little
first to work there or back on
the just on the bill right now.
Senator Stein born Thank you, Mr
Chair, Senator, Um, secretary.
Good. Good job on the bill.
First of all, I mean, I've read
it again. Read it last year,
but, uh,
You know?
Just good to see that you
thought of every little aspect
of every little detail and
How things are worded. Um,
notwithstanding the concept, but
I support the concept, but
that's number one. I know you've
put a lot of work into it. I
just have a just kind of a big
couple questions, ma'am Chair,
Mr Chair, Madam Pro TEM, do you
does the bill
Exclude public employers from
having to pay into this
Or do they already have their
own program that exempts them?
Mr Chairman Note does not
exclude
Eventually, If we pass this,
they'll all be in it.
They could have a waiver and and
there's several big companies
that have a program like this
and they can waver out. Thank
you could also purchase that
private insurance that one of
the Opponents' spoke about.
That's allowed interesting.
Um
Mr Chair Pro TEM. So are their
public agencies that provide
this benefit right now that
we're aware of
Um, Mr Chairman. The governor's,
um, executive order? Yeah. Allow
state employees to have the 12
weeks for maternity or
paternity. Her executive order.
It's not in statute.
So when she's gone properly, So
is that executive order. We
certainly have, like our
universities are universities
offer some form of this? Yeah,
if they improved that they could
opt out, or they could opt in
and save a lot of money and have
a better program.
Thank you And Mr Chair, Madam
Pro Tim. How about local
governments? Are they included
in this where they have to do
this? Yes. Um, but they also can
have the same. Opt out if
they've got a program
substantially similar,
understand? So I'll just assume
that public providers we heard
from the developmental
disability organization.
All providers and contractors.
Would be in it as well.
Nonprofits just treats everybody
the same is that fair?
Mr. Chairman? Yes. Okay again,
the same. Opt out if you've got
already a plan understood?
I want to throw out a couple
ideas Madam Pro TEM. Not
necessarily for now, although
one maybe for now.
You know, we're we're using our
one time money to set us up in
good strategic ways for the
future might be interesting to
look at a legislative trust
fund.
That helps
Offset the cost, like we have a
health care affordability fund
that lowers premiums might be
interesting to look at a fun
that helps out with the cost of
this program for a variety of
circumstances, including fixed
wage nonprofits.
Maybe employers and employees
alike. I'll just throw that out
there.
So, Mr Chairman, I I will remind
you that
You know, the only discovers 34%
of our employers would be paying
into it. We've got 66% of our
small businesses that have fewer
than five employees so those
employees pay in. But the
employer doesn't write that
scoops up some of those smaller
into little concerned about
Entities that are on fixed.
Fixed payment systems like the
example that was used for the
developmental disability.
So
Yeah. And Mr Chairman, Senator.
That's where we have a year and
a half before to make those
rules. Um, certainly, um, with
the advisory committee that's
made up of business and
advocates, um, to work through
things like that, So that's one
thought is we could we could
create a fund that could help.
Another thought is we could
maybe if actuarially it supports
that exempt out entities maybe
like that that are on fixed
basis. Government provider kind
of things, and Mr Chairman.
Where the provider state is the
provider. So this would be if we
go forward with this? This would
be part of us providing it.
We set Medicaid rates were
increasing the Medicaid rates
now moving forward. The rules
that we make will adjust those
kinds of entities that don't
quite understand how they'll
manage it.
Sorry, saying, Mr Chair, Madam
Pro TEM that it's possible to
rules will
Give them more flexibility if
they're on a fixed ability to be
able to pay Mr Chairman. Yes. I
just think that's something for
us to work on for sure, one way
or another, maybe even as this
bill moves forward.
But thank you again for the
bill and thank you for your
openness to allow questions and
debate as we do in the committee
process.
As this kind of refreshing so we
didn't get a little different
experience last night, so I
appreciate the discussion. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
This. This wage costs will come
off the top.
Usually you take your FICA your
your your federal taxes come out
first.
Then your insurance.
How is this in that Rove
insurance? Where is it
calculated?
Um, Mr Chairman, if we could ask
the secretary to weigh in on
that question.
Thank you, Mr Chair Secretary
Street and I are from the
Department of Workforce
Solutions. I mean,
My understanding is that this
would come out at the same
places and we don't call it a
tax in this bill.
And so, but, I mean, you know
you pay your federal taxes and
you pay, you know.
So security unemployment, right?
Then you pay your state taxes.
And as you deduct that, right?
They're not a lower rate, but
they mentioned that this is
going to come off the top.
Prior to
Mr Chair. No, I don't. I don't
believe it would come before
those taxes before federal at a
lower rate, but it come below
insurance costs.
Premiums. You know if we have
health insurance and museum
lawyers paid 30 or 40% of their
health insurance.
Does it come off of that after
that, or what? Because this
matters because if you have
$1000 paycheck and
The total was holdings is 12%,
right?
And you're gonna add an
additional 5.3%. If you take
that from the top, it hurts
their bottom line. 4.4.
I know, but I'm just doing
around numbers. Yeah,
whatever. I'm just doing round
numbers, Mr Terror. I think I'm
I'm starting under your stand
Your question. I do not think
so. The wage base, um that this
bill is calculated on is total.
Grosser than that.
The gross
It's total on the gross
So before they pay their health
care.
Or they paid any of those other
deductions that are required by
law. This would come on with the
gross
So they would maybe look at
that. And I'm just this may
happen. This may not happen,
right?
Employees will start looking at,
like, okay, I'm deducting 12%
from my insurance costs, right?
Do I want insurance or don't
want to take
5% cost instead of the insurance
because I can get this benefit
above this one.
Mhm it people are a creature of
habit. Let me tell you if you
tell him
Hey, paid leave is another issue
in the way we where we calculate
that right is still really not
clear and how we
Count the number hours. We know
how to count.
Count the number hours and
there's still some not clear
definition in that.
Our employees will come to us
and say
You know, I just want to take
the money for the paid leave,
which I have the option to do,
right?
And they'll put that money in
there, not this league, but in
pay.
Paid leave, They'll take the
option for the 30 minutes for
every
I can't remember hours.
They will take the cash.
Overseas. Mr Chair if I want to
make sure I understand your
question correctly, I think what
you're talking about is a
contrast with, say, a program
like a deferred compensation
that might come out of an
employee's paycheck and out of
their taxable wages. And so that
that I think that's is that
correct. That's what you mean by
coming out first. Yeah.
Okay, So, um, my understanding,
although we could clarify this
through rulemaking is that the
definition of total wages, which
is on page five of the bill,
lines, 12 through 17.
Defines total wages is all
remuneration for employment and
dismissal payments, including
the cash value of remuneration
and a medium other than cash, So
it does not provide for any sort
of, um, deduction to the taxable
wage rate prior to the
calculation of the text, But if
if my employees take the
insurance benefit, right?
And I pay part of it, and they
pay part of it right And they
see that deduction on their
check. They're gonna start
looking like okay, I'm taking
home 0.4.
Less than than what I would and
and they will change.
They'll start looking like okay.
How do I take home? More money,
right? Do I drop my insurance?
Do I do I start looking at other
places is my bills are here.
My income is here and I got to
figure out where I can make it
match together, and that's very
critical and and and just people
are creatures of habit that I
mean, if you told me I was gonna
win the lottery, right?
And I may be smart enough to
know this. Most people say Okay,
I want to cash payout or I want
over annuity, right?
Not me. I'd give hat. Give it
all the church and I'd be the
highest paid janitor never
cleaned the church. I wouldn't
have to pay any taxes.
I mean,
People watch their paychecks and
poor people watch it harder than
anyone else. I mean, they sit
there and calculate. Did I miss
a dollar 50 on my paycheck?
You know that this not happened?
I mean, and we do make mistakes,
but we'll make. We'll make it
right. But I mean that
calculation matters where it
comes out and making those
choices.
As they're looking at their
deductions, you know?
Do you want?
We match employee retirement
because we have a set program.
So that we can match up to 15%
of their retirement.
But they're required to put
money in there and they say,
well,
They want to do my step or to
want
To do this. There's some and
these are
Just average people that work
for us, So I'm educated
accountant. Some not educated
people. They all look at that
number to their total number
that they're taking home to make
sure that they can make their
needs. So that's something
that's really want to know how
we're going to calculate that.
Hmm. And people are creatures of
habit. I'm just like the lady
from from Gallup stated, You
know, we have, you know, tell
you probably gonna hear it from
my wife tonight.
I always use my family.
You have two young kids that
both graduated from college that
came back to New Mexico and
their father tells him I'm gonna
help him open a business, right?
What do you want to look at?
When you look at that 1 to 5
ratio
And when you get over that when
you're starting a business
That 1 to 2 years is the hardest
years. Even a 30 year is still
the hardest years to start up a
business, right?
And and you're borrowing money
may not be paying yourself,
isn't it as an owner struggling
along trying to get that
business on its feet moving up,
right?
Well.
His. This is his third year.
He has one employee that pays
pays $50 an hour, right?
More than a nurse. Traveling
nurse or nurse is ours right?
These technical, but they moved
up with him in the system. They
didn't really know they keep
moving up to keep moving up.
$15 an hour.
But he just had a child, right?
And so he makes good money, but
He is native who gets care for
my Jess but chooses to do care.
The insurance because we pay
part of that instrument. He
knows he gets better service and
a private
Are different hospital than HS.
So he'll now start looking in
that and saying
Okay. Should I should I just get
rid of my insurance because and
how do I take more home in the
dance? How they take more home
in their check? It's not the
benefit that they see in the
future. Okay. If I break my leg
and and I have to take time off
of my wife becomes pregnant and
she needs more time off, and I
have a struggling child to do
that.
I mean, I'll give you a perfect
example. Why? I agree with this.
But I just got to have it in my
mind is straight.
My mother passed away last year,
right?
And I was pretty much my sister
lived in Gallup, but she didn't
really helped me a lot.
56 times a day I was running to
my mother's right.
Healthcare emergencies, but she
was just aging.
And that's what I did as a
child. I didn't have that.
I had that.
Ability to do that other people
do not.
That's why I think paid leave is
important.
But I need to know the real
solid structure.
As we move forward, right?
I don't want
My wife who works for me
probably doesn't really want it
right.
In a private business, but now
it's required to do it because
she could just take the time
off.
And I do that, and so
Or she may want it. She may not
want to take care of me, but
that's a different story. But
there's certain instances right
and small businesses that really
change it. You get to 25 plus
business like 25 employees are
over. Okay, they can kind of
start to withstand that.
But human nature is going to
play so deep in that, but you
get his technical operator
that's making $50 an hour,
right?
If if he decides
Okay. I don't really need this.
But I know I can get extra time
off.
To go do something else.
I got a hunting trip. I got
Something and and they will
fudge the system.
Because you can get before you
could get a medical
License at the flea market.
They have medical marijuana.
There will be some fudging the
system and I'm not saying
everybody is going to do But
there will be some can't shake
your head. No, Because do you
own a business? Yes, please. Do
you have have you ever started a
business? Yes. $20 million from
the bank to do it, okay?
Then don't shake your head. Note
me because because it's a tough
thing to do, and we need to grow
business in New Mexico.
Because yesterday, the Federal
Reserve told us right here in
this room that construction
inflation is going to be the or
Wage inflation is going to be
the hardest hit sector in the
next couple of years, right and
his wages rise.
Price is right.
I don't have a problem with
Peyton.
I just need to know the
structure. I need know how it's
gonna work. Correct. Can I
answer you Sure. Thank you. So
for a minimum wage employee, the
employer pays less than $100 a
year. I'm fine with the pipe
employers part that's okay for a
minimum wage worker. The
employee pays $124.80 a year.
Basically two bucks a week.
For the state. Average wage of
the employer pays about 200. The
employee pays $259.30.
Um you we don't We cap it at the
state average wage, So we kept
the replacement and we capped
cost, So we also have the social
security. Uh, cost in here, too,
so we don't go above the Social
security amount for any these on
people.
You know center.
There's still people in the
Gallup itself, Firewood and coal
on the side of the road, right?
And sometimes I have a 70 year
old man that works for me that I
don't really need, but it comes
around and he things of my
wife's cars, and he sweeps up
the shop, right?
But to him
You know, making $100 a week
makes it difference, right? $100
a year, But there's people that
you see that like
I have money for bread, right?
They will look at other options
to cut and how they will cut.
This is human nature.
It's not really the bill I'm
discussing. I'm talking about
human nature and I get human
nature and then so let me just
How does this apply? So if I
have a great employee, Well,
every one of our employees sure
got a bonus, right?
So as we do those bonuses, we
have to calculate the
withholdings on the bonuses.
Right?
So will this apply to bonuses to
Mr Chair? Yes.
So if we want to report reward
those employees at the end of
the year
I mean, we're gonna pay another
0.4 because we're going to pay
their side on bonuses. Bonuses.
We say you know you deserve a
$5000 bonus. Whatever the cost
of that
Yeah. Is in federal taxes, state
federal taxes, we make sure
their net is 5000.
Right, so it may cost us
additional, But now we're going
to start looking at. Okay. Do we
reduce bonuses to pay a little
bit of difference in
It. May it may not, but it's
something worth discussing.
I do remember last year, you
telling me that you thought cost
for this was the minimus,
although I don't think you used
that term Well, it's
It's the minimus in in when a
person has a health emergency.
When they got to take care of a
family man.
Right when you're pregnant.
But when you have a sick child
Or when you have things that
that's told, administers to me,
right right, And that's what the
fund pays for. The fund pays for
your employee when they have to
take a leave for those medical
emergency. Sort of have a baby.
So you save money when that
employee is on leave, you can
use that money to hire other
temporary
Or give bonuses to people who
are taking on their jobs.
However, you want to do it, so
let's go to my employee.
For whatever reason their mother
is ill has cancer and they need
to take care of it right?
Probably.
For a week or two weeks.
private. Go take care of them.
You're on our payroll, right? Do
what you need to do figure that
out in life right? It would
probably have the time to kick
in this right.
So now I have to hire Tim,
right, really is not in my
chain.
Maybe not in my accounting
change, and they will be and
monitoring my semis. Right? And
so I need someone don't have
They don't may not have the
expertise right? Then they
worked for me. Then they're
eligible and I gotta pay.
There's even though their
attempt
But then the temp company pays
for the temp worker. We don't
have a temp company in Gallup.
So what do you do now, Senator?
I mean, what do you do now means
part time employees and no,
We're not going to change your
business practices. You can
continue to do that. This is
really for those.
This is really for those
incidences that are bigger than
all of us, And there's a high
particle get in. You have to
have a medical provider. They
have to say how long you need to
be out or how long you need to
be cared for. I mean pregnancy.
We all know how long that is. So
it's just for those instances,
it's to help businesses out. The
bigger businesses offer this
already.
They already offered already. So
it's the smaller businesses that
really need it. You've heard
from them today.
Paid businesses have a large,
larger margins right and it
broader base.
Small businesses and community
have a smaller bases right with
less margins that
A lot different than
McDonald's has a $15 Big Mac,
that people really don't care
that they want a big Mac and
fries. It's 15 bucks in
18 bucks in Santa Fe and 15. The
wages in Santa Fe are higher
than I just
There's a lot I still
I would like to see this
building had a good discussion,
Human nature is going to be the
biggest factor in human nature
will will.
Where it will cause and people
say I need I need that $200 more
a year. My paycheck.
So I don't want to have health
insurance.
Because they know sometimes so
they'll know if I got to go to
the hospital. I don't have to
pay because I'm in urgent,
right. They want to get entrance
so they could get better
services.
Okay. I'll quit arguing the
motion and I have a motion.
Motion for do pass by Senator
Stein, born second by Senator
Rodriguez. Wait, Wait, wait.
Where did we have a role on the
So
Is that Mr Chairman is that on
the motion previously made her
on the Let's clear up the first
motion first, Okay, and he
talked to me and Senator share,
So that is a motion right?
The motion does pass. It will be
added below the committee will
be a do pass motion from the
mall. Maybe during the committee
report, and then that that will
be additional below.
The motion from the committee.
So it is a motion that can be
made.
In the committee. So let's Mr
Chairman if 90 some
clarification here if we are
voting on the motion that was
previously made, then I withdraw
my second, but I thought we were
voting on the motion for do
Passo. So let's clear up the
first motion first.
So, center Sherman, you're on.
You're on his motion. I just
wanted to say that that's an
unfriendly motion for me.
Everybody's unfriendly and we're
still friends. But the motion
itself very unfriendly motion by
center woods to add my center
share
To add additional
Referral on the committee report
to judiciary.
Anyway, there's the motion
right?
Okay, So we're on that motion
right now. Senators, nine born
you have you know, just as a
teachable moment I would like to
hear from Raul if that's even a
proper motion.
For a committee to
Put in a committee report
actually take a vote, adding or
even requesting another
committee referral is that
Even a proper
Motion.
Mr Chairman, Senator Stein born
and members of the committee.
The committee process is such
that a committee can make
recommendations to the entire
body, because whatever the
committee does is nothing more
than a recommendation. A request
a suggestion if you will.
So it is proper and we have
seen, UH, committee reports.
Where
The committee moves they do
pass.
And further recommends.
That the bill be also referred
to X committee.
That has been done. It is
acceptable. It is just simply,
uh up to the body, whether or
not to accept this this subject.
Okay, so just for the bodies.
Knowledge in 2010 in public
affairs. One senator
Mhm. When Senator TV Feldman was
there. That was a motion and it
didn't pass and then go on the
committee report. But there is a
reflection in the record of
that.
Quite the scholarly research has
it.
Stein born you've done Yeah, I
mean, okay. Do I need to
withdraw my motion so that we
can entertain his motion? Is
that your preference or Yeah,
Let's withdraw the past motion
so we can have the correct We're
on centers Shares, motion,
second by center. Woods to add
additional referral.
Two.
Judicial
Colorado.
Senator Burke. Yes, Senator.
Bert votes? Yes, Senator.
Compost
Compost votes. No.
Senator Brantley. Yes, Senator
Brantley votes. Yes, Senator
Gonzales,
Gonzales. Boats Note, Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill boats. No,
Senator Padilla.
No. Senator Padilla votes No,
Senator Scherer.
Senator Sherrod votes Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. No,
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
Boats? Yes, Vice chair.
Rodriguez. No. Vice chair.
Rodriguez votes no and chairman
Ah's 65 had died.
Or back on the do pass motions
Center
Ocean Basin, nine, Born second
by Senator Rodriguez
Rodriguez in Colorado.
Senator Bert Senator Bert votes
No. Senator Campos. Yes. Compost
protests. Senator Bradley
Bradley votes No. Senator
Gonzales. Yes. Gonzalez votes?
Yes.
Senator Hemphill. Yes. Hemphill
Boats? Yes.
Senator Padilla? Yes.
Senator Padilla votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer, Senator share
votes. No.
Senator Stein born
board votes. Yes, Senator Woods
Senator Would Senator Woods
votes? No. Vice Chair.
Rodriguez? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez votes yes
and chairman knows
665? Yes. Past motion. Thank
you, Mr Chairman, members of the
committee.
Yeah, well, we got rid of the
£800 gorilla in the room.
Yeah.
Have you guys clear out quietly
and quickly? We still have some
stuff to take care of.
Past most of everything on the
list. Senate Rodriguez your
Housing Trust fund. I see. Izzy
is in the audience
to jump up and be real fast.
Rodriguez. We might meet you
there.
Oh,
Okay to play the one
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee. I have busy Hernandez
here who is the CEO and director
of the Mortgage Finance
Authority, and they administer
the affordable housing trust
fund by law. This is a
appropriations bill that was
endorsed by the oversight
committee during the interim,
and every year we endorse the
bill, just like this.
Other than this. The amount this
year was higher in the request.
Um, understanding that it's a
big ask $500 million request is
not an easy feat to get through,
but we are working towards
continuing to get funding for
the affordable Housing trust
fund to continue to narrow the
gap.
On the housing needs here in New
Mexico, and, um, that's really
what it does Mr Chairman, the
local protocol in the original
and ongoing process is to
temporarily table these bills so
that we can continue to look for
funding. Um, I do, um
Remind the committee that we do
have some funding. Um, in as a
recommendation from LFC, Um,
that has been included in the
full recommendation. Um, but
it's not 500. Currently we have
approximately $50 million as a
recommendation. Um, not nearly
the 500, but we're getting
little by little there and the
mortgage finance authority does,
In fact, leverage the money 29
to 1.
In return or up to 29 to 1 in
return, sometimes even 33 to 1
in return, so it really is a no
brainer to continue to put
funding into the affordable
housing trust fund.
The affordable housing troops
from committee members. Thank
you, Senator Gonzalez and I make
a motion for temporary table.
Second emotion 11 2nd
Is he If we took the 50 million
and and put a classification for
33 to 1 or 27 to 1
Are we allowed to target that
money to the highest
reimbursement?
Good morning, Mr Chairman and
Committee members. Mr Chairman.
Currently, if this money goes
into the New Mexico Housing
Trust fund the way it's
designated here, the actual act
itself requires a 3 to 1
leverage in currently we are at,
uh, 16 to 1. I'm not sure of the
legalities of how you would
structure that and require a
higher leverage amount.
But currently the act itself
requires a 3 to 1 and we're
currently at 16 to 1 leverage.
60 to 1 61 611, Okay?
Senators have acquired question
I asked him. Yeah, I mean,
Thanks, Chair, and thank you,
senator. And thank you, Izzy. So
the 500 million What's the
distribution out of the fund? Is
it It's prudent Investor rules
5% or what? What comes out of
it?
Thank you. Mr Chairman and
Senator all defer to Izzy. We
did pass. In fact, just a
amendments. Sorry. My voice is
still shot amendments a few
years ago to the affordable
Housing trust fund provision to
allow for more distribution and
more areas and provisions that
we can use to do more with the
Affordable Housing trust fund,
for example.
We now not only distribute from
there for building and so on,
but we do rehabilitation of
homes. We do weatherization
programs and even some rental
assistance and a D A compliance
for federal compliance one. But
I will defer to easy for
additional and more comments. Mr
Chairman, the activities that
are eligible under that fun or
very flexible. And so I m f A
Would, uh,
Dedicate. Those funds are
allocated based on where the
need is and the capacity to
expend those funds. They would
range from.
Homeless prevention, uh, rental
development ownership
development preservation and
redevelopment and homeownership.
So we have the flexibility to do
within those activities and they
could not tell you right now
what that breakout is going to
be with $500 million should it
be awarded Mr Chairman. Thank
you. And I knew what those were.
I apologize. I should have
refrained my question.
What is? Is there a percentage
that's distributed from the
fund or is it the entire fund
until it's exhausted? I'm
talking dollars and cents. I
mean, are we doing a 5% the way
you know the way we do with our
other friends and stuff.
Mr Chairman, Senator Padilla. I
understand your question
correctly is that those monies
would be distributed to the
various activities. How are are
you asking how much money comes
back from that? No. So, Mr
Chairman and and and senator and
Izzy thank you. And I will keep
you know so so in our normal
funds, What we do is we put 100
million. Use that as an example.
And then we invested. We'll
invest it.
And then it might return and
let's just say for kicks at 10%
return Now we've got 100 and $10
million in the fund, but our
distribution might be 5% so
therefore it's 5% Plus 5% of
that 10 million that just came
into the account that year or
whatever, so that's what I'm
talking. Is that how we're
handling this stuff this fund or
we simply distributing the 500
million until it's gone. Mr
Chairman and Senator Padilla, we
would distribute the money until
it's gone. The pace of that
500 million is not going to go
in one year. We estimate between
uh you know 70 80 million,
depending on the capacity of the
labor force and our partners out
there, so it would not be all in
one year. We estimate between
five or seven years to use. All
of the funds were calling this a
trust fund. I want to I fully
support. I'm gonna vote for
this. I just asking some
questions. Um
But it just seems to me like we
want this money to last forever
like we do with other funds that
we have in place.
Do we
We're not gonna We're gonna
distribute the actual hard
dollars out of the sun, not a
percentage of a return on
investment. That's how I should
have framed that question. Mr
Chairman and Senator, by the
way, uh, the
Track record currently with the
funds that have been allocated
to the trust fund about 16 $1
million. This is prior to the
recurring funds. We have program
income coming back in because
loans are made with this very
limited grants, mostly loans I
think we've earned about $40
million in a program income and
interest so there will be money
continued to come back in
projections that we've made with
the current funding and not just
500 million
As it is, program income starts
to come back in in about three
years From now, with those
recurring funds it would be
bringing in about 13 to 15
million and funds that are
coming back on an annual basis,
and they will continue to grow
as we proceed with the
additional funding and making
those loans are and the
programming and that would be
returned. I hope that addresses
your question does thank you. I
just I'm I'm hoping that maybe
in the future we can consider
Turning it into truly a trust
fund, which would be a principal
amount that would be invested
with the rate of return and then
we would have with good fruit
Investor rules. 5% of whatever
the rate of return is so the
fund will continue to grow and
continue to distribute for
decades. Not just until those
these hard dollars. That's all I
wanted to. I intend to fully
support. Thank you.
Very
Temporary table.
Emotion.
Senator Bert
Senator Burke votes. Yes,
Senator. Compost? Yes. Compost
boats. Yes, Senator Brantley.
Senator Bradley votes? Yes,
Senator Gonzales? Yes. Gonzales
votes. Yes, Senator Hemphill,
Senator Hemphill votes? Yes,
Senator Padilla? Yes. Party
votes? Yes, Senator. Sure. Share
votes. Yes, Senator Stein, born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods boats? Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Thank
you. Vice chair. Rodriguez votes
Yes. And Chairman knows
Yes. You have to pass a
temporary table. 11. Thank you.
And again temporarily table Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. There were some
questions. Is it ordinary
protocol for bills with
appropriations, So thank you so
much, and we'll continue to work
on it. Thank you.
What you're gonna be next.
You need an expert witness with
Senator Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee.
With the Senate Bill 31. This
makes it one time appropriation.
500,000 from the General fund to
the Department of Finance.
And administration for the New
Mexico Mortgage Finance
Authority.
To carry out the provision of
Affordable housing Act.
This bill allows expenditures
beginning with 2024 25 and is
done reverting.
And very much in the same of Oh,
What
Moisture Rodriguez had, you know
traditionally, what we do is
temporarily table.
Is also to see if funding can be
secured. But I'll have a
Are my expert witness,
Hernandez comments to the bill.
Thank you. Mr Chairman and
Senator Gonzalez. Just a quick
comment that I'll make with
this, uh, that M f a as the
state's housing agency. We've
been around for close to 50
years next year, and we were
designated as a state's housing
agency in 1998 with the
Affordable Housing Act. There
are currently 37 local
governments that have an
affordable housing plan in
ordinance.
That has been approved to allow
him to make donations towards
affordable housing. Um there's
been 98 million in donations
that have been made since the
act was put in place in 2004.
This funding would be proposed
to help those 37 entities
implementing their plan and also
assist others that may be
interested in doing that. So we
appreciate your support. Thank
you.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members seen none Have
emotion,
I make a motion for a temporary
table as we usually do. Mr Chan.
Motion by Senator Rodri.
Senator Bert Bert votes. Yes,
Senator Campos? Yes. Compost
votes. Yes, Senator Brantley.
Brantley Boats? Yes, Senator
Gonzales? Yes?
Senator Gonzalez votes. Yes,
Senator Hemphill
Hemphill Boats? Yes, Senator
Padilla? Yes votes? Yes, Senator
Scherer.
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes Yes.
Christ, you're Rodriguez.
Yes, my Children. Yes, Votes yes
and Chairman knows
Chairman. Minnows votes Yes, you
have do past two. That's nice.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you, sir.
What's your next?
Senator Woods. We do have a
committee substitute. Adrian,
Somebody grab Adrian. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
This is Senate Bill 161, and I
will wait here.
Until we get the committee
substitute and Adrian.
Hmm. What do you want to explain
the bill, And then we'll Okay
what we're trying to do here.
We're trying to, uh
It allows eligible healthcare
facilities to apply annually to
healthcare authority Quarterly
Serbs subsidies to cover revenue
losses due to providing
emergency medical services
Inpatient material. Uh, child
and healthcare services increase
medical malpractice premiums.
Medicare sit equestrians
restoration, increased property
crisis insurance, providing
pace.
Inpatient acute care.
And the committee substitute
defines eligible hospitals as
the names hospital in the
committee substitute bills.
We do have a committee
substitute
the second most of my center.
Sears, checking by Sarah Compost
or on the substitute.
Senator Woods in the decrypt er,
Adrian.
And explain to substitute
Mr. I'm gonna let Adrian
explained the substitute
quickly.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. The substitute
basically refines the original
version. The original version
was too narrow and would have
only benefited seven hospitals.
seven rural hospitals, so this
actually targets the ones that
are most in need.
Ah, the Senate finance staff
reached out to all these
hospitals and asked them. What's
the amount that you need to be
able to make it through and not
shutter your services over the
next two years, and they gave us
those numbers and then we had to
trim them down just slightly to
stay within the capacity of 50
million, So in total they
requested about 60 some 61.
Million, but we got them down to
50. But this basically covers
all of the county and nonprofit
and small independent hospitals
throughout the state.
Um, so as they're going through
the next two years, they would
get quarterly subsidies.
That would top off at those
amounts that are listed within.
Um, section Thank you.
Within.
Um, age three SUBS, um,
paragraph E.
Adrian is his bill. Not well,
not we need to be tabled.
Correct. Mr. Show this bill will
need to go through because this
has the structure of how it will
be done. It will also ensure
that the facilities are
considering and planning for
solvency.
Get them on a path towards
solvency. So this is, um the
mechanism we do need to pass the
bill.
Senator Campos. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Members of the Senate Finance
Committee. Um, Senator would
there really appreciate the
Forward thinking and taking care
of so many of our rural
hospitals across the state. I
don't really have a question. I
just want to go ahead and thank
the members of the different
hospitals who came together to
bring forth their information in
order to go and help put
together if you will. A bill of
this nature. Thank you very
much, Mr Chair.
Senator Stein board.
Thanks, Mr Chair. I have a
question, so it substitute here
has a repeal on July 1st 2026,
and I assume that's because of
the new
Taxes. No, that's not the right
word, but the new fee that we're
assessing on hospitals. This is
just a stopgap measure right to
get you through, So, but my
question is, and we use this
word.
Sustainability or fiscal
viability.
How long is this new fee that
we're imposing? How long is
that?
Going to generate funds that are
going to be remitted back to
these hospitals.
Is that a long term fiscal
viability mechanism.
So, Mr Chair, Senator, Slime
born the Thief E and that
mechanism, it's going to take
two years to be able to ramp up
and that's supposed to be more
of the permanent fix. So this is
meant to ensure that we don't
shutter. Any hospitals
understood that Mr Chairman.
question is, though, is how long
does that fee then stay in
effect once we impose that? Do
you know that?
We don't know that that Bill is
not in front of us, but the
numbers that we've been told is
about 1.5 ft.
You don't know how there is some
protection for rural. I think in
that bill that sort of high
Available.
Available.
Eligible to keep ahead. Can I
stand? Maybe answer the question
because he seems like he might
look know what I'm getting at
here.
Continues to
Support the provider tax. And so
what? Let's chat. So be an
annual Remittance to these
hospitals. Is that the way to
work?
It will be an increase in their
reimbursement level up to the
average commercial, pretty big
bumpers, the chairman said. It's
a billion and a half dollars, so
It will be a lifeline for the
rural hospitals. But
There's a particular piece of
legislation and thank you very
much for doing this and during
media substitute as well because
it didn't work as well under the
original bill, But this this
will take care of everything,
And I stopped at another year.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Yeah,
Supported and vital lifelines to
your communities and Mexicans.
I just hope also, we're open to
concepts like in Senate Bill 164
that ensure that these hospitals
also meet the needs of the
citizens by accepting all the
insurance programs in the
exchange and offer affordable
payment plans when they're
providing life saving
treatments. So, Dan, I'm sure
you'll be in full support of
that. See you on that.
Let me play catch up. You have
one person on zoom.
Two people.
Are they in support or
opposition? Okay, One is Senator
Combo.
She's online, so I know she
Christina Campos.
Good morning, Mr Chair in spite
of my deep affection for my
cousin, Uh, I
I am objective as possible and
on behalf of rural hospitals. I
really appreciate all the work
that you have put into this
along with Senator Woods and all
the rural hospitals and I
support this 100%. It is a
bridge funding to get us to the
next level, which would be the
average commercial rate which
would be indefinite. Uh and
we're all just really glad to be
able to participate in to have a
potential for future
sustainability. So thank you all
very much.
Thank you.
We do not. That's it.
That's it. Okay, well, tell your
cousin if he didn't already
here, it, uh we'll give him the
transcription. We don't know who
the other person is on Zoom so
If you want to state your name
for
Junior lobbyists. Do you wanna
Are you in support or
opposition?
And in support of the
Legislature, Uh, the other bill
that provides
Who else is in support so real
quickly. Mr Chairman Mike Miller
represent one minute hospital in
sequences and thank you.
Young gentleman in the blue
glasses in the back. You want to
come forward?
Well, who you represent.
Morning, Mr Chairman, members of
the committee. My name is Marco
Gonzalez and present Mukendi
County seat of this, Uh, Bill.
It's a very good bill, the other
component that passed out of
Senate public affairs also a
necessary component. We think
that
Sponsor for bringing it forward
and support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Sinners. Hemphill,
We're back to questions. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. I just want to
thank the bill sponsors and I'm
a proud co sponsor of this bill
and think Adrian for working
with me and making sure that our
local hospital was also included
in this. I know, um, how
important and vital that
hospital is too
Not just my community, but the
surrounding communities as well
for, um, the well being of many,
many constituents that I have,
So it means a lot that you put
all this work into it. Thank you
so much. Thank you. Other
questions from community.
Too late. We're done. This is
Thank you. Chair. I don't really
have a question. I just, you
know, being the only senator on
this committee from the Central
New Mexico area. I'm just really
glad that we're doing this. I
mean, we often hear that. Oh,
you know, the central the 2540
corridor gets everything, blah,
blah, blah. So I just want to
remind everybody, you know, I'm
very happy to support this. I'm
very happy that we're doing
this. Um, one question I little
question I had was
How often do we do this, though,
to keep these facilities where
they need to be. I mean, there's
what about 50 Million. How often
do we have to do this to keep
these? These places afloat and
doing well? Well, First of all,
this is the first time we've
done it. I thought I heard that
we had previously had something
previous to this.
And we're thinking maybe a two
year deal with will
Stopgap.
Until this other
Bill passed up other
legislation, kicks and Mr
Terence that why the delayed
repeal of the okay?
I had heard that a little while
ago, too. So do we need to do
something then, too?
What's the other legislation
that you're referring to?
I don't have the number of that
particular legislation. What
does it do, though?
Go ahead.
I think it's 52 and almost right
away. That sort of wood says
that build had another bill
myself, but it's not the one
The particular bill we're
talking about now. The the I
don't know who's carrying that
bill. In fact, you are. I am I'm
signed on to all the premium ru.
Wait, Wait. Don't get confused.
Are you referring to the premium
tat the premium increase tax?
That's what other building
almost mirrors this
Mr Chair. He referenced another
bill. I just want to know what
it is that it's the pre the
premium insurance tax and it's
It's, uh,
It's a bill that I'm not. I
don't think I'm signed on to it,
but I could be, but I haven't
carried it up. Put it that way.
It's it's a It's. The concept of
that bill is a
Self imposed tax.
On the hospitals to build a
fund.
To to distribute to help pay for
costs like this, that that was
exactly my next question. So
that's terrific. I'm really glad
we're going to do that, because
that just seems like the
direction the committee's thing.
Okay, thank you with the money
going to Medicaid Medicaid
match. I don't know what the
number is. But the end numbers
1.5 billion.
Yeah, it's it. Yeah, we put in.
they tax yourself and then it's
ah, back tax from Medicaid us.
Thank you.
So, Senator Woods word always
glad to have Republicans signed
on the tax bills if you want to
send up the hospital backs
building appreciate that
photo confidence, sir. That'll
help me a lot of my re election
So, Senator Woods word. Always
glad to have Republicans signed
on the tax bills. If you want to
send up the hospital backs
building appreciate that photo
confidence, sir. That'll help me
a lot of my reelection campaign,
Rodriguez, and then we're gonna
wrap up quick. Thank you, Mr
Chairman in all seriousness. Um,
Senator, I do want to thank you
for all your work, not only on
this, but many issues dealing
with rural communities and the
great needs.
Um And I just want you to know
that I appreciate all your work
because you're not only came to
try to explain all this to me
when you brought the bill to me,
but it just shows that your
genuine about with Senator Thank
you very much.
Can I have a motion by Sir
Campos. Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman, members of the
Committee, I I move that we
approve Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 161.
Second Senator Bert
Let me ask the committee this do
we need to do a roll call when
everybody's here or you happy to
say, Show your hand in the but
30 minutes at the end of the
year?
Uh, we have to do a roll call,
call her.
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes? Yes, Senator
Compal? Yes. Compost votes. Yes,
Senator Brantley. Brantley
votes. Yes, Center. Gonzalez,
Senator Gonzalez votes? Yes,
Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill Boats? Yes, Senator
Padilla? Yes votes? Yes, Senator
Scherer, Senator Scherer boats?
Yes, Senator Stein, born
Yes, Senator Stein born boats.
Yes, Senator Woods, Senator
Woods Boats? Yes. Vice Chair.
Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez votes
Yes. And Chairman OSCE? Yes.
Vice chairman. Chair of Munoz
votes. Yes, you have a do past
11 to 0.
Senator Rodrigues. We're going
to skip over Connie Mack,
waiting for one more I have. I
have a couple of baseball
players that have provided
Video and we're waiting for Ken
Griffey's, which witness
His expert witnesses. Wanna
wait. Senator Rodriguez, you're
gonna do wanna wait.
Yeah. Do you wanna wait?
To go.
All right. Bill 108 allows the
secretary of state to replenish
your election fund on an annual
basis after the cost of
elections are occurred in the 90
Day period, and we do have an
amendment for this bill.
Okay. Um, we're gonna move the
amendment first for discussion.
Mr. Chairman. I move the
amendment for discussion. We
have a 2nd
2nd 2nd 2nd is Senator Stein
born any opposition to moving it
just for discussion. Okay. Thank
you. My expert witness will
explain the amendment.
Yeah.
Ah, madam Chair members of the
committee. My name is Adrian
Davila Back out here. So the
amendment more than anything,
just changes the mechanism of
how we get the money into the
election fund. The original
version of the bill had the
money being done as a
distribution from the tax
expense fund. This just makes it
clear and cleaner transfer from
the General fund, and it would
occur basically, 90 days after
every election up to $15
million, so
The Secretary of State will
basically report to D F A. This
is how much the election costs.
After the election, and then
they get the money right back.
So if there's three elections in
one year, it could be refilled
up to three times if there's
four, so it just varies
depending on the year, But it's
15 each time.
All right. Thank you very much.
Do you senator this year? Expert
witness here? I want to say
anything at this point, or do we
just
I don't have your name for the
record, please.
Sure, Madam Vice chair, Mr
Chair representatives. Um my
name is Lindsay Bachmann. I'm
the director of legislative and
executive affairs for the
secretary of state, and I'll
just say that we We appreciate
the senators, Um yourself and
and Senator Munoz bringing this
forward. Thank you. Thank you.
All right. So anything else
Senator Sherrod before we move
on the amendment.
So
Madam chair.
I don't know if this is on the
bill or not, because this looks
like most of the bill.
But if I remember correctly
We decided that we were going to
give the secretary of state a
big chunk of money.
Before elections and then on the
non election cycle, little chunk
of money
And now we're saying we want to
give him $15 million for every
election.
My missing something which
possible everything. You're
missing two things that I have.
Lindsey do accountability of
elections and then you're
missing other things. It's up to
15 Million, so there's a city
and the county election.
Up to 15 million because the
fund should have some money in
that Lindsay and tell us what
the election costs were and the
roller coaster ride. Sure. So,
um, Mr Chair, Madam Vice chair
members of the committee, as you
all probably know, the budget
has fluctuated dramatically
because election costs have been
within our operating request.
Um, so when years or we have two
elections, we come close to
about $20 million in in years
where we have one.
We come close to we run between
nine and 11 million. Um, so so
that's why this has been brought
forward accountability
mechanisms that are in place are
are exist for all the activity
that we do within the Secretary
office were required to do
certain things with D F A and
other state agencies. We also
have a internal protocols, and
this year we did codify a rule
with the counties in order to
kind of
Established timelines and
expectations as to reporting
requirements how election costs
are documented, and when those
costs must be communicated to
the secretary of state. We begin
the MOU process, 60 days prior
to each election and the
reporting on the back end of an
election occurs at 45 days.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Or anyone
else understand? Born remember
words on the amendment at this
time. Thank you. Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Lindsey. Um
Nope. The words at the bottom of
the amendment. Um, certified
amount lesser of the certified
amount or $15. Million were. Are
we referencing the words
certified amount?
Heard the concept. But where is
it in the bill? I know you're
talking about certified amount
of the election, right?
But we're using these words. But
where is it in the bill.
So, madam chair.
Ah, Senator sign born, so it's
not in the billets in the
amendment itself, so their
amendment provides that
mechanism so that the secretary
of state certifies the election.
They get all the counties and
all the costs.
By day, 45 Day, then have 45
days to tell the FAA what the
final cost was.
And that's the certified amount
of that election cycle and then
d F they will reimburse the fund
for that amount up to 15
million.
And the idea is, if it goes
above then that's when the
legislative body can fill in the
remaining gap, which shouldn't
be too much. But no matter what
there will be at least 15
million that can always just go
in after every election. Got it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. And thank
you, senator for bringing this
up, because truly it is, um, it
is important that we earmark,
you know a certain amount
certain to ensure that you have
what you need to to run these
elections. This is one way to do
that. But I know Senator Woods
had a question. Thank you, madam
Chair.
This is one of the the huge
criticism that I get from the
county clerks that the secretary
of state has mandated to pay
these costs and they haven't had
the money to pay these costs and
this came out of the county.
Coffers to do that. So this bill
Will give them a fun to do that,
out of or increase the funding.
do that out of so I agree. It's
a very good thing to do.
Just a bit of explanation. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. Or anyone
else Alright, need a motion to
adopt the amendment. Okay,
there's a motion on the floor.
But Senator Padilla in a second
by Senator Korea, Hemphill. Any
opposition? Okay, take the role,
please. Senator Bert, Senator
Bert votes? Yes, Senator.
Compost? Yes. Post votes. Yes,
Senator Brantley. Senator
Brantley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Hemphill. Yes, Senator
Hemphill boats? Yes, Senator
Padilla,
Padilla votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer.
Senator share votes? Yes,
Senator Steinberg
Senator share votes? Yes,
Senator Stein born
in born boats. Yes, Senator
Woods, Senator Woods Boats? Yes.
Vice chair. Rodriguez Yes,
Rodriguez votes? Yes, sure.
Noone knows. Yes.
Votes. Yes, you have you have
adopted amendment. Thank you.
Now back on the bill any
questions on the bill before as
amended
And if not, do we have. Okay,
There's a motion by Senator
Sherrod do pass as American
senator 2nd 2nd by senator
combos and anyone in opposition.
Okay?
Oh, come, please.
Senator Burke. Senator Bert
votes Yes.
Senator Compost Compost votes?
Yes, Senator Brantley. Senator
Brantley votes. Yes, Senator
Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill? Yes. Hemphill
votes? Yes, Senator Padilla?
Yes. Padilla votes. Yes, Senator
Scherer, Senator share votes.
Yes, Senator Stein, born
in born votes. Yes, Senator
Woods, Senator Woods Boats? Yes,
Vice Chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Vice
chair. Rodriguez votes yes. And
Chairman knows
Yes, Yes. You have a do pass 10
to 0. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you. We're not having committee
tomorrow. So
Oh, okay, senator
tomorrow tomorrow at 6 A.m..
I think we're better all go.
Pray for you in church.
We won't meet tomorrow. Monday
morning. We'll look in and and
let you know, but I don't see
anything. We may we may need to
clean up some agencies as we're
getting the wraps on House Bill
two, so
We don't know yet.
According to the law possession
is 9/10 of the law, and the
House wants the house built to
