Good morning Mr chairman and
colleagues and people watchin I
am state senator Jeff Steinborn
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee in New Mexico
thank you for having us this
morning and senator Michael
Padilla Representative the
most of the terror county
Lincoln and a portion of Travis
county.
Sure Mr Chairman I'm senator
bill sure from Senate district
one which is Farmington.
guest with me this morning a
doctor Tom Clifford thank you
for.
and I will get started with a
presentation sunny you want to
go ahead and start that I think
is a secretary online Nathan.
I believe online with us is
Cynthia Martinez the state
budget division acting director
for DFA and then we also have Dr
Kurt Steinhaus the secretary
three public schools support and
for privative I think we're
going to combine both the Public
School support and public
education department
presentations if that's okay
that's where you'll see the high
level general fund worksheet and
then I think what we're gonna do
is want to speak to the first
section the highlights and then
twenty six this is your public
school support section and what
you do is you read from top to
bottom so at the very top online
to you'll see the base amount
new base amount for it FY twenty
three and I'm gonna start at the
very far right column that's the
FY twenty three LFC
recommendation just a few things
index from point three to point
three to four supplemental at
risk services.
Moving down the line twelve and
thirteen the LFC recommendation
a universal participation for FY
twenty three additionally online
thirteen there's twenty six
million to help smaller school
districts generate additional
units for those he called
online seventeen for the LFC
recommendation a seven percent
across the board increase for
all school personnel once
distinct differences that the
LFC recommendation includes
fiscal year twenty three
altogether seven percent.
Line eighteen after applying
that seven percent increase
across the board the LFC
thousand fifty seven point five
thousand and sixty seven point
five thousand for those three
levels when you combine that
with the extent learning time
program you get to be about
LFC recommendation includes a
with employer retirement
contribution increase there was
a scheduled one percent increase
this year this forty million
contribution and then I'll turn
over Cindy for her comments on
the SCG section.
Yes thank you us sunny and good
morning and that thank you Mr
twenty six but real quick the
executive recommendation in
total is three point eight
billion so it's about a twelve
percent increase and it utilizes
into what we call about the line
or the SCG online seventeen you
will see seventy six point nine
million in this encompasses or
hundred million and if this does
similar to the LFC
recommendation and increasing
the minimum teacher salaries
however we're just a little bit
higher we're at the moving the
twenty three we have twenty one
point seven million to fully
funded the insurance increased
costs and so this covers all
To sum summarise that online
thirty four you'll see the
percentage increase for SCG for
the executive an LFC
recommendation about eleven to
twelve percent.
from top to bottom to left to
right so on these appropriations
here comparing year over year
differences two things I'd like
to highlight in the section so
hundred sixteen million for FY
twenty three from the general
fund for transportation and then
what you don't see here is in
other state fund appropriation
I'd like to highlight is on line
forty seven of about fifteen
million dollars for the Indian
education fund this is a ten
million dollar increase
for the executive
recommendation.
Thank you Senate Mr chairman and
members of the committee so if
you'd like to look you can see
the increase all talk about
wrap Mr I'm looking for all
these hand of it panned out to
different emails we've gotten
for those of us online where
exactly is this chart
differences staff here so this
Nine nine three in your dip
Sheetï¿½ email.
And we are on page
Okay.
Thank you for that.
Thanks okay.
nineteen million which
encompasses a twelve million
dollar increase and this
includes to support increases
for maintenance operation of
Moving further down on the lines
of forty seven you'll see there
are Indian Education I and the
executive recommendation
includes nine point seven
an additional per student
distribution.
Moving down to line forty eight
you'll see ten point two million
for native American student
and grow your own indigenous
language teacher pipeline.
And then lastly on line forty
nine four million dollars for
advocacy for yet HB twenty nine.
And with that I'll turn it back
over to sunny.
Thank you setting so moving on
recommendation is relatively
flat for most of these hello the
land programs with the exception
on page five at the very top
Fund bringing that total to
eleven and a half million.
overall the general fund
increase online seventy six is
about thirty four percent
increase and I'll turn it over
executive recommendation in way
of general fund totals forty
five point six million and then
like sunny noted there is some
public education reform funds
Rhonda from lines fifty nine to
about seventy well fifty nine to
seventy three to help you find
those the first one is line
and structured literacy to teach
grades K. through three and
focuses on those elementary
learners it also provides for
fund to find de escalation
training training for teachers
with students that have IDPs and
English language learners and so
that you'll see as listed as
comes from nonrecurring funding
and that's ten million dollars
for the before after school and
summer enrichment programs.
for the public education
operational budget and the LC
recommended recommendation
includes a four point nine
million dollar increase to
On the bottom line eighty five
eighty six.
For all public school support
and public education department
for recurring dollars is three
point eight six seven billion
grand total for general fund
recurring and I'll turn it over
to send if she has any other
comments on section four.
Thank you Psy.D so just to go
back up over through that
five million for general fund
and this is about a thirteen.
Almost fourteen percent increase
for the operating budget and
with that I'll turn it back over
appropriations or turnover for
questions now let's go over the
nonrecurring at the same time
and then then we'll that the
secretary comment and then we'll
to ninety nine I'd like to
highlight line number eighty
nine in the LFC recommendation
this includes thirty million to
the state support reserve fund
we can move I'm good we can move
to the next section I thank you
Cindy so beginning on line one
hundred going all the way to the
next page on line one thirty one
nonrecurring source that gets
revenue from the unspent K. five
plus an extended learning time
programs.
A few ones I'd like to highlight
starting on lines one oh eight
On the next page.
H. I a few other appropriations
that the I'd like to highlight.
Lines one sixteen and one
colleges of education to help
with our teacher candidates.
Line one nineteen twenty million
dollars to the teacher
preparation affordability
educational technology and IT
staffing concerns that were
brought forward by the Martinez
Yazzie court order.
There are the more detail about
these teacher pipeline
section yes thank you sandy Mr
chairman I'd like to point your
attention to the uses of the
public education reform Fund in
the executive recommendation and
Next on line one oh nine you'll
find eight million dollars for
community schools and this will
this actually this additional
one fourteen you'll find ten
million for the career technical
education and this continues to
support those same initiatives
teacher residency and so this
funding will maintain programs
that are currently established
by the teacher residency Act and
then expand the program to
traditional teacher candidates
of the section one thirty two to
one forty nine R. other
appropriations directly those
for from federal funds or
have come to consensus on these
performance measures and targets
for FY twenty three and then on
pages twelve through twenty five
language sections for the
comments on this before we turn
it over to the secretary.
No thank you sent.
I Mr chairman that concludes our
it's an honor and a pleasure to
be with you today I I think that
setting and semi did an
excellent job of presenting an
overview of the two budget
different ideas and some of the
details this budget proposal to
here this morning is based on
three big challenges that are
as we speak today we've have
over a thousand classrooms yes I
said a thousand in New Mexico
without a fully licensed teacher
crisis our teachers or school
personnel our our school
counselors and nurses need more
that are we are presenting a
budget to you to address is the
Martinez Yazzie rolling and all
the pieces in that that need to
have W. secretary Gwen Perea
Warniment.
W. secretary cut to ring a Santa
Assistant Secretary for Indian
education which on a slow.
have on today R. Scott right and
I'm Tony Ortiz and with that Mr
chairman members we stand ready
to answer any questions you
might have.
We have questions from committee
members Senator Diamond I see
your hand up.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you good morning Mr secretary I
the job thank you secondly thank
you for focusing on those three
really important areas
To that extent would you share
with us what are.
Or areas maybe are in agreement
but I think it probably be more
helpful to focus on the areas
that are still sufficient your
perspective.
supportive in working with us to
present a budget package to you
that addresses those and I'll
just start with the the areas
legislature as well as the
executive and that's a rate
recommended increase the ELT P.
wage increase Mr chairman we
think it's also a recommendation
to you that addresses the
workforce crisis and then three
other areas where there's so
minimum salaries for level one
level two and level three
teachers and if you'd like
Mister chairman Senator I'd be
handout for you that looks like
this some holding up but its
color coded and it shows every
row in this budget proposal and
those of us in there here have
hard copies those online should
should have it and it says
public schools supported the
topics it's kind of a on our
so we do have that and so
members do you have that if you
want to if you want to go over
that that are being that be a
good thing to do.
I'd be happy to and thank you
areas the workforce prices
Martinez Yazzie ruling the
social emotional side and it
adds one another call which is
the end finish learning which we
you will see in that handout the
first column is at the role
which is the name of the
initiative for the proposed or
the budget item the second
titled FY twenty three PED
request so this is the request
that site that Cindy was
highlighting and then you'll see
then the last column says FY
twenty three F. why twenty three
recommendation and so out of
that
Mr chairman I'd I'd be happy to
details that way we we we
understand that because we don't
know what exactly we're budget
committee and and so the more
detail we get the better better
learning and Martinez Yazzie is
the extended learning time and
the it is the belief of the
executive and I think as well as
engaged with their teachers and
that's why from day one this
school year I worked as hard as
I possibly can to keep schools
open and even in light of this
think we also have I'm more
preparing today an announcement
for either Monday or Tuesday of
some additional staffing to help
and Martinez Yazzie the other
big budget item that's in there
that you increased last year the
year before which we appreciate
is increasing at risk factor on
of our budget request and that's
highlighted in this reported she
she.
I'm instructional materials and
educational technology is
last year we call it the tech
order and that order says to the
public education department and
state government to work with
home in New Mexico and if they
do not have a connection to the
internet our job and we worked
very hard on this and
accomplished quite a bit and I
know you've heard a couple of
for instructional materials and
technologies related to that
also in the in structural
materials increase request is
continue to work on that.
The next section Mr chairman to
address the workforce crisis is
a ten million dollar request
superintendent that especially
brand new teachers need a mentor
they need somebody that can not
only help them with the content
of the course which teachers are
really usually really good at
morning and that's part of the
mentorship in the proposal we've
got.
I talked previously about the
the
in the legislature if there is
agreement between the LFC and
exec usually the you know it
gets funded.
so while it's good to hear those
myself personally it there's so
many details that in a I think
of those those issues could get
lost if you don't focus on your
the things you think we need to
happen with the education budget
so well we have the secretary I
I think it's hard for for us to
review that as a committee so
the devils always in the details
sure we understand the details
and and so the secretary we have
that opportunity the secretary I
think that's really important
sure no I agree Mr chairman it's
difference on sika I us that's
on the.
Mister chairman Senator son were
and I'd be happy to provide some
highlights on where there's
areas where we still need to
work in and then have to answer
any questions
legislative approach has it up
in the funding formula and the
executive budget as ten million
dollars for technology down in
difference Mr Chairman another
difference the public education
department sees our community
schools is particularly useful
for students that are
additional fund for more
community schools but the
community schools so we have
that are functioning highly we
would like to move those from
I think there's some other
differences that money wise are
pretty small and so I I will
So you're proposing or are both
LFC and exec proposing to bring
everybody up to.
provided recommendations
certainly Mister chairman
Senator the difference is that
the LFC recommendation includes
a thirteen point thirteen
included in their minimum wage
increase but it's not specified.
Thank you senator Mister
chairman Senator Steinborn this
budget that we have in front of
that and they are supportive of
working with school districts
who who have the authority
today all school boards in New
Mexico have the authority to
raise that minimum wage within
Right and Mr chairman me ask you
the question the the seven
percent across the board pay
increase is that also affecting
these minimum wage employees
percent is for all employees no
matter what they make okay so if
you're getting the seven percent
and then is this line item that
the executive recommends for
That's correct that's correct so
it's the LFC that's recommending
a minimum on top of that.
Mister chairman Senator the LCR
the recommendation would bring
them to that new anymore.
I see okay well this is
something personally Mr chair
that I would love to see us get
support workers CENIC you know
we're we're very interested in
recruitment of professionals the
higher energy super important
but but that needs to be part of
says is is great and is that
right wise and girls club and
big brothers big sisters
secretary.
Mister chairman Senator of thank
you for asking if with your
permission I'd like to back up
that are keeping our schools up
and running in the maintenance
area and those that are working
in the cafeteria
so back to the mentorship Mr
that are this isn't like the let
me interrupt you we're gonna
we're gonna try to meet with you
guys on the fifteen dollar
minimum wage because we know
one more HSD and we're gonna try
to figure that out we don't know
how we're gonna do that but it
is it's a concern in in the
Senate on how we get everybody
across the board to that because
the janitors those six month
contract people are hard to keep
I mean they they do something
else when they're not working in
six month contract and we're
gonna have a big conversation
started that conversation with
but had a conversation last
night with staff about H. ET and
PT in that so those members as
we move forward we're gonna and
we're gonna get them and figure
that's been there for four five
years janitor or cook or
whatever and in a new person
comes in the same Hey there's an
imbalance there and in it'll
cause some waves in the fact
Yes Mr chairman members of the
committee so the executive
recommendation for compensation
overall does include the fifteen
dollar minimum and then
additional information on that
so I know we're we're working
towards that.
Thank you senator and Mister
chairman Senator Steinborn back
to your question about the
each year with a level three
license that does the content
knows the curriculum has been
successful and classroom
management working with brand
is to help brand new teachers.
enrichment and that would be
school districts contracting
with local community
organizations including
boys and girls club and all the
Mr chairman and senator so
they'll see recommendation
includes a lot of public
education reform Fund
appropriations you can find that
starting on lines one oh eight
participate in that formula
program and then contracted with
the boys and girls club to
provide those after school
programs which are required
under that extended learning
statute they could leverage
billion dollars
available to them to provide
extended learning opportunities
and they must use about twenty
percent of that so about a
so anyway I for what it's worth
I I don't know how we provide
anymore guidance on that I think
those are proven super affected
programs and
and have level thank you just
gave if there's anything we need
to do to strengthen this
particular thing I would love to
I thank very much Mr president I
Mr chairman and president I
thank you Sonny and Cindy and Mr
secretary doesn't a great to see
you in court installations on
will but to the just on the
salary the made minimum salaries
for the level one two and three
I don't know if this is directed
at Mr Secretary or Cindy or are
thousand opening class
classrooms with uncertified
that necessarily one two or
three teachers where does that
put us Mr Secretary.
New York saris are just way
higher because of the cost of
living so what we've done and
presented to you yes a
comparison of the region Arizona
New Mexico to be higher as far
as teachers starting salaries
and a higher average teacher
salary above those states and it
an eye on that ball you know as
another option to help what we
we have a Manhattan style
project need here to get those
thousand classrooms filled with
certified teachers and I know
people to show up to this thing
every year we've had
Gallup show up APS's are almost
every year tier C. Los Lunas the
land.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
We do know a little bit about
what's going on there there
there are a couple of categories
certified are by far the hardest
to find and so we need to work
with our higher education
partners to to build that
pipeline this second category
finding enough people and
supporting the alternative
licensure program that you asked
the Legislature and continuing
to expand on that because we are
technical education program so
we've got our professional in
welding or automotive mechanics
but they don't have a teaching
degree we've set up alternative
where we are at your license.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
secretary so on that you know
myself and Representative
Garrett passed a bill I think
you're well aware of it the grow
your own teachers act so the
know that we're on on the budget
discussion here not necessarily
policy or strategy but there's
dollars involved in all that we
may dollars available think they
were scooped up within minutes.
Mr chairman no and and let me
just take your question and
answer it from a budget
perspective I have done an
analysis of the cost of turnover
have a house their families
they're they're the ones that
stick with that and so that grow
your own program is financially
in first maybe even as a
substitute teacher and then an
instructional assistant and then
find those scholarships through
the grow your own program to
help them while they're still
Secretary I love everything you
just said that's fantastic I I
love that you see it that way
and that that's actually what's
happening in in reality in my
business will tell you we want
don't think I saw or or or one
of these line items I saw here
the so many line items here on
cyber security you know we have
this issue going on and APS
today and yesterday and I think
Rancho I think about a year year
and a half ago what we doing on
cyber security from a funding
standpoint for to augment or
for the last three years our
audit and everything will
district audit across New Mexico
received a findings about cyber
the Albuquerque public schools
of if a ransom ware attack comes
in and shuts the screen down
that affects the finances of the
million dollars so that's that's
what's happening right now
within our school district in
this budget proposal there is a
small amount of money to
increase funding for cyber
expertise in cybersecurity so
when Scott elder the APS
superintendent called me two
days ago and said we're
experienced a ransomware tack we
set of contractors to help
address that situation it's a
tough situation and I don't
pretend or or or say that we've
got it all figured out but we
worry acts.
Thank you Mr Chairman and Mr
secretary so I guess this legal
size document here that's
has I don't know which which one
this one is but online ninety
That that is I see that Mr
chairman I Senator I see that
line item in Senator sunny can
you help me out I know it's in
here somewhere and you're right
there is it somewhere else and
Line one twenty six you'll see
the executive recommendation
includes one point five million
for cyber security.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
enough that is just a small
increase to ramp up the
technical expertise but the
money that's needed is built
into school district budgets
crafting the attacks have a lot
more time than we do and so they
get better then we ramp up then
were ramped up and then they get
better at it and it's just this
little bit I appreciate that and
I'm happy to kind of coordinate
with you and give you some
thoughts if you're interested in
the Mr Chairman just just for
sake of time I'm gonna throw out
a couple of topics that I don't
think I saw maybe there
budget for consumer finance
training maybe at the high
school level I know we had
legislation that ask for it to
be done and build but you know
how to manage a check book how
through on that one I don't
think we ever funded it
so that's number one you don't
have to answer that now Mr
secretary anybody but I'd love
to have that information unless
you choose to consumer finances
section where a mock trial of my
trial was included in this
budget are not.
And and then the last items in
and want to take all the tanks I
know that others have questions
whether they could afford it or
not I I I would like to know
how's that affecting or is it
affecting school budgets and
there was some adjustment period
there because there was a lot
finance water management and
conservation mock trial and
hunger free student all right
I'd love more information on
that at some point thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Burt in center
brief I know we're kind of tied
on Thomas secretary glad to have
you here I understand that you
spend a little time Alamogordo
when a previous life as an
educator and but I must say I'm
certainly and had some
experience in the education
system in New Mexico with
understand different reasons
different unique needs in
different areas and so glad
secretary it we have a thousand
teacher positions open.
And how many of those are
special ed or special need type
getting through here for updated
chart I will tell you that I
will not do this but I could
sing that fight song for all
got and as you know it it
changes every day but when this
snapshot was taken in October of
twenty twenty one we had two
hundred and ninety one special
school hundred seventy nine
those were the biggest
categories of teacher vacancies.
Okay thank you for that I know
that
some of the.
decisions made by the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit is as well so do
that's that's bottom line is the
the teacher in the classroom and
the kids that's where the rubber
hits the road so I'm glad to see
is becoming competitive with
most of our peer states.
special ed teachers don't have
to go into any great detail but
but just kind of give us a
thumbnail sketch of what you
have planned.
Mr chairman and senator to point
address this crisis and after
this LESC hearing you have a
separate panel of experts who
are prepared to present a high
level overview of the work it's
childhood educators and
providing tool for school
districts to post job openings
and make it very easy for people
to find a job so that's a very
Put us down there are much
farther and I think
a lot of the incentive for
teachers to come in full some of
the other positions is certainly
incredible teachers in the state
already in compensating them to
I think a fair level and so I
appreciate that very much Mr
chairman I'll just do one quick
eight hundred million to almost
billion more than the current
budget.
So my my question is as we look
at and we guesstimate down the
budget of this size for PED
because I'll tell you back in
twenty sixteen I think it was
when we were in dire straits and
we told agencies including PED
painful painful here to do a
budget and I would prefer not to
have to go through that again
because these are Russia
promises that we make to the
Mexico and it's also our
obligation as the appropriating
body to make sure that tax
dollars are spent properly so
I'm just going to ask if you
let's just say education because
that's where we're at for
educate can we maintain this
over the next three to five
years from what you all have a.
add to that further I think
that's part of why the LFC
recommendation includes about a
thirty percent reserve target
and if you turn in your volume
that schools are also increasing
their operational reserve
balances as well in the case
that we may have a downturn in
those revenue sources so I think
so strong and balances would be
over forty percent without some
non recurring spending we also
have the early childhood trust
fund which is not part of the
General Fund and that'll be
Revenues.
That we're one time.
And as well as making
investments and things like E.
again back feeling of restoring
raises that were taken away when
it looked like we didn't have
money and overall spending
growth this is only a few
percent after adjusting for back
We know oil and gas is Baltimore
will go up and down but and
under under the current
environment prices are holding
up in production is still coming
in strong so there may be in the
senator Byrd for the question I
thank you Mr chairman and David
thank you and and Sony both the
for the comment I like I say
So I just want to make sure that
when I make a promise and
dresses legislature makes
promise they were able to keep
up with that promise so thank
you for the answer thank you for
roll back spending increases and
about twenty eighteen and again
in July of twenty in the
pandemic but the reserve target
then was in the fifteen to
spending is savings not that not
necessarily growing overall
spending and thanks for that
because Mr chairman I I'm I
didn't be overly cautious too
and I appreciate the fact that
at least when the financial
experts think that that's at
least minimal enough that I'm
I'm comfortable with that so I'm
I won't take up any more time
but again Mr secretary thank you
I'll be real brief well you know
again thank you to everyone you
know that just works so hard on
this but I.
Being a member of the LESC you
know all we have been with this
into all the more all in depth
you know on really addressing a
whole lot of the alright so
we're looking at and the Mr
On the on the three priorities
that you mentioned.
Yes within those three
priorities SO two things says
so.
Mister chairman Senator Gonzalez
let's see we are committed to
fine okay I'll keep going so I'm
keeping you abreast we stand
ready to come back to you the
yesterday to hire of very high
quality director of our research
accountability bureau and he is
useful to you the third area I'm
pleased to report that our
school districts this school
year are going to provide data
in July we're we're going to
collect the data in June after
school's out of will have data
to you and then the last thing
I'll mention Senator Gonzales we
do have a brand new strategic
that are built into house bill.
Well Mr chairman thank you thank
you for that enough the end of
the reason that I bring this up
you know it's like all we know
about it but we don't have
enough information and I'll give
you an example the nobody comes
to.
part of you know is that
something that we need to add to
it or work with it but at least
see the light at the end of the
tunnel you know how it's
progressing so with that you
know all the really would like
house just thinking up with what
happened with APS on the cyber.
Is so you think that parts
through you're part of the
frequent than we need to be more
all ahead of the game instead of
with the game of behind the gate
so just about that you know I
don't know if you are coming
of state government and they do
have a department just for cyber
security and they partner with
us in situations like this so I
Thank you well the last one that
I have this so you mentioned
about the community schools.
This is the.
I think it's but so is the
criteria there or you're going
to be developed and how do you
fall from hi that to be in the
recurring status for.
different pieces one of all is
around student achievement and
the second one is each community
school works with the community
being a pilot to being an
ongoing community.
Right thank you I just want to
end with this I'm just saying
that
We have worked all year long and
You know this is probably the.
The best with the highest budget
that we have ever seen you know
in the light for education New
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman that our
these times more than ever I
think it's important for anyone
who's watching to understand
that you came on in the middle
of this pandemic I think that is
a display of courage maybe a
for one on one conversation to
explain your goals and your
visions and how we're going to
get this pandemic and more
importantly to ask us very
specific questions about impacts
legislators in the nation but
it's very rare that you see
agency and department heads
allow themselves to be directly
access to thank you for doing
shift to online remote learning
and so this this pandemic sees
its way through and that could
be we could have been one year
two years three years which your
commitment to try to navigate at
follow up on that color coded
chart that you have here about
the allocations of funds on the
grey line we have it's titled
a priority measurements.
Mister chairman Senator the
answer is both of those because
of COVID and because of students
plus we started out behind
before COVID even started and so
the approach we're taking the
reason why we use the word and
finish learning is sometimes
they know their arithmetic
really well but fractions are
totally confusing so what we do
well we say okay that's student
knows arithmetic really well
understand what
corrections are and how they can
perform mathematical
calculations with practice so I
I don't know if I meant your
to hop in here tonight to allow
me to better understand this but
it looks like we have extended
learning time and then it looks
like size adjustment factors
both of those had been
identified as I'm finished
first the first time we find
something that you've identified
is to help address and I'm
finished learning is looks like
ten million dollars to
technology I would assume that
early literacy are we addressing
not in in any other areas that
maybe we just haven't identified
here on this
we do in the funding formula
which is the three point seven
billion dollars is addressing
learning and I'm finished
Keep in mind that these are
incremental changes on these
columns Senator what I'll just
say is both the executive and
the LESC recommendation include
dollars from the base with
general fund if you go back to
that page nine nine three sheet
that was emailed to you.
their one hundred sixty million
dollar base now I will say the
LFC recommendation does go a
little further online thirteen
with that twenty six million for
a size adjustments that you
funding in the formula to based
on their economies of scale to
operate some of these extended
learning programs so this is an
attempt to essentially beef up
that formula and get them enough
to thank LFC and for adding that
in because I know that that was
a concern here for many of the
rural schools so thank you sunny
and thank you secretary and
thank you for your staff for all
your good work.
secretary so.
Just going to starting with the
Senator Gonzales is comment
about
appears to be a Yazzie Martinez
suits issues.
If I counted correctly seventeen
different line items.
Mr Chairman I I I appreciate the
question and I ask that same
question I was looking at the
budget and
Part of the answer that I got is
items you just brought out our
specific areas that need special
attention and so those were
highlighted in the budget FY.
This so in Farmington we have a
Navajo prep
Which isn't really a.
A public school in the same
Navajo but you are quite
literate in English and most
people learn Japanese because
have Japanese teacher there.
Of the.
So I'm not sure what is
But I would like to see.
More of a program like that if
we could so if we could just
figure out how to to plagiarize
see if we can figure out how to
do that everywhere else and I
understand that there are
different.
Category but I still think there
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure how that really
works actually because if you
had more days but students still
than show up then what's the
here is more learning not more
hours.
So I'm concerned that we're
focusing on the wrong thing now
we may have the same goal but
days alone depending on which
school we're talking about
actually accomplishes that.
Mr chairman center sure
I could see how this.
landmark legislation two years
ago all the attendance for
success factor and that gets to
your point about making sure
that children are coming to
engage with their teachers we
are working very hard on
initiatives within schools to
of one high school that took the
name of every single student in
that school and got all the
faculty together and put those
names up around the room on the
contact with that student and
with a finish that exercise they
took a look around the room and
there were some students that
did not have an adult that was
paying attention to them and so
to get them to show up as well
so Senator sure thank you for
asking about attendance and then
the second part if you look at
in the language that comes with
the specific needs of that
school districts and that
particular community and if we
know anything about New Mexico
we know that our.
So that's a quick summary of I
think your question Senator
share.
Thank you
So the next one here is is the
my question is what are we
teaching in K. through three now
if it's not how to read.
Mister chairman Senator we
teachers the science of reading
and applying that in their
classroom everyday and we've got
seen and it's so effective that
we would like to apply that to
every elementary teacher New
Mexico and that's what this
budget proposals about.
In college that that's what we
ought to teach that certainly if
you didn't learn it David you
ought to learn it now but but we
higher and so that the teacher
preparation programs include the
science of reading so when they
start as a teacher on their
first day they've already
received that instruction in
year round schools help when I
say that people freak out
because they assume that I want
kids in school year round.
Of but I've so I I was in the
Any year round school.
And do it the way that one
worked as it was basically sixty
three days of school wells nine
weeks of school my sixty three
weeks where you can go to school
of maybe some students don't but
but I think that's something
that we ought at least
all the time all summer so they
don't lose things along the way
But it also gives the for the
so I think it's better use of
our facilities I think it's a
better way to to keep education
going and certainly today I
think you're more likely to have
more students in school because
that I just I I just want to
plant that seed we ought at
least look at it and study it.
Because I think it I think it
works I also see in here though
that we have enrollment growth.
But didn't our enrollment in
general go down.
Mister chairman Senator share of
the answer is yes statewide
current year funding remember
the forty day was a big day
because enrollment on the forty
they set the budget for that
entire school year and because
enrollment growth factor for
school districts that see more
than a one percent increase in
student population and so there
are even though statewide
So does that put us at risk
Mr chair Mr Secretary of next
year districts ABC will lose
they're going to get something
less next year just through SCG.
Yeah Mister chairman Senator I I
understand exactly what you're
saying and and this bomb is such
had enrollment growth and it it
was able we were able to roll
that into the next year's budget
without any problem at all.
they had access to broadband is
that is that right.
Yes Sir okay so Mister chair
Mister secretary I'm.
The great idea but how do you do
Yeah Mister Mister chairman
Senator yeah and that's a part
of the challenge and we have
gotten in trouble amount of
appropriations from our school
districts and I'll just add up
school and as a part of that
through an emergency procurement
we're able to secure a whole set
access for students and and Mr
Chairman knows a lot about this
and he's looked into it and in
detail and and yes it is a
challenge keeping up with
children and so we took that
ruling seriously and we're
working on it.
The so Mister chairman you
you're right is especially out
term so certainly hard wiring
something out there's almost
cost prohibitive when you get to
millions of dollars for one
household.
the new technology Mr chairman
Senator share the new technology
that we are deploying through
can look that up and I can get
that to you but at the end of
the day it's fast enough
download and upload to allow
students to participate real
Back to the Martinez Yazzie do
we have a plan to get out of a
court order because I'm a I'm
afraid that you'll never get
every.
percent because it says every
child.
Yes Sir Mr chairman we do have a
very detailed plan that we've
had the opportunity to present
have a percentage that I know of
but I do know that we are making
tremendous progress in meeting
that ruling and I do feel like
access to the internet their
learning and it's the right
thing to do and that's why we're
doing it.
I agree Mr.
a line that says identity equity
and transformation.
What does that mean what we do
with our.
Mister chairman Senator thanks
part of that is equity councils
that every school and every
school district has and this
would provide funding to it
another part of the funding is
the tongue in cheek that all the
wisdom doesn't says in Santa Fe
New Mexico it's across the
entire state and so this is
funding to provide are requests
proposal we have in this budget
we have a one or two page
briefing document we'd be happy
to provide that briefing
steam so it used to be science
technology engineering and math
and then we through arts in the
middle of that.
I thought our toward the one
thing that we had too much of an
Mr chairman it as a as an
educator if you were to draw a
Venn diagram showing all the
curriculum areas in our schools
kind of instruction and what you
learned in in our last compared
to a mathematics class and and
Mister chairman Senator I have a
master's degree in music which
but that's why the a was added
to this.
Thank you it just it seems to me
of that the reason that we had
to focus on technology before
engineering math.
But it's in government so you
know most people would have a
degree in in government going to
But I just thought that we were
trying to to focus on something
and now it appears that we
focused on everything which
means we're not focused anymore.
science but it also addresses
the the issue that the arts is a
very important part of the whole
child and in the Martinez Yazzie
Martinez Yazzie countdown just
went up to eighteen instead of
seventy all right all right.
The again one of those states
that do have merit pay which
include places like South Korea
in Luxembourg in Portugal
Portugal actually seems to have
the best merit pay program with
three times better than the New
Mexico to better than you
American yes course not in New
Mexico to scores.
There are failures like Greece
careful with that but again I
think that there are there are
models out there that we could
look at this and I don't see any
reason why a teacher who is
move them to grade six.
Even though they're already in
sixth grade.
So you've you've moved them
even though they were behind as
I think that's useful in fact
for how we increase.
Learning in again learning is is
the important part here and
what is Portugal doing versus
what it's Greece doing and
what's the difference can we can
we plagiarize Portugal.
Reserves are only going to get
us through a year or two
depending on the downturn that
that we will face.
office in Gallup and say we need
another quarter here.
in
And I I I fear that's coming
with with the budget.
This big.
seen that more than once.
In the people that haven't seen
that more than once a brand new.
So.
We know what's coming we know
under governor Richards and I
think when we went from us to a
six point four billion dollars
from five point eight five point
eight six point four.
And then we had to go to five
point seven.
That's coming and what I look at
now is certainly the price of
oil and gas today oil is around
eighty three dollars a barrel
right now.
Today.
But.
Natural gas today is around four
twenty two N. M. C. F. a year
ago it was two forty five in MCF
districts and how long we have
to rely on those reserves so
that's just something that I
think that we need to consider.
Make sure that we're not.
in two years two years things
will change especially because
the legislature.
And the governor.
And so Mr chair and others if we
want to kill in the the the the
goose that laid the golden egg
will continue down this path of
trying to kill oil and gas.
Rodriguez this is the biggest
portion of the budget so we
should take our time Senator
Steinborn I don't think we're
going to go back for second
question since your hand raised
The first thing I'd like to talk
about is
Own pre K..
In extended learning time.
Mr Chairman and Mr.
Secretary.
Mr chair Senator Woods the the
overall goal for the state of
started way back in the early
two thousands began with a focus
on at risk children and children
that were in families
experiencing already and so
secretary Groginsky and I get
back with you if there is
additional information.
Yes I was just wondering how
successful the program was
because
And off the top of my head I
think it was forty one percent.
For pre K..
Dissipation.
Forty one percent of them are at
pre K. and also extended
learning time Senator eight yes
And so this is showing by age.
The number of kids are getting
early childhood services and of
course there's pre K. but
there's also a high quality
olds about eighty percent of
them are in a state program like
three and four year old
developmentally disabled which
is public ad.
out of the twenty thousand
cohort eighty percent earned
some sort of program center
wants.
Extended learning time.
How how how successful are we
in initiating that it extended
adopted extended learning time
all blown and made it part of
their school calendar are highly
successful in the the Senate
of children who are enrolled
across New Mexico in extended
learning time is no where near
where we need to be and so our
proposal to you both the
in the what's called the P. L.
T. P. the extended learning time
program which is an additional
ten days of learning with
We're going to mandate that in
three years is that the.
Our son if you want to chime in
go ahead and Mister chairman
Senator if you look in your
extended learning and just to
give you a figure on that for
this year about a hundred and
forty two thousand students are
in extended learning which is
Miss Mister chairman Senator
what we've heard in speaking
with schools and charters.
Is that there is a lot of
concern about burn out from
a reluctance to participate
given that.
So with that thought in mind how
are we going to get to a hundred
percent in three years.
state has an obligation and the
authority to compel districts
and charters if they're not
performing at a level that's
appropriate for their students
part of that may also include
planning a lot of districts may
not or educators may not have an
idea of what that additional
time should be used for and if
programs we've seen our land the
community has come together and
said we want this type of
programming for students and
they've been very thoughtful and
deliberate about how those are
designed.
the goal by the secretary used
to have this a hundred percent
in three years.
So Mr Secretary for discussion.
about right now would be to
begin with the schools and the
children that need it the most
and to give school districts
for each Friday other school
districts that have
I need to incentivize more
court instruction in reading
writing and arithmetic and then
the afternoon we had all kinds
of highly engaging learning
activities from doing side
so that's that's our thinking
today and as a school
superintendent those kinds of
incentives and that kind of
What I'm hearing Mr secretary is
that you gonna be very.
Very lax on.
Mister chairman Senator thanks
for asking for clear Education
answers now we do not to be
doing we never planned to be lax
they're not making progress we
expect them to make changes to
their curriculum and instruction
so the students are making
progress.
And with that we're going to
extra R. six today's.
To you know account for the
transportation and everything
all cost included meals the
that when Mr chair so
Next I'd like to talk about the
workforce crisis.
And there's some initiative to
have here well one of them is
scholarships for we're educating
teachers another one is paying
contracts to guarantee the work
force for so long so that we
know that when we.
that the contract that we're
going to be expected to be
signed by these potential
teachers Mister chair Mister
Mister chairman Senator that is
on the agenda today as well and
she can find more information
about exactly how that's going
to work for maybe Cindy and can
bring us up to speed.
How exactly is that funded Mr
chair or whoever.
Sonny's you wanna answer that
use a reverts to that fund.
So that is money that
Okay let's that's what I thought
I heard earlier.
But I couldn't hardly believe
that there was that much money
reverting so okay.
The regional.
Education cooperatives actually
do for our school district our
began in New Mexico to
originally share ancillary
services and particularly in
small school districts so if you
in a small school districts
could bring a a full time
physical therapist so those are
you cease were originally
to share those expensive
initiatives including
professional development for
school districts including
working with individual school
districts on specific projects
We understand that Mr chair
those particular.
What do.
Actually the
are in statute that are being
required.
It's a sharing of those services
that are able to do and the
small school districts.
And essentially they are funded
through the individual districts
paying fees to the REC.
school districts to pay fees to
help pay for those ancillary
services and R. I. R. E. C.
directors of also been very
entrepreneurial in applying for
and below the line activities.
Okay thank you very much for
that.
And.
How are we standing honor.
and cap what what we've done
there Mr secretary.
Mister chairman Senator we are
making really good progress we
held
written comments and we got
thousands of pages of written
comments and so because we got
so much feedback the team of
this to respond to to read and
consider every single comment
we've gotten and once they
finish all of that work then
that new social studies
development so the teachers can
learn with the new standards are
and then throughout the entire
school year next year is a time
for school districts to work on
to teach and then another
activity that all current many
school districts
I did this is a superintendent
we call I ends and I doubt so
get the fifth grade so that
would be and he had to a fifth
grade and then the out would be
with the lead fifth grade
whether they need to know about
social studies standards so a
lot of work but that tremendous
progress in in a big
congratulations to all our
Another rule change.
That so many people participated
in like that.
Mr Mister chairman Senator I do
adopted new math and science
standards.
How did that come out did we did
we approve improve the system.
With that.
happened with this time.
I've got I've got great hopes I
know that that you're working
hard at your job and and you
certainly have a lot of
Sir thank you for your for your
time and effort with PED thank
you Mr chair.
Senator Rodriguez.
do go there I want to I thank
you Secretary I have you know
we're going to some extreme as
we know preaching to the choir
here extreme challenging time
that things are going well and
that you're trying your very
best and support our school
their parents.
In each other here as best we
the moment I heard and I heard a
lot of this in the LFC the
meeting that we had but
from all that I've heard and
continue to hear even today your
staff that you need you can't
get all these pieces lined up in
my proposal as we would like to
school are you help with the
staffing shortages and so on
yeah and I know the governor's
trying to do our very best also
all in a plant I am the that
that the first question that
came to my mind is how do we
align the professions with that
little time in other words are
my bus drivers you madam chair
that point we have shortages in
every profession I don't know if
his National Guard plan would
have all of those professions
better but I just would like to
yet you're still status of
cooking so this idea to deploy
the National Guard we're still
at the stove cooking at and
here's the work we're doing and
we've made tremendous progress
just in two days where you're at
a way to get first of all the
required for substitute teachers
that the National Guard can meet
I've met with the general is in
charge of the National Guard and
conference once we got this mail
ready to serve here
the National Guard members will
who are able to do this do not
each school and to get their
background check and their sub
license completed and then.
And senator Rodriguez you you
awhile and and even though I
don't have a degree in physics I
sobbed in physics class it was
because the physics teacher at
our high school prepared a
it'll also be I'm people in
addition to the National Guard
we're gonna be asked to step in
and help our schools stay open
and getting enough substitute
temporary whatever time it may
be on the plan it doesn't seem
to be getting better go from all
indications you know we we
start planning to bring you back
into the I Ching something else
it and hit harder than what we
thought and everyone is trying
to the masses Department of
Health was this to try to the
are much I hope commitment and
that a great work ethic you and
your staff I want to profusely
the head I think these are some
of the most challenging times in
education.
And we just see that now with a
cyber attack shutting completely
shutting down the school.
So it it's kind of crazy no more
Is changed in and if we're not
going to change with the times
and and we're in trouble.
Mr secretary how we gonna make
the school districts improve
don't do the extended learning
time and I'm a referred to
members of if you're really
paying attention in your volume
between fourth graders and
eighth graders across the state
in New Mexico only thirty
percent of them are efficient in
math.
accountable for that extended
learning time because.
Are how are you gonna hold.
Mr chairman
that language includes a
requirement that we do not
approve a school district's
budget unless they address
what's required around extended
in our charter school leaders
every week and I've been talking
about the need for us to
done is me getting their ideas
of how to do it so I created a
an email address call learning
dot time at state dot in M. dot
US and they have sent us their
we're going to hold them
accountable is just flat out
with attendance requirements
with graduation data and with
assessment data and we are going
Chairman I'm sorry for going on
and I'm not but it's a poll we
to work is every school district
with their budget will subnet
and had planned and in that plan
they have to identify the
but the regular school days.
That's a quick summary Mr
chairman.
You know and and it's been a
while and I I think the
lieutenant governor in a we're
in one other etcetera etcetera
that they're they're meeting
your metrics in your
qualifications and make sure you
get the language that you need
to make sure we have the school
districts extend that learning
scary.
For anybody in New Mexico in our
educational system because.
It's just it's bad.
Mr Chairman could I just add one
that accountability system Mr
chairman the talked about and
let's we have the people on the
public education department so
we are requesting additional
funding for staff they will
the broadband issue you and I
know the exact feeling I will
tell people I mean I don't own
any stock in any broadband
access to the worldwide web more
access to the internet it is a
plug and play system.
In but in a location pointed to
that technology is that in and
we searched and searched his
only technology that's available
today we want to continue to
have our kids go home schooling
spokesman for anybody but what
I've learned in what you learned
and and probably the student
success is that there in that
system of learn is that's the
have that instead of just make
talking about it as talks cheap
and if we don't make our actions
don't show that then then we're
in trouble.
in Texas they're offering a six
thousand dollar signing bonus of
five hundred dollar months type
in.
and that's for their time that
mass secretary this of EA's in
this next year.
What what is that gonna look
like and what we need to do.
We can increase pay all we want.
That's not not going to resolve
we retain them we can increase
our pay okay that's that's a
great thing to do now we're
eagle at Texas and now you got
signing bonuses and stipends to
topic up we do believe that the
budget request that we presented
to you well make us competitive
and I'll just add that it
signing bonuses the other part
that's in this budget doesn't
specifically Oct about this
crisis are working conditions
and instructional materials and
classroom kindergarten classroom
with the materials they need
that we keep our teachers so if
our teachers have the materials
I'd like to see with that
numbers instructional materials
so we can fix it.
And so we can do that later if
you know it now that's fine I I
agree that.
it faster than I am but but we
do have the instruction matures
there it is line twelve.
There are the executive and the
legislative have proposals to
difference on so there's a five
million dollar increase in the
executive recommendation and a
ten million dollar increase for
the LFC recommendation that
the other thing I want to talk
about it in this is.
You know dual credit it is one
of the greatest systems we have
but I want to talk about the SCG
I don't see three thousand
students coming back to the
classroom do you see three
thousand students being picked
up in the next year in the SCG.
there is a reduction in funding
based on the reduction in the
number of students and Senate
director Cindy if I'm wrong.
thousand from K. twelve from the
fourteenth day to the previous
for you today and so the
recommendation does account and
adjust the budget downward
accordingly.
be about twenty seven thirty
million dollars the LFC
adjustment is half of that it's
about a fifteen million dollar
adjustment our we're still
funding fifteen hundred students
fifteen hundred students across
the state in New Mexico.
let's see Mr chairman it to
parts of that I just read some
research yesterday from a
where it looks like there's a
trend of people moving to New
Mexico so we'll watch that very
carefully but also add with
building a budget is to be
has twenty students Senate
that's almost the same cost as
if it has seventeen students in
there so part of what you're
seeing in here is to trying to
funded if that makes any sense.
Yeah it makes sense but it also
makes sense that if if we're not
gonna see those fifteen hundred
students and we're adjusting
those dollar amounts in the
It's a dangerous game I mean
if we don't have students there
I'm I'm looking for a way that
school districts have to pay
the school district that's
teaching bill credit let them
pay themselves for that because
the teachers got the degrees in
education to do that let them
get bonuses or whatever to get
higher ed heroes ten million
dollars and reimburse yourself
it's a little better way of
performance in tracking dual
credit students in the system.
taken and I I think during the
interim if there's not time
during this thirty day session
we should look at that also add
enrollment through the funding
formula is based on the number
of it's reported on that EDS and
one hundred twenty eight and so
districts like to fudge the
numbers in the forty and then
they get paid to get more SCG he
gave me kind of a not there so
we know what happened I want to
make sure we didn't do
classroom and in so there's some
adjustment a lot of school
districts have what a hundred
million dollars in federal funds
to make adjustments that we
could come back in fact I just
have to we divide later on in in
so I think that's dangerous I
know that that L. E. S. C. is
preparing a budget I've I've
kind of glanced over a quite a
of pushing this P. program back
in and it may go to the time all
they could spend more time of
the teachers who may be able to
outside or doing something
different.
How does PED view that that the
program.
we we've you physical education
she is
that words from the LFC staff is
is to finally fully fund what
the legislature is expected and
thousand eight and it was
supposed to be phased in over
four years eight million dollars
each year well in two thousand
nine the Great Recession
eight them prioritize so the LFC
recommendation online fifteen
served as a more down payment of
eight million removes removes
kind of been in the state since
for the last.
Fourteen years.
Okay.
I want to kind of move on to to
college of art and entered if we
don't get your supply chain bill
for classrooms for teachers for
EA's for whatever it is.
We're still gonna be having this
make some changes in the house
pushed back in and try to fund
that but we and I'll need your
support that we get programming
in place that.
districts and get their their
their credits for for teaching
in the classroom I can't
remember the exact name right
now but we're gonna have to do
that's not the way students are
made today in New Mexico we have
to change is it easy access and
easy use I mean you look at your
build those programs and say
Hey.
We're headed down the path
almost free tuition why don't we
just figure out where most needs
are teachers nursing and those
Mr Chairman absolutely and
Senator Rodriguez and I and our
staff to work on a a very
needs to be addressed and it
needs to be addressed now.
The other thing is is we want to
sit down with you and and figure
out these pay scales in and we
know that a guy driving the bus
different for education and and
so we need to sit down and
figure that out the teachers the
janitors I know in the Senate
need to figure that out if if we
are going to go to fifteen
dollar minimum wage.
How we do that in the school
districts what the costs are in
and how do we bring those based
Equitable and in in fair and so
we're gonna need your help in
figuring that out will probably
reach out to you we may have
percent increase in in may not
get him to fifteen dollars and
making them at fifteen dollars
and one cents for the bus
drivers been driving for ten
years and and so there's some
issues that we need to try to
members grasp the details and
and everything that's happened
within in the budget I don't
believe L. E. S. C. has got a
members want and not what the
secretary needs to fix education
as you said this in your first
presentation that you're willing
to change its a call to get
proficient in math will have
moved the needle little bit.
Or move the cog at least a
quarter turn at I hope this.
in two hours you spent with us I
don't think there's anything
that anybody in this room are in
this committee that doesn't want
to see you succeed our children
effort thank you.
All right we're off to hire him
Micaela.
For for higher ed institutions
and and so members know the
higher ed institutions are
either online in the two year
institutions are up in the
gallery so if there is some
Because of what happened you
know we didn't know if we're
going to be in person and
virtual we're kind of doing a
split here in the Senate and so
you just gotta because a little
there's something you need to
say maybe.
Hello to be safe well figured
out what we're sitting here but
we don't want to exclude you but
it's just a wheel in motion all
my name's Micaela Fischer I'm
the program evaluation manager
at the LFC I'm also acting
higher ed analyst for the
session we're going to be going
over both the the department and
I believe on the zoom with us we
also have my DFA counterpart
Nicol Misia's as well as the
secretary of higher education Dr
Stewart excuse me yes secretary
appear in the gallery and as
well as on zoom with us today.
So if it's okay with me you Mr
chair I'll start with some some
background and performance
and I know the secretary has a
small presentation prepared as
well after that.
So to start off I have to
recognize the work of the
that went on that I think set
the committee up better to
understand the context in the
reality of higher education in
New Mexico and amid and you know
hopefully soon post pandemic
Thank you so you did what we
called legislative process in
discussion between the sub
committee and secretary of
higher education about those
This performance trends and many
others performance measures are
listed here on the first page of
getting kids to high school
graduation but fewer and fewer
of them are heading to college
after that and that's of concern
you know not only for the
potential future earnings of
those eighteen year olds but
plain lines what everybody's
been saying enrollments way down
across the board at our colleges
it's down twenty seven percent
over the last ten years and
eighteen percent in just the
year universities the community
college enrollment is down
across the nation and in New
Mexico but nationwide enrollment
actually up at four year
universities but that's just not
but also that even if those kids
do make it to college the
likelihood that they won't stay
rules to the second here is
about one in four to research
universities and that's about
get a degree or certification
and despite generous dual
crediting off until credit
offers that we were just talking
about where you might have
students coming in with enough
credits to take care of some or
freshman's they get will get to
their bachelor's in four years
at a research university
students about half that rated
comprehensives.
So the point of the legislative
legislature and the secretary of
higher education about what
plans the department has to
reverse those trends and then to
get regular updates from the
have the time or the band with
four but for higher education
the LFC made it a priority and I
really see the results of that
prioritization in this LFC
not the only a focus of that
subcommittee there were some
really great hearings about
meeting pricing workforce needs
from nurses teachers and social
workers in particular there's
And all of this you will see in
the LFC budget recommendations
to why don't I move on to the
details of that so if you turn
to page five your packet.
secretary but the department in
the institutions.
And they're at the bottom of
that high level on page five
secretary the four point six
increase from four point six
percent increase from FY twenty
two.
Executive recommended almost
double that at seventy five
point five million more.
LFC recommended adding five
million dollars recurring to the
base for the opportunity
scholarship to bring it up to a
twelve month million dollar
recurring level
well the executive recommended
recommending three percent New
instruction in general formula
funding that's on lines three
four and five there at the top
of the high level that's about
nineteen million dollars an
ATD authority to hold back a
portion of that new money until
each college and university
prepares and shares their plan
to help increase enrollment at
On special schools that's online
forty of this high level that's
our military and state institute
the school for the blind in the
school for the deaf I LFC
appropriations closer up to
parity with that of the school
for the deaf for many years they
received a much lower level of
state support.
And one new part of the LFC
subcommittee.
So let's turn the page to the
institutional detail that starts
on page six of your packet.
So this is the detail for each
services so for example that's
online eight for you and I'm
here.
Many schools also have similar
new categorical appropriations
for tribal education initiatives
intent was here to give the
colleges some flexible funding
to support their efforts in
growing those wraparound
services for institutions
to respond to Martinez Yazzie
And then I'm not going to go to
in the weeds on this detail but
I do want to highlight one of
the research and public service
projects the LFC is recommending
million dollars more for other
nurse practitioners and
physician physician's assistant
our PSP at the health sciences
center.
That's an area of extreme need
fifteen million dollars that you
appropriated for nursing
programs in the last special
session and another thirty five
million in non recurring funding
recommended for endowed nursing
budget recommendation for the
department it general fund
detail for that on page thirteen
if your packet.
for the department the executive
was a much higher at a hundred
and thirty seven point six
million our most of that like I
said was driven by the
opportunity scholarship
difference does again their
funding to support dual credit
programming and we just had a
discussion about that the LFC is
recommending four million
dollars for dual credit
programming but only in the
nonrecurring section so it
thirty three online thirty three
of the health profession loan
repayment program executive
recommended growing that program
to a level where they can find
There are a if you're looking
for them members traditional
different sheets for these for
the department in the very back
of the packet but they don't
to page fifteen now and pages
fifteen through seventeen is an
accounting of all the
nonrecurring funding the LFC is
recommending for the higher
education department
you here as well when I say so
much I mean the LFC
recommendations are there in the
green column you've got general
fund other state funds in the
total column.
funding that we have recommended
for faculty endowments for
teacher nursing and social work
faculty those are items I
seventeen and eighteen.
million dollars recommended to
infuse the lottery scholarship
within forty three million
nonrecurring for the opportunity
scholarship those reliance
are research institutions.
Any of these investments really
should help ensure that no
student should be to pay for
college in New Mexico at least
for the next several years if
and and that's pretty
incredible.
Okay lastly I want to mention
something that's not your packet
and that's compensation as you
twenty to and then an additional
four percent for the fiscal year
twenty three on top of that so
that's a functionally a seven
percent increase in pay.
And then lastly there's going to
be at our just a statutorily
mandated one percent increase in
here be contributions for the
to other reference documents
that I've got your packet I will
discuss some too much ones on
that page before page fourteen
this is the page that's right
out of the accountability report
That are owed but that are
charged by researching
comprehensive universities
compared to the average
financial aid award that
undergraduate to getting and you
can see you know back to the
fall of twenty seventeen we've
then lastly on page eighteen in
your packet.
There's a table that looks like
this it's it's got green blue
and red columns on it and this
is an accounting of all the
schools got some directed
funding about half of which the
were required to pass on to
students in the form of
financial aid but about a little
more than half they got to keep
students.
With that Mr chair that's that's
my overview of the budgets and
I'll pass it on to the call
center if you.
And secretary you are going to
the executive recommendation the
executive recommendation for the
higher education department is a
total of one point zero one
billion dollars which is an
increase of about a hundred and
that we need to make to page
five of your packet online sixty
five through sixty six but
that's because it it shows the
difference between the LFC rack
and the executive recommendation
universities online thirty eight
we have one hundred and fifty
nine point eight million for
special schools categorical
research and public service
I will go now into a little bit
more detail for the higher
education institutions.
The executive office yes we went
with eighty percent new monies
increase of about one point
three million for nursing
program so there about twenty
four existing nursing programs
across the higher education
institutions for dental programs
about four hundred and ninety
five thousand four hundred
dollars and the executive also
recommended a new program at the
there was a total increase of
about two million dollars with
the inclusion of two new centers
of excellence one western for
center of excellence in social
work mental and behavioral
health.
the executive also provided
of five hundred thousand
Department I can increase of one
million your of mine safety an
increase of thirty eight point
increase for Angie for those
special schools and then now I
will go into the higher
education department the
hundred and sixty two thousand
which or is two hundred and
thirty four point five percent
above the FY twenty three twenty
education program for a total of
nine million there was about a
six hundred and sixty seven
thousand dollars provided for it
point eight million was
scattered across the financial
aid programs for the higher
education department
eighty five point five million
which the the secretary
secretary guests will provide
additional details in her
presentation
Madam secretary want to go and
start your presentation.
but I just really want to touch
on some of the priorities for
the higher education department
higher education institutions in
this presentation with you all
today.
the agency budget counts for
less than two percent of the
overall general fund higher
education as a whole is twelve
percent of the state's general
fund approximately billion
programs two hundred million
dollars in capital in ten
million dollars in federal
grants with fifty F. P..
three hundred employees our
agency oversees twenty nine
public and tribal colleges and
special free special schools I
in addition to state funding and
capital funding for flagship
university health sciences
are supported with state when I
presented to you last year the
HSD had a twenty three point I
think it's the right let's talk
about that we've been working
really really hard at our agency
we're diligently working to fill
that vacancy and as we speak now
for fiscal year twenty three
we're looking to hire for new
team members at our agency to
assist with our doll Education
you all know the partnership
with our the three sisters
Education agencies and the
department of workforce
solutions which I'll touch on a
understand that students we were
creating we can recruit right
here in New Mexico right now.
According to New Mexico
legislative finance committee
report on educational attainment
Mexicans have not education
beyond I hate for the our
credential a lot of the times as
people are unsure of how they
can best your education in the
for the opportunity scholarship
and with the lottery scholarship
once again restored at one
hundred percent thank you
legislature more than eighteen
thousand students have benefited
million dollar request it is an
investment that is only one
percent of the overall state
budget we've proposed a
comprehensive free college
package to create simple access
Now.
About adult education because
newcomers from why do I
Albuquerque importing for now
charter school and considering
that access for parents to high
school the program is an
indicator called out in the
children's cabinet are and the
adult literacy funding so we can
continue these programs for New
Mexicans including our students
are.
What the requested all education
funding we estimate that we can
nine percent of the dog in New
Mexico are at the lowest level
of literacy with an additional
seventy thousand dollar
investment getting us to seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
And I know you mentioned that
feminine yes and I'm gonna touch
on a little bit I'm I thanks
CYFD that we're asking for ten
million dollars to support the
dual credit program okay it is
million dollars in tuition and
fees statute to administer the
dual credit program with this
investment we are hoping to
support higher education
institutions and providing more
high school students schedule
and of course covering fees
outside of general because we
have a lot of fees associated
with R. ETT courses for example.
last month we broke a record
this year with the fifty six
percent increase of six hundred
and for worries in total and
your two million dollar
investment will allow us to
continue to grow with our
outreach efforts in partnership
with our state teachers union
therefore we are requesting a
five million dollar increase our
I'm sorry five million dollars
will help educators and
policymakers identify student
challenges early on make those
targeted investments and
interventions and determine what
requesting seven point five
million dollars in the
implementation work the system
can go live in spring of twenty
twenty three we have done our
homework we've asked for
are awaiting a final vote on the
Senate floor.
And as a reminder we are asking
for to dedicated FTE so we can
ensure that this project is on
thank you and may but on the
next slide we broke down the
general fund recommendation for
higher ed institutions most of
these dollars are administered
through the I. Angie which is
our funding formula and we are
so I will go to to do but I do
want to talk about the two
adjustments that we made to the
funding formula the first is
student credit hour workload the
agency will hold back a
will accomplish increasing
enrollment and improve retention
rate.
Institutional improvement
measures what purpose does this
will have to improve on it
health over time in relation to
awards and see okay our our
formula measures.
consequence of based
redistribution in the past was
that some institutions could
gain or lose funding based on
historical funding levels and
not really as a function of
receives that strategic
enrollment.
And last month I talked about
this a lot I'm gonna try to days
of this a little bit so
are actually increasing the
Roman what does that mean for us
all of our public colleges and
universities are minority
serving institutions and H. PCS
forward to ask higher education
department.
I promise I will spend last
month the heard me talk about
enrollment declines to show you
following areas which are lined
with a lot of your initiatives
that well health care workforce
mental behavior health education
and early childhood and state
the center on this pie chart
workforce programs in nursing
expansions will receive nineteen
percent
I Angie had already of I'm sorry
in addition to that student
did not accept any increases
that's correct all sectors and
make recommendations to you will
see that.
preventive maintenance and
normal repairs of the fifteen
pass that in to assist with the
current maintenance needs to
have gone and find it these
issues are for two as building
publication every year however
the needs outweighed the
available funding that is that
therefore we are asking for two
and universities and grant these
right now.
And right here on slide fifteen
our agency is requesting five
million to the higher education
position finance and research
based the vote MHM in addition
to special education which is
behind we ask application to
address this level state
initiatives and this initiative
I think you're gonna see a
breakdown and everything I just
presented to you today.
And I would be remiss if I
didn't touch on those
accomplishments again that have
been in partnership with you and
thank the president's many of
which have joints you down there
and the Senate chamber and
gallery on because they have
also been instrumental in
how they will be in Mexico's
workforce and that is why our
agency is part of the arm and
hunger initiative that will
address the very challenge of
collaboration we look forward to
the work that is com with that I
thank you for allowing me to
present to you today this will
give back you chairman so we can
get into those questions ever
a question I know the higher and
people are on the zoom link
answer questions maybe the
general then I think that those
two year colleges are here so
the analysts and everybody
that's here thank you Micaela
just a couple of questions first
is it's probably somewhere else
in the budget in this budget but
what where's the grow your own
So Mister chairman Senator
Padilla to grow your own funding
it shows up as other state funds
there's fund transfers usually
and specials into that I'll
actually talk about that during
some thousand of that to help
you know support the school
staff as they get their teaching
license.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Micaela that that's the purpose
whatever of of being available
so now we're saying that we're
appropriating if I heard you
correctly five hundred thousand
but three hundred thousand is
what's being used so we're not
quite even using what's
recommendation probably the
Chasey version I think we can
catch it for LFC but well funded
out of fund balance is that this
year for that reason.
Okay that's great I'm really
glad I know that that's been
University of New Mexico I think
that it might be one of the.
Most successful programs that
was ever created there at that
institution and they've done a
literally I'm I've attended a
few of these things it's really
remarkable if you've ever had an
opportunity to do this or having
it up to the Is highly suggest
that you take and participate in
this so I think that they had a
million of do we know well with
does anybody have any feedback
on why that was the two point I
was cut out of the request.
There are based appropriation is
two point five million the LFC
recommended adding a million and
a half to that the executive
recommended keeping them flat.
Mexico to bring professionals
from all over the world to help
solve medical and health care
issues here in New Mexico.
Mr chair Senator yes thank you
for the question so this is kind
increase that was one of those
situations here in which we did
meet with the director and the
governor's office after the
recommendation was published on
November first I understand the
and not out of state for other
out of state initiatives that
they administer we did get that
clarification for them up once
again we did meet with them a
little later than we should have
a wrinkle in the shirt with this
with that one right there does
that get reconciled and and and
can we make a change there
somehow to make sure that that
program is fully funded because
they are highly highly
make sure that we have all the
data information that's needed
to get that to the four million
that they're looking for.
Enter a conversation was was had
recommendation they could change
that when they're when they made
their okay budget
recommendations they weren't
held to the November sixteenth
guidelines so they can make any
a discussion on that in in
finance and make some
adjustments as house bill two
moves across.
I appreciate that Mr Chairman
said at what point in the in in
conversation after is all of us
to Senator so the house here's
higher and then we I believe and
so they may hear some of these
had one in in in in my correct
in that hi Mister chair I don't
think it's been announced it but
I think that's the intention
they'll probably have a higher
end sub committee so as the
house makes recommendations or
where where is the
administration on that then what
is that something is you make a
presentation to House
Appropriations you're gonna
recommend the increase to the
four million.
we can go ahead and touch base
with the executive debate I'm
sorry later on and see where
they feel with that but it's
something I have to of the.
Mr Chairman.
building we've talked about a
lot of these issues project echo
has made incredible strides into
these areas and if we're ever
going to get serious about these
appreciate the executive going
back in and revisiting this
topic in figuring out if there's
some way that we could bring
that an additional two and a
pass this is a different path
that they take some very
innovative ways and we've got to
do something a little bit
different to correct this issue
does that project echo has some
unique ways to try to deal with
especially behavioral health and
other issues we really need to
explore this and give them the
here by one o'clock so members
know.
Thank you Mr chairman I couldn't
send any better the Padilla
Burke caucus will meet following
the floor the Senate floor of
question I wanted to also ask P.
E. D. so for anyone listening
involved in PED
I want to ask about COVID and
Here
a two year three of this
pandemic
That we're hearing more about
the importance of just improving
speak to that madam secretary or
any of the president's Sir are
we taking a system wide approach
improving ventilation.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn hello
the universities and what they
have done we have issued
guidance and has this in
relation to colleges and
ventilation systems that they're
and I'll go ahead and turn it
over to president.
So present shepherds kind on is
way out in in to get on the zoom
link if if there's a to your
school wants to join in or make
a comment well he's got the
filters.
Added more ventilation there's a
lot of stuff Nathan is the
present the company shepherd up
get.
So I know they got a lot of
Mr chair I can help filibuster a
little bit and that just to
reiterate on page eighteen in
your packet that shows the
federal stimulus dollars that
the institutions got that would
have been a really good use of
buildings so forgive Mr chairman
I'm not saying who speaking when
they when the speaker just said
would have been a good use I
don't know if that means it was
okay well I I don't really
understand are you saying that
it's on them to do it and they
have the money.
stimulus funding was given to
them for pretty broad purposes
it could have been used for
everything from err system
upgrades to helping them recoup
lost revenue from some of their
roundup exactly how much of this
was spent on that for you that's
awful yes Senator Steinborn I
don't see that that the
federal money we each have
different things with that far
more expenses dealing with COVID
and the money we had available
ventilation systems is a way of
not only comment for any disease
but I Representative and so
we'll continue to move forward
on that we've all had different
things that thank you Mr
president and and for answering
improving our systems I think is
a.
I'm sorry this is Tracy Hartzler
of the president for central New
Mexico community college and as
the LFC analysts described
track systems but certainly
filtration a number of other
safety precautions signage and
more to really meet the COVID
and safety health needs of our
another a number of them that
are waiting to be completed as
appointment comes in and just
think all of us understand that
exceed the all of us understand
our supply to supply chain and
we're prepared for the next the
situation that may come up there
thank you for that I'm sure you
have probably a lot more than
twenty buildings but that's but
course raging and I think.
Looking at the science it's
likely to continue who knows how
long but I really think this is
kind of the next generation
but frankly the private sector
helping encourage the migration
to good ventilation systems is
is a currently a very smart
That consider review of
standards and what kind of
incentives and assistance we can
be providing us the state to
invest in this.
The other thing I want to bring
up related of it is is mass and
what we're hearing now with
micron which is really late
breaking science is that.
education there's a lot of
counterfeit mass out there and
so I think a lot of people want
to do the right thing but
they're probably struggling with
how to and how to get the right
have a clearing house to assess.
To assist all of the member
institutions in knowing where to
get that material and again this
getting good quality PP so I'm I
don't know if that's something
you don't you don't have to
respond and I'm sure you
institutions are working on it
Air Force research laboratory's.
You need to ensure that we are
recommending quality vendors.
It has been since the beginning
mask also providing pick up
spots for their students to pick
up that PPE and have it
available we also work with the
proper department of homeland
security and emergency
secretary are you involved in
the proposal for the new film
academy.
Okay well have questions about
that as it relates to higher
education and certification and
how exactly universities but
again and you know that's an
important growing only important
have any additional information
to provide on that would you are
one of your staff please reach
out to me so that we can have a
conversation about that it
really again the next couple
from the higher education
department perspective
so as we certainly are looking
to engage in that take advantage
of that opportunity thank you
very much madam secretary.
I wish about and have been yes
got a question employment okay
Senator Steinborn members of the
Senate finance committee we just
wanted to let you know that we
be delivered by next Tuesday the
first day of class and we work
with our occupational said
safety director to make sure
they met all the standards that
thank you to secretary or during
your staff for for all your work
and I want to thank you for the
interim also we were discussing
is that the already the
hard job let me just that I was
going to add a little bit Mr
chairman I didn't want to going
to hope that point earlier but I
today west for truly a meager
four million dollars if it's the
five oh affirmative is a lot of
money you know and it is in the
if it's really not a whole lot
of money to be asking for in the
budget and so let me just
explain something there's some
started way back when the
program starts that's what it
Aurora has expanded into many
other specialty I I think there
were nineteen and may be much
more by now at one point couple
years ago there were nineteen
different actual fees the
shortages for physicians we talk
about the shortage for nurses
stations specialists are
different varieties but yet we
don't focus on this echo program
but they collaborate and serve
as a clearinghouse have
medical training facility
a fabulous job is you know in
stating the state a lot of money
so it was a little perplexing
for me the that all they're
going to be Representative are
prior to this administration.
We had appropriated to a bill
that I have sponsored a one
point six million dollars and it
went to the Department of Health
And.
And they've been down to two
point five million and they get
so little if they get anything
every year that investment it's
just not even a drop in the
restore the one point if that
was lost several years ago but
it leaves the deficit that truly
needs to be filled we need to I
return for all that money.
For that during the House
Appropriations Committee cabinet
secretary we would appreciate I
know you said you had other
additional procreation.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you Secretary.
Thank thank you senator
Rodriguez and I don't see
anybody else's with questions I
staff to see what their
performances and more they're
performing maybe one of those
that's the oral Roberts referral
ribbon urban divide that we're
gonna have that conversation
picking on you know for any at a
rate increases are you included
four percent but not the full
seven you didn't include
anything for E. R. B. which we
You look at performance measures
and you look at at numbers and
and the grade for for higher ed
there thirty percent graduation
rate it's tough.
Across the board.
You may know that and maybe the
present so that so I just.
academic year Senator Williams
and I'm actually going to show
you a chart right now to show
you those completions real fast.
But you can see that there.
Close by we can see your screen.
What what I want.
completed if you look at this we
have seen a little bit of a
decrease in some of our programs
as you can see but we also saw
an increase of bachelor degrees
up from the twenty twenty twenty
far as other certificates
associate's degrees we have seen
a slight decline but there you
can see on your screen where
we've had increases where we
have plateaus and where we have
degrees and then I believe
higher and universities also
counts or have kids what is the
difference between the number of
a degrees and the number of
certificates.
on page one forty three we've
got degree counts.
At we we're counting about for
the academic year twenty twenty
one about almost twenty three
New.
I agree may agree with partial
welding certificates because our
cost to schools I mean some of
the certificate programs well it
may need to be tightened up.
as we move forward but.
out of your chair at at some
point we're headed to we're
headed to free college tuition.
It's too burdensome today in the
news you just seen where the
company that that was probably
direction it's going to have to
be targeted it's not going to be
let's put eighty five million an
opportunity scholarships okay
what's our greatest NY New
Mexico we know that you know
it's teachers and it's nursing
nursing how do we set our kids
up in New Mexico so they don't
leave.
Going on a large amount of money
for their education if we really
that.
people have vices are don't have
vices in and how you generate
that we may look at something
different but we're gonna have
to figure out New Mexico how we
Teacher scholarship program now
hammer and more how many.
Funding sources there is but
there's ten or fifteen for
teachers and.
the hardest portion for students
and maybe even harder for
minority students that hasn't
had a parent go through an
educational system are hired
hardest and why leave them with
the debt New Mexico.
If you want transformational.
Now is our opportunity of make
that I don't want kids leaving
with that.
When we have the opportunity to
fix that.
And so is a sustainable I don't
I know the present shepherd and
I in in present Pendergrass have
had those conversations in the
in the teaching pipeline I don't
know why the exact in like the
could have a completely full
ride with stipends and
everything included
but I am looking to head that
direction.
doesn't leave a person in New
Mexico with with all that I
don't think everything in the
world to be free but we have the
of just giving the hi to
everyone in and so
that's something I'm gonna look
forward to working on during the
session my other thing is is a
If we're gonna make the money
fall the student.
And you've heard me say this and
and everybody's are in the room
says this McKinley County one of
the largest for school districts
and take a student from thirty
to their classes have a home by
three o'clock and if they want
to play football baseball
basketball whatever sport they
want to play for that that
school that they're out of.
opportunity because I will tell
you right now it my kids have
succeeded because the the dual
credit system has exceeded.
years old and that's what we
want for everyone and so when
we're going to fund the deal
credit system I really want to
put that inside the PED so we
be paid to those institutions
like Gallup does but we should
also have tracking because who
gets to count the student well
we can once in PED and then if
for the SCG where there's
fifteen hundred students that
don't exist but we're putting
the money in there because of
the classroom.
So the bill credit program.
of the legislature that's a
provided lodging lottery
scholarship
That's an opportunity to hundred
percent for your tuition getting
to school there's plenty
system PED it's just if we want
to spend the time and do it
right.
Well I move off that subject I'm
kind of like lecturing you
on institutions and how that
looks you are not inspo their
non CPO we don't know what.
And move to that and it's going
to be maybe a lot of work but if
we're gonna do it let's do it
right so we don't come back in
sales well here we are New
Mexico come back to think
inflation is here seven percent
so what some percent we're
giving today doesn't get him
very far get some back to zero
and so what we're gonna do
something to hold them we need
the the schools are coming.
General congratulations on
national championship by at your
I think you want to national
championship twice it and New
athletic increases a we're gonna
look and say maybe I'll take
some from the need to win
national championship and then
and we can talk about that thank
you you know Mimi always makes
bland and some of us here some
of us not here and who was going
to be available on zoom and just
it was a struggle for us to get
through I will tell you so
We may have you back we'll
figure out what we're gonna do
it as we move forward so you
guys if you do need to make
remarks in the presentations
that that you have that ability
thirty day starts
Four I guess we're we're almost
we're done in so madam secretary
thank you for members thank you
also important I appreciate your
time and commitment to sitting
here and can even online madam
vice chair.
It's hard to sit for this amount
of time as as we do this but in
Senator Padilla the house may
have the ingredients for the
budget but we have the event in
the icing.
So the repairs we move forward
So as we move forward I I
appreciate your time in in.
We're planning again so our
members know if we're gonna be
con and and masking we did order
some mass in Senate finance good
old Amazon we'll see what their
delivery date is I I'm assuming
our R. forty two cents an hour
that we get reimbursed.
So that there will be some
available
comfort levels are going to be
very important members want to
to participate or what way you
feel like you need to
participate is going to be up to
you so I appreciate that and so
I'm getting ahead of myself I
guess way ahead of myself
because I'm looking at the clock
Cut go do that and then we have
a.
Isn't Pendergrass with us all
I'm sorry I did not see that so
we'll try to madam secretary you
want to proceed sorry about
that.
everything up for you all.
And Mr chair since I know you
And then we can dive into with
you in a you all are ready.
I'm hoping you can see my
screen.
education department
administered primarily three
programs related to teachers the
first program will discuss is
the teacher lower payment
twenty over four hundred this
year and one hundred forty
approvals and that's the fifty
six percent increase and we also
mentioned this earlier but thank
you for the additional two
million dollars during the
special session the supplement
this program it's really going
toward outstanding that for
licensed teachers across New
Mexico and yes Senator we do
verify that they live and work
in the state of New Mexico prior
next year beyond the four six
hundred and for that we get this
year.
Now over here you'll see to the
right the teacher preparation
twenty one with an expenditure
up nearly five million dollars
we're spending the money this
program provides students future
teachers up to six thousand
dollars per year cover
we're asking that we continue to
provide this five million
dollars this legislative session
as well and then Senator by the
F. brought up a little gem in
our program are in our programs
legislation during the session
and thank you to the full
committee who has always
unanimously supported this in
past legislative session.
Hi points fellowship program
with a bachelors degree in
education we're trying to get
those dust because of licensed
educators in New Mexico we do
program and then coordinate and
collaborate with higher ed and
you should make the application
process is very simple for them
to get enrolled in the schools
across the state it's
have been awarded the last year
a like I said I want to get that
number up as soon as possible
and will do that partnership
with our part with higher ed
thing and it's more so a
cautionary tale so between two
thousand and twenty nineteen
sixty seven percent of students
receiving up bones through the
I think it's really important to
invest in teacher loan repayment
because we verify that they live
in the work your versus becoming
sheet that I'm sharing with you
is enrollment in certificate and
degree programs and teaching
increase at our colleges which
is really exciting it's not
twenty twenty one year we have
one thousand eight hundred
thirty one student so this is
where increasing that
recruitment interpretation
programs and we need to really
million dollars of those are
PSP's are dedicated to the
future educator early at and
social work programs that are
And I'll go ahead and just send
it over to whoever you would
like I have is that next Mr
chair.
whole set of slides which most
of you have here I'm not going
to go over most of them because
a lot of it is describing
financially purpose of between
Sonny and I we've already gone
first two slides in here though
just very briefly and the first
one is about the teacher vacancy
level you know
vacancy level that's from a
report that a group and MSU puts
out there called the sore report
it's called the store for their
call the store group.
concerning but it's also how
they measure that is just a one
day snapshot of job postings for
and ask him so it's a it's a
self reported measure in some
ways of district vacancies and I
I say all that just to say it's
it's a little difficult for for
positions it's a little
different than a state agency in
that way and also just put in
context that one thousand
teachers is about five percent
of the twenty one thousand
don't have good statewide data
but you know that APS
Albuquerque public schools in FY
twenty increase the amount of
teachers that they have by five
And what we see is you know
we've got.
Decreasing enrollment a slight
level of that district but
increasing numbers of teachers
and so while they're still
thirteen students to one teacher
the national averages about
twenty twenty one students to a
teacher.
And so you know I just wanted to
like put that on a little
would like to have zero vacancy
is ultimately and then that
second slide here where I just
have an overview of all the
educator prep programs in New
is no to the secretary's put
more people in rolling that's a
good thing but you know the the
retention rates that I talked
about earlier in the budget
presentation that we've got some
first year if you're gonna lose
a lot of those enrollees before
they get to graduation and get
to their decent teacher
licensure so a bigger problem
for the university applies to
decrease between fiscal year
eleven and eighteen we finally
started rebounding from that a
little bit but we're nowhere
near where we were you know a
decade ago as far as how many
that LFC staff had done closer
into the two thousand twelve
era.
When we started looking at
education prep programs a little
see you all schools across the
board investing that much back
into their programs in some
cases we saw that institutions
were you know moving some of
certainly not across the board
and then finally I'll say this
chart you can see at the top it
says twenty nineteen years your
information about enrollment
graduation from educator prep
programs as well as their
finances and some indicators of
quality of those programs and we
We didn't get that report
between the years of twenty
fifteen and twenty twenty PED
just didn't do it they did
release one in March of twenty
twenty which was good and that's
update that that this is a
really good report for you and
the public to keep a pulse on
what's happening with our
educator prep programs and so we
hope that report continues to be
payment program and you know
we've kind of discussed those a
lot throughout the day so I will
just leave those where they are
and to be happy to answer any
questions you might have thanks
Good afternoon many of us and
members of the Senate finance
committee we are excited to
share with you a innovative out
and San Juan college.
If you move to the for the
second slide this is been
discussed extensively this
morning and their seventeen
we know that at the state
national level the shortages
well documented to move to the
next slide the vote the
vacancies here in New Mexico are
chart in twenty nineteen we had
six hundred and forty four
vacancies among teachers but
then and and then in twenty
thousand forty eight this trend
must be reversed or it could be
associate degree programs in
education and we have three
alternative licensure
certificates for individuals
that already have bachelors
generosity of workforce
solutions for funding that now
moving on to the next slide of
our proposal it uses a grow your
recognize the commitment and
dedication of our educational
assistance and other educational
para professionals that are
already working in the schools
most educational assistance
cannot afford afford to leave
their job and pursue ATC
teaching licensure nor can the
The the first one is educational
assistance second substitute
teachers.
unemployed under employed and
displaced workers.
So the way it will work is the
school districts will help us
with the recruitment of
educational assistants
explain it is to think of a job
sharing model so if you have to
educational assistance.
One will work it is in the
public schools in the morning
afternoon this will ensure that
there's full classroom coverage
for the entire day.
The individuals will also be
benefit eligible earning a
Western New Mexico university
and San Juan college has signed
an ammo you and San Juan college
and western and thanks to the
generosity of Dr shepherd he
said that these courses will be
offered on San Juan college's
hires that are qualified through
our K. twelve system or existing
western professors.
Moving on to the next slide is
our funding request.
for five years we have also
designed an accelerated option
so if the students want to work
you I'm here around and go to
school year round they can
their books there will be a
faculty hired in each
institution and an adviser will
be a program coordinator and
administrative assistant and
dollars for marketing but what's
degree over four years for about
ninety four hundred and twenty
seven dollars per year.
Will move to the next to last
slides.
could start the program in
January and Dr shepherd and I
both said yes.
And so we developed a flyer in
prospective students as of last
night we have already recruited
twenty two students to start in
this program starting next
Tuesday and they're in our
hopeful that this proposal and
this model will be successful in
trying to find more teachers in
our pipeline.
Thank you are there any
questions.
And
that's the blue suit Mr chair
but I'm often wearing the same
suit even want to go to bed I
have nothing that other than I
just appreciate the fantastic
for many years out but we're
we're right up on that edge of
the abyss if we don't do
something about it.
And and the we will have a
Thank you this is something and
this is the first time I'm
hearing about it but I'm very
intrigued I agree we need to
what you guys are proposing and
see how we can support that and
then Mister chair I also want to
note that the EDD W. secretary
is also on the panel and
Good morning or good afternoon
Mister chairman and members of
the Senate finance committee
thank you I can be very brief I
know that time is running very
but there's just a few things
that I'd like to point out from
the graphic
we hope that this graphic will
allow you to maximize Cision's
on investment and so that's
going to be the theme I think in
terms of
what we would propose in public
education department in
partnership with our sister
agency.
learning and something that
Representative entire trajectory
ecosystem if you will for are
you as well as other adults were
interested in this profession so
consider.
So as you start with career
exploration there are
opportunities for you we
currently spend sixty five
thousand but are requesting one
million to support educators
organization perspective similar
to FFA it's exciting wonderful
it's a point five hundred and
thirty and some students right
now across the state as well as
this is not just in the realm of
education your peer tutoring is
aligned to and connects with our
youth having the experience to
know what it feels like to
our educator fellows that's
getting adults into classrooms
to service educational
assistance to the tune of thirty
five million dollars for anyone
who is eighteen above has a high
expensive program we're just
routing award letters today.
we're supporting it statewide
recruitment tool you heard the
mostly what's really critical
space and recruitment are those
high minimums and I can't speak
enough about how critical that
is the space actually elevating
teaching and education it's that
it's competitive with other
professions.
colleges of education.
But I'm gonna take a moment just
to speak a little bit about
teacher residencies and why bad
is one of the most important
why residency programs are so
impactful and certain really
interesting data so if you'll
notice these retention rates
educator part programs and the
state is taken from bank street
residency programs but you'll
notice that the district align
co design residency program
holds upwards of almost ninety
sixty percent retention rate
which is
you know sixty percent.
When we look at it is not that
great but in terms of return on
improved outcomes which you
spoke about Mr chairman really
eloquently before with the
secretary but they also retain
and support the entire school
million is expand residencies
not just in the space of
alternative licensure.
but actually the undergraduate
level and that's important is
have what's called student
teaching which is not robust
enough does not provide them for
the ark of the entire school
year four nine nine
clinical practice for seniors in
many of our students in New
Mexico as you know it's.
Critical issue in terms of
economic incentive for those
That would be one of the best
and wisest investments that we
could make.
Going on just a couple things
that I'll mention here the last
licensure in terms of
mentoring
And then finally with retention
again the compensation is a huge
issue really how with a mind
want to mention one thing though
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
I highly recommended investments
are minimums that are
educators of native languages as
well as general recruitment
strategies the reason why it's
so important and you can't you
have to look beyond the data is
They can seize.
I have one thousand vacancies
for an average of twenty two
thousand educators state that
ratio is about one twenty two.
Now I look at.
Because I get more than one
teacher rates middle school to
high school right.
Average Madam ratio is three
teacher kindergarten first or
second grade.
That essentially means I'm not
learning how to read.
What if I don't have a teacher.
So while the ratio doesn't sound
impactful it's very much is and
that's why we would really
encourage you to think deeply
Your muted Senator.
Okay thank you.
really nice to hear all you know
just thinking out of the box and
are we going to do this I really
like to
So if you want to call it
though.
If you want a yes Senator
actually that was a present
Pendergrass to mention that with
our partnership with San Juan.
because this semester has just
begun.
Okay so what you're working with
this but twenty two for this for
this semester that.
state that Senator pendant I'm
sorry present Pendergast and her
leadership felt it imperative
get it started now because every
day that in every semester that
we wait is another semester
and just really working with
itself that's going to be
interesting to see you know how
it goes all the other question
that I have is for when.
Yes
one half times this might be
talking about it you know pretty
much all year long would be nice
to see a component on you know
where the teacher each fall
it's.
and then not also anymore with
the urban art with all seen how
expensive the cost of living is
and some of our cities to you
know the so makes it extremely
hard for individuals to.
you can work with that and and
you know maybe.
Some ideas or it also with.
Director at the.
Thank you.
learn and that you know to get
three credit class in a four
week period or six week period
whatever it is.
And I don't know we had this
discussion why is an open
enrollment kind to.
different and just something
that but I think Senator
Gonzales kind of brought to.
Senator then yes and members of
the committee we do have our
this summer or this fall so you
know every few weeks they can
start a new cohort.
Mr chair that's similar in terms
now have mid semester openings
where you can start in October
and ultimately we want to move
those to monthly openings.
So I I think that's and families
maybe for secretary Rodriguez do
we have a heat map on where the
the majority of areas where
these one thousand teacher
what I've heard in the past
that's what I think are today
are we management monitoring
things that way to maybe provide
some additional intensive TLC in
care and support to help those
year so what we'll do right
after this is also and that you
as as granular specific that you
can really dive into the where
is the need where teachers and
port he's pulling up the exact
numbers right now I believe that
most of the vacancies are in
either in the Albuquerque region
and native American areas and
then we also have that broken
it's elementary and and special
ed teachers are air two areas of
highest need if I remember
right.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for all that and that date is
available that's exciting so do
we have somebody in the
for us if we have a champion in
the department that owns this
very challenge that we have in
front of us right now.
Mr chair Senator by the act
at the education department we
regular session we do have a
work group that's working on
teacher workforce issues we
actually convened this week when
cracked are going to be
I'm gonna let secretary W.
secretary let us know if they
have a dedicated percent our
agency thank you senator by the.
soul focuses on this work but it
crosses a to another bureau
college and career readiness
which focuses on career
technical education and are you
and high school programming as
well so but most of the people
single night and every day thank
you thank you Mr chairman I'm
really happy to hear that I mean
my business when I'm facing a
challenge or problem like this
I'm gonna have somebody eating
that we're all talking to each
other to to make sure we're not
sort of duplicating or whatever
or that we're we're kind of on
the book together thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
reached out to Google school
districts and and present
Pendergrass reach out to him
that will guarantee a job at the
end of their their graduation
Gallup McKinley is made the
portion that they go right into
the system they have a job
guarantee it at that rate
present temperature.
Senator Padilla and and Mr chair
Bernalillo county and elsewhere
and what's really beautiful
about this is this body
challenged us about a year ago
to figure out how our
institutions of higher education
that can be replicated with U
and M. and
central New Mexico it can be
replicated throughout the state
I just want to emphasize that
I'm very proud to have a
the the institutions you guys
are at the lowest and for four
year degree with books I and and
everything and in eastern was
and board everything inclusive.
U. N. M. was like a hundred and
twenty eight thousand so they're
they're a little out of the
market.
what we're gonna have our best
game and be able to accomplish
some some goals pretty quickly I
don't see the members this is a
priority for me and maybe we
funding revenue stream the
teacher pipeline is through the
decency RD have the workforce in
place to do that maybe maybe
just looked in the wrong place
I'm sorry for keeping the body
late I'm sorry for not reading
my own agenda but my wife is
calling in in and so I think you
guys I appreciate it.
I think many members already
told you what our plan is so
we'll see you on Monday.
Mr chair thank you madam
secretary call you right back.
