Watchers and observers from the
process Senate bill six does not
allow sixteen year olds or
felons upon release to vote nor
does it allow for automatic
voter registration Mr Chairman
I'm gonna let Senator Ivey Soto.
Proceed with the details of
what's included SB six thank you
for your time.
Thank you very much
The Mr chairman members of the
committee also if I could just
let the committee know that we
do have an amendment.
And we have a committee sob and
let me explain why we have both.
there were some fairly if you
could have gone through this
whole process and I had all the
yes.
And the reason why we have both
is because there were there were
some fairly extensive
Amendments that were made in the
Senate rules committee which
made this a better bill and we
have some additional amendments
to bring in here along the same
line and and just so that it's
easier for people coming out of
the rules committee we prepared
we prepared as an amendment but
we also prepare to as a
committee set up so that you can
vote out the committee sob but
you can track the amendment in
terms of the regional bell so
that way you know what the
changes are that you're making
in this committee
and so Mr chairman and members
of the committee.
This bill.
It is not a bill that seeks to
make it easier for people to
vote while maintaining the
security and integrity of our
elections it has been worked on
with extensive input from county
clerks the secretary of state's
office from
a variety of different community
organizations as you can see in
this bill with the sponsors of
this bill is a bipartisan bill
which in this day and age to
have a bipartisan election bill
is no small feat.
And it means we work really hard
at keeping the provisions in
this bill to be policy based
build a policy based decisions.
And and so with that Mr
Chairman.
We'll be happy to stand for
questions and at the right time
I will make them.
Thank you for that we need to
what have you and all the good
sense to build correct we could
either move to bill four we can
move the amendment and and then
at the end vote out the
substitute.
Afternoon to most okay in that
case go ahead move the
substitute and I can go through
the issues in the Middle.
Mr Chairman I move that we
table.
Bill six.
The.
Committee substitute for Senate
bill six for discussion.
Mr Chairman.
The correct language or is it a
move a do not pass on Senate
bill six packs and a new pass on
our wealth and okay yeah when he
sent.
Immunity the so Mister chair I
moved do not pass on Senate bill
six in a do pass on Senate bill
the committee substitute for
Senate bill six Mr.
Thank.
The group just moving it for
discussion for.
Additional discussion purposes
move Senate bills Senator Senate
finance committees up to percent
of no fix Representative
discussion Representative the
motion is yes Representative is
affected.
It's a Mr chairman the the
differences between this bill is
a came in and the substitute the
first first thing is.
We do find it as this bill comes
into this committee it does
provide that challenges the
watchers can be within sight and
sound of the collection board
but we also make clear that that
while they're not allowed to
copy.
The last four digits or make or
make a record of a people's
person protected information
that they can that sounds what
terms ever made shall be allowed
to see the presence of a
signature the last four digits
of a social security number on
official mailing envelopes
containing a voted ballot that
way they know that that that
that information is there.
On the
Yes thank you they are we also
We had in this bill after comes
as though three political
parties we were retreating on
having apartment convention
however the political parties
reached out back again and they
said well well that may or may
not be the best in the world
they've already made plans for
this year so we're delaying
implementation of that until
after after the twenty twenty
two primary process so this will
not affect the
preferring conventions in twenty
twenty two.
And and so and and those those
are the the a big differences
between what came in to this
bill and and where things are
are right and the substance
thank you Mr.
Senator you want to go in
discussed a bill.
Absolutely yes of the bill as a
whole creates election security
program it also.
By the for a voter education
elections Task Force.
it mandates training for
challengers and watchers.
It provides that pull of the
voter all of the places around
the state would be more
convenient Centers.
It it allows the
It amended the crime of of
obstructing polling place to
clarify who should be able to be
there as well as unlawful
possession of keys.
and often level position of apps
developed but it does not create
a new crime and either one of
those but we do amend those to
make sure that it includes us
monitor secure containers.
it also
Provides that if someone wants
to inspection
records related to voting they
need to do so unless they're
doing as part of a contest they
need to do so for good cause
shown.
and of but it does not make that
point available to them.
And it also provides that we use
the last four digits of of the
source to the number as the
control number and then finally
the other big thing that it does
is that it provides with regards
to our Charlie Conservancy
district and up a pick a smelly
artisan Conservancy district
that they aren't in the regular
low collection
based on agreements with them
and their support of that and
also with watershed districts we
retreat on the watershed
districts being elected instead
they are appointed by the soil
water conservation district that
created them and that was done
in conjunction with the soil
water conservation districts in
the watershed district.
Twenty it also prohibits
absentee applications by third
party groups so if you want to
apply for an absentee ballot
with the go online or you
request the paper application
from accounting clerk.
Thank you Mr.
We have anybody in support of
the bill.
Your my name is different than
the economic member of the Lee
County sold water conservation
district and I encouraged the
members of the committee did
stand support of this bill
Act player need to the watershed
district for help there's
elected and that was needed in
statute thank you thank.
My name is Mike when what was
can a of Sir you know as for
them whose bill.
As a group for the county
clerk's voted in favor of this
bill.
Harding County clerk and that we
have.
Thank you.
My name is for the green on the
Union County clerk and we do
support this bill I can tell you
that it was a huge effort that
involves
in other nations testing in this
we work hard on this and we
supported wholeheartedly.
We have anybody on the on going.
Kevin Clark on the Santa Fe
county clerk I will also say
that this bill took a lot of
time and effort to work out a
little case and the clerks are
in strong support there are
fixes in there we need right now
to be able to get to the primary
and the general thank you so
much.
Thank you.
We have anybody in.
That is a different representing
and we have all.
We have anybody on the amendment
of the fourth.
My name is.
to the clerk and county as
members of the committee I'm
here to let all of that the
ability of
the county twenty seven and
support the simplest solution
and not.
I thank you so much for your
consideration ask for your
support six.
I can't see you want to talk
on the server.
That you want to talk.
At thank Senator and I'm on the
are in the office we can.
Voted in favor of this
legislation Representative
accident.
Representative Eli R. Roberts
around.
Good morning Mr chairman good
afternoon Mister chairman of
committee members I'm like what
kind of Clark Robert you said on
the third and the we are just.
Thank one or two more.
The next one I think as we read
we actually.
We have.
Members of the committee on.
In order to Mexico we strongly
support this bill.
Cheated changes patients thank
you for your time.
We have and that's that.
A little hump.
Mexico has a support.
Senate
committees that
just say these funds are from
hardware and also tax you get
expertise and knowledge.
Legislation
we doing
to
raise concerns.
I
need.
A lot of communities come
together allowing us to do.
To.
Secretary of state.
Timeline attention editors you
are.
Compromise this section we also
like to claim that.
Well it was for students.
Use the legislation there's
another.
She.
The.
From this.
Focus on.
Senator.
Thank you.
And we have anybody in
opposition.
In the room.
On the right we have anybody in
opposition.
madam secretary state
randomization opposition.
Mr chair at it took forever for
my as soon to load but I I and
then very strong support of this
legislation and here to answer
any questions pertaining the
secretary of state's office.
Thank you.
Questions from committee members
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair so I hope
that you have a few questions
this a big bills and.
I'm just curious have the has
the committee Mr Chairman have a
chance to look at the substitute
that was brought today.
Did you the committee.
Usually we're substituting
emailed out last night.
But this morning we were sent
this morning this morning so
Mister chairman we normally
normal committee procedures
including the rules committee
police will used to be is you
got to get things at least a day
in advance this is a substitute
of a most three hundred page
bill so I'm just curious is
there been any analysis doesn't
sound like it's something we
just got it.
Mr chairman I'm curious as the
county clerk's scene the the new
substitute missing all the
changes.
Raise your hand if you see that
your account for communities
with Mr chairman and senator if
I could just real quick.
The the substitute and and this
was.
Verified by legislative counsel
to the committee staff.
The substitute is Senate bill
six and the Cayman with these
amendments and nothing more.
Okay so there are no there are
no changes other than what's
what's on this ammendment page.
Mr chairman and and and sorry so
if the county clerks have have
the county clerk's scene the
amendment.
With all the changes.
With the spokesman for the
clerk.
Kind of a dress to the division.
Let us Bernalillo county clerk I
don't believe we've seen the
change in the seven hundred out
I haven't.
You have not.
The Mr chair has has my County
clerk's office put you on the
spot when the have you seen the
amendment.
Mr chair members of the
committee we participated
actively in the amending process
on Wednesday the clerk's Matt
and discussed that yesterday
so reflective of the role than
the minutes of the meeting
Senate rules and we are aware of
what this is for.
It's not just.
Yeah because it's yes because it
was it's it's consist with what
was discussed and roll.
Thank.
Where.
Okay Mr chair
It's a big bill what can I say
and we're still processing and
getting lots of feedback so
there are a few things I would
like to bring up about the bill
I guess now's the time to do
that.
Mr one quick question.
To the sponsor one of several
questions press number one is.
We're.
Expanding the prohibition
fundraising blackout two
candidates for office.
And generally are session
happens before people filed to
technically become a candidate.
So if you have not yet filed for
that office and turning your
nominating petition signatures
become a plan a five year
declaration of candidacy are you
technically a candidate during
the session the proceeds at
period even if even else.
And that Mr Chairman Senator
Martin if you look at an article
chapter one article nineteen of
the election code the campaign
reporting act section twenty six
which is definitions you'll see
the definition of a candidate is
somebody who is probably the
course can see for someone who
for statewide offices raised at
least five hundred dollars or
for A. Ivey for statewide
offices raise least two thousand
dollars or for not statewide
offices right please five
hundred dollars they are
considered a candidate for
purposes of the campaign
reporting act therefore that
would be covered by the program.
If you read so if you raise
you've process rational to for
legislative race as a non
statewide race right that's
right yes Sir so if you process
financial thresholds and you
become a candidate course if
you're running for Congress and
you raise over a certain amount
you have to file.
With the FEC what's the process
and and Mr it's understand born
of congressional races are all
covered by the FEC and not by
the election code in terms of
campaign finance thank thank
you.
I want to bring you not to the
some but to the original bill
because we just got given us but
on page seventy one.
I have heard the concerns.
Which.
I can appreciate.
I'm going to line seventeen I
thought at one point time you
were in support of that Mr chair
and now maybe the positions
changes.
I.
I'm all for better security.
And and I've been in that room
I've been in that room in fact
you're there until I was just
election server.
In the congressional race we
have thousands and thousands of
ballots.
And I'm concerned.
That when we say it's a
verification if there's an issue
that they must qualify each and
every envelope.
As opposed to.
Qualifying the envelopes through
a system designed by the
secretary of state that insurers
accuracy maybe something more
practical.
how do you feel about that Mr
Chairman I'm working on that
serve to do bills sitting right
next to I know but we were
incorporating some equipment I
don't exactly know where the
bill the budget for some of.
Thank you Mr chairman so the so
let me let's let's unpack that
for the second right what we're
saying is.
That the county clerk is going
through and doing the initial
qualification a ballots.
In the clerk's office so that
the county clerk could reach out
to people more expeditiously in
order to your boss.
There.
Electors have been through
transparency.
Elections happened with I
thought.
Bigot observer present.
And and so what we're doing then
in this section.
Israel out of the verification
process were randomly picking
two percent.
What we're saying is if we have
confidence in the two percent.
We don't need to go to
scrutinize the rest of the
ninety percent confidence in two
percent they're randomly picked
up.
I don't think you can do that if
you say we have confidence in
the two percent within a margin
of error and now we don't need
to go look at the ninety
percent.
I think that's a problem.
And and because ultimately what
a margin of error equals it is
ballots that should not have
been approved for the votes to
count were approved for the
votes to Capt.
What's that typical margin of
error on that.
Mexico order over on that is
there.
So so that's why I would not.
I don't support that and I'll be
happy to yield to the secretary
of state's office either this
process or or secretary to lose
all of our for their thoughtful
decision as well if if the
purpose of you yeah Mister chair
I would money hearing from
secretary St St Louis Oliver
that would money hearing from
our county clerk's office on as
well.
This is not just a second at at
thank you Mr chair and Senator
Steinborn so this is just an
approximate terms I'm and I'm
kind of trying to go through
everything as we speak basically
might maintenance are is that as
long as we have a process in and
of course for most of these
processes that are set forth in
statute we are able to
design rules for their actual
implementation we are intending
to do so with this particular
section
my name concern is that as long
as there is no invalidation of
ballots obviously there's an
error in the state a higher
level of scrutiny applied to the
the auditing process to ensure
that are being qualified
correctly is totally appropriate
but you know needless to say as
long as those ballots will
continue to count Mr chair and
senators were your that process
and as long as we are able to
continue to promulgate rules
which I don't we need this
section prohibits them your
products Mr chair and
representative the county parks
would weigh in on that process
as well I'm sure.
Mr chair any any other clerks
want to address this I think
this is a serious deal
And the devil's in the details
how it ends up being actually
promulgated in a big election
when you have thousands and
thousands of pieces of paper
sitting there and.
You know you're basically saying
that because you've found a
problem now you have to go
through thousands and thousands
of things and I think there's
even a logical disconnect there
the eleven the state made by a
person now we're going to say
that maybe there was a problem
made by thousands of people
independently
but it creates the problem
frankly tension Lee.
This in franchising price last
threw opportunities potentially
to disenfranchise other votes.
So and it is nice and I know how
overworked or clerks can be in
those elections elements and
just the practicality of making
all the canvassers and all the
volunteers and workers have to
go through all that I'm really
concerned by this section this
man brought to my attention as
well by election officials and I
I think this is something that
needs a little more time to make
sure we get it right
I'll just I'll just like that.
And
Mr a Mr chair Senator Ivy Soto
can you talk about.
The.
The student ID language.
In the bill.
Certainly the chairman and
senator Sam ward this is to an
IDA came up in the context of
same day registration what kind
of ideas acceptable when
somebody's registering to vote
this is David the sex of the
bill that deals with section one
dash four dash five point seven.
And
and so
in terms of the the the would
you send a register I you when
you register to vote.
in the heat of the passion of
voting.
We require a photo ID in New
Mexico and one of the
improvements were making of this
bill is we're requiring a
listening to the address to
which your registering to vote
because that listening does not
currently exist in all
circumstances.
And and so that address does not
have to be on your idea because
people move but it's not on your
ID then you have to have
something else that's got your
name and your and your address
on.
and so and so as we're having
the conversation about the
acceptable identifications.
Current law allows school ID's
with no real definition of what
that means.
and so that has been
in this version of the bill that
has been dropped so we allow an
ID from any state for the
federal government.
from any Indian nation tribe or
pueblo.
those are all a lot of and so
There is another bill that's
coming through where my
understanding is that there is
going to be an attempt to
amend that to include school
ID's and if that happens in that
bill.
then then that would be
compiled.
in a in a manner that would
reconcile with this bill.
But I would prefer that we not
make the change in this bill the
people have that concern that we
live in for the other bill
that's coming.
Mr chair Senator I understand
that some groups have requested
that that provision come out of
the bill.
How do you feel about that.
Miss Mister chairman Senator
more that what what what comes
out of the bill the student ID I
do language that it is out of
the bill.
Is it happen the amendment.
It's so Mr but if you look in
the in the the committee order
because you'll see a claim
there.
On if you look at the committee
some of at one to four to five
point seven.
As as it exists in the committee
sub.
so you'll find that on.
I will
be getting on page eighteen.
And then the specific language
is I'm sorry page six section
eighteen begin page thirty one
the specific language on page
thirty three.
Where it says a qualified
subsection eight qualified
electricity could register to
vote or update an existing
certificate of registration
pursuant to this section
shoppers are providing a
physical for with dedication
that is issued by the federal
government the state government
or federally recognized Indian
nation tribe or pueblo and that
you gotta you gotta you gotta so
that's the the feeling was that
we have.
That.
Question moving on Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto if somebody
gets a check.
Prior to the blackout period can
they deposited during the
blackout period.
Of the seven and senator Munoz I
can't.
At.
Mr that's all I have for right
now thank you for thank you
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Of.
Soto on.
What is the last date and that's
at the ballot can be counted.
So Mr chairman and senator woods
the last moment that an absentee
ballot can be accepted could be
received by election officials
is seven PM on Alexis.
When we get around accounting it
is another matter.
But but but we're not going to
count that if it came in after
seven PM on election day and if
you look at I think it's in one
to six session eleven.
in the bill we are actually very
prescriptive about this it maybe
not yet actually want us.
was up one when the success ten
if you look on page sixty five
of the bill it's a straight out
a completed official mailing
envelope containing a voted
ballot shall be accepted until
seven PM on election day.
I completed official mailing
envelope proceed after that time
shall not be qualified or open
but shall be preserved by the
county clerk for the apple
retention rate provided for
windows for the sixteenth so so
if it if it comes in after seven
PM on election day it's not that
we can't.
I'm I understand that point.
The hiccup to that does you
know.
Most people want to know who
won.
At least by the next day.
And there's no.
No.
Place in the bill that says how
long it will be before.
Those votes are counted and made
official when it when when will
they be Candice's is is there a
date certain.
When we know who won Mr chairman
and Senator Woods there is an
existing law that is not
impacted by this bill the county
canvass shall take place between
six and ten days after the
election so no sooner than six
days that would be the Monday
after the election no later than
ten days that would be the
Friday of that week so so we
have election day on Tuesday
that following week all thirty
three counties except for
Bernalillo.
They get an extra three days
they get to that next Monday so
thirty to the counties have from
between Monday and Friday of the
next week to canvass their votes
and have official numbers
Bernalillo county has to have
their votes canvassed by that
next Monday.
You can see why.
The general public.
Gets upset about the election
results.
Mr chairman I'd I'd I can see
that which is why we release the
that's the reason why we
released the.
The unofficial results on
election night New Mexico does
better than most states New
Mexico we we have on the early
vote results usually we're able
to release within a half hour.
After the poll the the close of
polls the most of the mail the
ballots Mister chairman Senator
Woods real to release within an
hour or so of the polls closing
and most of our counties are
able to finalize their work on
election.
In terms of the the the
unofficial votes vote counts
prior to the prior to the
Candace being done.
For those counties.
However.
Where they're not able to finish
that night.
We find in this bill that they
should go home at eleven thirty.
That.
I'm sorry eleven eleven PM
because people been working for
eighteen hours at this point and
we want people get the right.
Go home get some sleep come back
at nine thirty in the light of
day let's not have numbers
changing at three o'clock in the
morning.
Come back in the light of day
when challenges observers
watchers can be present.
Continue your work during the
day.
Until you're done and refresh to
make sure that we get it done in
a proper manner.
I understand the process Mr
chairman understand the process
I'm just trying to.
Let people in the audience if
there is anybody on.
No why we have changing vote.
The next week.
Because it's very disturbing to
a lot of people that all of the
sudden our vote change.
And I just wanted to let that be
known to the general public yes
one that might happen thank you.
The primary convicts are the pre
primary convention nomination
process has been removed can you
tell me why Mr chairman not for
this year it has not with the
with with what we're doing in
this build here it will not be
removed this year because the
parties have already made plans
to candidates have already made
plans about how they're going to
proceed but for the future.
It's been removed because the
the problem is everybody just
give the number of ballots and
and goes around the convention.
And it ends up being a a fairly
large trained resources for the
political parties people leave
the conventions kind of sort of
each other when I touch base and
just pay for the partials of all
three political parties what I
did touch base with the
Libertarian Party representative
he did say that as a libertarian
he didn't think the state should
Tom how is partition operates at
least has been consistent there
and but but that's the reason
why and that doesn't preclude
Hey a political party from from
having a convention and and and
and doing what is effectively a
rally a raw raw rally prior to
the election but in terms of
having legal significance
the reality is it really has
very little legal significance
so that's why we're moving away
from.
And Mr chairman and senator.
Has it been a lot of requests
for that.
Mr chairman and center was there
actually have been a lot of
requests for that that surprised
me it was not something that was
originally within the scope of
what I thought was going to be
in this bill and it came up an
increasing number of times so
that's what and up there.
The
voter notification should be
mailed out to all voters at
least forty two days before the
regular election in forty nine
days before primary election so
now ever voter of record that we
have on our mailing list.
That the card is mailed out that
sense if you want to request a
mail in ballot absentee ballot.
This is a process for we are
going to have early voting
between these days and the
voting date is this state.
We get quite a few of those
cards back.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Senator Woods the voter
notification provision which is
an article ten of the election
code here in the bill.
Is a is a provision that what it
does actually we don't send the
notice.
Two of federal qualified
electors for participants in the
in the
intraparty well as survivors are
project and we don't send the
notice to those voters who
program we've had election will
return and they haven't updated
their address because we know
they're not going to get so
we're not going to send
something to that address to an
address for they're not going to
get it.
So so we don't send it to those
people what it but the other
thing is and you did touch on
this I don't want to make sure
that we emphasize this.
and that is that it does that
notification of a notification
I'm sorry it's it's article
eleven it's a the in the
substitute starts on page one
thirty section one dash eleven
to four point one and and what
she'll.
what you'll see in that and and
the is that it it's
It provides the information to
the voters.
Of how they can get a mail
ballot if they want and we're
they can vote in person if they
want.
So I really want to emphasize
this is neutral in terms of how
people voted doesn't tell them
and elections coming vote a
particular way.
It tells them and lections
coming if you want to vote by
mail you can go to and vote dot
org if you want to call your
county clerk is the kind of
point number and if you want to
go to person here's where you
can vote in person in your
county and the days sometimes
and you can do that.
And then the voter can make
their own decision if the vote
and how they've of.
And then Mr Chairman.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Say that I have moved.
And so I didn't get that
notification.
Now I hear the word of mouth
that I can request.
I have to develop.
How do I get that absent the
ballot now.
Mr chairman and senator was so
there's two ways.
For you to get about right one
of them is you could go vote in
person which I what is my
personal preference.
And you can same day update your
voter registration to your new
address which is what we prefer
that you do.
And in fact since we've had same
day registration between seventy
and eighty percent of the same
amendment registrations have
been updates of existing
registered voters.
The on the other option you
have.
Is that you can go online we
have to authenticate yourself
with your full date of birth the
last four digits and your MVD
number to go online and request
absentee ballots are a mail
ballot be mailed to you and you
can find the address for you
right now or you can call the
county clerk and you can ask for
an application to be sent to you
give them the address and then
return that with where you want
to go under this bill.
Yeah we're sending the ballot to
an address other than your
address registration.
We also send a courtesy notice
to your address registration.
You Mr ones.
We received a request from you
does that we send a ballot to
another address and not here we
just thought you should know
this if you have any questions
or concerns please call us
immediately.
And we send that notice out the
same day we send out this
balance.
So that if you cannot get that
notice.
A request about somewhere else
you've got time to contact the
county clerk before that ball
gets back to the county clerk's
office.
And.
Mr chair and Senator Ivey Soto
one more time.
To go online to request about.
And I have to do battle now the
clerk don't see me nobody sees
me but that computer screen.
What that is what I have to put
it in.
That application in order to
receive an absentee ballot
Mr Chairman center was you would
have to put in your
Your full date of birth.
Your last four digits are so
scared a number.
And your full motor vehicle
division number from your
driver's license or ID card
active or expired.
Okay.
And we've already talked Senator
Steinborn talked about those
forms of identification.
That would be required to.
To
Mr to the mmhm.
And to register to vote hello.
You have to do that in person.
Mr chairman and Center words if
you want to update your voter
registration in the middle of
the election.
You need to do that in person.
You can update your voter
registration online.
If you do prior to the twenty a
day before the election they'll
be processed if you do it
online.
If you do it within the twenty
eight days before the election
if you and you do it online we
will process that after the
elections over.
Okay Mister.
Mr chairman and senator Ivey
Soto.
What proof of residence what I
have to find if I'm updating my
registration online Mr chairman
and Senator Woods if you update
your voter registration online.
Prior to.
Get this to be part of the
twentieth date let's assume or
or if you do within twenty as it
does in fact happen after the
fact you don't have to provide
any any proof.
Per se but you do not have a
valid and be the number so we do
have to know that you have a
relationship to New Mexico.
Because of your M. B. the number
in addition to the last four
digits and your date of birth
just like the if you take the
paper form twenty days before an
election and you update your
address we don't require you to
provided documentation of that
the documentation we require you
to provide is if you make the
change immediately prior to
voting you walk in with a
mission to vote.
In your and you want to make a
change then you do need to
provide that documentation.
So I just let it go up there.
That could happen.
If I recently moved out of
state.
And establish residence in
another state still having the
New Mexico driver's license and
come back in state or even over
a.
The computer screen.
And say.
You know I live at my grandma's
house.
Syndrome you know that's month
residents on the computer
screen.
So I do see a hick up there high
on someone that is not a
resident of the state even
though they still have the New
Mexico ID driver's license motor
vehicle number.
I do see that echo but I Mr
chairman and senator woods.
So the residency provisions in
the election code not impacted
by this bill at all is that one
does wonder seven.
For our candidates and petition
signatures one that's one to
seven point one but for voters
one that's one to seven.
we have a number of
considerations have a through G.
considerations of what
constitutes residency.
Adult and I'll tell you in under
the circumstance that you just
described as long as you do not
also vote in the other state
that would be a lawfully cast
about.
I wrote that our farmers would
read that one yes Sir.
We're talking about county
election funds shall be
established Mr we're talking
about county commissioners now
having to appropriate money for
county elections Mr Chairman
center with the already have to
appropriate money for elections
and.
What part does the secretary of
state pay towards selection only
absentee ballot part of it what
part does it.
The the secretary of state
provide to the county certainly
Mr chairman and Senator Woods
the secretary of state's office
is providing an increasing
amount.
of the of the cost of elections
it used to be that the county
paid for
the poll workers.
the polling places I am the
postage.
And the secretary of state paid
for the ballots
the balloting materials and the
ballot marking devices or or or
or the ballots have years.
increasingly we've got the
secretary of state are actually
paying for a fair amount of the
postage and is also paying for
some of the poll workers.
Under this they would be paying
the the they would be reimbursed
the kind of the cost of the poll
workers and the reason for the
election fund is that is that
you you have then counties.
Not all the counties have have
enough money special smaller
ones have enough money to front
the the the costs are going to
be reimbursed and they get it
back.
And so the county the secretary
of state's office the the
reimbursed for the give a grant
up front.
And right now when they get that
grant up front or the reverse
all that money goes into kind of
general fund.
And there's no guarantee it's
ever going to be used for
elections.
So the reason for the cat
Election Fund is at the
secretary of state's office
gives that grant uses for this
purpose for elections.
Then we know it's going to be
used for elections because that
fund is not a lot of use for
anything else.
Well that's an accounting do you
I'm not going to argue that it's
a reimbursable in other words
the clerks turned in an expense
to the secretary of state and
the state secretary of state
reinforce that experience for
the most part they are also
trying to give grants up front
because not all the counties
have the money to spend in the
front.
Yes Sir.
Then that has to be audited on
the backside.
Okay Mr chair under the point.
Let's talk about removing.
Voters from the voter rolls yes
Sir.
That's always been a sticking
point in my eyes as to how long
it takes to do that.
It is a killer.
To to find out.
From your constituents that my
dad is still on the rules and
it's been dead for a while yes
Sir.
And so explain and I know this
is federal
I been beat over that hit
several times by.
Several people so explain the
process on how we can remove
someone from the rules Mr chair
absolutely Mr chairman and
senator woods in fact we improve
that process in this bill and
secretary section.
Seventeen of this bill and if
you look specifically online
beginning on on bottom of page
thirty beginning and and then
the top half of page thirty one
of the bill we improve that
process so under federal law
we're not allowed to cancel
anyone's the registration
restrictions permanent and New
Mexico pursuant to one four S.
three we're not allowed under
federal law the federal on voter
registration act
and the I'm sorry the the
national voter registration act
the NVRA
we're not allowed to cancel once
registration on last we have
reason to believe that they do
not live in the precinct was the
register to vote based on a non
discriminatory mailing or other
procedure that we then have to
wait at least two federal
general elections and and then.
We can go ahead and do what we
affection referred to as a
purchase a cancellation.
However what happens with a lot
of folks is we never get the
return mail.
We don't get the return mail
because because you know if.
If if a family member of yours
moves.
Then and then we send in a non
discriminatory mailing Miller
such as the voter notification.
And you get that at your house
for for what are your children.
You're not going to write return
to sender your is going to is
going to keep it and the and the
post office the post master is
probably going to go ahead and
deliver because the woods family
still lives there.
That's what we do in this bill
is that we actually.
Create a process where
personable with the the
secretary of state's office is
not able to get that interface
our the registration database
through what's called Eric the
electronic registration
information center is able to
interface are both of the
restoration database.
On.
A couple times a year.
What the national on social
security death index.
What we find in this is that if
if if the person is confirmed to
be on the National Security
master death index we cancel
their voter registration.
Now I know there are some people
in New Mexico may have
engineered their presence on the
National Security Devont'e acts
in their that may be alive and
well but that we're not going to
vote.
On the it in addition to that if
they have registered to vote in
of the state.
We're going to cancel the
registration.
Straight up we're not going to
wait.
And then.
Let's say you have a the child
that goes to the state and and
and because of our involvement
in act we find out that your
child got a driver's license in
the state.
Well under our constitution
Article seven section
I of the constitution.
You do not lose your residence
in the state because of being
deployed to for being a student.
Thanks for purposes of to so we
don't know if they got that
drivers listen of the state we
don't know.
If they're still residents here
resident there.
Now right now in the status quo
than we don't know that.
We can cancel them.
Nobody ever gets returned.
Because of what family members
of those your house.
We never percent percent
everybody's frustrated.
What this does under this bill
is if we find out that they got
a driver's license in the state
we put them on the list of
people so not discriminatory
method of doing it put them on
the list of people that if they
don't vote in the next two
general elections then we'll
cancel their their
the restrictions they don't vote
in an election between now and
and and the next two general
options we'll go ahead and
cancel them and if we get it
wrong because we have same day
registration thank you just
register to vote again but this
expedites that process of
cleaning up the rules which I
agree with you Sir is very
important to so Mister chair
Senator Ivey Soto.
So that cuts the process down to
eight years.
Mr chairman and Sir would take
cuts the process down actually
to about on twenty seven months
to you said two general
election two general elections
right so like a good editorial
and a and a and a presidential.
Eight four years.
Right so but if we find out just
before a presidential.
Right and then and then and then
we.
The other presidential then you
have the gubernatorial and then
by March we cancel that can be
as little as about twenty seven
months.
Okay this move or this.
You may have can pose a
challenge to a ballots Mr chair
certainly Mr chairman and
Senator Woods if your challenger
gone through the training under
this bill you go to a polling
place and and you have a reason
to challenge on a motor if
you're challenging a voter who's
voting in person you do that
percent of the provisions of of
one dash twelve dash twenty five
I think it's point four.
And in a list of reasons why you
can tell somebody.
If you're doing it.
for mail ballots.
Then the reasons for you to be
able to to challenge our
actually it was probably expand
the reasons to challenge.
How wide is that you can
challenge pay a vote.
And so and and that includes
right now we we we we have that
didn't find the right.
but identification but we did
not have that you did not have
the right documentary
identification some pages
seventy two and seventy three we
actually expand the reasons but
that has the reasons why you can
you can challenge a mail ballot
we used to for reasons that we
have I and then like I said we
have we have a server said
reasons for challenging a
And in person about the
basically comes down to the
purse is not registered to vote
or the person is not who they
pretend to be trying to vote in
elections when it comes down to
or in the case of a primary that
they're not of a political party
that would allow them to vote
and then
and then the when you raise a
challenge the presiding judge
election judges will consider
the challenge and if they vote
unanimously that the challenges
will taken of the person is not
a given a regular ballot they
have the option of doing a
provisional ballot which would
allow them to yield after the
fact whether or not the the the
the they got it right the
election board that federal law
that we have to do it.
If it's if it's not a unanimous
vote then they go ahead and get
they get their regular doctor
but that's that's that's the
procedure for doing so how much
higher does of the precinct
judge the the.
The judge have at the ballot box
how much time are what can he
allow just give me a general
idea of his duties and what he
can allowed would he can
disallow currently the
Ranks the county clerk outbreaks
the secretary spent.
The presiding judges in charge
the polling place can and still
order that polling place is
authorized to demand law
enforcement arrive if necessary
legal decisions as to the
veracity of a of a of a vote
more of a more of a voter is a
multiparty decision done in
conjunction with the two
election judges but the captain
of the ship is the presiding
judge.
Okay just just this is finance.
Then this bill I hope get it
right I haven't looked at the
the field.
But it's.
We're increasing.
A one point four million dollar.
Election to a two point seven
million dollars per election
with the local.
Election act.
And so.
The other part of that is.
I know we're we're putting in.
An increase of one point three
million.
And I understand this has
something to do with ever of the
year we put in money in this way
we're just gonna put in this
amount of money every year.
And Mr chair up I think that's
what that's about I'm not sure
but Senator Ivey Soto you want
to comment on that certainly
I'll be happy to Mr chairman and
Senator Woods there is nothing
in this bill about putting money
in the in the state election
from.
there is in this bill actually a
requirement of the state
election fund for the secretary
of state to have to do the more
procedure that that all the
other agencies have to do.
that modifies the LFC among
other people in terms of a bar
that would take place.
so so that is that is a
requirement that is added in
this bill in terms of the due
diligence are and requirements
of the election fund but this
this bill does not actually put
any money in the election.
So.
I guess I would I would like to
money in there by the way but
not in this bill.
The secretary of state as
requested for the election
security program to fund three
more FTEs.
Since with three hundred
thousand appropriation and and
Mr Chairman center was that that
was in this.
Bill coming into this committee
it is stripped out in the
committees up at the request of
the chairman of the finance
committee and that those are
three hundred thousand dollars
are paid for and through junior
funds.
Okay.
Last question Mr chair no you're
getting anxious.
The that you talk about a and I
think I got the initial fright
the T. R. A. program.
That actually goes from state to
state I think this is the
program.
Program yes Sir that that goes
to state to state to to
determine whether.
Pat got of elector over I'm in
four corners in the I voted in
four states.
And this is the program that
would disallow that.
Mr chairman and senator woods on
it is a felony if you vote in
both states this on the errant
program that we are part of the
the Eric consortium that we're
part of.
does do those tracks with regard
to the member states and by the
end of this year I think all of
the states that we touch pretty
much are going to be and Eric I
know Texas is coming online with
our and and Mr chair with that
not every state in the union has
to Mr chairman and Senator Woods
at this moment I believe there
are thirty nine states in the
union that are members of error
for the process of doing.
Mr chair thank you very much for
the opportunity to ask questions
thank you center for the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
at Senators I just it's just
been going through the
substitute Mr chairman I just
want to let you know I have
seventeen questions maybe
nineteen depending on where
things go and I really would
like an opportunity to to really
understand the substitute and
it's incredibly lengthy but all
to start tearing into it we can
be here as long as you let us be
but whatever you'd like I mean
I'm just would love some time to
actually read the thing the new
substitute understand it I saw
the FIR with three hundred
thousand dollars I think that's
been stricken I don't know so
we're doing just to turn my
questions are how you want to do
this.
Questions okay.
All right so so on the three
hundred thousand Mr chairman and
Sanchez you said that there
would be junior funds available
what what is that how much is
that in because I wrote next to
my seven and I didn't you know
assigned dollar symbols I ripped
off symbols next everyone of my
questions I don't put them in
every provision but how much
junior money Mr chairman did you
come up with or pull together
Rangel together to make this
very lengthy change to the.
Happen all three of those will.
You'll be able to do everything
here Mister chairman with three
hundred thousand dollars I'm I'm
I'm not saying that the that the
to say that the appropriation of
thirty thousand dollars is
covered completely in the June
funding understandable what is
the real cost actually implement
this because there are an awful
lot of changes you're gonna be
making here that Mr Chairman and
and the separately out there are
an awful lot of changes a lot of
these changes are going to be
Are going to be based are are
gonna be procedures that could
be implemented at the county
level.
and so band and some of those
are going to be additional
procedures so those are gonna be
cost savings.
so there's a mixture of those.
And for example with regard to
the monitor to secure
containers.
the current law requires us to
be emptied every single day it's
probably tell you if if you're
in return and you have to send
someone three and half hours to
angel fire and three half hours
back every single day to pick up
three ballots.
does not provide a good R. O. Y.
of for that and so we go to
every three days.
and and and by seven PM on
election day and so so that
some of the some of the
procedures here are procedures
to make things easier.
we're make sense and others are
procedures that where there's
some due diligence of what needs
to take place overall so it's a
it's a mix back and forth for.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I is
the association of counties in
the room I thought I saw them
earlier.
So I guess I want to make sure
that they're comfortable with
the absorbing all of these costs
because and Bernalillo county I
see my clerk here and I support
about ninety nine point nine
nine percent of everything she
asked me to do but there's an
awful big cost with with this
for her to be able to do this
and I have yeah and and Mr
Chairman and so the devils note
that your county clerk is the
president of the association
counties right now.
Thank you Mr chairman I did not
know that thank you for that
update I am interested to know
if she feels that she can absorb
all of these costs these online
and earlier would you be alright
if you answer that Mr Chairman.
This year the question.
Yes
please.
Senator.
Senator
the
and I'm sorry.
No no problematical thank you Mr
chairman and and Sanchez so the
sponsor just said that you can
absorb all of the cost related
to.
What is being proposed here and
there is a substantial amount of
changes that are going to occur
here I I I I I've got about
seventeen or so questions about
nine of them I wrote dollar
marks next to them because these
are going to be costs they've
stricken the they they're
agreeing to strike the three
hundred thousand dollar
understand the amount of through
the I guess the amendment there
are you in he just stated that
the the sponsor stated that
you're able to absorb all these
costs is that accurate.
I thank you Secretary.
So not in the direct path
argument Fund we work second
state
basically almost everything in
life.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Sanchez will just the other day
we had the secretary of state in
here and I see her now thank you
madam secretary for being here I
think there was a some some of
the cuts to your budget and
maybe a whole other area I don't
know but so I'm just glad that
this will be paid for I think
that's fantastic if that's what
we're saying I want to put her
on the spot but
are you able to cover all these
expenses with your current
budget.
Mr chairman and senator yeah we
we do have a cross and and and
you know it was kind of broken
out in French cost centers like
everything else is that the
money the election security
programs talking about right now
is really just full time
employees right now we have that
we funded with hava funds
through next year federal
funding
is very so those two new
medicine and continue to provide
a traditional.
so what we're talking about as
you know folks second consult
with the counties that have
resources they need I'm ballot
boxes monitoring all of that is.
Budget and yes Mr chair and
senator we didn't mention that
we have ongoing constant Alexis
specific costs that still do
need to do within the context of
our budget yes Mr chair Senator
and in those those post I'm.
Works over all the trucks on
this call everybody's gonna have
the need.
Mr chair Senator right thank you
Mr trump happy to hear that this
is funded if we fill those gaps
and I know that we had a
committee of the day for that so
I'm going to my next question
thank you Mr chairman thank you
to the folks on line.
So in creating the education in
elections Task Force will have
be made up is that a nonpartisan
is that equally represented by
the percent of these are size
greens whatever house that
formulated.
Mr Chairman the the elections of
task force is provided for in
section one third of the bill
beginning on page two thirty
six.
And and so the members the task
force will be six members who
are legislators with the two
political parties with the most
members is taping Representative
any phone numbers.
Three are members of the house
representatives put about
speaker through members of the
Senate appointed by the Senate
committees committee if
legislation on such the time put
upon by the president pro tem.
in consultation with the group
into the majority of the other
members the certificate is
committee the secretary of state
of the TIRS doesn't need will
serve on its secretary taxed Rav
will serve on it four public
members of the two political
parties the representative will
numbers.
and reflect the call at the
cultural geographical diversity
of the state appointed by the
speaker to put about a president
pro tem for county clerks with
two political parties being
equally represented appointed by
the courts affiliated
association counties.
one representative each from the
state registrar and the
administrative office of the
courts and one representative of
the county assessors appointed
by the director the property tax
division taxed rational service
advisory members.
and they shall also enlighten
the masses postal service in New
Mexico to put a representative
to participate.
You Mr chairman so how often
will they meet maybe you said
that you were going pretty fast
how often will they need how
will they be coordinated the
work documented what they
receive some sort of a per diem
of any kind I'm just curious I
mean it.
Yes certainly so they will they
will be over the space of a
year.
They are subject to open
meetings act they are eligible
to receive per diem per day at a
pursuant to per diem and mileage
act.
How many of them are there and
and we have that budgeted for
through the secretary of state's
office or.
Mr chairman and
Senator Padilla
all we do because the
legislators are taken care of
through Legislative Council
the secretary of state is taking
care of through her budget taxed
Representative through her
budget the county clerk's
through their budget so that the
only effective cost is the four
public members.
I appreciate that so then on to
And election security program is
that a has that funded what is
that.
Certainly modeled after some
other state security program are
we gonna divide develop our own
because that's an awful lot of
development
She was sure that the election
security program is provided for
that's a beginning on page
seven.
All of the bill of the sub and
this is on a permanent program
this is something that is
actually necessary.
given that elections through a
presidential directive have been
declared part of the critical
infrastructure of the United
States of America.
so the election security program
allows them to house most of the
critical infrastructure specific
items on in in that in that
office and so far Mr Chairman
secretary of state's office has
gotten federal grants to pay for
much of that and she's gotten
junior money to be able to to
fill the gaps on that and
continued on it's great that
we're getting some federal money
to do that this is just do we
not have one now Mr chairman
that's already in place or what
we're doing something new Mr
chairman and Senator Padilla
what we're doing is we're
creating a program around the
office of the secretary of state
is administratively officer to
implement Greg Representative
trough within her office is of
the person who's been leading up
to suffer based on a federal
grant this makes a permanent.
So it is already in place I know
the junior money Mr chairman we
did want new programs created is
that right correct.
For some of the second okay
great.
And then on to the the bottom of
the first part of the title I'm
just requiring voter convenience
centers number on the account
we've had those for at least a
decade now I feel I'm very
concerned that we've shrunk the
number of places you can vote as
a result of voting convenience
centers when you say you are
requiring them says I mean the
entire state has to go now to
voting convenience are they
already or what what what why is
that important call out here
certainly Mr chairman and
Senator Padilla so most of our
counties have gone to.
we're committed centers
throughout the whole county
Where we don't have them tend to
be more the exception than the
rule so on this simply pushes us
to having all voter community
centers we we have in person
voting.
That what that actually does is
it increases the number of
places where people can vote.
Because if you have a
traditional polling place that's
the only place where that person
can vote with the voter
community center they have
multiple places where they could
vote we ought to look at one of
them.
But they have multiple
opportunities in terms of where
they would go and so that for
example a for a lot of our rural
counties and let's use
it let's use Union County as an
example and that is that sure
they've got full some where they
have a polling place in Folsom
but a lot of those people find
themselves in
up in the county seat and quite.
And so and so this guarantees
that it doesn't matter where you
are in the county just find a
polling place you get about
thank you Mr Anderson how the
voting centers work I'm just
trying to make sure I don't want
to reduce the number of places
at all because we did reduce in
Bernalillo county quite a few
voting locations when we
implemented voting convenience
centers yeah and when you're in
a rural part of the state I'm
sorry Senator in a rural part of
the state the last thing you
want to do is cut down the
locations where you can actually
cast your vote so I'm just I'm
just very interested I I heard a
lot of supporters of I guess
that's fine
The reconciliation of voter
registration lists is that that
is that in in coordination with
a political party or is that
this independent of political
parties are consolidate what
exactly would we would be
consolidating.
And our representatives are
reconciling on Sir were you
referring to in the book I it's
actually part of the title its
the providing for a program to
reconcile voter registration yes
I thought we already have that
yes what what are we doing to
change that pope Mr chairman and
that was a discussion I had with
Senator Woods about reconciling
our voter registration list
against the voter registration
list of other states.
Thank you.
on this one I don't think it has
any the dollar the tax to dollar
figure attached to it with
adjusting time frames to fill a
vacancy on the general election
ballot.
We've had some deaths we've had
some issues that have happened
along the way what what what
change are you making there for
one for proposing to make their
certainly this chairman and
separately as a right now if
there's a vacancies at least
seventy days or more before the
general election doesn't want
estate estate all the political
parties have until sixty three
days before the election to fill
the vacancy.
So if it happens right up
against a deadline that means
the political party has to
organize a meeting within seven
days figure out who the
candidates are and then allow
them to run it also creates an
on near impossibility for an
independent candidate to be able
to collect signatures to build
around so what we do is we
actually moved that deadline to
ninety days before the election
if a vacancy occurs at night
you're more days before the
election then it has to be
filled by the political parties
one independent candidate has to
submit their their signatures at
least seventy days before the
election so what increases for
the political parties from seven
days to twenty days
the least amount of time that
they will have to be able to
fill those vacancies Mr chairman
so I guess this really is very
helpful then we're putting
convenience centers and because
you can easily change the name
because there's not a printed
ballot right I ate you would
print that when you go in there
so that's a little bit of a okay
I guess if you I think you get
your correct yes and improvement
okay
and then on revising
requirements for nominations and
candidates are we what are we
doing something the signatures
the percentages required I know
when you're running for county
office who do you go down to pay
fifty dollars were as you and I
have to go get eight times the
number of signatures to make
sure we got enough of the ones
we need this correct Mr chairman
and etcetera but it what we do
is the following things first of
all.
That if you're running in a
primary election you need to get
three percent of the total vote
of your cat of all the
candidates for governor and your
party's last.
The governor.
we what we have found is that we
have problems with judicial
candidates.
Who end up getting thrown in the
full politics.
Of candidacies.
And Public Education Commission
there is a very low return on
investment for the number of
signatures that to get.
And what they get out of be on
the PC.
And so we're reducing by one
third.
The number of signatures a
judicial candidate has to get.
so we would all get three
percent a judicial candidate
would get two percent of the of
the vote for the primary.
And then APC candidate would get
one percent.
So that we make it more
accessible to have people run on
the ballot instead of having
everybody run as a write in for
those offices we also that
require for right in that you
have to get there's a Senate the
whatever the central part of it
is for the office is it matches
whether you're you're you're
right a candidate with a
technician can see their name on
the ballot or whether it should
be a write in candidate we make
some adjustments for minor party
and for independent candidates.
and then and then finally the
other thing is we give an option
for County.
candidates they can either do
the fifty dollars what it use
what's that what's has right now
is big in the fifty dollars for
probably proper statement.
Instead what we do is we say
that you can do fifty dollars
for ten signatures if you
running for district office in
the county or twenty signatures
if you're running for a county
wide office and it's the it's
the candidates choice and then
we do with a summer thing of
fifty dollars or ten dollars for
the regular low collection for
candidates there
it's it's it's a very low
threshold.
unless that particular office
already reports of mistreatment
of the proper state was already
so but you've revised it to to
get to what ten ten signatures
yes yes.
on the pre primary I was busily
reading when Senator was asked
about this Mr chairman so how
how is the designation on the
ballot selected then because if
there is no that's typically how
it's determined in our party at
least is that right there's not
a drawing is there today or
would there be a drawing how
would you determine.
Who's in the first five versus
the seventh spot versus.
Yet Mr chairman and positivity
SO for all offices other than
those offices Senator preferment
madam does nation.
We use a random and it
randomization system.
operated by rule of the
secretary of state which
basically is we have what's
called the New Mexico election
off of it we're every two years
we randomize the alphabet and
and that's how people do it for
the only exception to that of
those people who get preparing
prevention designation.
But they do have all the offices
that are need that I'm in all
the candidates underneath that
who didn't get the designation
and they follow that off of it
now all the public and that's
what so Mister chairman on the
proposed the elimination of the
pre primary you said they could
still have it obviously if they
wanted a party wants to put the
money out to do that
yes Sir and also it will not
affect the department convention
this year right that part but
but even if they do have one
they would still have to go
through the state's process to
designate the position on the
ballot not not the their own
private chairman the primary
is not as bright as in are you
eliminating the a pre primary
presidential or is it being
revised Mr chairman and Senator
Padilla were not eliminating the
presidential primary the
president's primeiramente.
And the revision of the of the
filling a vacancy in the office
of U. S. representative what
what change are you making
wanting to make a because I we
did have a little bit of a issue
with this last time we did Mr
Chairman Mr chairman answer but
yes so the the the provisions
right now for having the special
election farm one dash fifteen
dash eighteen point one of the
election code however we also
provisions that provide that if
if we're already in the
nomination process whoever's
nominated.
Which is also than the candidate
for the unexpired term.
And so but there was a conflict
of the election code where it
was not clear that you don't
also have the special election
under one dash fifty to fifty
point one so what we simply
clarified was that if you're not
already in the nomination
process you have the election
under one that fifteen to
fifteen point one which we I
think want to revisit those
procedures maybe next year
that's not in this bill.
And then if you are already in
the nomination process we don't
do that elections that we do the
election pursuant to the normal
nomination process and those
people then also service
candidates for the unexpired
term thank you.
So on to the next and and again
like my good friend came in the
same day that I did that the
Senate Senator Woods sixty talk
so fast I can't keep up with
with what he's saying sometimes
you just see the and I love the
death like I love my brother I
really do but put amending the
legislative session have fund
raising prohibition so now our
candidates not able to fundraise
while we're here or is that
we're because that it's always
gotten in my crawl every time
I've had to be a candidate for
this office it's it's it's
really interesting we the the
urban myth is that candidates
are not allowed under current
law to fundraise during the
legislative session.
For some offices.
Candidates were not allowed to
fundraise for other offices
candidates were allowed to
fundraise.
Mainly because of poor drafting.
So what we did is we we wrote
that section so that it would
provide clarity on the drafting.
and ensure that up insurance a
few things first of all it
applies very clearly to all
candidates can be committees
legislative caucus committees
and incumbents.
Second of all that it
you cannot.
solicitor the privative period
and actually Senator Steinborn
is that a bill couple times that
you cannot accept money during
the privative period this
actually implements that.
It gives what it does do is it
provides that if you have
someone who prior to the
privative period.
Sign up to give a recurring
contribution you don't have to
turn that off to the privative
period.
And as long as that that
recurring contribution is as of
administering the minimum amount
of two hundred dollars and then
also we apply the same
provisions that we applied for
anonymous contributions for
statewide office no more than a
hundred dollars or more in two
thousand in total for non
statewide office for more than a
hundred dollars for more than
five hundred dollars in total it
does happen to come in that's
fine that's not what we're
talking about as long as they
don't come from a lobbyist
lobbyist employer candidate or
PAC and work work order out and
and as long as they were not
solicited them for.
in that I'm kinda half joking on
this one but on the Mr chairman
the unlawful possession of
alcohol I know that with this is
a problem in the past are you
for you allowing fifth now what
those polling places are.
We we got rid of the minutes
what we what we don't have those
now so we're now up to the fifth
so we've kind of put the game in
Rio Arriba county
New well I did not say that
let's just put that out they
have to be a little bit more
serious with what they're doing
now at least ponies to fit some
around the.
And and so we remove the two
hundred feet elimination of
alcohol but we left in.
That the election board is not
allowed to consume alcohol while
they're building the election.
Okay so then on to that the
requirement for municipalities
to hold organizational meeting
so Mister chairman in
Albuquerque we had a real kind
of dog fight if you might recall
after one of the districts
wanted to get their person or
the candidate and others want to
get the individual in office
ASAP what what we do as that
there we to addressing that here
somehow are we here allowing for
that early.
Placement okay Mr chairman and
separately so first of all.
And and those are actually two
separate issues but I'll walk
you through both of them very
quickly the process when we
repeal the municipal election
code part of what we repealed
we're provisions for commission
chair former governments and for
may oral small governments of
with the with the mayor to but
when the organizational meeting
would be we just simply restore
those sections in terms of when
there was a meeting the and and
and put that information in and
so that it it the protests now
that language never did apply to
on the City of Albuquerque
because they have their that
their charter so they do their
organizational meeting percent
of charter we do have a
constitutional provision in
article twenty section three of
the constitution we have a
provision that says that for
state office or county office
if somebody's appointed they
serve.
They serve on until.
December thirty one after the
election which their successor
was selected.
And so we do we do have new
material in here
within the local election act
which is article twenty two
election code that does simply
more that same language we all
actually had language along
those lines be forward we just
have it play a little bit and so
that that language is on in the
bill so that we have a
consistent.
We have a a consistent provision
whether it's a federal candidate
a statewide candidate a state
candidate.
percent office accounting office
or any of the local office on
page one ninety two section
ninety seven of the bill section
one dash eight twenty two dash
eighteen we just make very clear
that for small you have to take
the oath of office before
entering into the office and
then we also clarify that a
candidate elected in regular
collection to serve the
remainder of an unexpired term
enters upon the duties on
January one following the
candidate selection.
Thank you.
okay I think I sort of got that
one altogether I just wanna make
sure that you know when we've
elected someone for a four year
term right three to whatever
that they get to serve that
entire amount can get kicked out
just because they lost elections
exactly don't think that's
appropriate at all I agree with
you and and this make sure that
we have a consistent.
On the next section just or the
next portion of it what
certificates are you referring
to when you say that the clerk
certificates and authorizing
additional compensation is that
a notary or what what's your W.
talking about.
What we're talking about on that
one is that when someone would
say is is appointed Mr chairman
answer but it when someone's
appointed to office they have to
they have to file the
certificate I'm secretary of
state's office and servicing
thank you the secretary of
state's office make some pay
four dollars.
In this changes it so that if
you're filing a notice of
appointment on either to a civil
office or to an elected office
of the secretary of state's
office a process thank you very
much and files at the office I
think that's very nice of you
know it's good I don't have an
issue with that at all on the
authorization of taxpayer
information to to maintain my
voter registration essential.
Is that New Mr Chairman I guess
I don't think I've ever had to
do that yes Mr man we've we've
had under under the national
voter registration act.
We're we're required to have a a
voter procedure in New Mexico
which we have
detailed and and one that for
that forty eight of the election
code in terms of how that
happens however
M. B. D. for their purposes they
simply wanted to have for the to
they have a list of people in
their statutes.
of who it is that they are
allowed what tax and
Representative they're allowed
under chapter seven they're
allowed to share information
with.
And and we've made all the
changes for the for the federal
law the end we are right in the
election code and then with the
just simply asked that we that
that we go over there statutes
and make sure that marries up so
that's what we did.
And then the the last time I'm
actually getting to the to the
end of my questions on with
regard to Conservancy districts
and then conforming and
Provisions to the relating to
certain special districts a
Conservancy district is
considered a special district is
that right Mr Chairman simply at
this point okay so are we
putting those elections on a
ballot with everything else
going on Mr chairman and senator
to and have the Conservancy's
wait wait in on this Mr Chairman
answer Padilla they have waited
on this for the most part the
there was some question that got
raised with regard emergency D.
and the last.
Committee and Senator Padilla
made a motion to strike Senator
Padilla I'm sorry Senator Ortiz
Y. Pino maybe Hey a motion to
strike I think I sections of the
bill I'm honoring that in the as
I come in here I'm not I'm not
I'm doing what he did those were
specific to MRG CD
so this is applicable those
those provisions replicable
difficult valley artesian
Conservancy district and to the
arch Hurley Conservancy district
you're the quite County lobbyist
indicate that they support this
bill or troll is completely
within quick County and of the
pick a politician Conservancy
district is in southeast New
Mexico extend through about
three different counties Travis
at the are the main ones and a
little bit of Otero I think and
we have been in contact with
them and the language here is
endorsed by the and so Mister
chairman so is MRG CD stricken
from this as well Mr chairman
and senator Padilla that was the
intent of Senator Ortiz Y. Pino
is amendments was to strike
emergency do from here and then
they have not been restored
thank you Mr chairman because
that there's a whole other set
of things put in and everything
else we just talked about would
really kind of cause some
problems for them so I think for
the moment those are all the
questions I have Mister chairman
I might have more later if we
continue the conversation.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman so.
You know we've had a lot of
questions here I still have a
lot of questions and I'm just
wondering Mr chairman.
If we are not just roll this
over until Monday because as you
can see staff is even whispered
in my ear about things that
they're provide is.
And might not hurt us to to go
ahead and get an updated FIR on
this I do have two issues and
one is we have to go online
people who see.
That that becomes a big issue
because then they'll be filed
ethics complaints.
You're there and I have a bunch
of questions.
I want to get it I want to get a
total of cost of of the lectures
with the secretary of state she
did not respond in FY are I
don't think financial letter of
the galaxy did either.
Other than the three hundred
thousand that's there.
In the the governor's indicated
that she wants to
To a.
Kill the junior Bill Clinton may
have another issue there if we
have to go for more request of I
think we.
I just got in the Senate finance
is because they have money and
it.
and I think we need a little bit
more time Senator Ivey Soto your
co sponsor can can give us a
tune up on a Monday morning in
explain the bill to us.
And since she's a member of the
committee.
And and then we can go from
there.
Anybody object to just roll it
over.
This representative possible way
that we could revise this over
the weekend Mr Chairman
if we come in Monday morning
will come in Monday morning at
nine well here this bill will
give everybody of time over the
weekend that we whatever happens
we get a committee report to for
sametime.
They're not.
We will also members for this
bill we're going to put it back
we'll put it back on Monday
morning.
Thank you Mr.
And I I appreciate very much
conversation and if anybody has
any questions between now and
Monday please feel free to to
reach out I'll be happy to walk
walk folks through the.
Yeah I think that there's a lot
of confusion.
And.
Our staff that could help
explain it you can help explain
to a little bit.
A lot of questions.
Sorry be difficult but just
because it is a weekend coming
up I just wonder if.
I just wonder if you know with
staff working on this and
possible other amendments and
lots of interest from everyone
on every side if and I think
it's a big bills and important
bill probably in a lot of ways
just to get a ride if Tuesday's
not more appropriate just to
give so that everyone's not
chairman over the weekend that's
the situation we're kind of put
them all in but no I already
told sponsoring the job Monday.
The that's what we'll do we'll
give ourselves to that will be
at the people in the we need
help explaining Senator Diamond
because one person can explain.
We'll get people and so we can
answer some questions or give a
center Ivey Soto this weekend
they'll have office hours from
six AM to six PM Saturday and
Sunday I will Mr chairman in his
bill doesn't die and Senate
finance.
This.
Network
I think everybody's gonna have
twenty questions and images can
get laid on us that's that's
that's I Mr chairman I
appreciate the attention this
committee and as you all can
tell there's nothing I I've
enjoyed doing more than
discussing the inner workings of
election law.
Center I'm used to but I think
we're trying to get Ivey Soto of
their.
Senator Diamond that talks way
too much that's what takes yes
yes.
Thank you Mr thank you.
I think that's the best thing
for committee.
Secretary Stewart go George
leave out the door.
John Campbell.
Whenever you're ready start
restricting.
Thank you Mr chairman and
hopefully you have this handout
that looks like this in front of
you.
no headed out to okay where is
your of their Connor you doing.
Are you don't want.
Of.
You.
So Mister chairman to get this
handout lawyer well they had it
all just kind of give you a
brief overview and I'm not going
to be talking for very long that
way there's plenty of time for
questions
but I just want to overview the
state investment of happened
over the last three years a
little bit about the new bill
bipartisan infrastructure law
that passed at the national
level some of the challenges
that we're facing right now and
then of course if you have any
questions on our budget which
has passed house transportation
and then passed house
appropriations and finance is
you know with the phone bill
house bill three and I think we
came to a consensus off on that
and be happy to get your
feedback when it gets over two
years Mr Chairman.
So just to give you an idea one
of the good things that this
really happened over the last
three years at DOT is we've
received tremendous support from
the governor from you if you
look at the previous ten years
from twenty two thousand eight
to two thousand eighteen when
you're just looking at general
fund money the department
received less than a hundred
million dollars and so as you
know revenue is based on gas
taxed weight distance another
thing so it's very rare that we
receive general fund money and
so the previous ten years before
I started it was less than a
hundred million over ten years
I'm gonna go through each year
but you've been very generous of
twenty nineteen twenty twenty
twenty twenty one and of course
during the special session most
recently you provided a hundred
and seventy two point five
million of our put money toward
Department and of course we're
under negotiations now in twenty
twenty two to see what that
looks like so over the last
three years you we've received
at the department of one point
two billion dollars in addition
to our regular budget and that's
really helped us get caught up
put some good projects together
and keep moving our state
forward both infrastructure and
through economic development.
The good news is I know a lot of
times the this capital outlay or
some of this appropriations
doesn't get spent or there are
funded with a partial projects
but a hundred percent of the
money of that one point two
billion is assigned to a project
and about seventy percent of
that is already been spent or
and convert it is an active
project and so not only did you
provide us with that money
twelve times that we receive the
past ten years we're out making
sure that we spend it and put it
to good use and it's not sitting
in our coffee.
We went on to the next slide
local funding is increased a lot
of times when the DOT gets
funding it's basically only four
state roads US highways and
interstates part of that one
point two however has been
significantly invested in our
local
municipalities and counties and
tribal governments just to kind
of give you a comparison from
the previous three years twenty
sixteen to twenty eighteen
locals had received about
seventy million dollars from the
local government road fund
however it from twenty nineteen
to twenty twenty one including
the local government road fund
in the increases they received
about three hundred million so
it's quadruple what they receive
the previous three years I think
the good news is this is
something that will maintain and
be reoccurring so they're going
from about twenty three million
dollars a year to sixty five
million dollars a year and that
new money is only a five percent
match and so a lot of these more
rural smaller communities are
not able to meet that twenty
five percent match the match has
been reduced and that's really
helped them put some good
projects together even in your
smallest and most rural
communities also wanted to say
that a hundred percent of that
money is also assigned to a
project to the contracts are out
locals really stepped up and had
projects right ago and so that
money of course is not once
again sitting around not doing
anything but it's at the local
level the projects that I know
they need.
Just to give you an idea of the
new bipartisan infrastructure
law I think one of the good
things is there's a lot of
states who were are really not
prepared for all the money that
will be coming in from this new
law they're scrambling
scrambling around trying to
figure out how to put projects
together what to do with that
but because over the last
previous three years New
Mexico's receiving all that
state money that I mentioned it
really has prepared us both at
the state level and local level
to to accept input this money to
good use you probably heard this
number before but a minimum of
three point seven billion will
be coming in New Mexico over the
next five years under this new
law
that is a all encompassing with
roads and highways Evey charging
stations you see the list there
and particularly some of
bailable at the local level
which is really never happened
before I I stress the minimum
three point seven billion
because that is just by formula
funding alone and so there's
also tens of billions of dollars
available in discretionary
grants and so we will be
pursuing those it will be a
competitive process put on the
next page will show you what I
think we're prepared to do well
in that arena but at minimum New
Mexico will get three point
seven billion with the
opportunity for much more.
Moving on to the next slide.
Just to give you an idea of how
successful we've been over the
last eighteen months in our
discretionary grant applications
about eighteen months ago
receive twelve point five
million additional for the
project down in Carlsbad along
US two eighty five from the
Texas border up to Carlsbad so
that was good news Los Lunas at
the local level with our help
and I us.
Assuring that we will match meet
meet the mats since they were
not able to listen this was able
to receive twenty five million
for their new interchange there
on I. twenty five just south of
the Facebook operation and then
just a couple weeks ago we
received another grant for
twenty five million for the
Shiprock to the Arizona state
line there on U. S. sixty four
we were the only state to Mexico
you can receive a twenty five
million we're the only states
receive the full amount and so I
know that's so an important
project in that particular area
in San Juan County.
Just to give you an idea about
debt service one of the things
that I really wanted to do is
make sure that the the
department was put on a good
path for future success and when
you look at what our payments
are coming up to and that's the
far right corner this is total
this year will pay a hundred and
sixty eight million dollars
worth of debt next year one
seventy five and twenty twenty
four hundred and ninety four
million in debt however looking
forward to twenty twenty five
when our debt payment
significantly decrease save the
or gets about eighty three
million more dollars into the
our road construction program
and eventually in twenty thirty
one and twenty thirty two where
we have really small payments
the department will be in really
good shape and so with this new
money that I mentioned the one
point two billion state the new
federal money that will really
help us get through these next
three years we have high debt
payments but then when we get to
twenty twenty five the state to
be in really good shape and I'm
happy that under my tenure I
didn't extend the debt past
twenty to thirty two I think the
department has been into in some
way or another since nineteen
ninety eight and so I'm really
looking forward to that twenty
thirty one twenty thirty two and
the apartment is completely at
it and I think that's a good be
a good news for us and and for
the rest of the state.
I
just want to share with you
briefly the challenges that
we're seeing and I think they're
not really unique to us I think
it their unique to just about
every industry out there and of
course one of them is the rising
labor costs trying to find the
construction workers and
everybody that supports a
construction project has been
incredibly difficult and because
of that we just have to offer
not only in the DOT but in the
private sector more money to
bring people in and so when you
started a labor at fifteen
fourteen fifteen sixteen dollars
an hour that same position now
we have to offer them twenty
twenty one twenty two Bucks an
hour obviously those increase
cost gets passed passed on to
the project and so projects
become more expensive in
addition to the materials that
you need for project whether
it's still are aggregated all of
these other things are also
getting more more expensive with
the inflation and I'm sure
you're all aware of so even
though we have more money we're
getting more money unless
something like that changes is
that money is not going to go as
far as that you use to even as
as close as two years ago and so
that's obviously one of the
challenges that we have to look
forward to the other thing is
also in a national issue which
is a supply chain we have the
schedule projects and and that
are ready to go but because the
contractor doesn't have the
still the need or the aggregate
they need they can get the
project started not because they
don't have the people that
because they don't have the
equipment and other things and
so the supply chain issues have
really really hampered us in in
some ways not as bad as other
industries but certainly that
could change and so anything
that we can do to help with the
supply chain issue we certainly
want to do that
and then of course just in
general I mentioned the work
force we have about a fifteen
percent vacancy rate
we want to get that down to
somewhere between ten and twelve
percent but obviously.
Every industry is is struggling
to to hire folks to find some
people that want to work that
are qualified they will come in
and and do a good job and so
certainly we've ramped up our
our recruiting efforts trying to
target high school kids who know
they're not I don't want to go
to college and get them into a
industries like construction
that they can really be
successful in college students
that are graduating or or close
to graduating we want to make
sure that we keep our use in New
Mexico and give them a career
path where they can be
successful and so we've been
working on that and then of
course what we've done over the
last about six months is really
trying cleanup process is
sometimes we're our own worst
enemy we make a parodic
bureaucratic processes that just
help the project take too long
since we've been cleaning these
up with meeting with industry
finding solutions and common
ground where we can get projects
done quicker without
compromising the quality of the
project and so we've had some
some success there.
Moving forward Mr Chairman just
wanted to highlight the audit
results a couple last year audit
was clean we had zero findings
this year we had to minor
findings one was just we were
entering data into a database
easily fixed that have actually
been going on since twenty
eleven but we didn't know about
it and then the other one was
some gas receipts and not having
receipts for when our employees
inner guests at a private gas
station as opposed to in our
control yards no indication of
fraud or anything but we didn't
have the proper receipts and so
those are very minor we had a
My very first bill literally
about ten years ago right now so
I appreciate you care and that
through the house from my very
first bill but with just under
six very quick questions on
these one hundred percent fully
funded I'm sorry fully what what
was the term used
In center a hundred percent
assigned to a very signed yet
are they somewhere on your
website can we go to the can we
go somewhere from me just email
me like a some instructions on
how to find the I'm just curious
to exactly which ones are signed
some big ones that I've got
going on in my area I'm assuming
this I'm hoping I find them on
that list because I've been
advocating for them really hard
in different places so so
somebody could help me with that
at some point I appreciate it
and then Mr Chairman on the
broadband you know so there was
some real concern about the fees
associated with some of that can
you talk about that just for a
moment because I several members
here is a called me about it I
state and I'll I'll definitely
give the feedback but I I want
to make sure that we were moving
in the right direction there we
don't want to be so outrageous
that they can't do it so Mr
chairman and senator yes I
think.
Whenever you put out a new
regulation you have to have some
sort of documentation for how
you come up with your feet and
so the fear talking about is if
a private company wants to come
into DOT public right away and
they're not a utility consider
utility then what is the fee and
so we use historical data and
how we've done things
historically to come up with the
feet and so I know a lot of that
private entities thought that
fee was too high and having done
rules for quite a few years I
know that once you put that fee
out there you'll never right be
able to raise it but you'll
always be able to lower it and
so what we've done is trying to
work through some issues trying
to figure out a different
calculation to be more
reasonable and so we have a new
draft of the regulation out it
hasn't officially come gone to
public hearing it because you
want to try and get all the fees
and everything worked out ahead
of time and the fees are
significantly lower and so we're
going to share that with
industry C. will get some type
of you know their feedback on
the new fee structure I will say
that the fee is the last resort
in that rule there's always what
we'd really like to do is
negotiate with that particular
private entity what we really
want is conduit and you put put
in conduit you give us conduit
or the state conduits of the
state can use it and expand the
use of broadband we're not
making any money off the fees
it's a very tiny part of our
budget but because we can't give
public right away away for free
we have to charge something and
it has to be some reasonable
cost and so I think we've come
down a lot on the fees I think
we'll see if we still have some
work to do but my intent is not
in any way to out price is to
make that PED be so high that it
doesn't help them expand the use
of broadband in our state thank
you Mr chairman I'm really happy
to hear that thank you for being
very open minded and working
with industry and and all those
folks
did you and would.
Egypt involve them ahead of time
adjusters in in in the read
three right in the provision of
what the fees are going to be
able to make sure that we don't
show up in the office and we're
having the same conversation
again yeah Mister chairman
Senator we did we put out our
initial draft informal draft we
got a lot of comments and we've
met with a lot of folks I know I
went down and met with Senator
Woods and some I have flipped
his folks down there in Clovis
so we've gone around and talk to
folks we're really most
concerned about our local
providers here and want to make
sure that they have every
opportunities to succeed so yes
as soon as we it is finalized
we're gonna get our new draft
out and get some feedback on the
new fees thank you Mr chairman
I'm really happy to hear that
thank you very much for doing
that in the run around this
building you know fighting for
more broadband every opportunity
I get so thank you for helping
with that
just sort of maybe overall globe
welcomes me so the other day we
rolled out the trip report and
and I and for a couple years of
help to roll that out and talk
about it when it happens of
certain nine years on the
transportation committee here in
the census by what they asked me
to help with that but that the
number of Mr Chairman was was
five billion with the B. dollars
are you spend you have any staff
like this strategically planning
how to clobber that amount to
get it done in a period of time
I don't know is there a plan
that says okay within twenty
years we're gonna be caught up
eight years any input there Mr
Chairman said and Senator
Padilla yeah we do have a long
range plan that goes up to
twenty fifty but we really try
and focus more details in this
for the six year period which we
call the state if the statewide
transportation improvement plan
where it has based on the amount
of money we have it has the
amount of projects in there so
this step has to be fiscally
constrained so it's not a wish
list has to be projects that are
actually ready and have the
funding that we know we're going
to get and so yeah it there's
definitely a strategy involved
we based on pavement condition
and safety and economic to.
Element potential input all
those and prioritize them but
obviously as Connor said we have
a gap in funding and so you know
we just keep getting a little
bit further behind I think
what's really been helpful is
the money that state money you
provided us over the last three
years
but there's a lot of work to be
done for sure.
So Mr chairman again first here
on this committee so I might
just some silly questions along
the way but
is there bonding capacity
available to to get a huge chunk
of this.
Taking care of do we have
anything like that available to
us Mr chairman and senator so we
did have a two hundred and
thirty four point six million
left of bonding capacity from
grip last session this body
allowed us to use that we bonded
that money this last in the last
six months we got a great
interest rate of right around
one percent so the proceeds
ended up being about three
hundred and two million it
didn't add to the length of our
debt that chart I showed you
which I was happy about so we
have bonded if you wanted to a
huge bonding packages there is
some capacity there with the new
federal money coming in in the
where revenues were looking you
know I just hesitate to do that
at this point
Mainly because it even if we had
that five billion today I'm not
sure how much we can spend each
year to get us where we need to
go we do have some ceiling at
some point about how many
contractors we have how many
workers we have and so I'm
trying to stay within a
reasonable yearly amount that
can be spent in a in a fishing
manner.
Mr chairman that's a very smart
way to look at it thank you and
my last question Mr Chairman is
on the analysts report
To.
Yes Connor you're here all the
time I apologize on on the last
one of the distribution of state
road user revenues I'm not I
don't see a number of statements
or sell the seventeen cents for
the gallon of gasoline tax how
does that put a server has that
status up against like the
region of the country or.
Or or are we there
Mr chairman Senator Padilla.
Well I think we're I think we're
ranked I want to say forty
fourth.
Mr chairman and senator I think
we're the fifth lowest so yeah
around forty fifth depend on how
you look at it but we have the
fist fifth lowest gas tax rate
seventeen cents so Mister chair
what is a penny do for us do you
know give an estimate.
Mr chairman and senator a penny
is usually about nine million
dollars and some of that goes to
the local government real fun
and but the majority it goes to
the state DOT so if you're to
raise it ten center looking at
somewhere in the range of ninety
million dollars.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
what thanks Sir pretty I I think
Mr secretary do we divert some
of that money for the right well
Carlsbad.
Mr Chairman we have diverted
about forty one million dollars
of state road fund money to the
brown well yes.
And how much do we have left
payer.
Mr Chairman
This is what I'm told is that
that was the last amount that we
needed was last year when we
provided ten million they have a
new contract in place they were
seventeen million dollars short
we gave ten and some other
places gave some to get to that
seventeen and I'm told I was
with the last that they needed.
Senator.
thank you Mr chair so I'm.
I'm just a little bit confused
here so on the it's in between
page five and seven so I'm
assuming it's six but it's a
stable one.
On here we have the motor
vehicle excise tax if you go
down Rangers to sunset.
I didn't think we built the
sunset into that.
So is that is that one percent
one way or one point going away.
Mister chairman Senator share
the distribution changes.
so when the tax was first passed
there was a portion of it that
was specifically dedicated to
oil field roads in district two
that happened for two years and
then the distribution changes
the locals Act then got half of
the money and the state gets
half so in affect it was it was
restricted for two years for DO
to use.
Okay all right I understand that
the charging stations Mister
chair Mister secretary.
You know when we started when we
started to do with buggies and
replace with cars this there was
no government program to build
gas stations we get that but
hello hi how would I try my car
at one of these.
Is it is it free to me here how
to who pays for and how does
that work Mister chairman
Senator are plan is that you
would pay for so there would be
a credit card machine there
attached to the station you want
to stop there and turn your car
you put your credit card in New
however much energy use is how
much you pay and then you're
you're on your way.
So again Mr chair
you know gasoline prices move up
with various things with the
while most electric prices don't
move that quickly unless you
shut down all of the windmills
in Texas all of a sudden gonna
bite off the market.
How the pricing work.
Mr chairman and senator we're
we're planning to do net zero
right now I don't think as a
state or DOT or trying to make
any money off charging stations
we just want to make sure that
we're covering the costs and so
whatever amount of if the if our
costs for energy is going up in
particular is it might be a
little bit different so
there could be price fluctuation
I'm not sure exactly how much it
fluctuates but that's part of
the implementation plan but we
want kind and that zero whatever
it costs us we're just gonna
pass it on to the consumer.
It's so Mister share or
whatever.
Okay of.
And I think that brings me to.
Recycling where want to go so if
we are zero.
Then no private enterprise can
compete with us because will
they have to make.
We have to make a profit of some
kind even the nuns that will
that taught me in school said if
there's no margin there's no
mission so you have you know the
they got to make a little bit of
money even if they're nonprofit.
So that puts us in a position
that nobody else can compete
with us.
Mr Chairman said I think we're
trying to work with private
industry and and trying to
figure out how to work with them
for example we we don't have
enough public space and in the
right places to be able to put
Evey Evey charging stations
where we need them and so we've
been approached by a gas
stations and places like that
that says Hey if you do this and
so there is a chance for these
partnerships where we must mic
turned everything over to them
and they can charge what they
need to at those particular
locations those are some of the
things work that we need to work
this in to be a variety of
different ways that we have
relationships some might be
completely a hundred percent
state in certain areas some
might be turned over to with if
we have an agreement with a
private entity and and you know
you would have to pay whatever
they were charging at that
particular place.
And then finally Mr chair my
last question is a you talk
about that service and paying
off bonds with the yeah I'm
looking here.
If if everything was paid off
did you say would be ninety five
million dollars extra of a
revenue per year because we were
paying that.
So Mister Mr chairman and
senator in if you look at that
chart it's in twenty twenty five
from twenty twenty four to
twenty twenty five our gate
payment goes from from one
hundred ninety four million two
hundred eleven million so the
the the rest of the years were
basically gaining eighty three
million dollars and we're not
putting towards debt we can put
it on the road we can put on
maintenance then when we get
down to twenty thirty one and
twenty thirty two we're we're
gaining the whole amounts are
completely out of debt
Senator be another you know
hundred eleven hundred and ten
million that's going and so by
the time we're rate this often
twenty thirty two basically
we're gonna have another couple
hundred million dollars of of
the amount that we can use in in
the DOT and so Mr Chairman
secretary if we just paid off
the road runner today.
That puts more money in the road
fund so we can build more stuff
does it not.
Mr chairman and senator if you
look on kind of the the third
column from the right S. R. F.
means a state road fund and so
those are the real runner
payments
so this year we're gonna pay
forty one million so right now
for real runner payments we owe
about three hundred ninety one
million.
The the rest of the money is
from great bonds and other
things that went to construction
projects so that entire debt on
the right is not real runner
real runner is the S. R. S.
state road fund.
So that I understand this right
Mr Secretary.
This is just the payment this
forty one million.
What is that the the total to
pay off the the real one.
Mister chairman Senator the
forty one million that you see
there for state fiscal year
twenty two is a paid the payment
we have to make this year then
we have a forty one million next
year all the way down to twenty
thirty our last payment is
thirty six million and so if you
had to take a pay off number now
that you just want to pay it all
off on the bottom The three
hundred ninety one million
that's what our outstanding debt
for real runners and so I just
want to be clear that this
entire amount on the right is
not real runner but that part in
the blue that's a state road
fund that is real right.
What I'm what I'm trying to
figure out here is if if we
wanted to pay offered if we
wanted to pay off our house
earlier pay off on our pay off
the credit cards or whatever
that certainly gives us assuming
we can do that of the more cash
flow at the moment
so would.
I mean even if you only pay off
half of your car that gives you
more cap or pass your mortgage
to give you more cash if you
want that way.
Does it make any sense at all to
pay.
Well I don't think we have three
hundred ninety one well we might
we could do in dollars to of
despair.
In in the us give us that much
money cash flow for road funder
here.
Mr Chairman center that that
potentially is an option I'd
have to go and look at what
agreements were made with those
bonds previously I'm not sure if
we can Pam off soon or not I'm
not sure what the agreement we
made with them but I will tell
you that the last two years some
of these bonds have come to call
in so last year we able to
refinance one and if we save the
department seven million dollars
that was cast back in our pocket
so more coming to call now and
we're in the process of
refinancing those just because
interest rates are so low that's
in the put about four and a half
million dollars in our pocket so
every time these bonds come to
call we're looking and checking
interest rate and doesn't make
sense to refinance so that's a
way to get money back in our
pocket but I'm not sure what the
agreement is for every singles
because they're all in different
series it's not one bundle
together they're all in a bunch
of different series and so I
don't know what the criteria is
freed series to know if we could
even pay anything off in full.
But we should know about what we
what.
The the Mr chair I.
It just seems to me that if
we're making forty one million
dollars a month mortgage
committee your mortgage payment
that.
Might be worth our effort to not
do that.
If we've got our funds to to do
it you're paying one percent of
the payment made.
To provide its over the long
term if that's what it is yes
that's what I'd like to know so
the what thank you thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Senator Campos I thank
you very much Mr chairman and of
course Mr secretary and others
that are really involve the New
Mexico DOT thank you very much
for the work that you do and
particularly just be safe out
there on the road especially
during inclement weather and
again thank you for the
proactive approach as we move
forward the big question I
haven't it always goes back to
debt service and how we can
continue to go and deal with
that so in all reality as you're
talking about and I'm hoping
that you gonna be able to expand
a little bit in terms of where
we're at so here's the debt
service go into the out years we
could have more resources that
then we could be using down the
road to go to improve our roads.
But the problem that keeps
coming up is that we decide well
we're gonna go ahead and either
bond we're going to go ahead and
do some some more work with our
debt service and ultimately then
leave if you will someone down
the line with
the bill to pay and so I'm I'm
asking Mr secretary as we move
forward what strategic plan do
you have or can you develop that
will give us a great way to go
and approach how we're gonna be
taking care of our our roads in
the future you know the issues
that we run up against not only
with the with a couple are
bigger projects but the roads
themselves and we don't want to
do is to go ahead and leave a
situation that could create some
problems in ten years for the
next generation and then
ultimately continue to go ahead
and create the problems with our
our our roads as we as we move
forward so if you could help a
little bit with that and doesn't
have to be much today but I
really would like to see how we
can define that for years to
come but specifically let's say
for example during the next
interim so we have a real good
handle in terms of the debt
service and then how to leverage
the resources that that we could
come up with to continue to
improve our roads thank you.
Thank you senator.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
thank you all for being here
proceed to the conversation and
actually it's interfered.
FY
the big question but I I and I'm
glad to hear that the you
working with private industry to
figure out where those charging
stations can cause I don't think
there's anything in statute or
in the rules or anything about
we're obligating the state to
put in charging station for I
guess we're doing that as a
courtesy to kind of help the
industry get moving along and I
guess I guess to take that one
step further I get all concerned
if we're doing this and you know
the ones I've seen are are
somewhat Spartan quite frankly I
mean there's a propose in a and
a table over is if you're gonna
be cash New Mexico are you gotta
cover nominee got a convenience
store yeah restrooms and all of
that stuff so I would hate to
you know do a lot of investment
in the state and then the
industry become large enough to
where it's it's supported by
private industry have charging
stations at gas stations and now
all of these charging stations
are sitting there clicking
cobwebs in we have an investment
that we won't get any anything
back on so I I just wanna make
sure that we're investing
dollars correctly and and I know
you're gonna be smart about all
of that.
I just And I appreciate let's
let's try to work with private
industry and see if we can maybe
shifts on that obligation back
on to them because they have a
lot to to win I think by just
making that charging station
part of a gas station.
You know facility and it also
provides.
Better facilities certainly for
the owner or driver that car
where they can go the Russian
analysis of supposed just kind
of you know when twenty thirty
minutes and sending them on an
office of so I hope we're smart
about this and we don't over
extend ourselves to where we
we've put frankly will waste of
money just my comments Mr
chairman thank you for the time
the server I've never seen a
line at a charging station.
Not yet or what.
Thank you Mr chair
Thank you for coming to to close
to talk to us I did appreciate
that very much
Got I've been asking ever agency
that came in here.
For a list of their contractors.
And kind of the amount of the
contract.
In the services they provide and
I'm assuming that most your
contractors are for rural
contractors doing road work.
But in their big contracts no no
big dollar contracts food I
would I would like a list of
those if that would be possible.
Mister chairman Senator will be
happy to to get those for you I
know that
there on
to be honest the sunshine portal
there there through all of our
stuff is posted I I know I GSD
but I'll be happy is our
particular area that you're
looking for like construction
because just so you know there
is several hundred if not more
more than a thousand that we
have right now and so we can
certainly try and get that for
you but I know if there's
something you're looking for
that we can pinpoint I'd be
happy to to narrow it down for
you if you with tell you the
truth addition the deal to
electronically and and I know
that's crazy but I would just
like to see
How many contractors serve the
state of New Mexico and
I've got one that was well two
pages already and it's small
print in my eyes are very good
but.
Hi I just wanted for my own idea
of how many contractors they are
state of New Mexico contracted
to the state.
Mister chairman Senator did you
want so there's a all contracts
and then did you just want you
need contracts because sometimes
will have ten contracts with the
same entity did you want to see
all those tentative if you're
trying to figure out how many
contractors you have is just one
I'm not.
Let's get complicated Sir I
don't know.
Maybe maybe you could use your
discretion and then send it the
way you think it might be most
useful to me
and in another question I have
Sir
Mr Chairman.
I
wonder we talked a lot about
minimum wage and and you know
one group wants to be thirteen
fifty minimum wage one group
wants to be fifteen minimalist.
How much is that going to affect
you just the minimum wage itself
how many how many employees do
you have below those numbers
right now.
Mr chairman and Senator Woods
and I think my staff can correct
me if I'm wrong but I know we
just did an analysis and I if I
remember correctly there was
about sixty one.
DOT employees who are making
less than fifteen dollars an
hour I think that's a number
that stuck in my head.
Sixty six
So
We do have a figure that maybe
that of my staff has about what
it would take to bring everybody
up to fifteen but it the thing
is.
So they'll get that number for
there wasn't a whole lot okay
and and then and then you'd have
compaction on top of that.
And I'm assuming compaction if
you moved.
These guys up you would have to
move the wants of bubble up some
and so that would be an extra
cost.
Mr Chairman etcetera I think
that depends I think for example
some of the lowest paid people
that we're already trying to
bring up our mechanics and so
they're already pretty low and
if we just brought all the
mechanics of the majority of
those are mechanics that will
really affect anybody else who
would just be like one
profession that we're trying to
bring up and so I would say with
the pandemic that could happen
but I think the majority of it
is all in in one or two
professions that we really
should be paying more anyway.
And that a bunch there.
The last request.
And I hate to bring this to your
level.
But I have been going into a
perpetual motion machine in big
terms circles I've got.
A guy over.
In the.
Right outside the state of New
Mexico.
That runs the current need it
over there and he said trucks
into the New Mexico to haul
cotton marchers.
And.
I have been trying to get them a
one month permit.
Forever and we we all agree that
test done and then I get word
back oh no we can't do that.
I kind of hate to try to change
statute and I've been talking to
the drafters talked in the some
you guys and I've been trying my
best to get this done.
Because it's time sensitive to
get a crop out of the field.
I would request from you some
kind of help with that.
The.
The season's over this year.
The next year it's just a little
ways away again.
And if if we could work
something out to that which
certainly appreciate.
Mr chairman and and senator
we'll certainly look again and
see what we can do I know you
had a bill maybe last year last
couple years and we supported
that bill we don't have any
problem with what you're trying
to do we think it's a good idea
but it for whatever reason
hasn't passed I don't know but
we certainly will continue to
help you with that and let me
look and see if it's not against
the law we're willing to help
them let me take a look at that
and see and the number Mr
chairman and senator was that it
would cost us to get everyone to
fifteen dollars an hour as a
hundred eighty four thousand.
Which with with the top budget
that's not a great big deal.
Mister chairman Senator I would
agree with you.
Okay Mister chair the those are
my million requested by I do
appreciate it thank you very
much Senator Hemphill thank you
Mr chairman thank you Secretary
for The presentation I just had
a quick question right with
supply chain issues and
workforce issues do you have
what you need to have the
capacity you need to complete
the projects like highway one
eighty I guess if the expansion
of highway one eighty do you
have everything that you need to
be able to complete that.
Mr chairman and senator yes I
think we've already put aside
twenty five million for phase
one of USAT these are challenges
you know cost materials supply
chain we're just trying to be
more strategic power letting
things and making sure that
we're giving contractors enough
time to get everything they need
but there's plenty of projects
to go out there so we don't have
the full amount that we need yet
for US one eighty but I know
with some of the federal money
coming in and maybe if we were
to get some more money this year
a general fund or other kind of
funding that is on our priority
list for sure actually yeah
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr chairman I just want to note
that the first time out seven
years that and the secretary
from DOT in here and I haven't
said we're one about highway
fifty four scientists.
Want to go on record of of
taking their first.
Thank you Mr secretary for being
here let me ask you some
questions what we gonna do about
I forty.
I mean not that deal with either
no more construction.
Or figure out what we're gonna
do it it's to that point so many
within eight hours the other day
there was a wreck and there they
were eight hours.
Mr chairman I think there is
some short term things in some
long term things a short term is
we're starting to to cancel or
postpone some of the projects
that we're doing on I. forty for
example we just terminated a
project to do guardrail and the
reason was is because it was in
a B. mile several different
miles of going down to one lane
to get that guardrail installed
and we're postponing that until
eventually what we're what we're
in the process of doing a six
lane in from Albuquerque there
is on the state line and so we
already have a contract in place
to start phasing that out and
seeing what the smart way to do
that is we already have close to
seventy million dollars put
aside to start that process
thirty four came from bonding
and then the other the other
amounts from some of the money
that's provided will invest some
federal money and that we want
to build up some of the frontage
roads first and that way if
there is a crash or something
like that happens we have places
for people to go that the
traffic can keep moving what
we're trying to limit any
construction that's not.
Absolutely a hundred percent
necessary from now until we
start building out the frontage
roads and getting that six line
process started well they they
did that the other day in the
front row stop.
They had a record of more than
and then they blocked a railroad
track.
So people trying to come over
could get out just today the
biggest nightmare we got to
figure that out because I mean
everybody from Gallup grants are
just like.
They don't even know what it's
could take if they leave the day
before for the doctor's
appointment personally with our
before.
And the it's giving real service
it and I bet the cost of that
road is equal to the cost of the
lawsuits that we're going to see
of the accidents.
So it's just we've been two or
three years right we did that
for western R. or forget their
finally we did one sided we said
we'll wait to the next with
because you had a whole bunch
workers and they closed we could
have got it done in the year in
so far that's on us but
We just got to figure that out
maybe put right in the late.
Louisville Mr.
Maybe Senator did have some
right maybe we should take some
more federal money and pay off
the bonds and build your
capacity.
I don't know if you can because
they may be under contract
budget of what kind of bond but
we should give you the
opportunity have war cashiers
part of it and not always be
bonding everything it can get
rid of some of that that that
may be one of the better things
you can do that turn off the
realtor.
And the.
do so the way that things
because it's absolutely out here
I see the ghost on it the other
day.
The only person on there
What talk a little bit about
Gallup.
There's two rooms warning
Gallup.
I wanted twenty million dollars.
There's absolutely nothing
there.
There was no design or build out
for that nobody's ever going to
move there
right I don't have that we got
through the cracks of.
But there's nobody there.
The other one is Allison
corridor.
I mean I keep hearing from local
engineers that I use but one
twenty to translate for me the
Senate Allison is that if eight
right there and you're going to
be below the.
The flow like when you go in so
what we're gonna do it.
Mr Chairman I think the only
thing I can I can say about that
is those are roads are
identified in house bill two
and so that's why we're doing
them.
We're gonna have to deal more
specific is not fixed up that
doesn't have a house or doesn't
have anything but I count as a
kind of that was down the road
it's it's kind of more so when I
got here from people like.
With that road for is going to
build your house there the the
have anything to do with it
The other thing is could you.
Also send that list that seven
one woods wants to senator
Candelaria the.
And then the.
There is talk about a bill that
you probably the perfect agency
to do this Senator Lopez has a
bill for fifteen dollar minimum
wage but you want to apply to
contractors to.
Could you guys run a cell
numbers that say what would your
total cost increase if the
fifteen dollar was applied to to
state contractors and there is
some federal Davis bacon the
already deal with their cell
that.
Wages with.
Mr Chairman we'd be happy to and
I want to I will tell you the
we'd probably need to get that
information from a CNM and
assuming that contractors are
willing to share that with us we
can provided to you I don't know
what.
Senator here what privacy they
have I know they don't like to
share some of those things
because if they're compared or
knows what they're starting as
but I if there's anything that
we can get a hold of would
certainly happy to share that
with you yeah and and I would
just what I'd ask myself if
there is a fifteen dollar
minimum wage on your contract
and let's just say litter
control.
for low hanging fruit how much
is that more than across the
state.
Read that's what we do know
because they want to push that
down contractors Senator
contractors they want pushes a
fifteen dollar minimum wage
across.
Which nobody works for fifteen
anymore settled the other makes
a difference about but we better
make sure our budget that we we
know that cost is the mission of
the.
I see that.
A lot of road maintenance
coverage right he have enough
rural regions your.
Mr chairman we do not have
enough for road maintenance and
I think if we were to get us
some of the money that's
proposed in the in the LFC
budget we're proposing that
ninety million of that goes
towards
we we column smaller projects I
don't know that maintenance is
the right word but kinda Year
two inch for inch Millen and
lays a statement stuff that will
really help it's not total
reconstruction and so we think
there we want to be equitable so
fifteen million per district we
came up with ninety million
dollars with the projects in
those have been submitted to
LFC.
And so the the gap that Connor
has presentation you can show T.
rate is about three hundred ten
million.
So how much of that can be used
with federal funds.
Mr Chairman federal funds are
not we can't use them for
maintenance and so there's that
kind of fine line we draw about
what to maintenance project and
what's a regular project so some
of this increase federal money
that we're getting we think we
could use some of that for some
of these million lays and other
things but for general
maintenance like fixing
guardrails and all of those type
of things we can't use federal
funds for that will you give us
some numbers that can offset
that cost so if we're a little
bigger okay I have a five fifty
if you could you have a five
fifteen get with federal funds
rate what what the dollar match
would be so that we can actually
free of money.
To go other places and you can
pick a place I'm not I'm just
saying maybe it's because it's
easy it could go to later claim
of it could go the rest stop
areas it could go to.
Mr chairman we can put that
together for yes.
I think that's really important
I just want you guys to do the
job.
And all the.
They do a really good job don't
ever hear the bad things the
summit I forty.
I just texture picture.
And and so I I do think you guys
do a good job
I haven't ever heard any
complaints about the O. T.
they're always responsive to
everyone in the room.
except for center was but.
Thank you I appreciate that.
Thank you Mr the other thing I
appreciate is you don't come in
here tribal office on the
budget.
And put the squeeze in this well
this with this that's the most
important thing that you can do.
Thank you Mr.
There was one that got your
truck.
Secretary of rural.
There was talk earlier about
wildlife crossing.
So that'll understand that
twelfth because.
You guys go in there in in mold
your dentures when you mow your
ditches get rid of all the
coarse grasses.
And it takes him down to a nice
place for a while.
And when that new growth comes
up sometimes but because water
runs off of highways.
The new grass is a greenish
Representative how with.
And I can't see why wildlife.
Would go up been over when he's
got all the good grades and
right beside the highway.
So the only way that I can see
that that would work.
Is to put came fits up.
You know that the.
You know the cost of that game
fits is about a hundred thousand
dollars.
Quarter mile is what I've heard
chair.
So when we start talking about
wildlife crossings we also have
to include the cost of the game
fits on both sides or they're
just going to jump the for wire
fence for the five R. six to R.
fits in go graze along the edge
of the highway where the best
grazing is because they don't
know any different.
So I have support for when we
start talking about wildlife
crossings Mr chair
you are you still are you eating
roadkill.
Yeah I have the we had a
restaurant there and Grady when
calling.
Interview ever go to the
Farmington go to aspect towards
Colorado that there's about five
miles of the states that that
way when they diverted under the
highway and everything else the
other **** thing is is you know
we we gave money to subgroup
last year plant flowers next to
the road to see bees.
There's there's some hi
financing alone of.
The two here is good news.
Right in there and they they've
got places for the game to jump
out of there is not real
crossing through ways for me to
get out of there so it makes you
wonder if they got all that high
financing how does the game get
in there.
Makes it easier having center
yeah.
Easier to thank you Mr chair
thank you Secretary thank you Mr
chairman.
You tell frankly congratulations
on this award again.
Our staff of expert as you sit
down what you give us a high
levels because we're losing
members like flies.
All right.
Thank you before you leave
there's a sign for you my
office.
Respect we're gonna start.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee will be reviewing
very very briefly I just some
high level differences between
the executive and LFC
recommendation for sections five
and six you do have a
spreadsheet it looks like this.
Yeah looks like this your
personal problems have the
executive recommendation and
your green columns have the LFC
recommendation and then your
very very far right column has
the difference between the
recommendations.
again my name is Amanda Dick
Peddie with the LFC I'm doing I
cleaned lowball LFC program
evaluators and Dr Andrew Miner
from the state budget division.
I'm.
Do we just have to of all our
members been through this
before.
The.
I know that but the average that
is gonna make a rack the DFA is
going to come back and say why
they did that so you'll
understand and was given to the
high levels of mold wants to
eight eight differences and LFC
members have seen this before
this document is also at least
the LFC recommendation is in
your volume one as well so it's
been circulated around since
December and I'm always
available for questions.
So to get started the LFC
recommendation totaled fifty
five hundred and sixty nine
million including a hundred and
ninety five point six million
from the general fund.
The executive recommendation
totaled one point six billion of
which is seven hundred and
twenty six point nine million
was from the general fund.
So that makes the general fund
difference between the LFC and
Executive recommendations
approximately four hundred and
sixty eight million dollars
that's obviously really big gap
but most of that difference is
accounted for in about ten items
which I will review and then I
will what internet for their
contact.
So couple really big differences
between recommendations
for Medicaid the executive
recommended about a hundred and
twenty eight million in general
fund revenue that the LESC did
not recommend.
The executive also recommended.
You Mr line numbers medicine for
the.
Sorry for high level with.
There's a like number put.
Sixty seven.
We just the page by page Mr
chair yes the this is not.
Okay the page by page is that
under okay
Nobody will interrupt you.
Okay that's fine I thank you all
right Mr chairman so again the
spreadsheet should look like
this for page number one.
These are mostly appropriations
to the courts you can see the
executive recommended almost
every single item for the courts
I would like to point out item
number nineteen you see a
recommendation.
For four hundred ninety five
thousand dollars from the LFC
and you see nothing in the
executive column so what the LFC
recommendation data is it rolled
up a lot of these teeny tiny
recommendations are requests
from the point and put them in
one line item so that's the one
all five for that one hundred
and twenty good afternoon Mister
chairman thank you members
pleasure to be here in the
interest of time I'll keep my
comments the very biggest things
and so I have nothing on page
one.
Thank I'm also in the interest
of time I have nothing on page
two we're still going through of
course is on page two.
Andrew anything.
We appreciate
Mr chairman members I have
nothing on page three.
We will move on then members to
paid for.
So the first really big
difference that you're going to
see between the recommendations
is actually on page four that's
item number sixty four the
department of finance and
administration are the executive
recommended a hundred million
dollars to DFA for us
expenditure for public safety
initiatives this was not
requested this was an executive
admin so that's a really really
big chunk of the difference that
you see I will note that the LFC
has its own prime package and
some of those items I can no
throughout the presentation.
And thanks Amanda Mr chairman
committee members item sixty
four you've probably heard about
it's been out there it's the ten
year public safety initiative
that's a in full forward to
distribute funds to all local
law enforcement agencies across
the state for officer
recruitment retention and things
like that so this is a little
bit more detail on what that was
put in for.
Mr chairman and committee
members will just point out a
couple items on page seven.
Item number one hundred and one
for the game and fish department
nine million dollars for the
executive recommended for
conservation efforts for species
of the greatest need that's
contingent on at the federal
recovering America's wildlife
act passing which would leverage
about twenty seven million in
federal funds if that happened
that item number one sixteen for
energy minerals fourteen million
dollars for conservation
easements recommended by the
executive.
I'm sorry that Senator that's a
one oh six.
And Mr chairman members if I
could just make a quick note on
item one of six.
At fourteen million dollars
that's recommended by the
executive you see nothing and
LFC LFC actually recommends five
million dollars in section ten
which Mr Cheney's gonna go over
right after this so that one
wasn't completely left out of
the recommendation is yes
included in another place.
I have a question Senator.
Just on on
we've talked about.
The money to buy land this looks
like money to filing.
We're going to get to review
these again this is a
spreadsheet before house bill
two comes over you can see the
differences that and have the
differences in it for you and I
are.
You can read.
Well the good news is I'm
nothing on TV Andrew anything on
page eight I'm also good all
right we'll move ahead to page
nine I'll go ahead us and point
one big one out item one twenty
four for the department of
health this is five million
dollars for health care
infrastructure LFC did not
recommend this it was used as a
recurring expense which we
generally try not to provide in
this section of the bill
Andrew anything else Mr
One
Item two seventeen the LFC did
not
That action.
I am.
On
That are for
Primarily a health LFC
of recommendations so for
One is our
Nibert
What we are for a
For right now
That
The LFC provided
One.
I think the
Five
Appropriation from previous
years three authorized for four
three I'm so that we have been
available for the.
Created by the to use the
internet this project with the
PDF versions.
Each of the
plans to be included for about
twenty twenty five and all of
the believe that the department
of health could be about twenty
eight hundred eighty offered
for.
we'll go to the next one with
the fire department with the
difference of about one point
five million online one of the
program.
The police on the request where
the LFC PDC Agency and not begin
a project LFC one entity even if
you click on completion of their
other thing I talked to the
enterprise the monarchy.
so that provides the right
there.
the bottom with a nine hundred
ninety thousand members for the
purpose of public speaking line
three the.
Permissions.
Your project I get into the
members of the people they had
the funds there.
For the line number twenty four
again into the part of the
public the internet intelligence
let's looking hard.
the requested by five point five
million.
Fully funded all of the
legislative line for your free
to the
the the limited staff report
project.
A couple more at the bottom of
your.
The higher education department
you get about three point two
million on the line fire.
One.
Project again.
Fund we're looking to find about
how.
Impacted analogy was would you
do we need any additional
contributions from
from federal.
And then the last one year.
similar to the.
And for planning and information
for the most part.
In in the home nation's leading
of that and and people the
collaborative higher education.
This is a partnership between
community colleges and the
higher department you can see
there are questions about one of
the executive budget policy
provided five million dollars
the EDD your contribution from
those participating college
members and as well as.
Thank you.
I'm.
The overall.
You need to be about thirty
million dollars LESC provided
about one thirty nine.
Million at one hundred thirty
nine million in total and then
the with about one hundred.
Relational COVID.
And then the economic questions
or.
Thanks committee chair members
of the committee will take up
too much of your time uses
Jessica went through all the
differences but overall the
executive is about thirty
million dollars higher than the
general fund then the LFC
however recommendations provided
at least partial funding for
pretty much all of the requests
so really the majority of that
thirty million dollars this is
due to the executive zero to
support full funding for these
projects as well as the LFC
recommendation which provides
partial we're the funding for
many of these projects and so
please finally requires agencies
to come back to you in the three
years to request the remaining
nine funding needed or if we
need and just as a reminder is
appropriations are act all the
way through the end of fiscal
year twenty twenty four if there
appropriated session.
the executive recommendation
supports for funding for these
projects really for two reasons
first AC expressed concern that
the funding can only increase
the cost of the overall cost of
the project and seconded BDCs
indicated that the funding can
lead to project delays so with
that turn it back over to you Mr
thank you for your time.
Thank you who's going to hire
it.
Mr chair I wasn't aware that
higher ed was on I know we have
section ten which is the arpa
section and we have Mr Cheney
here to do that.
We have that.
Mr chair.
Members of the committee.
It looks like this.
I actually got to so we've got
one that looks like this.
This one here is just a
reference we're not going to go
over it but it's so what we did
during the special session
because part of the LFC
recommendation.
Was passed during the special
session and so it kind of got
split into two.
So that kind of helps me explain
the
Spreadsheet the other
spreadsheet the guys have in
front of you with the you'll
call on.
You have a cold there this is
additional general fund to reach
the LFC recommendations just as
we did part of those
recommendations during special
session.
We have a little more in here
or.
More in here to reach that and
then we also have a call this is
a joint additional general fund
ACF ACF stands for the
appropriation contingency fund.
And so what we did during the
special session.
Was we transferred one billion
sixty nine million dollars from
the Arbor fund into the
appropriation contingency fund.
The reason why we have a broken
out like this is because some of
these appropriations that we're
looking at or going towards
federal projects which you can
the.
Match with state dollars and so
you'll see it some of the
language items on there that
we say this comes from the
general fund and not from the
ACF because ACF is essentially
federal funds.
With that Mr chair let's go over
the first one I'm not going to
go over every single item in
here I think if you guys have a
question I think the best way to
do it it's just stop me if you
can.
Go from there.
So online want to the department
of transportation these are for
the statewide major investment
projects that haven't been
funded yet you can see the list
of projects that are that is
included on that line I'm not
gonna go through all those.
skipping down to line eight to
the administrative office of the
courts this is to the county
courthouse building fund this is
a new fund it's being
there's a bill being passed
right now so this is contingent
on passage of that bill.
I move on to page two.
Line thirteen.
I just want to the department of
finance administration and this
is for those of public private
partnership of hydrogen energy
this was a hundred fifty million
dollars.
includes administrative costs
for MFA is meant to help make to
stay competitive to receive a
sum of eight billion.
I for one of the for hydrogen
energy hopes the federal
government funded in the recent
structure bill.
moving on to the line fifteen.
This is the for recreation
centers a statewide this is to
DFA to do this.
Line eighteen we have seventy
million there to the General
Services Department for the
executive office building I
believe this is the one they
were talking about going across
the street this B. for all those
executive agencies like
Like the eight well maybe not
the need but the treasured some
of the others.
With K. three.
Line twenty seven.
State engineer.
Thirty seven million dollars and
this is for that am I K. Madam.
for the Indian Water Rights
Madam.
Line twenty nine to the Human
Services Department this is
twenty million dollars this was
basically to build capacity for
behavioral health services sure
this behavioral health and
community of child welfare.
Line thirty the next one down
this one's for hospitals labor
costs
due to COVID nineteen.
And that would have about
seventy million dollars in there
that you don't you don't see it
on these columns here but once
we built into the bill you see
about seventy million dollars in
matching Medicaid revenue with
that.
moving on to page four.
Line thirty five to the higher
education department we've got
fifty million dollars.
And this is for social worker in
the elements.
includes language requiring a
maintenance of effort from
institutions so this one is this
one's kind of one that I think
we've talked a lot about you
know it's it's the work force
for social workers out there if
you think about children youth
and families department a lot of
those kinds agencies.
It's hard to staff of those
agencies with with staff and so
this is to build up the
endowments in the universities
to try it look kind of a longer
term strategy to kind of build
up the work force in that area
then same thing in the next
slide down for nurses it you
we've heard about that quite a
bit that we don't have enough
nurses out there this is in
order to build those endowments
of.
Line forty three higher
education department.
This is a hundred and fifty
million dollars to the lottery
tuition Fund the way we want
right the strategy were kind of
looking at is that the higher
education department would spend
these funds down first because
they do expire at some point and
then.
The
Fund balances from all the other
funds all the other revenues to
go into that fund would build up
over time and we build up the
principal balance in those in
that fund their.
The last page.
Well to show the totals there on
the.
In the you know traditional
general fund com additional
general fund.
Go total of seven hundred
seventy six point three million
and then from that federal this
federal funds a CF we've got
about seven hundred twenty four
million.
And with that.
Mr chair will stand for
questions.
The first thing I see there is
in your section nine ten eleven
I want a complete breakdown of
that okay I want to see what it
is I want to see eight of the
ones that make them question
from committee members service.
Yet Mr chairman I would like to
see that also if it's alright
with you
what was there I'm not quite
sure if this is where it would
be or what part of the
presentation of the but did we
and make sure that we left
Special Olympics funding along.
Because we we have that we're
member fell a couple years ago
out of the budget and Google
said come and get it put back in
and.
We put it in the last year that
that isn't house bill two
general fund we're not if you
are part yeah I know this is our
first but is there somewhere
that I can see if you're in the
other document.
Chairman members this Special
Olympics funding for the tourism
department.
Has been funded in this special
appropriation to my knowledge
it's not in the operating budget
but it is included in the LFC
recommendation for tourism
intersection I what I just want
to know that we were attempting
to stir chairman to take it from
with to make it recurring and
ensure that it was that it
started out recurring every year
is is that the case.
Mister chairman Senator all have
to double check but it
definitely there is a
nonrecurring appropriation all
double check the operating
budget for recurring and thank
you Mr chairman I just wanna
make sure that that's there and
what is the amount and then if I
could see that I appreciate it.
And then that was making a bunch
of you know kind of questions
were going along here but on the
line twenty six on the
The AGD component portion.
Is that any over hello from
where that came from.
The higher a total for the
condition is page notes the
other one it's the one that we
were looking at that.
Yes Mr chairman and members I
think that that question goes to
Jessica.
The broadband yeah was that
we're gonna go well I've got a
bunch of questions and broadband
necks actually but so so online
twenty six is that the
partnership between C. N. M.
Santa Fe community college and I
think the northern I think San
Juan jumped in on some action
there Clovis Community College
anybody know.
The yes that is correct I
believe some of the colleges you
mentioned are slated for the
you.
So they're kind of doing it and
we say no fears about I believe
there's four five colleges that
are currently and then there
will be additional colleges
joining and one will be joining
me to where are completed before
we for that that is the correct
you'll refer to okay thank you
Mr chairman thank you the
presenters and Mr Chairman said
okay we just jump around real
quickly to some questions we
have on any of these are how did
you want to do this Senator
Padilla you know what since
Friday at five o'clock.
we can go through these with
staff but we can bring the DFA
analyst over R. LOC the store
forty eight we need to have to
go through one by one okay the
most important thing that you
can look at this you'll see
large numbers but you don't
break it down after that that's
where you really want to look at
the detail of where the money's
Representative generates going
when you see a large number.
Okay can I just ask about
broadband right now because I
know that we did the one twenty
three it looks on this document
here during the special a
special number to.
I think I saw another seventy
million somewhere in here we're
racing through the the figures.
Mr chairman I believe
Twenty six million.
on line nineteen.
To do with this twenty six
million left over that's how
much it would cost to reach the
LFC recommendations for
broadband want to surprise the
chairman is no more about this
surprisingly because I don't
still have you seen the plan I
still have not seen the plan I
don't know what they're doing
I'm not quite sure what the
financial plan is I haven't seen
a map I have an order you're
doing that's not you guys but
I'm just wondering what we doing
with with all these dollars and
what what what is the plan
because that we were relying on
a plan for a an analysis of two
years from two years ago right
now so I'm not quite sure what
we're doing with this I'm
looking at it plans to work you
can in that were presented to
committee's two years ago.
Senator Padilla.
Okay well I just wanted to help
you on this Mr chairman I know
you were concerned about it so
the plane the like five hundred
thousand I agree and that's why
I keep asking about if.
I don't know.
They were planted in the liver
probably deliver it.
Thank you that's an ongoing
thing for receive any bill
federal funds for reimbursement
the plan has to be a place so I
just worry Mr chairman I'm gonna
senior those federal funds if we
don't get this plan in place so
and also thanks.
Etcetera I suggest you go to the
fourth floor hello.
We're not gonna resolve the
Mexico's issues of this we are
pleased.
They're giving that.
No just just the general one
column I did go over was a seal
on it was just to point out that
there was no executive
recommendation for the so
that's.
Mr chairman would you ask a
question.
Mr we're not talking about a
proven any of this on this all
the frameworks we see the
sections of the bill you know
how much money is going where
what agencies so with the bill
comes over you'll see that'll be
compiled like we usually see the
house bill two so you need to
know the sections of the in
additional appropriation of what
I do want you guys to do is
somehow give us a break out she
of federal money and the.
And general fund money.
Because I really want to watch
that to your timeline of war
placing that money if they're
going to use it there or not.
And if they're not gonna be able
to.
Mr Chairman off on there is it's
broken out so that the general
fund and the general fund ECF.
Your ACL Fund is your federal
funds.
Okay good.
The board thank you guys.
Thank you guys the LFC and DFA
in I mean yesterday or golfing
today or back at the beach.
You're you're like the third
deputy secretary of the health I
think she's somewhere out of
state to the.
How did we get everybody thank
you.
Thank you to a healthy guy but
you guys are flat right now.
From.
