30 Day session. What I refer to
as the next generation session,
to, uh as over the last couple
of years, we've really worked to
bring together the finances,
developed the programs and the
strategy for New Mexico moving
forward. So again, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Thank the vice chair
and all the members. It's great
to be here.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr Chair and
Madam vice chair and members of
the committee. Welcome back
Everybody for another
installment of
A lot of fun and a lot of fun
Next generation to session. I'm
more than happy to be a part of
it represent the Southwest
Quadrant. Bernalillo County
Appreciate all of the staff and
everybody that does so many
wonderful things for all of us.
I want to look around and say
thank you for all of the hard
work that you do you work just
as hard, if not harder than all,
all of the work that we do and
chair I do look forward to a
very active and robust
discussion and
What we're going to be doing
with this surplus that we have
right now and just making sure
that we're doing something safe
for the future as well as
getting things done now. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Good
morning to our audience and
Um Senator Roberto Bobby Jay
Gonzales on
District six and encompasses
part of Los Alamos, Real Rivers,
Santa Fe and 1000. I just want
to extend a big welcome to our
new staff and to a very
productive sessions, So thank
you to our new staff.
Sara Woods. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Half Woods, representing CORRECT
Quinn. Union counties, uh, in
northeastern Mexico. Thank you.
Morning, Mr Chair of Good
afternoon. We this afternoon
already. My name is Bill Bert
Senate District, 33 and with
redistricting were
All of Lincoln County and the
northern half of Otero County,
And I live in Alamogordo and
nice to be back in Santa Fe led
the snow is melting.
Good morning, Mr Chairman and
visitors. Crystal Brantley. I
represent Senate District 35.
which is the far southwest
corner of New Mexico. It's good
to be here. Thanks, Mr Chair.
I'm Bill Sheriff, Senator from
District one, which is far
Minton and points West.
Senator Rodrigues.
Good afternoon to everyone. I'm
Nancy Senator Nancy Rodriguez
Santa Fe, Of course, District
24. And I'm happy to be here.
It's I can't believe we're here
already. Truly for a session, So
welcome to everyone. Thanks.
Thank you. I'm Jorge Mendoza
represents Ebola, McKinley and
San Juan counties get started,
since I know they're anxious to
present this
Number of I've heard three
times.
Who's gonna start with Wayne or
secretary. Good Morning, Mr
Chair or Good afternoon. I got
that from Senator Bert. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Stephanie
Chardon Clark. I'm the secretary
of the Taxation and Revenue
Department. And this is a repeat
of our presentation that we gave
to the lfc and December I think
it was December 11th. And so
we'll keep our comments very
brief and make sure that we
leave enough time for your
Guides starting on Page four.
Really The highlight here is
that there wasn't a lot of
change to the macro economic
baseline forecasts on which the
estimate is based between the
August forecast in the December
forecast both Moody's and S and
P as well as you and EMS Bieber
are currently forecasting no
recession in the U. S economy,
but slower positive growth in
the U. S economy.
And so that's that's the main
takeaway from slide. Five. The
next couple slides really just
kind of show that, um, first we
look at US GDP growth again, not
much changed from the previous
forecast. Same with state GDP
growth and slide six and then
over to employment and slide
seven and eight. You can see
there's not a lot of change to
the U. S. Or New Mexico
employment forecasts.
Um, slide nine gives a nice
overview of where the job growth
has been in New Mexico, that
this is your over year change
from October 22 to October 2023.
And if you're interested, you
can kind of delve down sector by
sector and what which sectors
are growing and contracting. Um,
next on slide 10. The main
takeaway is really just that the
New Mexico and U. S economies
are about even when it comes to
the unemployment rate.
There there, both hovering right
around 3.8%.
Um, on the next slide, 11. There
is one change to call your
attention to on the graph on the
right. You can see that the
forecast for the federal funds
rate did change pretty
significantly from the August
forecast to the December
forecast. You can see that the
Fed is now expected to hold the
target rate higher for longer.
Okay, moving into oil and
natural gas and slide 13. You
can see the change that was made
to the oil price forecast in the
near term FY 24 and 25 the
consensus revenue estimating
group added a couple of dollars
per barrel to the oil forecast,
but in the out years they reduce
the oil forecast for by a couple
of dollars per barrel. So, um
Up in the near term down in the
longer term for oil price and
then on site 14. You can see the
other component that impacts oil
revenue, which is oil volume.
We've reduced the expectation
for production volumes for oil
in each of the forecast years,
so overall, there is a decrease
to the oil forecast. I'll talk a
little bit later about that,
Really, The General fund is
pretty well insulated from that
increase from that decrease to
the oil forecast, the the result
of the decrease will be more to
the reserve.
Transfers, transfers to the
trust fund. Things like that.
Um, I'll skip over the next
couple of slides that are very
technical side. 15 just shows
the decline that you're used to
seeing in our oil production per
well, um, some some more
technical slides.
And of Skip forward to
Slide 21, which summarizes the
personal income tax revenue
outlook. Um, you can see that
after two years of very strong
growth in pit fy, 22 and 23. Now
the forecast calls for basically
steady, moderate growth in the
out years. There's a negative 1%
growth projected in FY 24 that's
not showing weakness in the pit
base. It's it's a result of
legislative changes being
enacted.
Um and then two and 3% growth in
the out years.
Next on site. 24. I'm sorry
Inside 25. We have the same kind
of chart for the grocery seats
tax. Similar story after 22%
growth in fy 20 to 15% growth in
FY 23. We're forecasting. Um,
just
Positive but moderate growth in
the grocery seats texts in the
in the out years.
Um, Next, we move on to some of
the energy related taxes,
severance taxes and rents and
royalties slide. 27 is just
giving the committee and update
on those transfers. I talked
about a minute ago and as a
result of legislative changes
enacted over the past several
years, we've got these
mechanisms to move windfall
revenue out of the General fund
into the
Text Liberalization reserve the
early childhood trust fund. Um,
and now the Severance Tax
permanent fund, and you can see
here the estimated transfers to
those reserves and and again
what That means is that the
decrease to the oil forecast is
not impacting the General fund.
It's it's instead impacting
those out your transfers.
And with that, I'll turn it over
to Secretary Propst.
Good afternoon, Mr
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman. My
name is Wayne props on the
secretary for the Department of
Finance and Administration.
Happy New Year to each and
everyone each and every one of
you. You might have to pull that
just a little bit closer wing.
Okay. Is that a little bit
better?
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I, too will be brief. Mr.
Chairman. I'll start on slide
30.
As Secretary Chardon, Clark
noted after a number of years of
quite extraordinary growth in
revenues, we are starting to see
revenues Plateau the growth for
FY 25 is projected to be 2.2% if
I 26 2%, 27 3.2% and FY 28.
3.2%. So we are again Mr
Chairman, As we noted in your
hearing in December, expecting
growth to return to a more
normal level after those
extraordinary and frankly
unprecedented levels of fy 22
through fy 24
I'll skip over side 31 Mr
Chairman and go on to slide. Um
32
What you've all been waiting for
For the fourth time. The new
money for FY 25 is projected to
be $3.48 billion. This is
unchanged from December, and,
frankly, it's unchanged from
what we reported to you.
In July as well.
I did, uh,
Note to the House Appropriations
of Finance Committee yesterday,
when we made the same
presentation that I had seen a
report that our neighbor to the
West Arizona, whose legislature
convened yesterday is convening,
facing a billion dollars
shortfall in their budget, So we
have that pretty good here in
New Mexico that we are blessed
with this.
Um, projected new money of
almost $3.5 billion for the
upcoming session.
A slide 33.
Again. Mr Chairman, Not much has
changed on this slide since the
original consensus revenue
forecasts, the only thing that
has changed slightly is the FY
24 the middle column you'll see
reserve transfers, etcetera. I
believe when we reported to you,
at least in July, if not
December, as well. That number
was closer to 600 million. We
are now projecting a little
slightly over 900 million for
that category in FY 24.
Hmm.
Side 34. I'll skip over this one
as well. Mr Chairman, because
you can tell the future as well
as I can.
It's aside, 35 as we always do,
Mr Chairman are economists that
have joined us today as well as
our consultants do a number of
stress testing on all of our
scenarios to ensure that we are
capturing the potential, not
only for upside from the revenue
forecast, but also potential
downside either from a Russian
recession.
A decline in oil and gas
revenues or a combination of
both of those, And with that, Mr
Chairman, I will will all stand
for quite or I guess we'll turn
it over to Mr Torres.
Thank you, Mr Secretary and good
afternoon members is mild.
Torres, the chief economist of
the Legislative Finance
Committee, I'll be speaking to
the LFC brief.
Which hopefully you have in
front of you as well. Um, and
I'll also be brief. I hope
you're hearing the or taking
away the message that we've been
repeating, which is
The growth or the revenue still
remain high, but the growth is
slowing down significantly so we
had almost 20% revenue growth in
FY 20 to 20% and 23, where,
estimating that to slow down to
10% in 24, and then before US
secretary props mentioned
reaching that 3% 2% range in the
out years so going from that
extraordinary Lee high level
rather than continuing a sharp
upward trend, it's now slowing
down and flattening out into
something more of a plateau with
slower growth than we were used
to in these
Couple of years.
Um, if you'll turn to page to
the chart at the top of this
page here just shows the makeup
of the revenue increase in FY 20
for two thirds of that is oil
and gas as you all are familiar,
And so that's the base that
we're really climbing from in
the out years, and it's really
important to know as I'll get
into here in a second that the
now the largest driver of
revenue, General fund growth is
coming from our interest and
investment earnings that's from
the permanent funds and from
investments on the general fund
balances by the state
treasurer's office.
So, um, if you
Turn to Page three.
The chart at the bottom is is an
example of this slowdown that is
both economic and financial
fiscal for the state's revenues.
These bars represent the
employment growth over several
years. The green bars show in
22 blue bars, 23 and orange bars
in 24. You can see how much
employment growth has slowed
down as the state reached full
employment.
That, of course, correlates to
slowing personal income tax
collections as well.
If you turn to page four, you'll
see the oil production growth
rate at the bottom there. New
Mexico was leading the nation in
in oil production growth, almost
60% oil production growth there
in those early years, especially
after the pandemic. We continue
to lead the nation in oil
production growth, but since
that has come down quite a bit,
it's now below 10% growth
approaching that 0% as we see
oil production leveling out.
And you can see that on Page
five. The chart at the top is
oil represented an average
barrels per day per month and
you can see over the last
several months. We had a dip in
oil production. It's since come
back a little bit, but that just
speaks further to that point of
plaque towing.
Economic growth plateau owing
revenues for the state, and
we're seeing it in oil as well.
Plateau in growth in oil
production.
Um, if you turn to let's see
here
Page seven.
I'll speak to the chart at the
top here, which is just another
way of thinking about what
Secretary Chardon Clark
mentioned with the grocer seats,
tax slowing down and with
legislative changes taking
effect we had, as you can see
here, the represented by the
black line, uh, above trend
revenue growth in the gross
receipts tax. The blue line
represents the trend.
The Black line represents our
actual revenues. You can see
we're well above the 10 year
trend. But as you all have
enacted those gross receipts tax
rate cuts it since come back
down towards the trend.
The charts below it.
Just illustrate the point again,
that Secretary Shorten Clark
mentioned these are oil and gas
related revenues. If you take
the sum of all those bars,
that's total collections, and
you'll notice that we actually
had a peak collection year in FY
23. That's because oil prices
were high, and even though
production has grown since then,
prices have come down so much so
that total revenue collections
from that source are actually
down. And if we did not have
those insulating mechanisms like
Secretary Sharon Clark mentioned
to the seven sacks Permanent
fund or the early childhood
Trust fund, we actually would
have declining general
Fund revenues, but because of
those insulating mechanisms
The General fund is is able to
continue to grow from its other
sources.
Um, if you turn to page eight
The chart at the top represents,
uh, the general fund growth from
different revenue sources. The
Green Bar is the largest. That's
interest and investment income
in the General Fund. It is the
most stable source of revenue in
the General fund, and it is now
our fastest growing revenue
source, in part because of all
those distributions that you all
have chosen to make, um into the
permanent fund.
If you turn to page nine, I'll
draw your attention to the graph
in the middle of the page. This
is similar to the grocery seats
tax on personal income tax
collections were well above the
10 year trend, but many of the
income tax credits or deductions
that you all have implemented
have brought that personal
income tax back into trend as a
lot of that strength was passed
back onto new Mexicans.
Alright if you turn to page 12
Well, just briefly get into a
little more detail on the stress
test as secretary props
mentioned, Uh, your economists
do this to help you understand
the risks that that might be
presented to you all and I want
to draw your attention to the
table line. Five in Blue is the
potential license to the General
fund over two years. That's
about 1.71 point $6.5 billion of
potential losses in a low oil
price and production scenario.
Over the course of three years.
That would be closer to $3.5
billion, so that hopefully helps
to inform your reserve targets.
if you turn to page 13.
The two charts on the right
represents the trends in oil and
gas related revenues. You can
see that those still remain well
above the trend and have not
returned to trend and are
contributing to the Total
General fund being well above
the trend, as you can see in the
middle of the page $2 billion in
24 1.5 billion above the trend
in 26.
Um, And with that, Mr Chair, I
think we're ready for questions.
Um, thank you, mr Chair on the
revenue side.
Because we are so dependent on
the oil and gas industry.
And we have, I guess pretty
stable prices.
In the $70 range now.
Do we see that affecting?
Production.
Uh, assume
The wells that are
In production right now, But are
we still seeing the rig count
coming in like we have been
seeing?
Is the exploration still going
on?
And kind of at what price of or
do you think that will be in
your crystal ball? Do you think
that that will decrease
Thank you, Mr Chair and Senator
Woods. We are seeing a
surprising amount of stability
in oil prices, given everything
that's going on in the world,
but we're also seeing that very
stable exploration and drilling
and in the number of rigs that
we see in New Mexico, in part
because of the discipline. A lot
of these producers are having in
returning any sort of
profitability to shareholders
rather than
Investing it back into further
or or expanding exploration or
expanding production. So we've
seen rigs stay around that 100.
Range around 100 rigs, active
rigs, and that has led to that
slowing production because, as
you know, and as Secretary
Chardon, Clark pointed out those
Decline. Curves on each well are
pretty steep. So you have to
continue to drill in order to
maintain production. So we're
seeing that 100 rigs stable. I
would say the price that we are
estimating for a decrease in
production is maybe upper
thirties $38 a barrel, maybe
close to $40 a barrel where if
prices were to fall below that
we might see a substantial
impact on production, but
As of now, we expect that
prices variations in price will
actually just be passed on in
variations to returns to
shareholders rather than large
changes in production. So you
don't you don't see a
Uh, huge amount of investment in
production.
You see that going to
shareholders?
That's right, Mr Chair.
Yet we're maintaining 100 rig
count.
How bigger
Changes are in industry from
going to
Smaller to larger producers.
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods, if I
if I think I understand the
question, I think
Substantial one in in
You know, Psychology? Perhaps.
Maybe this is what you're
getting at there. There has
we've noticed the trend on
smaller producers, maybe more
eager to actually invest more
heavily in in exploration and
production. Um, whereas the
larger
Producers seem to have that more
disciplined capital plan that
they stick to almost regardless
of price. So I would I would say
that that's a big difference. If
that's hopefully answers your
question. Yeah, that's that's
one part of Mr Chair and I'm
sorry that I'm leaving you out
of this discussion. I know
you're very important guy that I
should be using your name quite
often.
Yeah.
But at least you're not called.
What'd you call me last week
Queen or something?
But
I guess what I'm getting at
This can be a very volatile
situation and it's not
And
Even that should have a
concerned
Um
Would in you.
Madam Secretary. Would you like
to comment? Mr Chair and Senator
Woods? I think the only thing to
add that you know that's on the
top of my mind is, is this sort
of for for better or worse, They
say this without any judgment,
For better or worse, there's a
self regulating of price by OPEC
actions. You know they can. They
can reduce production to
maintain a target price.
And then New Mexico kind of goes
along with the flow of that. So,
um, you know, we we are always
subject to weakening global
demand, especially big economies
like China. Weakening demand
should bring down prices. But
then we see OPEC responders
production cuts, so
That's part of. I think what has
stabilized prices in the recent
era.
Well, even though we're major
producer in the world, we have
very little control.
Of world oil prices.
And that's always a kind of a
scary thing. Our producers will
Produce oil.
You think down to the 38 to $40
range?
And I know Mr Chair there is a
place
Where When you
When you get one of these bids
to
Least from the federal
government. You have to
You have to dig on that you have
to to drill on that. You have to
improve that.
That permit that you get
And there. Is there any way we
can.
Seems use that as a future.
Looking into the future, as is
how much we can expect.
Will be
Coming online in the future.
Yeah. Okay. Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods. Yes, We do. Track
inventories of permits permits
to drill and also of those
leases, so we do attempt to use
them as a future indicator. Um,
I would say, you know, maybe a
year a year to some, in some
cases three years or are sort of
what we can see out. We haven't
seen I haven't seen. I shouldn't
speak for
Um, Dr Delgado, but I haven't
seen a large build up in
inventories of permits. They've
remained relatively stable
following the build up of around
2019. They've come down since
and they've stayed relatively
stable, stable over the last
couple of years, So we're not
seeing any anything new,
necessarily in those indicators.
Yes, sir.
Mr Chairman, Senator would so if
I understand your question
correctly, just to add some
context in terms of how the
price would impact
Productivity coming online with
Chief Doris mentioned is 100%
accurate? We use a analytics
firm that helps us with some
data and tracking. Um, producers
have a healthy level of permits
online as mentioned, um by Chief
Torres, and that they they also
track producers by tears.
So Tier One acreage is the most
profitable. That's where, um the
break even prices at about $40 a
barrel that's for most producers
are are producing. When prices
are up, they do take advantage
of those high prices, and they
shift to some of the other tiers
like Tier two, tier three or
four acreages.
And what happens in those
acreages is the break. Even
prices increase. So if I'm
understanding your question
correctly, is right right now
Producers are, Um uh, taking
advantage of the the current
markets and prices and building
their strategies so they can
produce around those tears, of
course, if prices were to come
down or collapse.
Um some of those tears and those
acreages would become
unprofitable and they would only
produce where they see
profitability.
And right now, there's um uh as
chief daughters mentioned we
We're not seeing any, um,
anything to warrant. I'm like a
warning that the the aren't
going to be producing,
especially in those profitable
tears. So so if I understand you
the last 60 has kind of a
Kind of an odd thing because you
really don't know.
What tier they're producing in.
and what? How much production
could fall off.
At a lower price.
Uh, Mr Chairman, Senator Woods,
So, yeah, that would depend on
the market conditions on the
operator's plans. Right now
they're taking advantage of
those tier one acreages, where
the break even prices. Um let's
say on average $40 a barrel. The
only other question I have Mr
Chair is has to do with the
investment income.
The interest on investment
income.
And
Especially when you say interest
On investment income.
Hmm.
That means it's a very short
term.
Investment is way I would read
that.
Because interest is just came up
in the last
Year or two.
So these are
Long term.
Investments is that Mr Chair? Is
that true? Or
Not Mr Chair and Senator Woods.
Uh, I apologize. If I was
unclear, it includes both
interest income and other
investment income Right now. A
large part of it is from the
state treasurer's office, which
is very short term and mainly
from interest, but it also
includes the permanent fund
investment return, which is long
term, okay.
All right.
That that's that's a lot better.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator Share.
Thank you, Mr Kerr.
We talked about full employment.
Madam Secretary.
I believe it was you anyway. Um,
but what is the labor
participation rate?
Senator Scherer and Mr Chair.
I'm wondering if the I think the
LSC brief has a chart on labor
participation yield to his mail.
You have it. Go ahead, Leo.
Mr Chairman, Senator share the
labor force participation rate
for New Mexico is currently
57.3%.
In November, Um, a little bit up
from October. Okay, so, Mr Chair
and
Whoever answered the question
ultimately here
Um
Before Covid nationally we
worried about 66, or 67% labor
participation rate nationals.
New Mexico was somewhere around
60.
62 58 50 before covid Mr
Chairman, Senator chair pre
pandemic. It was 58.2%. Okay.
All right, Um
But I think that labor
participation rate is one of the
things
Nationally. I think it's now 62
or three
Um, nationally now, which is
certainly down from covid time.
Um
But I think that has a big part
of of of what's going on. So
certainly our personal income
tax.
You know if we're if we're
missing 10% of our population or
even 3% of our population? Well,
that's significant thing.
Um
But I know that they're still
participating in the economy.
They're getting money from
somewhere. They're buying
things.
Um
How does that affect us?
In our
Revenue estimates there were
anticipating more people working
or less or the same,
Mr Chair and senator share
I think we not. I think I know
we expect in our estimates
gradual increases in the labor
force participation rate. I
don't believe we estimate.
Returning to pre pandemic
levels. I believe it stays
slightly below that, as is the
expectation for the national
economy as well.
So, Mr Chair. I also know that
there's a
Kind of an unknown number of
people that have started their
own.
You know businesses out of their
kitchen.
Um
And I don't know what, uh, From
my perspective, he
But certainly they're not paying
tax. Most of them aren't anyway.
Um
And not that I want to go out
there with the 87,000 I r s
agents or even 100 to your D
agents. Look for those guys. But
Um
But do we have any guests on
what? That
What that is or we do. We have
any guests at all and how many
people are
Now working out of their kitchen
instead of out of somebody
else's off it.
Thank you and in general were
saying nothing specific on that,
Um from attacks and rev
standpoint, I can just add that
you know, we do have data and
tools that do help us identify
that kind of noncompliance. Not
that it's perfect, and sometimes
it's a little after the fact.
But we do everything we can to
bring those individuals into
compliance and and we start at
the lowest level of escalation.
possible, not sending people to
their door, Senator.
Thank you.
So I'm just
I think one of the things that
I'm looking at here, Um, Mr
Chair.
Is. People are working.
So I think our labor
participation rate is probably
pretty high.
But not working the way that the
way that our system is set up
for them to work. Okay? I think
there are people out there.
They're doing a lot of stuff.
Some of them are working out of
their kitchen, but some of them
are pouring concrete.
I don't know. Um, so some of
them are making, you know, few
$100, and some of them are
making a few $1000 a month doing
things.
And I don't know what that means
in the overall economy of how
things are going, or how we're
measuring those things, which I
think is the more important part
part of this part of this
And so
How does it How does that work
with grocery seats tax if we've
seen an increase in grocery
seats tax
Outside of oil and gas.
Yes, Mr Chairman. Senator share
if you turn to the LFC brief on
Page six.
This is a table that
Reflects the gross receipts tax
growth across a number of
industries and actually what
we're seeing, currently is the
largest contributor to gross
receipts, tax activity growth.
In New Mexico is construction,
followed by professional
services in prior years. It was
primarily driven by oil and gas
by mining. We're seeing that
sort of reverse in in the most
recent data we have
So I guess Mr Chairman. It's so
certainly construction jobs.
They're those. Those are more of
the traditional jobs. I get a
contract. I build something I
pay tax.
It's the retail
That I think would reflect
whether people have money or
not.
Are they? Are they shopping?
Buying stuff.
Private stuff, not paying
grocery seats tax on business.
And so I see that that's grown.
5.6% that grown 5.6% because of
inflation at 11%, or is that
growing 5.6%? Because
More people have money and are
spending it.
Mr Chair and Senator share it.
You know, I think it will be a
mix of both. It's going to
Basically the match. Taxable
grocery seats are gonna reflect
the amount of of the value of
goods sold so inflation affects
that, but so does spending. Um,
Also, I should note, though,
that including Internet sales in
our tax base a couple of years
ago also expanded the retail
base of the
Grocery seats tax pretty
significantly.
So, Mr Chair. I guess the bottom
line is our revenue estimate and
don't get me wrong. I think
you'll do a great job here.
So
But our revenue estimate
Um, certainly can be scary
because of oil and gas.
And if you lose that
You lose a lot of other things,
including, I think gross
receipts tax for non mining.
Just because now the people that
are catering to something I
don't have anything to cater to.
Um
In their in their unemployed
again.
And then that ties in again to
income support from wherever
it's coming from states, the
city's feds, whatever
Do we see that growing or
shrinking?
Some kind of income supports.
Well, Mr Chair and senator
share it certainly has shrunk
from the federal transfers the
wind down of a lot of the
pandemic programs have actually
did result in a decrease in
personal income, primarily from
transfers across the country.
But here in New Mexico as well,
um, I think going forward
Those transfers are expected to
increase with the rate of growth
like in many cases, inflation as
you pointed out, Um we're not
counting in this forecast for
any
Sort of notable outside of that
growth in transfer payments.
Continue Mexicans, right. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Center campus.
Okay. Thank you very much, Mr
Chair. And of course, uh, the
questions that I have are going
to go and follow down the lines
of what Senator share was
talking about a couple of things
and as we get into career
technical education
We start talking about people
that possibly could be changing
and going into some of the other
fields. Let's say, for example.
Ah, creating an innovation but
in that as you take a look at
the numbers
Are we
At the point to where we're
becoming less reliable on oil
and gas and moving more into
The innovations of
manufacturing and construction
in these areas. And what is that
going to look like as we
continue to promote CTE through
throughout New Mexico?
Whoever wants to answer that.
Well, um, I'll take the first
step at that. Mr Chair and
senator Compost by be happy to
have any of the other members of
the panel add on to this, but I
think there's two different
issues. There's diversification
of the economy, which is, I
think what you're sort of
articulating, are we
diversifying into other areas to
be less reliant on oil and gas.
That's one question but then and
and I think
Every policymaker at the state
level in New Mexico for decades
has has been aimed at
diversifying the economy and
there are some success areas.
Um, but a separate question is
have we insulated the General
fund from that volatility, and
that's something that was more
within our control, and we
certainly have through Senate
Bill 26 last year and and
Senator representative
Toranaga's bill, you know, a
decade or so ago.
So
Well, we are, you know, doing
everything we can to grow these
other industries in New Mexico
and diversify the economy. In
the meantime, we've done a
really wonderful job as
policymakers. You and the
governors that have signed those
bills to insulate the General
fund and take that windfall
mechanism way and then stick
with just a very strong reserve
policy.
Who wants to add to that. So if
I could just follow up on that,
So here we are. We're insulating
the General fund, but at the
same time as we're trying to
diversify the economy, what are
going to be those industries
that are going to come in where
we're going to go and have a
strong tax base? How we're going
to have the diversification
attract additional industry. And
then if you will create the
stability and sustainability.
For the long term for our state
budget because it's grown to the
what the 10.5 plus billion and
then with the reserves that we
haven't even though we say those
resources are available.
At some point if we're making
that transition, uh, definitely
Within a couple of years, there
could be a big shift, and I just
want to make sure that as we go
forward that were prepared with
the innovation in order to go
ahead and go through the
diversification.
I don't know if anyone wants to
comment. If not, that's all I
have.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos.
That's it. That's a great
question. Um, uh And I think the
best answer, at least from my
part is I'm not really prepared
to give you an answer in terms
of picking a particular industry
or sector in terms of moving
forward, As you know what would
be a good sector to invest in.
Thank you. We could definitely
look into it and research and
work with, um Ah, chief tourists
and and follow up. Thank you
very much. Mr Chair. Just as
that follow up, the whole key is
going to be what that transition
and transformation is going to
look like.
In order for us to have that
sustainability even if we do
have the resources available for
We'll just say the next decade
and if the resources are there,
but we're doing the same things.
Then are we really prepared to
go ahead and meet what we'll
just say? Gen. Z or the
millennials are prepared to go
ahead and invest in when it
comes to the workforce. Thanks
again, Mr Chair.
Senator Bert Thank you, Mr
Chairman in again. Thanks for
the presentation. Just
I guess, uh, couple of big
picture.
Questions we talked about again
following up on some of the
questioning.
G R. T s down.
Probably because of oil and gas,
primarily
Um
But
Are there other sectors that are
having a significant impact on
G R T showdown and and if so,
what would the top two of the
three B
Mr Chair and Senator Bert. So
just to make sure the record is
clear on on our presentation
Page 25. We've got forecasted
growth in geometry of 3% in FY
25 and growth of 3% in FY 26
with its not down, but it's more
moderate growth than we've seen
in years past. And you're
correct that, you know,
comparing those moderate 3%
growth forecast comparing that
to the past we had 22% growth in
FY 22.
Two.
15% growth in FY 23. Part of
that is a reflection of the
plateau owing oil and gas
forecast. Um part of it, though,
is also potentially the timing
of the Internet sales expansion
to the G R T as well as then
phasing in the rate cuts. We had
a rate cut take effect for FY,
23 and 24 Correct? Yes. So the
at the start of FY 23. We had 1
8% G r T rate cut and another
1/8 starting at 420 for each of
those cuts.
Bably reduced grt revenue
somewhere in the neighborhood of
220, or 230 million.
Hmm. Okay.
All right. Thank you for that,
Mr Chair.
Um, there wasn't any mentioned
in your Ford about recession.
Although listening today
business think the
Chairman of JPMorgan
I said I wouldn't rule out of
recession in 24.
Since you did the report or
anything, Have you gotten any
new information or what? Do you
think that the possibility of
probabilities of
A recession. Um
Minor or major, Uh, coming up
this year or maybe in the next
year or two. Any thoughts on
that?
Mr Mr Chairman, Senator Bert so
I can speak to the Moody's
Analytics, part of the forecast.
That's that's one of our
contributions. Moody's Analytics
currently does not assume a
recessionary event for the
country. Um, in a recent
presentation there, Chief
economist did talk a little bit
about recession risks.
He mentioned there. Hi. Um, I
think he put in his discussion.
The probability somewhere around
20% 20 25%, with one of the main
triggers being just a misstep by
the Fed, Either. They, um hold
rates too high for too long or
they cut too soon. Um, so they
highlighted that as the
The main mean risk for tipping
the country into a recession is
just a misstep that the Fed
somewhere errors, but in their
baseline forecast for that we
include in the forecast period
for the state. There's no
recession built into it. Its
baseline forecast no recession.
Just that's uh, that's more
updated information than in the
forecast. It'll also say, um in
the stress test scenario three.
This is on five. The probability
of a moderate recession is given
10% probability for for the
stress testing.
I appreciate that. And and it
just seems like
That word has come up.
I mean,
Really since the first of the
year, So we're what nine days
into this thing and
And I hadn't heard that in some
time and all centers popping up
a little bit more so much.
Chairman. Um
I guess. One other question. I
had again picked big picture
because it would impact the
Mexico oil and gas production.
Um federal government talking
about possibly replenishing the
oil and gas reserves. Um
Any
Father. Have you heard anything?
New?
Concerning that possibility.
Mr Chairman, Senator Bert. I am
familiar and from what I can
tell, though, the expected
reserved
Purchases are going to be spaced
out to attempt to reduce the
impact on prices, but of course
at the extra demand we would
expect could elevate prices. Uh,
if anything that would be the
impact is higher prices, but I
would be Ah, I would be suspect
if they came up.
Very significantly from those
purchases as they expect to draw
him out over time.
Okay?
I appreciate that, and I
appreciate the, uh
Answer previous to I
It just seems so fluid right
now, Mr Chairman. Uh,
And it looks like they have a
handle on inflation. According
to what you hear from the
federal government, But I want
to tell you, I just hear more
and more complaints.
But you know, grocery stores and
customers and my business about
the cost of goods and services
anywhere and everywhere.
Um And I mean
Anyone who goes shopping that
shopped a year ago and they're
shopping for the same item. This
this time men significant
increases in just about every
item.
That you can. You can come too.
So, uh, inflation is still out
there, and I think you're
absolutely right. I think if the
feds make a mistake as to when
to adjust those I think that
could have, uh, negative impact
and so more so I think than in
the last few years where we've
just been kind of growing with
oil and gas and and coming out
of covid, and so on and so
forth. We've had a pretty strong
Feeling about where we're headed
and what the possibilities are
now I just feel
Personally, I feel little more
iffy about all this stuff
because I think inflation again
and the Fed and what they plan
to do. Uh, so I don't know. I'm
just trying to get a little
context with regards to
New Mexico How the federal or
national Picture may impact New
Mexico because if we have
additional monies were going to
be spending those monies and
putting them into much larger,
re occurring budget.
Um And then we agree to all of
that. And then we do hit a even
a minor recession or a dip in
oil and gas production. Um, we
could be
You know, in trouble a little
bit, So I'm just I'm just trying
to throw up the flag of caution
If nothing else, That's all I
have. Mr. Chairman. Thanks.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for your presentation.
everybody. So how many
incentives credits deductions do
we have on the books at the
moment for economic development
purposes?
And do we know how much they
cost us in this last year, Mr
Chairman and Senator PDO, we We
do have that kind of tallied up
in the tax expenditure report.
Don't have it in front of me
right now. I think we have
somewhere in between 36 and 40
or so tax credits, but they're
not all economic development.
Some of them are
You know, sure, Support and
things like that. Um, we can get
back to you, though, And then
you asked about deductions and
probably exemptions as well. I
mean, all told across all 40 or
so tax programs or hundreds.
You've seen that report, but we
can get back to you on that
specific to economic
development if you like. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and so I'd
like to know how many of them
are there.
And and, you know, in the last
fiscal year, how much did they
cost us? Because it just seems
to me like you know, we were
looking at Page six of Izzy's
report. We really are the Lfc s
report. We should probably be,
you know, bumping that up
against, you know. What is it?
What are we getting for them?
I think they're probably all
great. I mean, they're probably
outstanding, all of them, but
maybe some of them are and maybe
some of them are innocent.
You know, produce very little
for us. I'd rather stop those
ones and put them in the columns
that worked really well for us
in the you know, Um I don't
know. Maybe we would set a
threshold if you're you know,
delivering less than as a
area. It's less than 3% of gross
receipts. Tax whatever growth
whatever.
Fact you're looking at there
then you know, maybe we sunset
those and make those go away.
take those dollars and put them
in the ones that are producing
something like 1719 15%. Do we
have anything that measures all
of this and compares it against
each other bumps it up against
each other to figure out why are
we being efficient here at all?
So, Mr Chair and and Senator Pia
director Sally gave us volume
three of the LSC budget and I'll
call your attention to it looks
like it's pages six through
Ah, 11 or so, um, the lfc has
produced our data from our tax
expenditure reports. It's here
for you. Um, you know, in the
past, we would talk about
repealing a lot of the Swiss
cheese if you will in the tax
code as a revenue raisers. You
know, there was a there's been a
conversation along time about if
we If we repeal all those holes
in the tax code, then could we
use that to raise to decrease
the rate?
The hard part about it. Is that
the tax expenditures that really
have real money behind them, you
know where if you add them all
together, you get enough new
revenue to decrease rates are
pretty hard to do without things
like, um, you know the deduction
for at home consumption of food,
prescription drugs and oxygen.
Um, some of the non profits and
things like that. That
Are, you know pretty difficult
to stomach putting the tax back
on those things, but that's only
part of it. Reverend revenue
raisers, and there's also the
administrative ease of the tax
code and the complexity of it,
So there are, you know, arguably
some in here that probably cost
more to administer than good
that they're doing and we could
certainly look at those with
you. But all of the tax
expenditures are listed in
volume three.
Thank you Chair and thank you,
Madam Secretary. So really, just
what I'm really concerned about
her for economic development
purposes that wind up
generating, you know, now it's
all relational and some of them
It's not a dollar for dollar,
but a dollar a percent produced
on that invested dollar that I'm
interested in. If we're
investing, you know.
$5 million in a particular
incentive credited actually ever
and it's producing 400%. Well,
of course you want to keep that
one. But if we've got something
that's you know, we're putting
in, you know, $200 million into
and the roi on that is, you know
3%.
Well, you know that That might
be a lot of money, but that's
still $6 million on a $200
million versus it's equal to
what this $5 Million investment
turned into because it was a
400% return.
Do we have any any reports? That
kind of show all that kind of
lined out for us, Mr Chair and
Senator Padilla. It kind of
depends on the credit the tax
expenditure report. I will say
it, we We do everything we can
to evaluate the effectiveness of
the tax expenditure, But given
that there are hundreds, it's
obvious that we can't do an in
depth kind of study or
evaluation on all of them.
Um and you know, and sometimes
the Economic Development
Department produces studies like
that. Sometimes the LFC produces
studies like that. Um, but I
think what I'll do is after the
committee. I'll send you the
portion of it that directs you
right to those that are for
economic development.
Um, I can send you what we
presented to rest up this summer
That goes into more detail on
that. Thank you, mr Chair, and I
think it's probably my last
question or comment, But it just
seems interesting that we should
maybe, you know, Think about an
index of some kind tells us
Well, how many you know how much
did it cost us? How much do we
get for it? How many jobs did
you create? What was the average
salary for those jobs? Um, how
long did the jobs last?
Did we get our return on
investment that we made to help
stand up and interest industry
in New Mexico? Maybe there's
also something there that says,
Gosh, this is an industry that
coming into New Mexico is going
to take five or 10 years to
truly blossom and turned into
something. Um, I sure like that
advisement and that that council
from you all to help us make
better decisions that way. Thank
you. Chair.
I guess we could go by Brantley.
Oh, thank you, Mr Chairman. It's
my own page six of your report
You reported the final effects
that the destination points
Sourcing is unclear. But for
several years now we have been
told that the legislator needs
to undo what we unintentionally
did. Can you know in here? You
clearly state that we weren't
considering out of state
reporting or out of state mis
reporting or lack of reports
from out of state?
Can you explain that impact? Um,
on this kind of on this fix, and
I guess more importantly, if if
we shouldn't rush to make a fix,
What do you recommend? How do
you recommend that the
legislator addresses that to
make sure that those movements
and municipalities that continue
to come to us are made whole.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair and
Senator Brantley. It's a good
question. The I should clarify
that the unknown is as you
mentioned or point out the
amount that still remains out of
state that we expect otherwise
maybe shouldn't be so I'll give
you an example. We still see
some out of state retail sales
and we can't We seem to think,
lfc. We think that that should
probably be brought into the
local tax bases of
Municipalities and counties and
source to in state now, so
that's the unknown we've
actually done and TRD as well
have have done a lot of analysis
on the destination based
sourcing issue in general and
and done our best to estimate
the impacts of all of the out of
state that has been sourced to
in state. Um, and from what we
can tell. It's been
Uh, very large net positive.
On the whole. Now, as you
mentioned there are I think we
identified the last time we did
this analysis three communities
that I can think of, of the top
of my head that had a negative
impact when considering the
shift of services specifically,
now, I don't think we did the
analysis on the net of goods
plus services. I'd have to maybe
dig up that report, and I'd be
happy to send you the analysis
we have done on destination
based sourcing.
Um
I think
For the solution. You know,
that's really tough because
On the one hand.
Destination based sourcing is in
our view, good tax policy. It's
it's allowed to state to collect
and allowed cities and counties
to collect on a lot of out of
state. Ah tax base that
otherwise wouldn't be allowed
and undoing. That would be a net
negative across the state and
for many other counties,
municipalities, So it's a
difficult balance because any
fix
Could potentially hurt another
municipality.
So I'd be happy to get with you
and brainstorm more and send you
that analysis and all the
reports that we anti r D have
done But it is really tough
issue. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
I appreciate you, noting that
there's a net negative if we if
we change that, and so there is
there is other, I guess
perspectives that we need to
consider. How then, would you
Would you recommend that we
capture those unknowns?
How do we help Help capture
those unknowns that you're
saying? We We believe that
there's funding out there that
really belongs to us.
Do you wanna do? You understand?
I think so. I think so. Mr Chair
and and Senator Brantley. I'll
have to get used to that, Um
So I think what you're saying is
there may still be some
lingering noncompliance where
we've got taxpayers using the
out of state location code when
they file their grt rather than
using a local, uh, in a city or
municipality or tribal location
code, and that's you know, kind
of par for the course for us.
We're constantly looking for
taxpayers that aren't quite
reporting correctly. Or, you
know, In this case, at least
they're reporting they might
just be using the wrong location
code. So we routinely as the
department go through and
contact those folks.
Is to get them in voluntary
compliance. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Good afternoon, everybody and
it's great to be with you. And
I'm sorry I'm late, but I've
been listening to you coming
down the highway and
Formulating some good questions,
but everyone's asked a lot of
great questions. So, um, But,
secretary I'm gonna start with
you, Um
You talked a little bit about
the slowdown of gross receipts
tax a little bit.
And, um
You know, every time we have
money, whether we do or we don't
or ever how much we have We have
all kinds of deductions and
bills to create more tax
credits. And, of course, last
year we had a big tax bill that
was also gonna suit reduced
gross receipts. So when you said
that, that kind of got my
attention a little bit at the
beginning of the session about
how much we should be cautious
about
Gross receipts tax.
These actions in general or
overall reform that would lower
that and, um
So I'll just ask that as a
question is that concern you
share as well? I mean, are we in
a situation now where we should
be keeping our gross receipts
tax level stable?
Rather than reducing it more.
Um, Mr Mr Chair, and Senator
Stein born um I don't have a
hard and fast position on
whether the statewide grt rate
should stay the same or come
down slightly. I think it's it's
understood that the half a
percent reduction that was
vetoed and house Bill 547.
Last year was thought by the
executive to be too large. And
and you know that Bill once
fully phased in was going to
have about $1.1 billion
recurring revenue reduction,
which which was, you know, seen
by at least by the executive and
I know by some members as as too
large and and I know both the
LFC budget recommendation, as
well as the governors this year
are targeting a smaller
Recurring tax cut. Um, you know,
I don't I don't have a strong
opinion about whether G R T rate
reduction will be part of that
or not, Um, but I think half a
percent reduction was was a
little risky.
Okay. Is anybody else want to
answer that?
Sure, Mr Chair and Senator Sam
born. I'll go out on a limb here
and take a take a crack at this
one. So I think, um, we studied
this quite a bit and, um, the
overall state rate combined
local and state rate is on the
higher side nationally above
above the average.
And, um, there are There are
academics out there who think
that that is a drag? Certainly
on our economic competitiveness.
I will note, though, that our
state
Gross receipts tax rate is
actually quite competitive.
Nationally. It's below the
median and where we stick out is
actually on the local rates are
local rates are much higher, and
that's what drags us down. And
so it becomes a difficult issue,
of course, because in order to
buy down the rate
Either. Some mechanism needs to
be used to encourage or help the
locals get their rates down, or
you do it through the state
rate, and both have their
challenges, issues and benefits.
But I think that would be
hopefully something that I could
add to the conversation. Yes,
thank you. Anyone else want to
happen today? Okay. Thank you
Know that's really thoughtful
answers. I appreciate it, and,
uh,
Yeah. I mean, on one hand, we
obviously need the funding and
on the other hand, it's a It's
something that makes her
effects the competitiveness of
our state, and so as we consider
strategically reducing that
Um And then I just have one
final question. Mr Chair, which
is about personal incomes.
And as we see what's happening
in the changes in our economy,
and I think this will probably
be hard to give a real specific
answer. Because
We have different industries
being combined together but have
personal incomes risen on the
same level as inflation, or we
hear so many stories about new
Mexicans.
Losing their homes, not being
able to pay their bills. I mean,
what are we seeing as far as
Average new Mexican and their
financial situation. I'll take a
stab at that chairman and
Senator Stein born I'm in a flip
to the personal income tax
slides in the executive handout.
What's your 2021? We saw a very
strong growth over the last
couple of fiscal years in
withholding, so that is a
reflect that reflects wage and
salaries of wage and salary
workers.
And, as is kind of in line with
the whole message about the
forecast, we're still seeing
growth, but much more moderate
growth in wage and salaries in
the most recent quarters. Um so
yes, we did see that uptick now
whether it
Uh, keeps pace with inflation or
is a little more a little less
is more nuanced question. But
yes, we've seen very strong
growth in wage and salary since
recovery from the pandemic.
Why do you think then? Mr Chair
and panel? Why are we seeing
Or is it more anecdotal, so many
folks struggling to keep their
homes and pay their bills?
Their incomes are rising that
fast is it that these other
costs are just rising that much
faster?
Um, well, Mr Chair, and Senator
Stein weren't love to hear from
the rest of the panel as well,
too. But I'm certainly inflation
has been a pressure as well as
interest rates have made housing
decisions more complicated for
families. Um
That's that's what I wanted to
say. I think
But, you know, just add the
inflation rates are down across
many sectors. But housing is is
still. Um, you know the highest
level of inflation for the most,
you know broad based things that
people consume. It's still the
highest well, and I know that
New Mexico has done a lot to
help help our people the last
few years, which I'm proud of.
That's what happens to you.
Thanks.
Um just to kind of wrap it up.
Is he How many? How many drills
But ducks do we have a button
producer?
Ah, thank you, Mr Chair for the
tough question off the top of my
head. I don't know that I have
that number for you. I know.
Hmm. I I shouldn't speak out of
turn. I can get that number for
you. Just turn is it then
Mr Chairman, I don't have the
number off the top of my head,
but we can
I mean, the last number you
maybe heard, I mean, because
that tells us what's in
inventory compared to what's
being drilled.
I don't have that off the top of
my head, but we can get it for
you. Mr Chairman, Okay.
Um, I mean, you said the most
vulnerabilities in the federal
missteps.
Madam secretary, I think you
said that.
Or who said that if anything
happens in the market that I'm
the federal missteps, What do
you think, are the two things
that we need to watch for the
feds, and when they
Misstep because it's
Who knows what they're gonna do
up there.
Miss Mr Chairman. Um so all take
the first step at that. So I
think having anybody anywhere
you can take a guess we'll take
a guess. Absolutely. Um, so
something I would be looking at
is when they decide to do their
initial rate cuts there. I think
there's a lot of discussion of,
um
The signals from the last Fed
meeting.
They might
I think there's some speculation
they might start to cut in
March. I know Moody's Analytics
thinks that might be a little
too soon and in their baseline
forecast. They are, um, building
in cuts in the second half of 20
24th of June forward
Um, when they decide to do those
red cuts
But once that federal cut
inflation's less than 2% where
they targeted it, right.
The feds said. We want inflation
to come down from 6 to 2. That's
why they targeted the rates
hikes to get to 2%, right. And
now we're at two for over almost
a quarter now. Yes, Mr Chairman
that that's absolutely correct.
It's back to, um, pretty close
to the target they wanted. Um, I
would just add to that that the
Fed more than likely doesn't
make changes until they're
absolutely sure that's
That rate is at the target they
want and, um
Ah, so
They
The Ah Excuse me. I'm stumbling
here a bit. Um
They usually try not to make any
changes until they know exactly
where things are. And so even
though inflation has come down
from the peaks, it's still high
from let's say pre pandemic
levels. Um, which is many of the
panel members here have
discussed there's still a lot of
new Mexicans that are feeling
the
The impact of that high
inflation. Um, so I I would say
is the Fed is, uh, when they
make those rate cuts is when
When what I would watch for a
signal.
Yeah, you know. Is there any
talking? Maybe you know this
because I haven't looked. Is
there any talk about resetting
that
New baseline in in the C P. I
For their next step up because I
mean we went
Pre pandemic and then you call
after pandemic. Then we saw this
master rising money of influx in
the system.
But they got to reset a base
number right at some point. Is
there any talk with the feds
resetting that number?
Mr Chair. I think if I
understand your question, maybe
setting a new target rather than
2%. I certainly have seen a lot
of that that maybe 2% is
actually too low. Um, I think if
I were to add my gut reaction to
what to watch for, I would say
too soon cutting rates too soon.
I think there's a lot of pent up
demand out there and waiting to
be unleashed by lower rates and
if done too soon, I think that
could spur inflation again,
which puts us on another cycle
of rate hikes and could be
Really difficult for the economy
to swallow. So I think, you
know, talking about a new
target. I wouldn't be surprised
if as we as see the Federal
Reserve drop rates and we're
still not getting to the 2%
because wage growth is still at
4% say, for example, that the
Federal Reserve might say okay,
we're actually okay with 2.5%.
Inflation rather than 2%. I
think I think that's a
possibility, but I don't
Yeah. What was the calendar?
Your NCP I, Nina
Uh, Mr Cherry? Of course they
do. Year over year growth rates
on CP I at the end of the year.
I want to say it was it was
maybe around 4%. Depending on
the measure. You can look at
core you can look at nominal
depending on the basket. I think
around 4% is probably what I'm
remembering.
Okay?
Let me ask you. Is he on on your
presentation on slide 29, right?
And we're talking about
severance attacks bonding
capacity.
In your ranking. This so in 2024
in this
This year. 24 we had 2.97. We're
in year 25. You don't have a
number there is that because
we're
With cash and not using Geo
might Mr chair, general
obligation bonds or every other
year because they're required to
be on the on the ballot. That's
the reason for that. Severance,
taxi and bonds with 666 25 If we
did that.
Choosing not to do that this
year.
Right. That's right, Mr Chair,
and then what limit has
As a board of Finance said OK at
what rate at what
Her cabinet income. Do we say
bonding levels are safe.
Mr Chair. I don't want to speak
for the board of Finance, but I
think the analysis would suggest
maybe around $350 million per
year. Bonding would be
equivalent to maybe, say the
national median of per capita
debt ratio.
Wayne.
I mean, this is key important
because the governor is talking
about 500 million
Water projects in some type of
shape or form, and I just want
to see what they're bonding
level is going to be at because
expended the cash Mr Chairman as
worth, is he I would defer to
board of finance staff, but I
believe in response to your
first question. I agree. I seem
to recall a $350 million figure
that I've heard at border
finance meetings.
Okay, Let me ask you when When
is the early childhood transfer
going to take place?
I know you guys have to transfer
those funds pretty quick, and
it's about
2.1 billion.
For 23.
To get into 5 Billion. When are
those transfers take place?
Mr Chairman, that That's a good
question. So there are two Xs
transfers, one from the federal
mineral leasing program and one
from the emergency. Um, the oil
and gas emergency school tax,
The federal mentally seen excess
transfer was made in August of
2023 and from recent discussions
with Dfas Fcd. That's the
financial control division. That
transfer is
Um, will happen this month in
January 2024 so this month and
the transfer of
2.73 billion will happen.
Mr Chairman. That's correct, OK?
Okay. I just wanted to make sure
we were correct on the fund
balance notices.
Um
Feature
General Woods.
Okay, 15.
Exactly what does that mean for
us?
If you look on page 29, I think
that's 29. They have
They have 666 million that we
could have had in severance tax
bonding, But I asked him what
the board of finance
recommendation is based upon the
Board of Finance comments were
saying the debt level for
bonding for per capita person in
New Mexico is above what we
could if we continue to bond at
the same levels.
And so they're saying that we
should We could bond at 350
Million and be safe.
At the debt levels and not 6666
change that number
nine better Add. Madam
secretary, Mr Chair. I don't
want to interrupt you. But if
when? When committee has done
with questions? I have one more
bit of news. I want to share
with the committee.
To win the lottery. Well, no,
Not yet. Um, I just wanted to
share some good news. And it
kind of goes to Senator Stein
Burns. Um questions a minute
ago. There's a new report out
from it Tap, which is the
Institute for taxation and
economic policy. They do report
each year on regressive itty of
state taxation. And they've just
announced that for the first
time, New Mexico moved up into
the top 10 least regressive
states In the last year, we
moved up to 18 positions amongst
the states, and that really has
a lot to do with the
The changes that we've made
together to the working families
Tax credit Lichter, the child
tax credit and things of that
nature, so I didn't want to
forget to announce that
While we're on that point income
across New Mexico has risen
right whether it's weight. I
think it's wage inflation
personally right income and
wage inflation is really driven.
The income levels right and
whether people are going into
bankruptcy could be are not
paying their mortgages.
whatever it could be a factor of
things from gambling to alcohol,
to whatever fact divorce rate.
And I don't know how you ever
Figure that out right?
What percentage are Y? Are they
in the bankruptcy or winding and
foreclosure? I don't know what I
would. Is there any way to
forecast What's driving that?
Then go through the bankruptcy
court.
Mr Chair. I think I'm familiar
with. There are some surveys of
bankruptcies of reasons for
bankruptcies. I don't think it
gets into that level of detail.
Um, but that's that's as
familiar as I am with that level
of
The brothers of bankruptcy, no
foreclosures. Yes, the surveys
of those going through
foreclosures for the reason of
foreclosure foreclosure, and it
definitely doesn't get that
specific.
Okay?
Senator Rodrigues.
Here and not to deal with the
bonds here. But I'm gonna go
back a little bit to something
that we talked about earlier
and, um, you know, it really is
quite concerning when it sets in
that on The General fund
overview, both from D F A and
also from lfc and the fact that
it is the recurring revenue has
dropped so much.
I mean that that's pretty
significant when you look at
19.8% that we were we had
increased in 2023, but then it
dropped to almost half 10.2
little more than half the next
year, just in a few months and
then
Now dropped again to 2.2. Not
even half if we follow the
trajectory we would be looking
at 2025. Thank you know, Okay,
well, it dropped by almost half
last year from the year before
or the current fiscal year and
then in 2020.
Fiscal. Your will is the 24
currently through June 30th.
It's 2.2%. That's very little
compared to just a year.
Two years ago in 19.8 in
recurring and so tell me what am
I missing and
Yeah, I'm hoping to hear that.
I'm that I'm wrong, and it's
really how I see it seems clear,
Mr Chair and and Senator
Rodriguez. I think you're right
that there's we're all
projecting caution in saying
that this exponential rate of
revenue growth at the state is
enjoyed for the last few fiscal
years is plateau owing But we
have to keep in mind, too, that
we're plateau owing at a
historically high level.
So I think that's what could
give you. The comfort is that
revenues went through the roof,
and now they're projected to
stay there. So that's that's not
doom and gloom, but it is a
cautionary note, and I think
that's why and thank you for
that. It is kind of source of
comfort. On the other hand, it
makes it even more important
that we think along the lines
that we've been working on the
lfc level and that is to look at
Putting funds away revenues away
for the future for one more
downturns.
Um in the end of oil and gas
industry or other revenues
happen, then we're able to
whether that downfall because
we're not going to have as much
even though like you said it was
from a high level.
It's where used to budgeting for
these high levels. And so that
part is where we need to kind of
RIA revamp our brain and do
something about thinking the
reality of how how much is
dropping like a rock. This is
pretty big 19.8 to 10.22 0.2. Do
you know what I mean? It's so
Yeah, thank you.
And you were gonna say
something. Yes, Mr Chairman,
Senator Rodriguez just to add
context to the secretary's
answer. And I think this will
help a little bit, um in FY 19
The state's recurring revenue
was 8 billion in FY 23. The
state's recurring revenue was
12.7 billion, and that's the
high level that the secretary's
mentioning that
The rates are slowing, but there
at that high level and if you if
you consider the the gain from
19 to 23, I think that adds
context. Thank you and like I
said, that does have some
comfort at least to that. But
thank you so much for that.
Thank you, Just to kind of wrap
that conversation up. We've
built this pile of tax credits.
Right? Lichter Low income
whatever is film, right?
And now we're seeing this
leveling of tax credits on
reoccurring because that's
reoccurring dollars that were
taking out of our budget.
To score those tax credits, and
you know the entire number that
we might be have
Mr Chair. This this chart comes
in handy a lot. It's page 26 of
the LFC brief. We've tabulated
over the last four years of tax
changes. Ah total tax recurring
tax changes of over $3 billion
over the last four years.
3 billion recurring that some of
it be occurring.
Well, it depends how your
score's depends how you cut it.
maybe 1.5 billion of recurring,
not including rebates.
And other non recurring rebates
would be not being a tax
category, right? That's just a
Rebates are in the tax category.
really personal income tax
rebates.
If I maybe I misunderstood your
question. Wait, wait, wait. I
thought rebates applied to
everyone that in certain
sectors, right? The last one
applied to everyone across the
board. Prior ones were based
upon income levels. But the last
one why would the last one that
implied Everybody throughout New
Mexico be scored in that?
It's um Mr Chair. It's It was
still It's not a credit, but it
was a tax rebate because it was
tied to whether someone filed a
New Mexico personal income tax
return in tax year 21 so it was
scored in the revenue estimate
as a non recurring reduction to
pit revenue.
For only that one year to well
to two years. We should three
rebates in calendar year 22 1
was income tested to or not, And
then we issued one rebate in
calendar year 23 that was again
to all pit filers like you say.
Okay?
And you really got me confused?
Yeah.
Yeah, well, I'm not non
recurring, but they're scoring
it in the reoccurring.
10. No, Mr Chair. We wish we are
not scoring are I misspoke? So
now you got, did you? I thought
that's what you said
Better. Just quit.
I mean, Wayne and Madam
Secretary. I mean, we've all
been here a long time, right?
I mean, in this scenario, we
know New Mexico is kind of set
themselves up right for
longevity.
If we stay around where we're at
with the LOC wreck if we go
about 10% we know that we've hit
this cliff where we're going to
start cutting in two years.
Right?
In our scenarios in your
scenarios in my correct in
saying that
No. Not two years.
We had a 10% increase over this
year.
Charles Isn't that in our LFC
Rex?
Scenarios in my presentation,
Okay, Taxes, okay?
Alright, we'll just save it for
him.
Anything else?
That's it. Thank you.
Thank you Don't I don't think
I've ever seen this before.
I think this is the first time
I've ever seen in the executive
record book.
Sarah companies. Have you ever
seen that?
You know, we had
Yeah, yeah, Years ago we had
that Mr Chairman, Mr. Paper
still paper.
He's gonna charter sh started
Charles or
Sure I would like to point out
that Charles pile is way too
big. Just just saying
oh, director, Abby used to hide
it in a briefcase.
So
Afternoon, Mr Chairman. Do we
have a presentation? Charles, or
there should be one that looks
like this in a pile in front of
Hopefully, it's out there.
Oh,
Well, we're getting that you've
got the LFC budget
recommendation in front of you
as well. Um
It comes in three different
packages, as you may know, just
a quick reminder. So this first
one is
It's got the budget summary in
it. It's got all the special
supplementals revenue estimate
in the back and then in the
middle, it's got a lot of policy
analysis and performance
analysis, which is really good
for providing context for the
overall, um, budget
recommendation and the direction
that Lfc was trying to take.
This is a good one to take that
if you need to fall asleep at
night reading, um or preparing
the night before on what we're
gonna do. Talk about schools
tomorrow or healthcare. This
will provide a lot of good
context for for that, if you
want to get deep into the budget
recommendation itself, how much
agencies have actually been
spending of their budget and in
prior years
Um, the details behind why the
LFC recommended, um what it did,
um, and more detail on
performance measures. This is
more of a reference document to
keep
Before you are really put you to
sleep at night.
This last one has got
Answers to lots of your
questions or your staff's
questions. This is a good one
for, um, staff to look through,
Um, to be able to help answer
questions. It's got everything
from who are the beneficiaries
of the collective land grant
permanent funds. Um, how much
money was generated for, um
The school for the blind last
last year. How much an assets do
it Does that particular
beneficiary have how much did
agencies move out of their
salary and benefits Tab? What
was the transportation budget in
a detailed way? How much have
they spent of the transportation
appropriations you've been
making, um, to supplement their
their operating budget the last
couple of years.
School district. Cash balances,
You know, it's a lot of it's
going to be in this particular
document.
And you should have received And
if not, we'll make sure you get
a copy of, um, a list of all of
our staff, their backgrounds and
their contact information for
you to be able to reach out to
them. You can go through me or
you can contact him to direct
directly this session to help
you carry out your
constitutional duties.
So, Mr Chairman, if we turn to
the presentation, slide one is
what we don't want to have
happen, and that's going off the
rails of this roller coaster
ride that I call the General
fund. Rollercoaster. Um, And as
you heard the Economist talk
were screaming northward and
have been over the past couple
of years. And now we're on that
roller coaster where you come
off of it, and you kind of
flatten out.
Um, And so the next slide shows
the actual General fund roller
coaster and you've done a number
of different policy changes to
try to smooth this out and quit
having it be so volatile. I
could run this graph back to the
early eighties, and that's just
the story of of the General
fund. This boom and bust cycle
and a lot of that is because of
we are known collectively known.
Um, dependence on oil and gas
revenue and direct oil and gas
revenue.
What's different about the last
couple of years, and before
that?
Is the production levels, you
know, going back to the eighties
We produce about 70 million
barrels of oil a year almost
like clockwork, but we were
writing the price highs and
we're writing the price lows.
Now production as you just
signed. The revenue estimate is
projected in next fiscal year to
jump up to 700 million barrels
of oil.
So
Huge increases in production
coming out of the Permian Basin
that have led to these, um large
revenue spikes that you can see
on the next slide. Four.
And so what's been happening
starting in 2018 and really 20
fy 19.
Has been this huge gap between
how fast revenues have been
growing. And you've been growing
the budget. Um, pretty
significantly during that time,
just not as fast as the revenues
have been growing. So to give
you an example if we go back to
the FY 19 budget of 6.3 billion,
um, and look at this year's
budget at 9.5 billion, that's
about a $3.2 billion increase or
over 50% over the past five
years, so
10% spending growth year over
year.
Public schools have been up
about 50% health and human
services largely driven by
Medicaid up 59% over that.
Period of time. So what if we
run this graph out into the
future LFC and and the executive
in doing those long term revenue
forecast now, and we've been
adding to that with long term
spending forecast to the mix, so
if you turn to slide five
You can see a scenario of
Of 10% budget growth continuing
over the next couple of years,
combined with 500 million and
tax cuts.
What I'd like for you to do this
session is to think of like
anything when people talk about
tax cuts in $100 million
increments. That's about the
equivalent of 1% of spending. So
many combined you need to
combine these two when you when
you're talking about them,
That's a 15% impact on general
fund.
And what that does is, it moves
up the date of spending that the
surplus to the point of us
living needing to live with when
I whatever the general fund, Um,
revenue forecast is for that
particular year. So if we had
spent all of that money over the
past couple of years and then at
the revenue level that it's
called for an FY 25
We'd be growing budgets by 250
million.
That's it. That's what that's
what the revenue growth is your
over a year.
So the question you have before
you is, you can spend it all now
or you can spread this out over
a longer period of time, and
that's what the committee has
been was focused on during the
interim was coming up with
mechanisms to spread this out
over time, and so you can see on
the next slide.
The 6% spending growth with a
combination of $200 million of
tax cuts.
Provides for a much longer
runway of being able to do
healthy, um, increases to agency
budgets, You could even go up to
7% and this would continue to
give yourself a buffer for being
able to have more sustainable
growth pattern into the into the
out years while still doing a
lot of
Um, big, potentially
transformative, um, investments
with non recurring revenue, So
those are going to be, um, the
major kind of issues that you're
going to be faced with this
interim.
So the overall budget
recommendation for LFC on slight
seven is about a 5.9% increase
to 10.1 billion. It includes a
4% compensation package for
public employees and educators.
You'll see the educators, um,
compensation built into the base
budget.
That, um 5.9% increase is
strategically targeted towards a
lot of things intended to get
better outcomes, whether it's
strengthening our healthcare and
behavioral health. Indeed, the
waiver um, network as well as
providing services for for
individuals. I'll talk to more
details about the recommendation
for some of those big buckets in
a in a minute.
Includes about 900 million in
different specials and
supplemental funding, You know,
in a good year for specials and
supplementals used to be 250,
maybe 300 million. So really
big, non recurring action.
That's where a lot of your
budget attention should be
really focused as you're working
on House Bill two is in the non
recurring area. There's lots of
moving parts there, and lots of
Lots of, um investments.
So how do we help transition?
Um through this, you know,
spread this wealth out over
time. One is the is the
traditional way that where we've
been basically creating trust
funds. There's an opportunity to
do that to basically offload
some coming liabilities that we
know we have based on promises
the states made in the area of
financial aid for higher
education.
So the LFC recommended creating
an endowment to basically
guarantee um assuming we don't
do big tuition increases
guaranteed free tuition going
forward for lottery and
opportunity.
That would fully endow a cradle
to career system from early
childhood, the K 12 to access to
higher education that's pretty
significant.
There will be a record
recommendation also tops off the
legacy. Land of enchantment, Um,
permanent fund, which then spins
off money to a variety of
different beneficiaries that can
use to match that with federal
dollars. That's a would be a
transfer of 300 million. I'll
talk in more detail, but we've
done a good job as a state of
setting aside that big sums of
money for the long term.
Like I just said, we've had a
50% increase in agency based
budgets just over the last
couple of years for the near
term, But what we're trying to
figure out is that midterm Um
and so the lfc is recommended a
new what I call an expendable
trust this government
Accountability Truster Gate
Fund.
And that would be to set aside a
good chunk of money for the next
couple of years. That would spin
off either 25% or $300 million a
year to fund agency expansion
request before and make them
prove that they are implemented
effectively. They've got
research behind them. They've
got evidence of effectiveness
before putting that
Money into any agencies based
budget and I'll go into more
detail about how that would work
soon. You've got so much.
Money and both non recurring in
that new money figure that was
just talked about that you have
an opportunity to cash finance
capital outlay at a much greater
level. Um, that with General
fund as opposed to taking out
hefty bonds that the chairman
just pointed out that maybe we
can't afford on a personal per
capita income basis.
Going forward. That's the
generosity of the oil and gas
industry is funding that highly
volatile, totally more exposed
to, um, volatility and our
severance tax. Um, bonding
program. We probably need to
continue having discussions and
and work towards a reforms for
that. Um, if not this session,
certainly next session.
Overall, the LFC recommendations
prioritize investments in human
capital in an effort to boost
short and long term games in
that personal per capita income.
We had discussions over the
interim of that's that's the
transition from the reliance on
oil and gas is having a much
more proper, prosperous
population, and you do that,
with having a much more educated
population. Whether that's um
from everything from industry
recognized certification and
trades to the normal, higher
education.
To be able to attract the kind
of employers that pay more, Um,
for our citizens to be able to
be employed at much higher
levels. All of this still leaves
reserves at 30%, which was the
committee target, and that
includes moving the tobacco out
of the reserves to have a true
reserves that would be
accessible in the case of
downturn.
And let that endowment fund grow
as it was originally intended.
So with that, Mr Chairman,
quickly public schools growth.
Like I said, it's been about a
50% increase. There's been big
increases in educator
compensation. Um, probably in
the tune 35 to 40% when you
include the increases for the
three tiered system.
Despite a lot of the controversy
over a longer school year. Both
recommendations include more
money for extended learning,
because more districts are
taking the state up on doing it
When you look at and it's a
range of districts, it's
districts, um, a small and
diverse as Cuba going to school
for more than 190 days, Um to
gallop, very rural remote
schools the same thing.
Two very high performing
districts like Los Alamos, Um,
last Cruces Urban District, So
there's lots of different
districts that have done more
extended learning.
There's a significant amount of
the gate funding made available
to test out strategy for the
best ways for supporting new
educators before they enter the
classroom, Um, to test out
methods for, um
Supporting getting special ed
teachers and the most
challenging classrooms. We know
we have enough special energy
teachers, but they're not
teaching in the classrooms that
we need them in, and that's
where your biggest shortage
areas um the rest follows really
the plank that we've been doing
a responding to Yossi Martinez,
though you've done so much in
response to that, that there's
not a lot of
Extra new needs in the basic,
um, school funding. So on slide
nine you'll see big increases,
um, in school budgets geared
towards those populations that
were identified in the lawsuit.
At the same time, you've been
pumping lots of money into
schools.
A lot of that money has been
sitting idle, um so school cash
balances at the same time have
continued to skyrocket.
That's leading us to have the
conversations of how do we get
school districts to have more
skin in the game with some of
these below the line initiatives
and really require them to start
putting up matching funds, So if
we want to do more CTE, that's
great. Let's not do it as a silo
at the pit, but you put some
money in at the district which
you clearly have. There's a
recommendation to put some more
money into the SCG. For those
Um And then you decide. What are
the reform initiatives that you
want to take on as a district is
a community schools is a
teacher. Professional
development is a C T e some
guardrails, so you'll see that
as a theme within the public
school budget.
Higher education when the
Legislature enacted the lottery
scholarship New Mexico shot up
from kind of a mid pack state in
terms of students graduating
high school and going to college
and became one of the top 10
over a period of time at the
same time.
Tuition.
Increases soared to the point
that the revenue generated by
lottery could no longer support
100% tuition When we d link
Those exacerbated what we see in
the fall of college going rates.
Um, you've done a new program to
basically pre fund for a couple
of years lottery to make sure we
can cover 100% as well as the
new opportunity Scholarship.
If that gets more students
Not just to the door of higher
education, but through the door
to a graduating degree. That
would be the benchmark to judge
Judge success going forward.
I would say I'm I'm worried
about tuition increases going up
exponentially. Now that you've
are paying for 100% of tuition
going forward, and so you had a
really good evaluation report
from our staff. This interim
that talked about
The value and the impact of
tuition increases versus
Putting money towards I n G and
a performance based funding
formula. So that for higher Ed,
that's where you want to really
focus your money and make sure
that you're paying for improved
performance, not just
performance relative to other
peers and really cap and hold
down tuition increases going
forward, so higher education
does that in the recommendation
with LFC
That makes sure that lottery and
opportunity are fully funded
with the first year proceeds
contingent on enactment of that
endowment. Um and it directs. Um
um
Increases for I n G as well as
some targeted healthcare related
R P S P s early childhood. Um,
this total agency budget is
slated for I believe over 750
million
These are just a suite of a
couple of programs. The
recommendation is, um, to
continue using the increases
that you'll see in the General
fund from that's coming from the
constitutionally approved voter
approved change to the Permanent
school fund. It's about $17
million, as well as
That the reason the chair was
asking about that transfer for
the early childhood Trust fund
is it should be at about $5
billion. That's how much money
is coming in, which was
sustained a change in the
distribution to $250 million, So
we want that transfer as soon as
possible to make sure that a
sustainable spending level for a
range of pre k quality
initiatives as well as childcare
expansion
I would caution, however,
continuing to do these huge
increases in early childhood as
the number of youth coming into
the system continues to shrink.
We could find places. Where will
we already know there were over
saturating certain communities
with two funding too many slots
than there are actually kids so
good things happening. Want to
protect those investments of
quality initiatives?
Child welfare. This is going to
be one of the areas of the
budget where you'll want to
combine looking at the operating
budget recommendations from the
executive LFC along with the
gate funding.
C Y F D has basically flat in
the LFC budget for on a
recurring basis.
Because of the challenges
they've had implementing the
funding that you provided to
them over the past couple of
years, so the recommendation is
fund them for the next four
years through the gate Program
for evidence based community
interventions as long as they
get approval from the federal
government to tap into a new
federal funding stream that will
pay three quarters of the cost.
Of that program.
These are some of the suite of
programs that can be invested
in. We've talked to them about
that. We've got alternative
response on the books. They
haven't been implementing it the
way that the statute
contemplates nor best practice
research. We're recommending
expanding that, but only if they
get approval from the federal
government out of the gate
program, not in their base
budget.
Medicaid online, 13.
Continued big increases just to
maintain the status quo.
The federal F map changes, um of
less than 1%.
Cost about, Um, $68 million
So as we become a richer state,
hopefully from our human capital
investments.
Uh, based on our personal per
capita income has grown faster
than the rest of the country
over this past year, which is
great. But then the federal
government says, Ah, now you can
help pay more for it.
Um, And so that's just that
revenue shift.
Will be a challenge. Budgetarily
going forward. Um, but the
Medicaid budget and the LFC
recommendation continues moving
towards supporting expanding
healthcare providers through
increased rates for targeted
high priority ones like primary
care, infant mental health,
behavioral healthcare DD waiver
continuing to support the
elimination of the DD waiver
waiting list, which is basically
gone.
We're just bringing on new
patients, and those new patients
are starting to use slightly
more money.
Big cost growth in this
particular program since 2019,
however, cautionary tale
The difference is that you'll
see what the executive
recommendation are primarily
going to be.
Is the program's enrollment
continue to and grow grow in
this more prosperous economic
time. If so, why and their
executive will have even bigger
rate increases. We haven't even
fully implemented the ones you
just appropriated to see if
that's actually working to move
the needle. Lfc was a little bit
more cautious in that particular
area, And this is why on the
next slide the long term
Oil production forecast. Um,
we've got this peak.
Like I said that, like the
severance tax permanent fund
will be replacing some of the
lost revenue in the out years.
That's going to keep our budget
on a net basis, basically flat,
not growing and even 3% we would
like versus flat. Um so the
Government Accountability
Expendable Trust fund is a
method
To try to continue to support
new innovative programs and
interventions will not building
that into the base budget until
they prove that they're
effective.
Um how would it
How would it work? I talked
about this already. You know,
the the more we build into the
recurring based budget, the
sooner we're are building 3%
budget increases, so that's the
challenge.
There's really not a systemic
way that we've had in our
history for using these current
windfalls. Um and we're really
faced with a lot of capacity
constraints that agencies have
being able to implement big
increases and get money out the
door. Get it out effectively.
So when Page
16
There'll be a two pronged to
funds would be set up. One would
be a Government Accountability
Trust fund.
The gate fund.
And LFC recommends parking 663
million into that for the next
couple to be available for
future appropriations.
The trust fund in the future
would spin off 25% of its
corpus. That's why it's
expendable. Normally trust funds
only spin off 5%, which is
usually a little bit less than
their investment earrings.
Or $300 million.
Those 303 $100 million would be
appropriated for four years for
an agency and each year would be
the the same amount it would be
split up.
So the agency would have
certainty over implementation of
that demonstration pilot right
now what we're seeing. We're
doing this right now. Already In
the budget you you've been
making multi year appropriations
for the past couple of years,
um, in a variety of different
arenas.
Agencies are coming back, asking
for extensions for those they're
asking for extensions for big,
um
Um, single year appropriations.
This will give more certainty.
Here's the next four years. Go
evaluated show that it's
working. Um, and then come back
the next next budget cycle.
Would require agencies that
wanted to expand their programs
to use a new budget tool that we
used with them this fall that
has elements of effective
program design and they would go
through the budget request
process for the Legislature.
Just like the normal process. It
would just be a different
funding source for it.
The legislature would retain
full appropriations power over
which projects get in. We
wouldn't recommend doing a ton
if you're going to try to
evaluate all of them, but a
select some that are that are a
priority that could actually
move the needle if they were
implemented correctly and then
in the future, you decide
whether based on the evidence
whether it's worthwhile to build
in
To the agency's based budget. In
total, there's 300 million,
would equate to, you know about
half a percent of spending
growth in the future. So even if
we're at that 3% spending growth
and something's really working.
Half a percent. Getting built in
wouldn't be the end of the
world. If it's not working.
You've got such budget
constraints that not funding it
would be in order as opposed to
going in and having to cut
Winston budgets once funding
gets into agency based budget is
very difficult to reallocate
that when we find it's not
working, so this is a mechanism
that is a proposal to try to
bring more order and discipline
to that.
Lying page 17 just gives you
some of the criteria. Um, that
agencies would would need to
provide to you to help in the
decision making process of
whether it gets into the fund.
Where did the 300 million come
from? That's in the lfc
recommendation. Well, it came
from the agency request this
last fall, who were asked to
fill out this budget tool They
did. It was like
Interesting, not fully cooked,
needs more evaluation. Let's put
it in in the gate and and try it
out, as opposed to just saying
No when you've got $3.4 billion
of of new money, um and so
that's where those things came
from, Um, the one that you
funded before that didn't come
through a formal request.
Was the one for industry
certified, um, trades programs
and apprenticeships. You've
you've funded that this year.
um, and that the proposal is
that's a good human capital
investment to test out for
people that are not getting
funding through the lottery or
the opportunity scholarship.
The last sighting in conclusion.
We continue to have these
booming revenues that are
moderate moderating. There is an
opportunity to spread this
bounty out over a number of
years through, um, still healthy
increases in agency based
budgets, but not to the tune of
what we've done over the past
five years. We've we've got to
start moderating that a little
bit more, making it more
sustainable. You can still put
together really nice budget
packages.
Um, that hopefully can move the
needle for agencies. You can
test out new and innovative
ideas and you can still do a lot
of big, non recurring items to
take care of the things that new
Mexicans want and need. And with
that, I turn it over to
Secretary props and B Stand for
questions. Mr Chairman, members
of the committee, You should
have two documents from the
Department of Finance and
Administration. The first as you
noted, Mr Chairman, is this
document here? We have produced
this last several years. This is
the
Overall, detailed mostly as
you'll see tables. Uh
For the executive
recommendation, but we haven't
produced for several years is a
budget in brief, which you also
have, and this is a little bit
more detailed information.
Only for executive branch
agencies and the judiciary. We
don't get into non executive
branch agencies, but a little
bit more detailed information on
the executive recommendation.
Mr Chairman, as you're well
aware of the executive is
recommending a general fund
budget of 5.10 $0.5 billion,
which is a 9.9
Percent increase over FY 24.
A couple of things we've also
built into the few things we
built into the executive budget
2.1 billion and non General fund
nonrecurring appropriations.
It's all always nice. Mr
Chairman and members of the
committee to start these
discussions where in places
where we agree because we do
agree on a number of important
items, and I'm grateful for
that. Director Salim mentioned
the Land of Enchantment Fund I
believe are recommended funding
levels for that are the same.
I also believe Mr Chairman based
on my initial read of the LSC
budget, that, um
We're pretty close on the, um
Rural healthcare delivery fund,
which I know is a strong
priority for the executive and I
believe you may actually be
higher than the executive
recommendation on that so
grateful that we can start off
with some agreement in some
areas. Of course, we're not
always going to have complete
agreement that's to be expected.
Mr Chairman. We also are
proposing a total capital
package of $850 million that
$850 million will be funded
through General fund again this
year.
We have said a, uh, tax package.
I would call it a ceiling of
$500 million
Obviously is, Dr Sally indicated
you all are considering a tax
package that is lower than that.
So if we go below that 500
million, a ceiling that is set
by the executive, I don't think
you're going to get a whole lot
of pushback from us,
particularly considering
The fact that if the tax package
from last year of 1.2 billion as
you indicated Mr Chairman had
gone into effect, we would be
looking at things quite
differently this year.
We do recommend Mr Chairman, a
overall across the board 3%
compensation increase. This is
different than the lfc
recommendation of 4%. Because
only 2% of that is across the
board. The other 2% is tied to
appropriate placement.
Calculations, but the executive
is recommending 3% across the
board for all state employees.
As well as, uh, public school
employees to we do have some
targeted increases, including an
8% increase for correctional,
probation and parole officers.
And 11.5, or 14% Increase $11.5
million in General fund for that
for an increase for state police
above the increase that is being
recommended for state employees
and public school employees as
well.
Overall, Mr Chairman, the
executive recommendation would
leave reserves at for FY 25 at
$3.6 billion, or 34% 34.2% of
recurring appropriations.
I'm not going to go into a lot
of detail. Mr Chairman on agency
budgets, that's what you'll be
doing over the next couple of
weeks. And they are the experts.
I can't certainly answer
Detailed questions about D, O T
or H s D or C Y F T s budget,
But I will highlight a couple of
items for recurring items for
the executive budget. We are
recommending an additional 11.9.
Million dollars for opportunity
Scholarship.
68.9 million for a projected
2.4% increase in Medicaid growth
and to cover F map decreases.
$87.9 million to increase
Medicaid provider rate
reimbursements beginning on
January 1st of 2025, and this
may be one of those areas, Mr
Chairman, where we do have some
differences.
But we can work on those in the
coming in the coming days.
21.8 million to increase snap
benefits for seniors and those
with disabilities.
And $28 million to the early
childhood.
Department to expand
prekindergarten slots by 2700.
For non recurring general fund
appropriations. Miss Chairman.
We are
Recommending a $500 million
appropriation for statewide
housing initiatives through the
mortgage Finance Authority.
Uh, 200 million for statewide
road projects, and we have
included those projects in
Section nine appropriations.
We are recommending Mr Chairman,
$100 Million on non recurring
general fund appropriation to
provide matching grants for
Local governments,
municipalities and state
governments as well as tribal
governments. Mr Chairman last
year you appropriated $10
million for this purpose. Um, we
have expended I believe all of
but a small amount of that $10
million. We do believe this.
This is a worthwhile to continue
that investment we hear, often,
particularly in our local
government division at D F a
Of needs of your local
communities for matching grants
to be able to access the
tremendous amount and frankly,
unprecedented amount of federal
money that is out there, and we
believe that finding out $100
million will, uh, will assist
many of your local communities
again. Mr Chairman $100 million
for the rural Healthcare
delivery fund.
We are recommending $35 million
for law enforcement recruitment
and retention efforts. This
year, we are recommending that
addition to law enforcement we
had correctional officers to as
eligible for those recruitment
and retention funds.
Last year, Mr Chairman, you
appropriated $57 million for
Recruitment efforts for law
enforcement we have at the FAA.
We have gotten that $57 million
out the door.
That's well, that is a good
start. We recognize the
communities throughout the Nomex
throughout New Mexico continued
to struggle with a recruiting
and retaining law enforcement
personnel, so we do want to
continue efforts in that regard.
We included 35 million for
firefighters and emergency
medical technician recruitment
as well because we are also
seeing communities facing
difficulty with
Recruiting and retaining
firefighters. This is
particularly true because New
Mexico as you well know, Mr
Chairman and members of
Committee and many many of your
communities rely on volunteer
firefighter
To provide those services to
your communities. We're seeing a
significant decrease in in some
areas, at least in terms of the
interest in being in serving as
a volunteer firefighters, so we
would like to see an
appropriation there.
As you know, if you saw the
article, or the or the editorial
recently in the Santa Fe, New
Mexican, the governor has been
going around town picking up
trash.
Uh, she has made it clear that
she's not satisfied with the
condition of our highways in
terms of trash, and some of our
Communities, including the city
of Santa Fe, So we are going to
be including 10 million
recommending $10 million for
roadway route of beautification
programs at the Department of
Transportation. I could go on
and on Mr Chairman, but you've
already had a long afternoon. So
I think I'll stop there and I'm
happy to answer your questions.
Question, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you to both of you.
Um
First, uh, Wayne on
In reference to the 10 million.
That's what we had last year,
right?
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Yes, that's correct.
10 million Mr Chairman and
members in the prior before that
was 3 million.
Mr Chairman and members of the
committee and senator that was
before my time, but I'll take
your word for it.
Okay?
Well, I guess so. The whole
thing is, you know, going from 3
million to the
And it seems like we haven't
made that much of a difference.
I still say you know that, um
One part
That if you want change
You know it has to go through
education.
And I still say that all
Something for our state, You
know, $10 million or rather
would really see it or not much
better.
But
You know what I'm what I'm
looking at is that if we were to
come up with a
Program.
That would be scope and sequence
from kindergarten all the way
up.
You know, into learning this
behavior.
And you know, it is a culture,
you know, and, uh
You know that we could make a
difference because so
I know that within energy
savings and many of the other
things that we have done, You
know the big big changes the big
steps that we have done.
Has been when we implement it
through education, So it's just
a thought. You know that.
We can work and we can work with
that together. You know, I
really like that. The other part
of Mr Chairman Charles so
I think that
You know the way I view it, and,
uh,
You mentioned the average of
five years.
And and I think that if we were
to keep that block
For everything.
You know what? We can just you
know, so it's like
Maybe a little more tight. You
know the information and where
I'm going at it is like, um
Recently I have met with a lot
of educators.
And then they just hit us really
tight. Like you know what? We're
only going to get 3%. We're only
going to get 4%.
Um, you know, the point that I'm
trying to bring here is that if
you really look at five years
You know that that is recurring.
You know, Look at what we have
in comparison, especially
referring to
State employees and education
employees yourself seeing what
we have, you know, in our
benefits also
Because so
Benefits are expensive.
So
Yes, sir. Mr. Chairman. We
looked up school district
spending on salaries.
That's up 52% since FY 19
Over a billion dollars in new
company new salaries for public
school employees, Mr Chairman.
That I think I believe it was
like a 2.2 or 2.3 billion.
And it's actually on the last
three years, isn't it that we
have gone to the form?
Yes, Mr Chairman. We've gone
from 2.8 billion in FY 19 for
public school support over all
the 4.1 billion or about almost
a $1.4 billion.
Increase.
Much of that, for educators
salaries much of that for
extended learning, which
translates into more take home
pay for more work. Those are the
two big things and then
districts have been using their
at risk money to hire school
personnel. Whether it's
teachers, counselors, social
workers or others, so big
investments in
New positions. New compensation
increases increases in the three
tiered minimum salaries that are
recurring as well.
Mr Chairman. The less part is so
Charles, I think you made a very
good comment.
When you made on the extended
learning
You know that?
Small districts and
Large districts.
You know that are doing
So I think, eventually if we're
going to get a buy in from
everyone you know then also how
in comparison? How do we work
that with the charter schools?
Yes, sir. Mr Chairman, Charter
schools, actually.
Bump there.
They're just like districts,
They run the gamut.
But many of the highest
performing charter schools ones
were called out and recently and
and the Web post Mission
achievement success there.
actually, a poster child for
extended learning.
I mean, you can drop your kid
off at seven in the morning and
picked them up at 530 in the
afternoon, and they've got
tutoring programs, Meal programs
support.
They go to school longer than a
PS does by a lot in terms of
their school calendar, they
invest heavily in their, um,
teacher. Professional
development. They've got highly
effective school leadership.
They've got many of the
components in place that the
state has been trying to, um
To support districts to move
towards overall and and they do
get better results particularly
related to some of the student
demographics that they're that
they're serving very well. Thank
you. And I really want to thank
you for the for this.
You know, I glanced through some
of them, but it's a lot of
information. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr
Thank you, Mr Chair.
One of the things that was
brought up was tuition.
Um, when we did the lottery
scholarship
And and I remember that
So tuition. It stayed relatively
flat for a long time. Then we
said we were going to pay for
everybody's tuition, and it just
shot up. And so, Mr Chair, this
question is really for you.
So
It was okay.
Yeah, it really is for us.
Um, So now we're doing the
opportunity Scholarship. We're
again. We're now we say we're
going to pay for everything
again. We said we were going to
pay for everything with the
lottery scholarship, and then it
got
Less and less of the tuition
because we don't have the money.
The same thing is going to
happen again unless we somehow
figure out how to rein in
The universities who are just
going to
Drive that up to till the till
we bankrupt the state.
Um
So I don't know how we do that.
But I do think that that's a
huge, huge issue that we need to
address somehow.
And you know, in the past we
were told. Oh, no, that's up to
the region, so we don't have any
say in that.
Well, we're the appropriators.
We have a say in that.
We just figured out have to
figure out how to say it.
Because it will happen again.
And and then all of a sudden we
don't have money for K 12.
Because we're paying for higher
Ed or whatever.
So I do think that that's
something that we as a committee
definitely need to address and
think about.
In Charles. We need you to help
us figure that out because it
will happen again. No doubt in
my mind.
The other thing I want to
address real quickly is tax
cuts. I'm not sure that you know
If we look at the taxes of the
state of New Mexico were not
particularly overtaxed as a
state.
What we are is we're taxed in
such a confusing way that nobody
can figure it out.
I think there's plenty of
business here. Economic
opportunities that simply don't
come because they look at our
tax code and they go. I don't
know what you're talking about.
I'm out.
Because they're each every one
of those looking for a reason to
just cross off somebody. You
know you're given 10. We gotta
cross off some until you get to
the to the three looked
promising after that.
Well, we're not promising
because we're confused.
I would suggest that we have tax
reform, not tax cuts.
So I throw that out there also.
And so, Mr Chair. Thank you for
listening So appropriately to me
and Madam chair, I turn it back
to you.
Thank you very much. I guess we
can talk to ghosts and any
invisibles. Right? Thank you.
Alrighty. The next one is Oh,
there it is. Okay. Sanders Stein
Born your next. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um and thank you for the
presentation. And first of all,
Charles Bravo to you and your
staff on I mean,
Some of the work. You've done a
lot of his very visionary and
Kudos to you guys. It's It's
really
Inspiring, actually, um
How are utilizing these funds
and we know we have challenges
and we know that there's
problems that we haven't
Successfully addressed and you
know you try things. Sometimes
they don't work. It's just part
of part of
Leadership, But, um, but kudos
again to the good stuff.
The good ideas. I want to ask
you about a few areas that I
know are important that I've
been kind of looking through the
guides here kind of
Checking my own impression on
the issue to see if the data
matched up with that one of
them. Senator compose always
brings up that I
Uh, I think we all recognize
important that senior services
And as we set up these trust
funds for a long term.
Financial support feels like one
area that
Has has been hungry for more
funds, and certainly very in
need. Population are seniors,
and I just wonder, you know,
I've been reading about the
services that we provide to the
population and it's
We're providing these services
free pandemic lower than pre
pandemic levels, like the
services to these seniors is
falling off.
It might be at a point where we
need to be increasing our
support home visiting types of
things. So I just wonder, um
What's your impression of this
issue? And should we also be
looking at a trust fund support
seniors?
So, Mr Chairman, I would say
that your investments in the
aging network have been
continuing to increase.
The services being delivered
have changed with Covid, Um and,
frankly, the services that
The next generation of of
seniors. The retiring boomers
want might not look like the 19
fifties senior center that we've
been operating, it might be a
multigenerational center might
be more. Uh, it might be other
opportunities for engaging in
the community. So I look forward
to working with
The new aging secretary to say,
what is the vision for the next
generation of of seniors and
what are their needs? They're
still a very large population of
very vulnerable. Um, low income
seniors that exist in
particularly rural areas of the
state that we need to pay
attention to, But aging is
another one of these, um
Agencies where you'll want to
look at the gate funding in
context of the operating budget,
where the LFC recommendation
funded the increases for the
aging network for more services.
Higher rates to adjust for cost
of living. Um, but then the
department had a priority for a
new program that it wanted to
implement to provide in home
services to seniors who
Or have higher incomes or don't
qualify for some reason for
Medicaid. Okay, this is not in
rule. It hasn't been fully
flushed out. Interesting
concept. Let's test it, um, to
see how it works. And so there's
funding and the indicate program
for, um added senior services,
So that's that's going to be one
of those agencies that will turn
to
I would say.
For the committee.
Those gate funded projects start
on page 232 of your volume one.
And you'll see it's in the line
numbers will be onto the left
and then there will be a number
nine.
That's for Section nine of the
bill.
And so that's real find a
handful of those projects and
it's good before you get those
big agencies before you to
double check what might be in
there. If you see something that
seems really light on the
operating budget recommendation.
Okay. Thank you Share in
Charles. Yeah, That was a little
confusing. Um, little wonkish.
Uh, when I answer, so I'm sure
it was a good answer. Just a
little bit wonky all over the
place for this part time
Legislator so
I would just say in the new
secretary is that our former
tourism secretary? Yes, that's
correct.
But for those listening to have
a background in this issue, I I
would welcome
Just some some vision.
For
How we can really set up our
seniors for success Movement
photos So I'd look forward to
hearing some ideas. Some bold,
bold ideas. Um
On vocational education as far
as the education mix. Is that
something that you think we're
funding that very robustly.
Vocational education through
post secondary education or the
new CTE movement in K 12.
I guess both
So I would say that the CTE
movement holds promise in K 12
If done effectively, I would say
it's a mixed bag on what
Districts are really wanting to
do the best practice researches.
You don't have a shop class at
the back of the high school, you
integrate more hands on and
practical learning into your
curriculum.
Um and you funded
Support.
Technical assistance to do that.
But then you've also got a bunch
of districts that want to open
up a new welding program in the
back, and you're not gonna
graduate somebody with the
welding certificate from high
school. They're still going to
need post secondary education.
So why not partner with your
community College for dual
credit to make sure you've got
that full pipeline going through
and decrease the cost of
equipment and other kinds of
things so
Lots of promise. Uh, mixed bag
on implementation from from my
perspective.
Okay. Thank you. Glad seems
super important in the gig
economy And then, um
Um, school based health centers.
Mr. Chair, Charles. How
dramatically are we looking at
expanding those in this new
budget and for you as well
secretary crops.
Mr Chairman.
Senator there was not a request
for an expansion for school
based house centers. As I
recall, Um
Frankly, that's one of the
capacity constraints that we see
out there where I'm not sure
that they even have their
contracts for the current fiscal
year. They're probably still
billing for many services
through Medicaid, which is
keeping them afloat. Um, so most
of the money that they're
generating is primarily through
third party payers. And then the
the General Fund Support is for
Basic operations are for
services that might not be
covered by Medicaid or the
client. Patient may not want,
um, to see coverage for that.
And then finally, Mr Chair. I
just because I got it because it
was brought up.
We went through this last
session.
Uh, we talked about litter. We
talked about keeping New Mexico
clean. We know from national
experts the best way in my
colleague here, Senator Gonzalez
nailed it. It's education. We
can throw 10 million a year
litter cleanup for people who
don't value cleaning, protecting
the environment. They're just
gonna throw the next thing
another mile down the down the
road.
The best strategy that keep
America beautiful and leave no
trace. All these groups will
tell you is is education and our
neighbors Texas. I don't like to
quote them a lot, but they got
it right. You know, 1985 when
they started Don't mess with
Texas campaign and they really
instilled through using, you
know, serious, um, marquee kind
of brand ambassadors. Texans
Stevie Ray Vaughan, Randy White,
that was Cowboys.
Major commercial campaign. Don't
mess with Texas take pride in
your state. New Mexico could do
this. We had a great bill last
session. I don't know why.
It, uh, didn't make it all the
way through the fourth floor,
but that would have spent
started a statewide campaign,
which for half a million year,
according to the tourism
secretary, We could do a marquee
statewide campaign for half a
million, so I would just suggest
it's still a really important
idea in New Mexico that
Landerman Chapman as we grow our
outdoor economy, we should do a
multipronged all points
bulletin.
Uh, protect New Mexico's
landscape. Don't litter campaign
and we'll get more bang for the
buck and probably half a million
dollars in spending that we
could spend millions in the
pickup, and that will save us
money that will be financially
smart and also teach stewardship
to the next generation about
taking pride in our environment
Secretary, Mr Chairman and
senator executive budget does
include $2,000,002 Million
appropriation for that kind of
advertising campaign.
So we agree with you.
Fantastic, So secretary process
Perhaps you can educate me more
about about that. And who spends
those monies? We spent a lot of
time last lot of turf within
executive over people who have
done this kind of work.
D O. T has done a lot of this
kind of work in the past with
their toss no Moss.
Tourism obviously has there.
Don't you know Mexico? True, And
then they had a program called
Keep New Mexico. True, which was
there?
We kind of the conclusion that
tourism was a good place to do
it because they're kind of
branding experts.
I'm wondering Where do you
target this? $2 million
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee and Senator, it's with
the Tourism department.
Perfecto. Something to build on.
All right? Well, I'll just send
on hideout. I'd love to learn
more about
Work to make that a success.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Senator
Rodriguez. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Good afternoon, Wayne
again. And of course, Charles.
Thank you. I just have a quick
question. Charles, please help
me. Help me understand this
expandable trust? I thought I
understood it. And now I'm a
little confused. Okay, So tell
me on your page.
You know what the page number
is? I don't see the number but
anyway under expendable trust
fund where you explained that,
um, we we create in the end the
recommendation lfc
recommendation. We create that
fund.
But with $663 million in it,
which is like remember that but
What confuses me is How can we
spin off 300 million a year?
From that trust fund for four
years each year if we don't have
but 663 million in there, so Mr
Chairman work, so the four year
funding would come out of the
300 million. That would be the
spinoff.
So 300 Million, so about 75
million a year.
For those selected items that
you choose to appropriate.
I see. Okay, so in here and then
we would have
Conceivably than it could be a
year's worth.
I don't understand. Because then
you'd have so the 663 million
would give you two more years of
being able to do four years
worth of projects down the road,
And that's why I talked about
that. This is spreading out some
surplus over the midterm.
Is your funding two years? Yes.
because you're finding two years
at a time, but it would be would
be two years Would it 663 allows
you to spend 300 million in FY
26. And then those would be four
year projects and then in FY 27
If you didn't put any more money
into that fund, it would give
you another 300 million.
To spend on another set of
projects for for for another
four years. Conceivably, eight
and it if if, in either of those
two sessions. You still have a
surplus, and you want to
Put it into that fun to save it
for the midterm. Then you'd be
able to do that.
I see. Okay? And so then, after
that, I mean, are we going to be
like funding every year into
this trust? Or is that the
expectation or there's two
different options? One is that
you make a decision on an annual
basis on whether you want to
pump up the corpus. The other
option that we're looking at is
You know, you always end up with
a bunch of extra money in, um,
reserves. You know where it what
Almost 50%.
And the operating reserve.
His only supposed to have about
8% in it, And then it kicks that
money into another reserve
account that just balloons your
reserves even higher. It doesn't
change it. You could shift some
of the money the excess money
out of your reserves
automatically into this fund as
well. That's the other option.
So then it's it's gonna have to
be replenished every so often.
Obviously, otherwise he wouldn't
have enough money. Expendable.
Trust the It's it's. That's the
difference between a regular
trust fund where you don't want
to spend down the balance.
In this particular case you're
saying we're willing to spend?
We're willing to take a risk on
whether something works, but
we're going to spread this out
over the next couple of years,
Right? Spend it all at once.
Okay. Thank you. But initially
we started with 900 million
I think was close to 1 billion
into this expendable trust
right? That's the combination
between the 663 Million and the
300 million that in year one and
just appropriate to the the
program fund for spending on
those items that I outlined in
volume Exactly so bad. So then
the 300 between 663 and the 900
some million we have already
Recommended in the LSC
recommendation. Approximately
300 m correct. Got it. Okay.
That was where the little glitch
was from my mind. Alright
numbers in our scenarios earlier
that combined the two and we've
broken them out because you're
actually spending that money and
so not to think that it's like
being designated for future
years, okay, and that 663 would
act as a backup.
Tear overall reserves.
That if something went really
awry over the next couple of
years, you could reach into
Before you needed to tap other
types of reserves because it's
coming from your reserves right
now. Okay, Thanks for the
explanation. Charles, Mr
Chairman.
Oh, Senator Padilla.
Thank you Chair. And And thanks
for the presentation, gentlemen,
And all the work. Um, so Senator
Rodriguez questions were very
similar to where I was going to
go. But on on the
G A. T F the Get to fund think
people are just calling it the
gate. The gate there you good? I
was trying to kind of come up
with a creative way to the gate
gets created. It doesn't
eliminate any existing funds out
there that exist or are you
collapsing any of them into
making this thing work? No, it's
just brand new.
So, So Thank you, Mr Chair, and
I'm glad and happy to hear that.
So the creation of this, though,
is a stop before the other
funds.
Get their disbursements into
their into those those other
buckets. This does not intercept
any money from any other funds.
Right now. There will be
proposed legislation for the
committee to consider, Um on
Monday, and all of the spending
that's tied to it is contingent
on enactment of the legislation
setting up the gate fund. Okay,
They're very, very interesting
and creative work on this. Thank
you. This is really, really
good.
Only question that so I did have
a question on page. Let's see.
This would be 16. So does this
change our our standard or
typical sort of prudent investor
type scenario rules that we
normally follow? Because of the
disbursements that you're
recommending here of 25% or 300
Million. Mr Chairman, he was
like that's a big shift in how
we normally do things, Mr.
Chairman. Um, Senator, Yes.
Don't think of it as a normal
endowment if you are setting up
a normal endowment
You would not want to exceed 5%.
Um, expenditure.
So you know, a billion dollar
new endowment would only give
you $5 million or $50 million a
year.
Um
Versus this is kind of again for
the midterm. This gives you 300
million and each of those
projects get funded for four
years and you can do that for
the next three years in a row,
and you're going to have a big
new money figure. When you come
into the next session, you can
do it again, and it will
continue to allow you to spread
out this wealth and still do
innovative things for new
Mexicans.
You know, government doesn't
often
I think agencies don't feel that
they can innovate because the
price of failure is so
significant and we got to change
some of the culture of being
able to test new things out, and
this would be one avenue to do
that without having to figure
out how to client back out of an
agency's based budget. So, Mr
Chairman and Charles so with
this sort of act as sort of like
a junior
Um, funding mechanism that we
are traditionally look at
Mr Chairman, Senator. No,
there's a very strict vetting
criteria and process for a
select few, um, items that
agencies would be requesting as
expansion to their base budgets.
So is it Is it feasible, Mr
Chair that maybe some years
there would be no distribution
or no, No, no money coming out
of this could be Mr Chairman.
Thank you. And then, uh, Mr
Chairman, I just, you know, want
to bring the committee's
attention to page 42 on the
secretary's presentation. I
don't want everybody to fall off
their chairs when they see a
216.9% increase for the Obey
office.
That's a total of $4.3 million
because of the different things
that they're that they're doing
their, um this thing called bead
that you might have been hearing
about in terms of money that
monies that are going to come
into the state. That's the vast
majority of this increase, so I
just want to call that out to
the General fund. It's only
patients only. It's an 802,000.
I guess increase out of the
General fund and my reading that
correctly in terms of how this
is going to be realized.
Mr Chairman and members of
committee and Senator that's
correct. And then just just for
kicks. I mean, what do we truly
invest anticipate will be money
is brought into the state as a
result of the work of this
office at the From the federal
level seems pretty significant.
Chairman, members of committee.
I agree It's probably
significant I would leave that
to the experts. If you
Couldn't ask them that when they
appear before you because I
don't have the number on the top
of my head. I think I will,
because just just want the
community could be close to a
billion dollars in money is
coming into the state as a
result of a of an office that
runs on a $4.3 million budget,
So it's pretty exciting stuff
for all of us. And that
investment Thank you. Chair.
Starling, Senator Bradley
Thank you, Mr Chairman. First, I
too, share the governor's
concern regarding illegal
dumping. In fact, just last
session, Senator Stein born and
I carried a recycling and little
reduction bill that did that
exact same thing. That was,
interestingly enough pocket
detailed. So, um, but I will,
Regardless. Nevertheless, my
district will be excited to know
that she is
Personally wanting to attend
dumpsites and pick up trash
because along the US Mexico
border, we have miles and miles
of a crisis that includes also
environmental crisis with trash.
and so we welcome her visit as
soon as possible.
Um, Charles, I wanna I'm gonna
clarify Just a couple of things.
I really appreciate Senator
Rodriguez's question about the
dollars because on page 16 if we
could get some more information
on the Government Accountability
Trust fund, I realize now that
these are almost Cliff notes,
and so I was reading that number
Incorrect as well. Can you
explain?
Who exactly is a evaluating the
agency programs, is it Is it
lfc?
Mr Chairman and Senator, Um if
this goes through post session,
lfc, um D f A and the agencies
would sit down and look at
performance Accountability plan
that would include a suite of
performance metrics that the
agency would report on a regular
basis as well as well as um, an
evaluation plan. Money that
would be appropriated would
include sufficient money if you
needed to do a program
evaluation.
That could be potentially
contract it out. Um, with, um
You know, universities or other
researchers, um, to help
evaluate the impact of the pilot
project Project LFC and D F A
would be monitoring all of that
and then coming back to our
respective the committee or the
governor's office to make
recommendations, Um, at the end
of the pilot on whether it
worked or not. Okay, so, Mr
Chairman, just to clarify we're
not building
FTE s. We may need to contract
but but the agencies will
collectively come with with a
reporter suggestion or
information as to whether or not
the legislator wants to continue
with that program. Correct.
That's correct. OK, thank you
for that clarification. And
then, Mr Secretary. I just
wanted to compliment you. This
is my fourth session. I don't
think I have ever seen a more
professional presentation. While
I just agree with the contents
of this report. I have to thank
you.
For just the professionalism and
how clear you have presented
your request. I greatly
appreciate that in the time that
went into this, So thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you. And so this concept of the
expendable trust right?
If you look back and you talk
about we put 700 million in
behavioral health.
No one knows where it went. No,
I didn't see any change in my
district. We look back in during
the LoC. We saw 20 million
sitting it
H S D.
And for three years and that was
for startup, behavioral health.
You know, I need to turn on the
lights. I need chairs. I need to
rent a building and never moved
right?
And so as we move forward, they
all want new programs.
And we say, Well, how do we
track the programs and
performance measures? And is it
worth us investing that money?
Because we don't know at the end
of the day because sometimes
agencies won't give us
information. They don't know the
information. They haven't spent
the money. It's it's stuck
somewhere. There's agencies that
requested money that requested
the same thing last year and got
funded and didn't even know
And so how do we make government
more accountable? But how do we
How do we start? Tracking the C
Y F D is a is a big issue coming
in the legislative session,
right. They requested in
Total myriad of things. Okay,
That's fine, but we want to see
the performance. We want to see
the chat tracking and child
safety so that we can do it. See
it monthly quarterly and tell
them okay. Our money has been
put into good use. Now, let's
roll it into General fund
appropriation because we know it
works.
Instead of p y p. D.
And we don't know where any of
the below line
Funding. Go well, you know where
it goes, but we don't know the
performance measures on it
right? We don't know if it's
making moves are not making
moves and
You know if you don't try new
stuff.
And you don't
Take a risk and try to make a
change, especially in
government. I think
You might as well just turn the
page in another day.
I don't know where the executive
is on this, But, you know,
sometimes some point you have to
start making changes in
government.
And Charles kind of let us in
this direction. I mean,
congratulations, Charles, He's
new director. But, um, this is
the first time in the budget and
I think this is very important
to the state and community that
we have an actual reserve
number.
And it's not based on adding a
bucket here, putting the bucket
over there.
In this budget is it's a true
reserve number on our financial
statement. It's not selecting
other funds that should be used
for other things, so
I just think, Charles, why don't
you give us a good framework?
On that, and
They're gonna have a lot of
questions that sounded like
through the session and how that
moves forward and
We'll talk to Wayne to get past
that.
But I mean
We know that spending can't go
over a certain amount, and and
how do we keep that budget and
how do we keep spending money at
a slower rate? But keep spending
it because I don't know if those
I've been here when we had to
cut in, just like Wayne said.
Arizona's
Facing $1 billion deficit today.
Hmm. And how do we avoid that in
our scenario, and I think that's
that's very keen important.
Senator Padilla's question if
you if you look on page 40 for
their presentation in early
childhood
This is still amazing to me in
2020. We put 300 Million and
center diversion, right?
And when we did that in two
years later, we're at 1.5.
Two years later than that were
at 5.5.
It's amazing, And so what is
enough for one agency? I mean,
is early childhood.
An agency that's been operating
what three years now.
It's almost at a billion dollar
agency.
I mean, it's got to cap off,
especially in a declining
population and in services
aren't getting provided and she
called us Secretary called My
District, You know, uh, desert
for early childhood because they
can't seem to get the providers
out there because it's so rural
And it's hard, but I mean $750
million and I don't see it
moving the needle in my area. So
why aren't we putting them on a
performance report?
In areas and and see what really
is working and what's not
working target dollars to there
so
Wayne.
Appreciate your time patients.
Sara Woods.
Sure.
First
Is there any money in the
executive budget?
For, um
Their retirement of bonds at the
correction facility at Clayton,
Mr Chairman and senator, That is
a question that have don't have
an answer to I will get back to
you.
Unless Dr Miner has it. Yeah.
Maybe in capital. But I don't
know that. Thank you. Okay. But
and Charles chair and Charles
What? What money have you got in
that deal, Mr Chairman in the
capital framework. I believe it
was 34 million to retire Those
bonds that frees up about $5
million in the operating budget.
Combined with a bunch of
justice, reinvestment and other
spending increases in the
corrections budget, they still
had huge surpluses because of
declining inmate population so
you'll see a 3% reduction in the
LFC recommendation for
corrections because of the
savings from the bonds that were
coming out of its operating
budget.
As well as the positions that
they're continually not feeling
because they don't need them,
and they moved the money
elsewhere in the budget.
But sometimes I wanna
Talk to to you about
How that is done. Retiring bonds
like that.
That's that's got to be a little
complicated deal.
Mr Chairman, You don't have to
do it right now. But yes, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I'll follow up
with you. It's this the state
would be exercising its purchase
option under the least purchase
agreement with the village of
Clayton.
Yeah.
I understand that part
Exactly actual bond. Retirement
is what I don't understand,
Okay?
Better than the other question
of God is is we're talking
about, uh,
The the fun but that everybody's
talked about here and
If you're saying to find
programs, you know, uh, I
understood Charles in minutes
ago, he said that agencies are
always coming asking for for new
programs.
And this. This would fund those
new programs.
And give it some kind of a short
term lease programs is is that
kind of the concept that we're
talking about? The real question
of goddess who picks the
programs
Well.
Charles, You want to answer
that? Who picks up programs, But
this is not a leash. This is
like performance measures,
right?
Give you money and you perform
with it or you don't perform and
That's the question at the end
of the day if we give money to C
Y F D.
Are you using it correctly? Are
child poverty or child injuries
going down? How do we track
that? That's the whole entire
common sense. It's the same
thing as a legislative hearing,
right? We're tracking their
performance measures and and the
people in the number they
served.
Um, agencies like Charles talked
deals with the agencies,
agencies coming and they make
these requests to us, right?
I want 10 million for this. I
want 20 Million for that, and
agencies are actually making the
request. Are these all agencies
requests that are in this
program, Charles? Yes, Except
for the, um
The workforce Development one
The You know, there's the aging
that was part of their request C
y F D, um
The Big one. That was not
necessarily as the industry's
recognized credentials. But
that's been something the
Legislature is an LFC. We're
discussing all interim as a
priority area, including
apprenticeships, So so from what
you say, mr Chair?
The 75 million
Would cover all the requests
that were made. It would not
cover all the requests. It's a
select subset of projects that
look like they have promised the
staff recommended to lfc and lfc
adopted, Um, during the default
budget hearings.
And next next fall. If this goes
through, you would get
Agencies requesting money from
this fund.
Or we would recommend pushing
them into that process for
expansion request for
consideration by LFC to make a
recommendation to the full
Legislature and the full
Legislature maintains discretion
over which one do you want to
find? You may change what LFC
recommended this session. Say
that one doesn't look as
promising after we have met with
the executive.
This other one might be better,
so it's it's it's legislatively
driven in terms of that
appropriations. It's not
delegated to any other body.
So it would be a process much
like we see the water trust.
Board projects come to the
Legislature.
Uh,
Am I completely wrong on that
Senator Woods went, you know
when we're building the budget
agencies come, and they make a
request for a budget increase
for
X Y and Z. So LFC staff reads
through them and says, Okay,
we're gonna fund
Why, but we're not funny, X and
Z.
And so the with these are
projects that we that they want
to move forward with, And we're
just saying, Okay, we're gonna
fund you instead of putting it
into reoccurring automatically
and doing the increase. We're
going to fund you for this fund
for 34 years, four years.
Four years and we're gonna track
it for four years and we're
gonna see at the end of two
years where you're at, and if
it's worth continuing, or do we
go ahead and pull it into
General fund then and and save
the two years worth of money and
created a new program or what,
But it's
Call the government
accountability. Call it
tracking. Call it legislate.
Its performance really measure
based budgeting.
And it would kind of show up as
In the language of the budget as
coming out of this one fun
instead of a general fund ledger
account. That's correct, Mr
Chairman, you'll see in House
bill to a separate section.
Of a list of the projects just
like you see in the special
appropriation section in the
back of the bill, and it will
have your one funding your to
funding year three funding in
year for funding.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez. Mr. Chairman. Thank
you Don't want to elaborate a
little bit. Maybe because I was
kind of in the very beginning.
when it was proposed. I had all
these questions, too. But
actually, in a nutshell, and
correct me if I'm wrong all is
doing is moving funding that
would ordinarily be for the
agencies that would ordinarily
be in the base.
Correct the base and so instead
of doing and we get lost it, we
just can't follow it. It's
integrated in so much for the
departments and so this way we
isolate the funding and please,
As I'm going, correct me, we
isolate the funding into this
fund so that we can track it.
We're not adding any more taking
anymore. We're basically moving
it to a place where we can
manage it, and it's for
accountability so that we can
know that the new pilot programs
or new projects or programs. In
this case, it's not projects
would can. We can follow up on
him and see if, in fact, they
are making a difference, like
legislate.
It's just it's something we need
to follow and continue to fund
in the future. Or is it
something that we're throwing
money out, and it's not going
anywhere, So it kind of helps us
having an area where we can look
at it more effectively. That's
all it's doing. Right, Charles,
Mr Chair That's correct and it
it allows you to maintain a
Um
Spending growth in the recurring
budget without going to the 10
to 14 to 15% that we've been
doing without this kind of
ability, Um, accountability
system that goes with it.
Exactly. So it's up to me. It
seems like a good way after I
really understood it. It seems
like a good way to fund these
programs and still have some
accountability and in a again to
decision making from the
Legislature doesn't go away.
Nobody makes any new decisions.
The Legislature and the LFC
recommends as usual, so none of
that changes. It's really more a
place to put this for
accountability so we can follow
it. Thank you, Mr Chair. Mr.
Secretary, Mr Chairman, just so
I don't have to chase Senator
Woods around for the next 30
days. Because I know you run
fast. We also have 34 million in
our capital for retiring those
bonds.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Robert. Just Mr Chairman, just
for clarification. These are
just for new programs. Correct,
Charles or Mr Chairman to expand
some existing programs that want
to expand or that they want to
start a new program. Correct.
And it's all done through lfc in
that budget request is not LLC
members picking out projects to
fund it would be a committee
decision committee and it's all
based on agency requests.
So, Mr Chairman, if I may this
this is this
And we got this idea from other
states or other states doing
this, or is this
Something unique to New Mexico.
This maybe even do unique to New
Mexico. We have been doing multi
year appropriations for many
years and House Bill two.
But it doesn't have the
apparatus of going through a
different request process. It
didn't have the apparatus of the
ongoing reporting back and
tracking, um, of whether or not
we are. We should continue this.
So you've been making big multi
year appropriations for the past
couple of years that that
concept is not new. Um, but what
is new is how to take this.
Windfall.
And balance.
Setting aside huge amounts for a
little that produced little
today.
To setting aside big amounts to
start using it for
I call it this afternoon, maybe
through next week. You know the
over the midterm rather than,
um, the long term and not
building it in to the near term
because we've already built in
50% increases the agency based
budgets.
Wow trying to implement
efficiency into government.
That's
What a concept! I like it.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. We'll
sign you up for the bill may
lose some hair over it. When
Wayne stands up in the room and
may oppose it or not oppose it.
We don't know where the
executives on the ship so we
haven't seen the bill yet, Mr
Chairman, and the time is
ticking.
Yep, you'll see it on Monday or
Tuesday. Hope so. Thank you
guys. Appreciate your time. Got
a little bit of work on this new
funding mechanism. But I mean,
the other thing is, you could
just take a billion dollars in
creating another fund.
And you're only going to raise
$100 million a year or you can
appropriate 300 million a year
and figure out where you really
more efficient in government.
I mean, Medicaid is going to be
the biggest budget costs over
the next
4 to 5 years, and it's going to
eat the largest number of the
budget than any other.
Agency requested all and so
There's got to be aware of that.
Thank you guys.
