For questions we have an
amendment that is basically just
a.
tour amendment for for the money
that has been going to the
magistrate judicial retirement
fund.
And what this ammendment does.
Principally what the amendment
does is it just explains where
the money's been going and it
also puts it back to our our
fund.
And there's funds that
We'll go back into our chairman
and pay for this money going
into retirement to the two
thirty two thousand dollars a
month.
June July to July twenty twenty
to thirty June thirtieth of
twenty twenty five.
No come out of this and then and
included twenty five all of
money comes back to a retirement
fund most of the over funded.
Question.
German I move that we accept.
You have one more minute.
After that the instrument.
What it does is I.
On your amendment line one and
two.
Twenty million dollars an
additional five.
Right that in the.
actually saves the fund money.
So.
Never mind.
No.
But for the
second.
Thank you.
Senator I read the bill and I
read the FIR and I guess
something I didn't really
understand so are we in this
world the pension issue right
okay is is that it said when you
retire at sixty five or later
they really see that in the
bill.
It is am I missing something is
this this is only kick in.
If you retire after sixty five
for does it kick in after sixty
five even if you retire before
sixty five with you explain that
will not have to pay for Mr
chairman members agree I think
the fifty five.
If I remember the original bill
correctly if you're older than
fifty five you controller you
can draw the chairman
immediately and before that you
have to serve as a legislature
for legislator for five years
and then if you have serve
fourteen in and say you're forty
years old after ten years you
can grow that chairman for the
for.
From then on.
Okay so.
I just want to say I don't have
the the rich rich rich renewable
in front of me right now.
Here I five years.
On.
Have more than six I over.
I see so you so it's not just
sixty five six five under one
circumstance but otherwise that
if you've served ten years
consecutively or like you know
when you're under than that in
the same situation applies to
you okay thanks that clears it
up thank you for at least five
years to be to be eligible for
two two part two to get the
retirement.
Thank you.
Thank you very much thank you in
future ten years in your in your
retired age forty you can draw
to rest your life.
Excuse me if I may just add to
that or any age you don't have
to be forty years no no no no no
no just just example of.
Thank you Mr I think we have.
In college the second body.
Senator.
I want to call the roll.
Chair Senator Burt.
Senator Byrd yes Senator Campos
yes Campos yes Senator Diamond
is excused Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator share yes Senator sure
yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods years Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes and senator Munoz
yes Senator yes that is ten for
everyone excuse here's a new
path thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee
additional noise trash that this
cost the citizens of the state
not one penny this is done by
tax on out of state royalty
owners that we were not getting
it was in law for years but we
had no way of we were getting it
so I passed a little bills that
whoever writes the checks just
to send it to New Mexico it is
brought this state in over a
billion dollars we were not
getting and we take two million
dollars a year that and we're
over funded our phones are in
use for other retirements it's a
good thing because this is the
state not one penny.
Senator thank you.
Senate bill forty center.
Is the secretary still on
secretary Chris Scrase was on I
thought.
Great Sir so Mister chairman
this is a bill the the that
takes up the sunset clause on a
on a program that we started.
Two years ago three years ago.
And.
Nursing homes and assisted
living facilities.
A an extra tax.
The state uses a portion of that
tax.
For general fund purposes in
another portion of it goes to be
matched with Medicaid to
increase the reimbursements to
those nursing home facilities
that meet certain quality
standards and we did it because
we were trying to make sure that
some of the problems that we're
developing in our assisted
living facilities could be dealt
with through an increase
reimbursement.
We at the time had a had a that
in New the sunset clause placed
on it and what this bill does is
it simply removes it because all
indications are that the program
is working exactly as it was
designed to do.
And I have with me Mister
Charlie might kiss the the chief
of lobbyist for the of health
care association which is the
nursing home and assisted living
care association and and then Dr
Scrase is available to to say
some things and then Mr Vargas
is the executive director of the
health care association.
Are you going to sing no I think
the Sierra well thank you thank
you we'll go to in support of
the bill and I don't know if
they're the scent they've
ourselves team in the room of
the online is that.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee committee my name is
basically about about some I am
executive director of the New
Mexico Health Association Mexico
Center persisted living we
represent sixty four of sixty
nine nursing facilities that
participate in healthcare
quality surcharge program this
program has been.
Successful in improving the
quality of care in nursing homes
I believe is Dr Scrase can of
children Medicaid the the data
to back that up the program was
initially started was it
intended was to improve the
quality care for residents I
hope the
Close the gap between Medicare
and Medicaid pays and what the
cost of care is schisms that
definitely scene that that
assistance and have benefited
from that assistance and
special residents so with that
Mr chair members of the
committee we Senate support of
this legislation with the
questions thank you thank you
Melissa Steffen.
Honnold Wilson.
Your those on.
That's all I have on my list I
see somebody's hand right but I
can't see your name.
Thank you for your carrier me
hope within with the with the
Human Services department but
the secretary is here so maybe
we could start with the let me
finish this and then so that we
don't have anybody opposed.
Online right anybody in the
audience for anybody in the
audience against.
US secretary scripture against.
Okay.
The lady on the internet
secretary Scrase do have
something to add.
Mr chair and members the
committee and want to thank.
center or G. email for bringing
back this legislation we do have
data data that shows
improvements in multiple quality
measures and nursing homes is
the intent of the bill is being
carried out the armory and
another substantial amount of
revenue from.
The federal government to
support group pods hearing your
systems Kerrier meal
conspicuously and then you
should probably hear from
secretary Stephanie Schardin
Clarke you can talk about how
this is working out at taxes as
well of course the stand in
strong support of the bill this
is a provided legislative
initiative I thank you all right
forward that was passed in this
deliver the results you ask for
in the region.
Pass this bill so that the signs
in the program can continue
thank you.
Mr chair.
M. secretary having that real
quick.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I just want to add
that the tax department fully
supports this bill we've already
done I. T. work to stand up this
program and I want to add that
compliance is very high we're in
a unique position to know
exactly how much surcharges owed
and you can compare that exactly
to how much as we see in the
compliance I thank you Mr chair
thank you questions questions
from committee members.
There was one more person
another.
Kerry I need your name so I have
I see your hand but I have a
from my list go ahead.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Kerrier Niko W.
secretary can Services
Department of course want to go
all of the points that were made
by our fellow supporters this
really rebel I think the the
final point that I'd like to me
is that failure to pass Senate
bill forty would result in net
losses eighty five point one
million in federal Medicaid
dollars that we're currently
paying out nursing facilities
and to facilities with for that
serve individuals with
intellectual disabilities here
in New Mexico we paid out.
Two hundred and twenty eight six
five million to these facilities
hundred twenty seven point one
million in quality dollars which
the service mentioned are
resulting in noticeable
improvements in performance and.
and so just wanted to make those
points and Abby very much
appreciate the support.
Question from committee members.
Session some of a do pass Mr
chairman Amadu passed motion by
Senator Rodriguez a second by
Senator share that we call the
roll.
Mr chair Senator Burt thank you
very yes Senator Campos yes
Campos yes Senator Diamond this
excuse Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Padilla excuse
Senator share yes Senator sure
yes Senator Steinborn that
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods years Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes and senator Munoz
yes senator Munoz yes you have
nine yes and to excuse.
We have the fastest thank you
very much members the committee
and Senate chairman.
Thank you.
I think we're all wrapped up.
We're gonna do house bill two
tomorrow and then try to the
junior committee they finally
got everything wrapped up in the
junior language looking over at
Campos thank you very much Mr
chairman so the intent this
evening is not to go over any of
the
the formalities of the
subcommittee on on this
particular measure or it how are
you gonna handle that interview
if you want to do that right
now.
Fine.
Not we can do it in the morning
before we go over the bill that
maybe.
Need to build that way it'll be
fresh in everyone's mind okay so
you'd rather do it that way then
so then at this point I just say
when everyone convene this
committee are going to be here
then we'll go ahead we'll go
through the those changes we're
gonna get house bill two
tomorrow and so we'll get that
back up and then.
I'm here to work.
Where are one.
After the floor the morning.
Where we're not gonna do any
mornings tomorrow Saturday
because we're going on the floor
of what one eleven thirty years
thirty we may have a morning.
House Bill to to get some of
bills and Senator Rodriguez and
got a bill
there's a few more scattered
about that we are committee
members out first so.
All of them work next week will
be kind of packed.
There's there's a lot of issues
we're gonna meet with I'm gonna
be with a bunch of cabinet
secretaries and see where they
were left short they're trying
to get the executive committee
approved what they want and so
then I mean Madam the.
People are going to come to you
and say.
You know I need this I need this
the houses left this about ten
million in reoccurring in about
ten million in non recurring to
put in the budget.
And so some of project and then
there there's a lot of wiggle
room on a lot of we still have
the hundred twenty two million.
Appropriate.
So.
That's another issue we gonna
have to.
Thank you Mr chairman.
It is not the.
For the water.
