Morning we'll get started
sending Pad.
Yeah.
The way it works. Some people
know.
Not all of them are in the
budget.
It's like Taco Bell in here
tamales.
Maybe we go down that path.
I'm gonna have to go buy a
plunger for the 4th floor.
Tin Padilla, let's hear about
Senate Bill 93.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman for
allowing us to present this even
though you did tell me right
before we started, you were
gonna table this immediately.
So, uh, it's simply out of, out
of school time programming for
boys and girls clubs and all of
the things that, uh, you know,
we, we tend to do tutoring, uh,
that kind of support, the uh
important.
Uh, to social skills for these
students has helped with some
transportation for kiddos who
can't get to or from these
programs. So that's essentially
it, and we, we asked for um
approximately $20 million and um
it is in the budget and so uh we
just want to make our members
aware it's that time of year
when we start tabling bills
because the money's already in
the budget.
And so there's no need for the
bill because the language and
everything's in the budget.
That's why I didn't know why we
needed to hear a chair, but I'm
happy to do whatever you want to
do, me, me hear it so our
members know we have new
members.
Of several new members.
And so they need to go through
that experience.
Any questions?
None can have emotion.
Oh, let's go to the au, anybody
in favor?
How many we have on Zoom.
Uh, anybody in opposition.
There's no opposition.
I think we'll save ourselves
some time.
No.
6 in the audience, 3 on Zoom
Center.
to table.
I'll move the table.
A second motion.
We tabled these so people
understand that the language.
And everything is in the budget.
And so there's no need for the
bill.
Just any questions from
community members, no call the
wrong.
Senator Brent,
Senator Grant votes yes. Senator
Campos. Senator Campos votes,
yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
votes yes, Senator Padilla.
Senor Padilla votes no. Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobias Sibosia, Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods. Senator
Woods votes yes, Senator Shedo.
Senator Sendosia, Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz, yes, we have a
table bill 9 in the affirmative,
1 in the negative
Congratulations.
Would, would you like to table
Senator Cervantes Bill because
we're gonna table his next
No, this is the way it works. Do
you not remember how it works?
That that we've done them for
I've, I've been here for 10
years in finance and they're all
done that way, they hear when we
table.
So
And sinner's response is not
here, I guess we're gonna hear
about mushrooms today.
One person at the table, let's
not talk for any Senator Hickey.
That's the way it worked.
Have a committee substitute,
right? Yeah.
That's, this is a committee
substitute we're hearing right
substitute for Senate Bill 219.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 219.
It's just a man. Did they do a
sub? Oh well, I wasn't aware
they did it, Mr. Chair, but all
right.
I'm just making sure where the
committee substitute for me.
Who's starting.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair, very
much for hearing this bill. We
really appreciate it. Senate
Bill 219 proposes to create a
medical psilocybin mushroom.
Program here in the state of
Mexico, Psilocybin is.
More and more research is
showing to be a very effective
plant medicine for treating
certain behavioral health
conditions. Uh, the FDA has
ruled that a breakthrough
therapy for treatment resistant
depression, and that's how I
heard about this from a
constituent who had dealt with a
lot of childhood trauma and
needed new options, and she had
explored this world and wondered
what we were doing about it and,
and, and so I got involved in
helping advocate. Since then,
the state studied it.
Um, we then, um, with that
research from the state, which
the Senate unanimously passed a
memorial last session asking
them to do.
Um, we have worked with the
Department of Health who was in
the audience today if you have
any questions, to develop a
medical program. It's a very
thoughtful approach, would not
start until December 31st, 2027.
Um, the department would
determine all aspects of the
program, including who the
qualified uh providers, medical
providers are.
The dosage
The medical setting, uh, this
just so you know, this is always
medical programs, psilocybins is
administered in a medical
setting, very different than
cannabis. You go in, you have a
supervised session. Um, there's
a lot of psychotherapy involved
to help you work through
medicine with the psychotherapy
helps you kind of really get on
ways of processing uh those
issues. There's 4 qualifying
conditions built into the uh
this bill to begin with.
That one can be prescribed this.
That includes a post-traumatic
stress syndrome.
Um, uh, major depressive
disorder.
Substance abuse disorder and end
of life anxiety.
And there's actually providing I
know would love a minute to
speak to you about that.
And uh what else can I say, you
know.
While there's funding in the
bill, so I will say that in
House Bill 2, there's already
too good the preparation has
been stripped.
Um, so we're off and running
there.
Um, it also has two other
components. I'll just close with
that has a research fund because
this is ongoing, growing field.
Um, we actually have one of the
premier research programs in the
country here at UNM. Doctor
Larry Lehman have kind of a
research efficacy-based question
and also there's an equity fund
in the bill, Mr. Chair. We don't
appropriate any money to either
of those.
Kind of uh swap some of the
funding for DOH to research in
House Bill 2, but there's an
equity fund because this is not
covered by insurance or Medicaid
at this point. When this program
starts, we want to make sure
people without resources could
still have access to the
program. So if we decide to put
money in that fund.
We could fund patients around
the state who need the
treatment, but don't have the
I'd love to ask my co-sponsors
here to make.
Other than that
Everying there.
We have, we'll go to the
audience who's in support.
got one person, like this is
here 3 because I don't even know
what these are, so.
How many on Zoom.
It's 3 people step up and
uh let them pick themselves so
you don't need to pick them
centers.
This is heavy.
Good morning.
Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, you
can't see me. I'm like 3 ft
tall.
So.
Chairman and members of the
committee.
My name is Crystal C. Romero.
I'm a retired Army Master
Sergeant in the New Mexico Army
National Guard.
And, uh, primarily all full time
and all over this country,
actually.
I served with honor, knowing the
risks and sacrifices that I
would have to make, but nothing
prepared me for what would come
after my service, which was a
battle against PTSD in 2014, I
nearly lost the battle to
suicide.
Had I succeeded my 3 daughters
wouldn't have just lost their
mother, they, they would have
inherited my pain.
Suicide doesn't just end a life,
it fractures families, burdens
communities, and carries an
economic toll.
That extends beyond the VA and
into every social system we
have.
I did try every treatment the VA
had to offer. Therapy,
medication,
Costly procedures.
But only working with
psychedelics like uh like
psilocybin provided lasting
relief and true healing.
Yet veterans like me spend
thousands of dollars to seek
treatment in other countries.
While here in New Mexico, we
continue paying a high price.
Lost lives, broken families, and
millions spent annually on
emergency services in crisis
care.
My duty has never ended.
And neither should yours.
Passing SB 2119 is more than
compassion. It's fiscal
responsibility.
Invest now in healing our
veterans, our families, and our
community.
Cause we simply cannot afford to
ignore a solution that saves
lives.
Thank you so much.
Thank you sir.
OK
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
committee members. Thank you for
hearing me today. My name is
Jeffrey Holland. I'm uh a
clinical therapist here in the
state of New Mexico with over 25
years of experience dealing with
mental health issues and
addiction, and I would be uh
remiss if I did not mention that
today is International Women's
Day, so um we need to
acknowledge that and the reason
I, I choose to do so is because
the overwhelming amount of women
uh dealing with issues.
Uh, in relation to this topic,
massive amounts of substance use
disorder, um, due to massive
amounts of trauma, sexual abuse,
mental health issues across our
state, um, are suffering with a
lot of these qualifying
conditions and um.
It, it hurts to see this. I see
this on a regular basis, and
when they come to my treatment
center and when they come to my
housing program, I'm constantly
hearing stories of sexual
assault, abuse, rape, which
consequently leads to substance
use disorder. And so when we're
talking about a breakthrough
medication with, you're gonna be
hard pressed to find anything
with fewer side effects from the
pharmaceutical side of things,
the medical psilocybin, I think
it would be a great disservice
if we passed up this opportunity
to implement uh this bill which
would result in a breakthrough
medicine.
That could have just
astronomical positive effects
not only on the women of our uh
community, but our first
responders, our combat veterans,
and those uh who have been
dealing with these issues for
quite a long time. And so um I
appreciate you hearing what I
have to say, and I, I hope you
greatly considered to addressing
the most vulnerable populations
in our state. Thank you.
Hi, good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks for listening to this
bill. My name is uh Doctor Joel
Rose and I'm a family physician
here in private practice in the
great city of Santa Fe, and I'm
here to testify in support of
Bill 219.
I'm involved in offering medical
aid in dying to patients at the
end of their life, uh, since the
bill.
The law passed here in 2021 I
been a bit the bedside.
With over 100 patients since the
law passed.
And I regularly see in the
months and weeks leading to
one's death, uh, the fear and
anxiety of dying.
Something we will all experience
at some point.
Studies in the medical
literature specifically a
meta-analysis from 2022.
Uh, indicates the value of
psychedelics and specifically
psilocybin uh using uh or
treating patients who are facing
fear of dying and anxiety as
they are nearing their end of
their life.
Uh, I would love to see this,
uh, be available here in our
state. I currently use um in my
practice, ketamine, which is
available, but it is um
Expensive and, and I think
psilocybin would be another
awesome and uh option for our,
our
population.
So I urge all of you to move
this bill forward and uh thank
you so much.
Anybody in opposition.
We have anybody in opposition on
Zoom?
Questions from committee
members.
the
Uh, thank you, Chair, and thank
you sponsors for bringing the uh
the legislation. I'm learning
more and more about this. You're
all doing a very good job of, of
educating us, um, so,
What we're, uh, the what I have
been able to uncover is just,
you know, things related to
heart rate, blood pressure,
increases in, in, in heart rate,
increases in blood pressure. Uh,
how do you, um, can you help me
be a little more comfortable in
how patients can avoid that.
I know there's really only one
doctor at the table, but is
there a
I
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Sing, and
there are some concerns with
people who microdose day to day,
the microdose no doing MRIs pre
and post, pre, uh, post trauma
having uh the clinical entry
Thank you chair and thank you
sponsors. Um, so about how long
would it take the average
patient to begin to regulate
their dosage. Uh, can you give
me any sort of info on that?
You know, anytime I take a new
medication.
I, I'm just kind of a real
lightweight with absolutely
everything. I mean, any sort of
medicine, any alcohol, I do
consume alcohol, but it takes me
like when I take a new medicine,
it takes me probably
6 months to figure out exactly
what it needs to be for someone
like me. Can you tell me how
that would interact with this
type of a, of a treatment.
Uh, this is not.
forever or for, for
most people forever. It's, it's
literally a one protocol here.
And in fact, the state of Oregon
who started a medical program
they've had.
9000 patients as I as I
interview perspective.
And out of that night was
remarkable, probably.
And so chair and and uh I expect
to Doctor Hickey there, Senator
Hickey.
So just talk to me. I this is,
this is, this is uh breaking
news for someone like me. I
didn't realize that this was,
you do it and then you never
have to do it again.
It literally fixes the what we
just heard from some of the
patients that spoke.
Mr. Chair and Senator Padilla
literally some of the the most
modern stuff.
Modern approach clinic, you do
That's it.
But for many people, our session
with the guy.
done and Senator, I just wanna
just be clear so we're not
overselling.
Does this work for everyone?
Probably not. Does this, does it
work for enough people that it's
been in treatment? Yes.
Um, does it, do they show that 6
months later it's still
effective, yes, which is a
really powerful, amazing data
point about this medicine is
that it does have long term
effectiveness, which is amazing,
um, that, you know, if you're
suffering from
ETSD or some conditions where
you're resolve that and.
Heal from it then. But as Jeff
Holland, a practitioner here
likes to say, also it's
important for people to know
that they, there's work involved
there's psychotherapy involved
and people who want to do this,
um, you know, there's some work,
some self work. Thank you,
chair, and and uh Senator. I
don't think he would mind, but
Jeff actually used to work for
me a long time ago. We used to
be, used to be on my team a long
time ago, so it was great to see
him today. Um, so it is a
medical doctor prescribing this
or is this simply a, um
A movement or senator, so the
bill says a licensed provider, a
licensed, so it does have to be
uh.
The word in the bill says
license, we, there is a, you
know, in the medical community,
there's a lot of licensed range
of people who have prescribing.
We did not want to pick and
choose winners and losers in
this bill, knowing that there's
a range of people who are
probably qualified to do it and
we're gonna, the Department of
Health in the rulemaking and so
then go ahead, doctor.
Yeah
Senator and Mr. Chairman, uh, in
Oregon, you, you get a, you get
a license and usually you're
some type of psychiatrist, uh,
with some licensing. This is not
the kind of thing that would
evolve into, oh, I just finished
my nurse prac and do ketamine
and I'll invite people, you have
to uh apply going to a very
strict clinical people taking
you through it. OK, and I'm, uh,
thank you, chair, and, and, and
senator, and I'm glad you said
about the ketamine, you know,
because, you know, what data
exists that say, is there data
that exists that this turns into
some other type of
Of uh
Senator and Mr. Chair, this is
really uh a, a therapeutic, uh,
again, maybe just a, a, a one
time or where it's done. Think
of it almost as 6, but it,
it fixes the brain in ways that
we're still understanding is
definitely a rewiring of the
bread repeat and the depression
so that it removes that from
your.
day to day life and
people say it after a year.
of
So
do you mind if Larry just
answers your chair allows it. I
mean, I, I want some answers
because I'm on the fence, as you
know on this bill. So that's an
important issue to you, Doctor
Lena, would you mind?
Addressing.
Um,
Doctor Larry MD um professor at
UNM researcher that includes
psychedelic therapies,
uh, suicide is probably the
least of any substance abuse for
addictive potential.
It is, it's not very pleasant in
a lot of ways, and people think
about an experience that people
are having butterflies and
dreams, but actually there's a
fair amount of nausea that'll go
along. There's a lot of
psychological processing, um, a
good study happened by Doctor
David Knott, who's at Imperial
College in England, compared the
abuse and danger of so I been
with all the other drugs there
and it really came out to be the
least of any of them.
There are risks. I don't want to
say there are no risk, the risks
are actually when you're taking
it, if you take it in an
unsupervised setting, you go
out, you drive a car, you would
do things and so by being in a
facility with trained
facilitators, we address that
part of it.
Uh, thank you, Chair. I'm glad
you said that. I mean, there's
no there there's, this can only
be taken in a supervised setting
at the moment.
In this building
In this building
I thought you said in this
building in this building, well,
we, we think that'll be
productive to lawmaking, uh. I
thought if I took this, I'm
gonna wake up as a Republican.
Yeah.
so my last question here, and
I'll stop now in case others
have. So is, is any of this
covered by insurance at this
point or would this make that so
or, or we'd have to go down the
road of
that next step or how does that
work?
Uh, currently
insurance
OK. All right, thank you, Chair.
Center compass.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members of the Senate
Finance Committee and to the
presenters, uh, since it is the
finance committee, but I want to
do is to go through the
Finances, the resources and so
forth as we deal with it. So at
this point in House Bill 2 at
all, the understanding is that
there is 2 million that is
appropriated there. Is that
correct, uh Mr. Chair, Senator?
So in terms of that and uh as we
move forward, Mr. Chairman, what
you're looking for is an
additional 2 million, is that?
Um
We, um, when we started off, we
also wanted to secure some
funding for continued research.
Into some of the, the best
research data leading into
rulemaking. So actually what I,
Doctor Lehman, is that we should
actually shift over the 2
million and then hopefully
we'll, we'll do shifting.
Half a million of the two into
research and giving Department
of Health 1.5.
And that's actually the more
optimal financial.
the program and then certainly
moving forward, we will need to
continue to fund this program.
So, so, Mr. Chair and uh
senators as we go forward then,
so there would be part going to
uh Department of Health, and
then there would be uh 1/4 of
that going to.
Would it be the university uh to
go ahead and uh continue with
research and the development of
the program.
Uh, Mr. Chair Center, correct.
Thank you very much. And then
the other part of that as you go
forward, um,
In terms of the legislation,
the, the appropriation amount
has already been struck from.
The legislation.
did, Mr. Chair, we struck it in
judiciary.
is the appropriation was in.
and
We're hoping, as the chair said
this morning that
You know, maybe we wouldn't even
have to be here because
sometimes that happens when it's
in the budget.
That's good, that's fine that we
are here, but.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and, and senators as
we go forward when we start
talking about the advisory
board. Are there any expenses
tied directly to that that are
gonna be covered possibly
through the amount going to
Department of Health or to the
uh to the university.
Um
Do
Uh, we have Dominic.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you members of the committee and
Senator Campos. Yes, uh, some of
the fund would go for travel
expenses, as usually occurs with
regard to board members who are
not state employees.
So, so, Mr. Chair, along with
that, it'll be for for DM
expenses, basically. And, and
what about for operations of the
advisory board, will there be
resources used uh through this
amount for that purpose as well.
That would be, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee center
Compos, that would be handled
through the staffing, through
the department.
So in other words, those would
be Mr. Chairman responsibilities
is absorbed through the
department in order to go ahead
and set up the advisory board.
Conduct the meetings, ensure
that uh minutes are taken, and
then from there to take care of
any administrative
responsibilities related to the
advisory board.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, that's
correct. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the Senate Finance Committee,
this is a great bill, and I'm
going to be in full support of
uh what we're doing here. Thank
you.
uh Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
senators, thank you for bringing
this forward. I actually have a
family member who experienced
trauma, went through, um, a
totally different procedure
years ago, but it rewired his
brain just like this does, um,
led to that neuroplasticity um
took this child from being stuck
in theta because of that trauma
to where he should have been
with brain activity in a
balanced brain, which is so
important.
So I know a lot of veterans, I
know a lot of people of
different ages who really suffer
from a lot of mental health
issues unresolved traumas and
scientific research and
discovery should be leading us
to more effective and efficient
forms of dealing with trauma and
in a statement in a session
where we're saying behavioral
health is the number one focus,
um, I am in full support of
this, and I actually think that
the FDA should be looking at
America's
a hole in saying, where are we
in our mental health as a
society and fast tracking just
like they have done with other
medications, um, and I love how
you've set this up, obviously
people that are using this as a
therapy have to have appropriate
certified professionals with
them to make sure that it is
safe and hopefully effective. So
I am in full support and I
really thank you for bringing
this forward.
So there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, senators. Um,
Senator Byson brought up
something. I is it not FDA
approved yet, or is it?
Mr. Chair, it is not, and it's,
it's actually a little
different. The FDA is doing uh a
clinical trial on a drug and
it's
As one of its key ingredients,
so they are actually in a phase
trial of a.
type of drug. Um, there're
probably several years away from
that, hasn't been improved.
So, in terms of this approach.
Um, this is what they call the
whole mush product. If you, when
you look at the bill, it
excludes what they call
synthetic products or kind of
chemically changed or not.
Um, the wheelhouse of the state
government from regulator and
because the FDA is moving into
this space for synthesized.
Pharmaceutical products.
We, they, you know, the, the
drug, that, that there's only
one, it's.
Run by owned by a company called
Compass Pathways. They really
want to be excluded from this.
They didn't want us, right? We
agreed and the officials of the
approved products from this.
And synthetic products. So we're
we're
This bill deals with substance
which is being used in Oram.
That's what we're dealing with
an FDA OK.
Thank you
and Mr. Chair, and I'm gonna
apologize you guys, my questions
are kind of all over the place
because I was just writing them
down as.
So
So who's growing this and
producing it. I'm
My next question was gonna be,
is it synthetic, and you
answered that. So who's growing
it and how do we get it to
the patient. So that is another
area that's in the bill that the
Department of Health would
determine and approve, approve,
you know, established approved
producers of this. Um, so right
now it's not being produced
because
I mean, outside of being used
for research, maybe at Dr.
Lehman's program, as far as for
medical program, though, there
is no production per se. Under
this law, if we pass it, the
Department of Health, the one
thing that is good to know is
they would be, that's because of
Be old
Controlled Substances Act.
You know, it's, you don't want
the difference in laws.
And so, so this would be a New
Mexico producer, for sure, of
producers, but to be determined
by the Department of Health and
you would want that for quality.
You would want that for dosing
by the Department of Health.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
when, when uh Senator Campos was
talking about the finance part
of it, which we're our finance
committee.
What
How would that money be
distributed?
Like, does, does the money go
straight to the doctor? Does it
go to the patient? I, I'm just
confused there a little bit. So
this funding in our budget, if
we pass this and then pass the
budget, we go to the program.
So, there's 2 million that's in
the budget right now for the
Department of Health program, to
create the advisory board start
to lay the groundwork for the
rulemaking that's going to take
multiple years figuring all
these things out.
Half a million, what we're
proposing is 500 million of that
be shifted to UNM to continue
the research decisions as far as
medical setting, I think the
best setting modality for, for,
um, so that's it for now.
Patients, when this program
starts and this will be a
service that patients will have
to pay for themselves.
Insurance doesn't cover this.
Medicaid doesn't cover this.
There may come a time and
hopefully there will come a time
when it does. Um, so that
answers the patient part of your
question.
Perfect. Thank you. And Mr.
Chair.
How is it administered?
Cause I've, did they just get a
bigger room and eat it? I, I
just, I don't understand exactly
how.
I'm gonna have to phone a
friend, Doctor. I think it's
very you need to come up to the
cameras
so what they did is the mushroom
I'm sorry you have to come up
where we can get you on to
introduce yourself again.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, Crystal C.
Romero, um, I went to Jamaica to
um have this.
therapy. And what they did is
the mushroom is dehydrated and
then it was ground into a powder
and it was put into a ginger
tea.
And then I just drank it.
And
Can I question her since I have
her there, Mr. Chair.
Only if you want to add it to
Taco Bell's line.
Does it make you hungry?
No
So
So what can you explain to us
the atmosphere? Like, are you in
a padded room? Are you in,
because they, they said, you
know, you're not, they don't
want you to go out and drive. So
how is it administered?
Uh, thank you for your question,
Senator. Um.
I was, it was outside.
And there was 10 of us. I was
actually the only veteran in the
group. I was amongst uh CEOs,
CFOs, bunch of uh people that
could afford to be there. I was
more there on a scholarship,
but, um, we were outside and we
were all laying down on a mat.
Everybody had a mat. Uh, we,
everybody had a facilitator next
to them and
Um, once I drank the once I
drank the tea, I lay down and I
put an eye mask on and I kind of
just went inward and I was able
to kind of just.
Sit with my trauma and process
it.
OK, thank you.
You're welcome. No, we, we
appreciate that. One more
question while you're there, how
much does that cost?
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, Senator
I was on a scholarship, um, had
I paid for it myself, I would
have paid $6000.
But I had a um nonprofit that
actually paid for me to go.
Alright, thank you.
And Mr. Chair.
Um, just a couple more
questions.
How, how are the, how is the
patient selected?
Um, because, you know, we've
heard maybe suicidal, um.
Veterans who who would be.
Like the primary beneficiaries
of this. So Mr. Chair, Senator,
great question. If you go to
page 3 on the substitute,
There are 4 qualifying
conditions that medically
speaking, whoever's licensed.
Issue you a prescription or
whatever.
You have to meet one of these
diagnoses and it's the 4
starting conditions.
And then we allow the sect to
atom.
But before starting or major
treatment resistant depression.
Post post-traumatic stress
disorder.
Substance abuse disorder and,
and other conditions as approved
by the Secretary of Health. So
there's 4 conditions that
qualify.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
they you, you brought up other
addictions. So I've seen, I
don't know where in the
paperwork, but I had seen.
This, this is administered to
alcoholics.
And
so, Mr. Chair, how, how
effective has that been with
them? I mean, I would think that
was a place you could have some
data built up already.
Um,
Very much.
Uh, you gotta push the little
button.
Got it.
The, um, there's been studies of
alcohol and psilocybin that were
done at UNM and and NYU, um, and
they, they showed benefit what
they're measuring is the
decrease in the number of days
of um of alcohol use and so
those studies have shown
benefit, um, they were using
synthesized um psilocybin.
So Mr. Chair, what it
Does it
Could cure them or does it just
Make it less addictive, so I'm
similar to I think what um uh
Doctor Steinberg said it
doesn't, these are not panaceas.
Everybody is not going to be
improved, but what it showed is
statistically significant number
of people had significant
decrease in their drinking, and
that was occurring with 2 doses.
OK, thank you. And Mr. Chair,
um, and doctor.
How about nicotine or tobacco,
would it?
Less than that, yeah, there's
one really promising study that
was done um from Johns Hopkins.
It actually showed after about 2
years, 80% of people were
abstinent, but it was a very
small study of about 20 people.
There's currently an NIH study
happening at Johns Hopkins NYU
in Alabama, looking at that, and
so we're kind of all waiting to
see what it shows, but if that's
promising, then that would be,
that would be amazing actually
to see that kind of a decrease
in nicotine.
OK, thank you. And don't go
anywhere, doc, cause you may
need to answer this one. This
one will be my last question,
Mr. Chair.
Autism or not autism, well,
autism might be a good one to
ask.
Um
But
Alzheimer's.
The process all of us up here
are aging.
A little bit, some of us more
than others, but
Has, has there been anything on,
on something like that, and I
know it's big in the news right
now in Santa Fe, especially, but
um,
Is there any results? It's not
an area where there's quality
research at this point in time,
there's hope that the same idea
of neuroplasticity could help
Alzheimer's, stroke people, but,
but it's not one of the areas
that has strong enough research.
Mr. Chairman and Senator. Yes,
sir.
I've, I've not heard of that
with uh this medicine.
mic on. Yes, my son, uh,
however, GLP1, the diabetes
weight loss drug is turning out
to have so many and it's an
anti-inflammatory, but we are
finding people with Parkinson's
substantially improving and
peeping again, the mechanism is
not clear.
But it it they were able to see
this and who were being treated
for other things, but the OK.
Well, thank you, gentlemen. I
appreciate it. You answered a
lot of my questions and as I was
on the fence.
one leg over.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thinner woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK. This is a natural occurring
mushroom in nature.
Senator
Essentially, that's true. OK, so
is it uh native to New Mexico.
Miss chair Senator, I don't
know, um, so.
You don't know where it comes
from, you just know it's out
there.
Mr.
OK, OK.
That's not important. That's not
important. We don't have a whole
lot of mushrooms growing in the
desert in southern New Mexico,
but I know in northern you
probably would be.
Uh, OK, so this is a.
FDA regulated drugs which.
No, no Mr. Chair, uh, uh, sorry,
no, yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator,
it's not, it's not regulated.
This is not like a is the actual
natural mushroom I'm, what I'm
getting at is it, so it's not
regulated at this time.
It's this, this is not
regulated. It's been researched
by the FDA. They've ruled it a
breakthrough therapy for major
depressive disorder, they are um
looking at approving a synthetic
pharmaceutical drug, including
psilocybin.
So what part of it is regulated
and
Good.
Yes,
Mr. Chair, do you ask, is it
illegal?
I'm, I, it just says I'm my
analysis that he asked if it was
late.
It's not really regulated in
law. It's, it's, it's being
researched. It's been studied,
so I'm, I'm trying to speed you
along. I don't mean to over talk
you, OK.
But what you're asking for is
research money.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator, no,
not really. I mean, we are
asking for that too, but we're
we're this.
This research, this bill would
create a medical program that
the December 31st of 2027.
qualifying conditions only
administered by qualified mass.
We are we in the budget we have
money for the Department of
Health to stand up this program,
but in addition to that, we are
wanting. OK, so with that,
Where will the liability lie,
Mr. Chair, Senator?
Mr. Chair, Senator, liability
will lie certainly with the
realm of this program and wait,
wait, wait, wait, so who's gonna
Who's gonna put the parameters
on the program.
The Department of Health, Mr.
Chairman, will deal with issues
related to safety, which is in
this legislation.
So then the liability will be on
the department. I'm not an
attorney, Mr.
Chair, but this is kind of
similar because they would be
standing up and issuing licenses
I would think the liability
would be more on the.
The players involved in directly
administering this care to
people?
Or people and there's a section
of this bill that says if you
are not connected to this
program, but you are pretending
to be, then you can be
prosecuted and that is but I'm
talking about the people, Mr.
Chair and Senator, that
That
is operating under strict.
Strict orders of the law,
whatever rules and regulation.
And what I'm getting at, there's
always a hiccup.
So I'm trying to figure out
who's going to pay for the
hiccup.
Whether it will be the state
that pays for the hiccup, the
administrating physician that
pays for the hiccup.
People will pay for
The, the lawsuit yet to come, of
course.
I'm sure there will be a lawsuit
to come out of this.
So
You know, I'm just trying to
protect the state a little bit.
own lawsuits here.
That's been my goal this year.
Mr.
Senator, I apologize. So I just
ask them with the medical
cannabis and he said, no, it's
really the liability goes to the
license permit, you know, uh.
Uh, companies that are out there
producing, selling,
administering in this case, if
they do something and they are
uh issue a faulty product or.
You know, you said, but you said
that was cannabis.
Well, I'm just using that as an
example because they run another
medical program, I've got the
problem. That's my problem. I
confused if this is.
If this was a
DFA approved process they and I
know it's a long process before
they can approve anything and
they do all kinds of trials and
studies.
And all of a sudden we're gonna
try to be the one that does the
trials and studies here.
And
The liability is gonna fall on
somebody.
It seems to me it's going to be
the state of New Mexico because.
We're the one that approved this
setup, so.
That's, that's kind of where I'm
at. So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Shindo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks
for the presentation. I'm just
curious, uh,
I, I know that uh you know,
Senator so is always talking
about ACEs events, and the
adverse childhood experiences,
what would the youngest patient
be or what, what does that look
like? I mean.
I don't, can you explain? I
mean.
I know we talked about some of
the patients possibly, but what
could this mean?
Well, Mr. Chair, I mean, I think
this would be for adults, um.
So, uh, certainly, you know,
trauma.
A lot of trauma starting its
envision that this would start
with adults and.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
You know, the, the first place
someone would go, right? This
is, this is the treatment of
last resort.
And you've done everything else
you've gone to the counseling
for, you've gone through
whatever programs are paid for
the people that are that are.
Reaching this level.
You know, you have one that went
to, you know, Guatemala.
To get this treatment.
I think you said Jamaica I got
the wrong country.
Went out of the country, there
we go, uh.
get this treatment, and I, and
so, you know, the VA has
actually been looking at the the
PTS. It's not a.
Um, you know, so it's actually
one of the things they're
looking at, but they're kind of
in this.
But they're looking at it saying
this could really help our
veterans.
And that's one of the reasons
I'm here. We're gonna be the
You know, I'm not going to do
this.
To get treatment for PTSD before
I've gone through.
The treatment through the VA
I hope that makes sense. No, no,
I appreciate that, yeah, no, the
other question I had was in what
form, but I think that was uh
answered by the young lady back
there. So, uh, no more
questions, Mr. Sherman.
The bison for the 2nd.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
want to clarify something
because I've, I've heard some
really good questions, good
points brought up from other
senators, but the FDA actually
their process of approving and
regulating a substance is based
on whether it's
Synthetic or not, right? Cause I
heard you say synthetic. So the
FDA would not be regulating
these products because it's a
natural product and actually you
could call it like an herb
therapeutic herb if you want to.
It's a plant, um, which the FDA
does not regulate, which is why
you can go to Natural Grocers or
Smith's and buy vitamins and the
FDA is not regulating what's in
those, mark my words, um, it can
be anything and actually, you
can buy a vitamin right now, an
herbal supplement even, it'll
have a label.
and safe with the ingredients
are and it does not have to
match what's in the bottle,
because the FDADA is not
regulating it. So I like this
because it's controlled. We have
New Mexico growers, sounds like
a new New Mexico industry, which
is interesting, um, but only for
medical use and because this,
this substance or this natural
mushroom has such strong, let's
say, effects when it's being
used therapeutically.
This is never anything that I
think any of us would ever argue
to go out onto the open market
and be used recreationally, it
would be dangerous, just like
the reason why you can't drive
when you're in the middle of
this treatment is because just
like a strong substance or an
opioid that you might get from a
doctor. It has that warning
label, you can't drive while
you're taking this. This takes
it even to the next level. Not
only can you not drive, you have
to have that licensed
professional who knows how to
take you.
through this safely, um, and it
sounds like you're not going
every week. Am, am I right on
that? Am, am I off on anything
I've said?
well stated on that, and I would
just add one little piece for
Senator Woods's question.
Nonetheless, the department in
choosing licensed producers, I'm
sure there will be testing,
there will be quality control.
This will precision dosing and
dosing requirements and that's
written in here. So it won't be
as if they're just randomly
given stuff.
It will be as as
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Padilla.
Uh thank you, chair, and so I
Is this kind of goes back to one
of my original conversations
chair with Doctor Brandt and
Doctor Steinborne and Doctor
Hickey.
I'm concerned about um take some
mushrooms, you know, there was
um there was just the whole,
well, there's just no way this
is gonna become recreational.
Well,
I mean,
Please convince me.
Senator, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator.
Right now,
People go out and find mushrooms
in the woods and use it
recreationally.
We're not making it
To do that.
Right
But it happens today.
Um, it's it's often not, you
know, since we were.
You know, since before we were
born.
Um, it's happened for eternity.
Or mankind goes back, they found
natural things and ate them.
This doesn't make that legal.
What this does is set out a very
prescribed way.
Or
Medical doctors.
Psychologists, psychiatrists is
probably more in line as what
would use this.
That would take someone through
this treatment.
Where they don't leave the
facility until the treatment is
over and don't leave the
facility until the effects of
the treatment.
As far as the the brain altering
effect, so you can't drive or
done.
So it's not like they're gonna
give it to you, you know, the
big ways, so you kind of use the
same vehicle, but the way it's
different than medical marijuana
is, we're not giving someone a
card that they can then go down
to the shop and buy it and go
out to the car and smoke it and
then drive home today.
I mean that's, that's a whole,
you know, that's a, and if you
can do this today.
Because of the, the dangers of
doing this on your own.
I don't see that you'd ever make
this legal.
Recreationally
OK. And I, I can appreciate
that. Thank you. I, I, if you
can do this today, then I'm not
quite sure why we need what
you're proposing here.
Um, I don't think that having
this in law.
is then going to stop what you
just described. So I'm, I'm.
Well, I mean there's there's
people that have been doing that
forever. There's people that,
that you.
But I think more to the point,
Mr. Chair, what we're talking
about someone using it
recreationally. These are
people.
dealing with major trauma.
We're gonna go off and have 1 or
2.
Where other things haven't
worked.
So I, I think it's a leap to
kind of say that someone is in a
situation now is gonna go out
and on their own.
to have it.
It's, I think we heard type of
thing, so I don't think this is
a bridge to that legislation,
that's why we're proposing this.
Thank you. Cheers.
Thank you, gentlemen.
You
And just to continue on Senator
Padilla's question, then why
don't we just ask the
The, uh, healthcare providers
to.
Like Mr. Chairman, this is still
in the uh initiating stages of.
Uh, a use of a uh essentially
call it a new medicine, um, you
would have to, you would have to
be in a clinical setting. So
providers done in the clinical
settings with the qualified
people to do it, being a drug
that, um, oh yeah, it's like uh
opioid we're trying to do here.
I mean
Understand for the treatment of
PTS, right? I understand it for
into life, other than that, it's
a high end hippie drug.
$6000 the young lady just said
it was a CEO's go and CFOs were
the only ones who were there
other than her.
And and so it's a high-end
hippie drug and.
though and I were talking a
while ago, we're just build an
alberage over there by Chaco.
Give you a treatment.
In charge of $20,000.
I understand part of what it's
for in the life, I completely
get I wanna.
Wouldn't take any pills. Uh, I
understand that would help, but
I mean, if it's not illegal now.
It is. It's not illegal to go
pick a mushroom, need a
mushroom.
I can't all my mushrooms in my
house growing horse shit.
There's a lot of mushrooms. I
don't know if they're these
mushrooms, but there's a lot of
them around there when you pile
them up and.
And so what do you mean you
can't eat a mushroom meal
legally in New Mexico. They sell
them at the grocery store.
You, you might be able to,
especially if you're providing
medical treatment, you want it
to be safe.
You want specific dose product.
This is creating people.
And you know, you go pick them
I'll kill you.
And the, and if you eat one of
these mushrooms, you couldn't
die.
Uh, they do not have any
evidence seriously of anybody
that's very, very safe. I mean,
there's side effects in all
pharmaceuticals. I mean, is it
causing, does it cause any birth
defects? Is there any long term
lasting effects of all that been
research and studied, right?
And we're gonna create this
program and I think that's what
comes back to the liability.
If the FDA hasn't researched it
enough and maybe they're not the
ultimate god of research.
I mean, is there something
underlying something that says,
OK, in a certain patient this
could cause
Seizures just cause cause.
effects later on. We, we don't
know that, and then you want us
to just approve people to say,
OK, we can go for the streaming.
Understand it for certain things
and there's certain risk, I
mean.
You want to take the weight loss
shot, there's a risk to that.
You want to take another pill,
there's a risk to that. Don't do
cocaine, there's a risk to that.
And and so, but I don't know.
If the state is, is ready to do
this, and you say, oh, we don't
want to legalize it. Well, this
is the first thing that's what
we did with marijuana.
He's called it medical.
And then we went to
recreational.
And so.
I mean
The board is made up, it can
have personal confidential
health information.
Um, but they cut it, they gotta
keep it quiet, advisory board to
set up a majority of people.
I just, I think they got a long
road to hall with this, but this
is the first step to
recreational.
Mushrooms, I mean, they sold
them in college in the bags, you
could buy a bag of mushrooms if
you go to your room and see
whatever you wanted to see.
Uh, it hasn't changed.
We're just gonna say now the
state's gonna manage this and.
You know, I, I just don't.
I don't feel comfortable.
I feel comfortable. I went to
somewhere to the mail, and they
said, OK, you can go here.
And get a treatment your end of
life, uh.
You have PTSD. Here's a place
where you could go do it, but I
mean,
This is the same thing that we
started down the medical
marijuana road with this.
Let's do this medically.
And let's have every rich hippie
want want to smoke.
mushrooms from the 60s that's
left over.
Uh, come in and do a $6000
treatment and we'll have it
approved and they'll be in an
environment with the.
They'll be safe and uh.
The medical side, I wish it was
just for medical use and not for
other things, but can have
emotion.
German
I move that uh I I do pass on
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 219.
That motion my center combo 2 my
center.
Senator Brent, Senator Brant
votes yes, Senator Compos.
Senator Campos votes yes,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes no.
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes Senator
Tobiasin.
Senator Tobias in votes, yes,
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods boats know Senator
Sendo.
Senator Sendosia Munoz. Yes.
No, no, I'm sorry, no.
when you supposed to know.
We have a due past 7 in the
affirmative, 3 in the negative.
Thank you. I'm looking forward
to open my roadside stand.
That are not illegal in the
state of New Mexico.
As a medical drug.
Tenantis is not here, so we can
rent.
And changes to liability clause
bill so we can sue Amazon.
I'm pretty familiar with that.
Go ahead center.
carefully watching Senate Bill
282.
Structures settled. You can go
to your next bill if you want to
while you're waiting.
Thank you so much.
Sorry about the delay. So 282.
Ms. Chairman centers, we have
what's called the Structured
Settlement Act in New Mexico.
Structured settlements are.
A device of financial tool
that's used oftentimes when
you're settling a case, a civil
case.
Uh, where oftentimes the party
who's recovering the damages or
or the other benefit is a minor
child. And so for example, they
may not, uh, if they're 6 years
old or 10 years old, we don't
want them to maybe receive
hundreds of thousands or
millions of dollars that they
can't manage and we're, we're
very cautious about putting that
kind of money in the hands of
parents because the parents may
misuse the money as well too, so
oftentimes a vehicle like a
structured settlement is used,
which assures that the money is
not paid or certain milestones,
you know, when they
to buy a car, and these are
structure settlements are also
used quite a bit when uh an
individual is receiving a
settlement and has long term
medical needs. So for example,
if they're gonna need lifetime
medical care, nursing care. We,
we have the structured so paying
out a certain amount over a
period of many years, so that
once again, the individual
doesn't end up with a large lump
sum of money that they may not
manage well and then find
themselves without the resources
to take care of that long-term
care. These are all just
examples of how structured
settlements are used, um, we
years ago created a.
Structured Settlement Act to
assure that when um a company
and there is, there is an
industry out there that um goes
out and buys these structured
settlements they essentially
take a offer a lump sum to an
individual and say we'll take
your future income stream that
you're supposed to receive over
the next 20 or 30 years and
The highly profitable and it
would probably shock you all to
learn it's profitable way beyond
even what we talked about when
we talked about title loans or
payday loans. So for example,
I've been given an example
recently where an individual was
supposed to receive an income
stream over a million dollars
over the lifetime that that they
were offered 8000 now.
So the structured Settlement Act
is intended to require, as it
exists, require that a judge has
a hearing.
Uh, in approving this type of
type of a transaction. What this
bill does simply is take that
existing law and allows for a
judge or requires a judge to
appoint a guardian ad litem.
This is an outside investor
who's gonna advise the judge on
the merits of the proposal, so
the, the outside adviser to the
judge will tell the judge here's
what the income stream should
be. We think the discounts that
are being taken, the interest
rates that are being applied,
the amortization of that
obligation over a period of
time, that, that's fair and in
the best interest of the person
receiving it and.
We list the factors that should
be considered such as.
Is there a spousal support
obligations, is there a child
support obligation? Are there
these long term medical care uh
conditions and so forth. But,
but a financial advisor should
be able to take that future
income stream and figure out
what a true present value
discount of that amount, uh,
allow the court to make that
appointment and to require the
company that's buying the long
term obligation or destruction
settlement that they're to the
court so that's, that's all the
bill does. It's pretty simple,
uh, additional language to the
existing act. So thank you Mr.
Chairman. I'll stand for
questions. Thank you.
I go to the audience, I guess
anybody on support.
Anybody in opposition to.
I guess let's take one.
Mike Hart you there?
Like heart you.
Um
Let's try the other one.
Nat Dean
Right
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh.
Can you hear me?
Now we can. Thank you very much.
I'm sorry. I'm struggling with
my voice over the last uh couple
of months. My name is Nadine,
and uh I am a disability
advocate. I'm also a person with
multiple disabilities and the
structured settlement always
presents uh its own set of
challenges because it reduces
the long term, um value of the
settlement for the individual,
but having a structure which
protects the individual who may
not always have access to the
financial literacy and financial
tools to manage that asset
wisely is an important feature.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Sponsor, and members of the
committee. Thank you.
So let me just go over a
scenario real quickly, Senator
Cervantes. I'm about to die. I
want to go take mushrooms. I
can't afford it. Now I gotta go
to the judge and say, can I have
some money from my account to go
take a mushroom, uh.
Treatment, so I can die.
Would that be correct?
Uh, I need more facts center, so
I'm gonna die. I wanna go spend
it on mushrooms. You and you've
got a structured settlement, is
that right? You have a yeah, so
under our existing law you would
have to get a court to approve a
lump sum payment of that
structured settlement. So yes,
the only difference this bill
would do is require the judge to
appoint somebody to look at what
stream of income is gonna be and
figure out whether you're being
offered a reasonable discount in
value for that. And as I said,
if, if you're taking a million
dollars obligation and selling
it for $8000. People you.
Your situation is you may want
that $8000 so badly, and you're
gonna die, that you may say,
yeah, I don't, I don't want a
million dollars over 20 years. I
want $8000 today, and that may
be what you need and that may be
right for you, but the judge,
this, this bill comes to me from
a judge because judges
oftentimes don't have the
financial literacy. I don't mean
that to be negative to them, but
they don't interest rates in a
future stream are being properly
calculated. I shouldn't say that
in all cases, but they some
cases need help.
And questions from committee
members.
Start with Senator Padilla, and
then Senator Trujil, then
Senator Brent. Uh thank you,
Chair and thank you, Senator. I
think you have a great proposal
here. I think it's, it's very
solid and sound, it's a good
idea. um, on the example you
were that you were discussing
with the chair, there could be
other bills, right? That would
have to be beyond that $6000
which we just heard of
psilocybin exercise that they
may want to do. So this is going
to ensure that that's uncovered.
In the court proceeding?
Well, that's right, Senator, and
you get back to Senator Munoza's
condition, what if, what if
Senator Mosis it's not my
condition that's a made-up
condition. Well, I know, I
understand that.
I know there's some people that
were really anxious there for a
moment, uh, but, um.
No, I mean, but what if, what if
Senator Munoz is a 30 year old
father with 3 kids who he's
supporting and that's what I was
hoping you'd call it might be
seeing a million dollars over
his lifetime, but he wants $8000
to go get mushrooms for 2 weeks
before he dies. A judge might
say, you know, you're not doing
the responsible and then share
one just last question, uh, only
a bit of worry that I would have
is um some time ago when I first
came to the legislature, it
seemed like we had guardians who
were taking advantage of the
people they were supposed to be
guarding, providing.
Guardian services for.
What sort of protections do we
have that these, these folks
aren't.
Part of the game, if you will.
I don't know what other way to
put it, you know, so no, that's
a good question. I remember you
leading on that a lot. I don't,
you know, I don't know what you
were reading about him, about
him.
And we were trying to introduce
a lot of protections here for
people that were under
guardianships and
conservatorships and the issue
seems to have gone away really
getting chased down pretty,
pretty heavily. So I think
that's mostly gone away, but
here, uh, realize a guarding
that item is essentially a
guardian appointed on a very
temporary, it is a guardian, it
is not a guardian for the person
receiving the money. The
guardian does not represent
them. They may have a, I'd light
here is essentially a court
appointed advisor to the court.
Uh, the guardian litem has their
duties to the judge, OK, and
then just one last thing.
and Senator, uh, who pays the
guardian ad litem? I, I, I've
never had to interact with one.
I have no idea how that, how
that works. But by this bill,
the company that's trying to buy
the future income obligation
would be responsible for paying
the cost wouldn't that then
share.
Influence and make that into
that guardian bias.
Um, it's, it's a good point.
It's a good concern, although
the
would make the appointment the
guardian is the court, the court
found that the guardian was too
close or too financially tied,
then presumably the guardian
proposed in each case in a truly
disinterested and just so I'm
sorry, I want to make sure I
understood what you said. So the
company attempting to buy the
structured settlement would be
the ones paying the guardian
item. Did you just say that?
Well, I think that that really
influences how they might look
at what's going on here.
Uh, well, I, I've got to trust
that they wouldn't send her, but
you're right. I mean, that's,
that's a concern we have to
find, we have to have somebody
who's gonna advise the court. So
if you, if you look at page 3.
You'll see that the new language
here on page 6 and 7 says the
court shall appoint the guardian
ad litem.
And it says they're supposed to
make an independent assessment
and advise the court, so.
Presumably the court's gonna
appoint somebody who the court's
gonna find trustworthy and
reliable to do that.
Um, but, but at the same time,
it only makes sense that that
company would be the one to pay
the costs and otherwise, you,
you might have the same
situation if the person
receiving the income stream
where they were responsible pay
for it, concern might be, yeah,
they're gonna approve everything
they're so somebody's got to pay
for that adviser and it makes
sense that the, the uh party who
should pay that would be the one
who's really promoting and, and
financially uh benefiting. I
mean, I, I, I don't, I haven't
done the, the figures and
calculations, but these, these,
uh, structured settlements
they're applying a very
low interest rate for a future
stream, and then they're
applying uh so the the you again
I get we've seen a million
dollar obligation. And I know I
said I was almost done, just one
more so with the guardian item,
is that a is that an attorney or
what what is their training?
Uh, it, it could be Senator, I
mean, there's attorneys and the
attorneys, some of my colleagues
in the bar are CPAs, they're
very good at accounting,
financial balance sheets, the
whole bit on, on balance, most
lawyers are notoriously poor in
matters and uh so your question
is, would it be an attorney
perhaps I would imagine it's
probably a business who can do
projections, um, and look at
things like annuity we're
usually very good at that.
OK, so it, you don't have to be
an attorney to be a guardian.
OK, thank you. Thanks.
Easter
Centri
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator. So most of my
questions were answered, um, in
regards to, so I am used to
hearing the term guardian ad
litem for someone who's under
age or incapacitated, you're
using that in the form of it
could be you, me.
Not that I'm not incapacitated,
but it could be used for just an
average person, right? We, we
use the term guardian in Latin
to describe various different
functions of a garden item and
you're right, so, so for
example, when I bring, I will
practice lawsuit and I'm a
representative, I will ask the
court to appoint a guardian ad
li do that role. His job is to
look out only for the interests
of the child because the
parents' interest in the child's
interest in money and want a lot
of money now they want to buy a
new house, do a lot of things.
A job of somebody like Peter
Worth as a guardian of light is
to say, I want to make sure
there's gonna be money for
college. I want to make sure
there's money,
she's 25 or 3.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman
Senator, so, um, I, I'm gonna
tell you just a little bit and
then I, I, I, I'm gonna tell you
this cause I wanna ask a
question about it.
Um, my son was in a motorcycle
accident. He was hit. Um, it was
not his fault, and so he went
into settlement agree yeah, into
a settlement, um, instead of
going to court and um he ended
up with a lump sum.
Uh, payment, and then he had
some installment payments that
came, I think over the course of
like the next 3 or 4 years. It
could have been 5 years, and
then he had an annuity, um, that
he was able to cash, um, uh, you
know.
Down years later, um.
This law doesn't prohibit this
just has to do with if he had
had the
Uh
Installments or the annuity,
maybe he could have wanted to
collect on it early by selling
it to someone, and this would
kind of help make sure that he
got a good deal. That's exactly
right. OK. All right, thank you.
I appreciate that.
And rent.
think he was German and senator
um.
I just had a few questions, so,
uh, I keep hearing the jingle in
my head, so thank you very much
for that, um, I, I really
appreciate it. um.
mention the name of the company
me, but I did look him up,
um.
you know.
Yeah, the Taco Bell jingle roll.
I'm I'm, I'm joining your
committee too late evidently so
I'm missing it. You went right
over my head.
You know, it's my money and I
want it now. Oh, OK, all right,
yeah, yeah, and, and and you're,
and you're right, there are
people that are marketing and
selling and advertising, we'll
buy your structured settlements.
I, I'm not familiar with the
jingle or the ad, but this is
heavily advertised because it's
very lucrative. Yeah.
Um, so, so just a couple of
questions on the, what would be
the qualifications for the
guardian ad litem.
Um, Senator, uh, Chairman, we
don't specify what the
requirements are for the
guardian litem. I, I would rely
heavily and confidently on a
judge to decide here's the
person who meets the
qualifications that I need and,
and that may vary from case to
case, uh, so again, from my
experience and I've done a
number of structured settlements
in my career. There, there are
people that are solely in the
business of doing example to
Trujillo's example, they'll set
up a plan for her son in that
case and say um let's give him a
lump sum now.
I don't know how, do you mind me
asking how old he was at the
time?
At the settlement? Yes, Mr.
Chairman, so he was in his 11th,
uh, he was, he was a
Junior college age and so you
would, you would want to be able
to maybe make available to that
young person at that age for
graduate school or postgraduate
school or or finishing their
college without having to take
fewer hours and work part time.
There's a number of factors so
you may have a lump sum and then
you say, OK, we're gonna have a
few more uh payments over a
period of time and then there's
a lump sum maybe when he's 30 or
35 or something, you can see all
the scenarios, the reason we do
this is we're trying to, we're
trying to help people avoid
creditors candidly, we're trying
to avoid people avoid.
Family members and friends who
all wanna have them invest in
the latest greatest uh idea or
make loans. Hey, you just got a
million dollars, why don't you
loan me $50,000. I'm your best
friend for life. We do all these
things to be protective of our
clients. OK, um.
So
Mm
In the scenario you were sharing
earlier, you said that sometimes
you use Senor for that.
Um, so would the person have to
be an attorney or?
Or would he need to have a it
seems like a financial
background would be more
important to me. Yeah, Senator,
so, so we're talking about
guardian items in two contexts.
So I, when I said I use set of
word as a guardian and lim. I
use him to be essentially a
guardian of the child. In other
words, to say to the judge, I've
met with the child, and he does.
I've met with the child, I've
met with the parents. Here's
what I think the best needs, the
best interests of the child are
in coming up with the settlement
amount itself, but the Guardian
that let him here is to advise
the judge on the financial
aspects of a lump sum, hey.
if you will, and you're right,
in that case, I would imagine
that's always gonna be probably
a financial advisor, somebody
who's good at projecting money
over a period of time.
People who sell annuities life
insurance people projecting how
long people might live, uh, and
what they're, what, what a fair
rate of return is gonna be on
something like even life
insurance. Thank you. That's
all.
Senator Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator, um, let's take me for
instance, uh, if I were awarded
right now, let's say 50 million
I'm of sound mind.
Would you still be saying that
the judge should be using a
guardian ad litem to determine.
Whether I get a lump sum or
whether that is paid out. Tell
me specifically who would need
this guardian ad litem, right?
So if you, if you, if you had a
case right now and you settled
the case for $50 million you
might in, in that negotiation,
you would be offered all
different alternatives. One
would be, we'll give you the
company paying you off may say
we'll give you $50 million right
now.
Um, and you walking down the
road, um, the company may say
we'll give you $20 million now
and we will pay you the
remaining $30 million over the
next 20 years with a rate of
return and interest on that
money, um, and you would have
that option as well too, so you
could look at that rate of
return and decide whether that
rate of return is something
you'd rather have as a surety,
um, as, as, as an assurance or
would you rather have all the
money up front? Those are all
the factors you could consider.
there's benefits to you in
stringing that out over a period
of time for the reasons I just
explained.
Um, you're not, if you, if you
get yourself into financial
trouble, it's hard to get from
creditors, um, to something
that's a future obligation.
Um, if you have again.
about your spending habits and
you're afraid that if you
suddenly have $50 million you're
gonna go through it again, you
may want that kind of structure
in your life.
Um, but you would ultimately
have the decision to do that.
The, the question here is if you
agree to and and and and the
company is paying you the $50
million has an advantage to
wanting to pay you over a period
of time, because they're also
floating the money. They're,
they're playing with the float
as well too, and the interest on
it, so these are all factors
that they, they take into
consideration in some cases
they'll offer you more money. In
other words, if, if they'll,
they'll say,
We'll we'll give you $50 million
now or we'll give you $60
million but we're gonna pay it
to you over 30 years. So again,
they're, they're working with
them, so you would have all
those choices, but if, if the
deal you took was $60 million
over 20 years and 2 years into
it, you change them all now.
Then you'd go to the company and
say I'll, I'd like you to get
all the money now and say, OK,
instead of paying you $60
million over 20 years, we're
gonna pay you now.
In, in this case, $5 million or
$10 million right now and you
might say.
I'll take it and the goal here
is to have.
Uh, a judge to go wait a minute.
Uh, are you getting a good
return? Are you getting a fair
return on that?
OK, so it's not, it's not to
control Mr. Chair.
How what I choose.
The moment that it's. That's
great in court initially and
then let's say
We went back with the structured
settlement, how are the
attorneys involved paid when it
first goes to court and then if
I choose to go back to court
with a structured settlement and
guardian ad litem. How are they
paid? that's a good
conversation. It's a good
question, Senator Munoz and I've
had that discussion before
because when you hear some of
the proposals on medical
malpractice reform, uh, and that
may be what you're getting to or
even workers' compensation the
argument is well it's not fair
the lawyers get their fee up at
the front end of the thing
because the client is not
getting.
their money until 10 or 20, 150
years over and the lawyer
should, should spread their fee
out over that period of time as
well too. So make that argument.
It's, it's an impractical uh way
to do things because as a
lawyer, I, my, my phone bill
can't get paid over 15 years. My
rent can't get paid over 15
years. I've got to meet my
current obligations expenses now
so I really can't uh stay in
business. I don't unless I'm
really good at business to
maintain a a a a business
operating with current
obligations with a future
promise of, of uh.
In income streamed down well,
but lawyers will take their
money usually.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I, I just have a
couple of big problems with your
bill.
One is the word requiring.
It is, if I'm bit and I get a
settlement and I'm healthy.
I don't need
Required to the judge to go to
the judge and say, hey, I want
to sell this, I wanna do
whatever. I have the mental
capability of doing it.
What, what seems to be the
problem of requiring.
I mean, what can't, if I get to
a point where incapacitated or I
think I'm gonna make a bad
decision. I mean, I could make a
bad decision today and go
gambling, you know.
But requiring kind of tells me
there's an undertow to that is,
is where the money is gonna go
and what's the cost to that.
I mean requiring people to do
everything just because you got
a judgment and how you're going
to spend it is.
is troublesome to me,
it's right in the very first
line under
that 1 page one page 12 in the
requiring.
I mean, there's people that are
capable, there's people that
aren't capable. I mean, you get
strung out on drugs and sure the
judge needs to oversee that,
right? I mean, requiring a
competent person, I mean.
an example of the DOT hit my dad
and lost half his heart and he
didn't lose any mental
capability when he got the
money.
And if you wanted to spend any
of it or went into trust, it
would require him to go to court
and take an action with the
judge and have someone say, oh,
cause you're mentally stable,
you're just gonna blow the
money, what's he gonna do with
it?
That's an issue for me. I mean,
in certain incidents, I could,
you can ask the judge to review
if necessary, not just require.
Maybe me, let me help you set it
please a little bit. So right
now what you're concerned about
is actually already the law. In
other words, right now, if, if
you want to sell a structured
summit, you're required to have
a court hearing.
So all of that is already in the
existing law in the Act. The
only requirement with the words
requiring is using the title
that you're referring to is only
the requirement of the
appointment of essentially a
financial is what the court
decides this because they
already, they already have to do
it or it has to approve it. So
we're just gonna fund this
through the courts because that
would be the cheapest way for
the state and for the payee to
fund them through the courts and
not have to go hire another
attorney engage an attorney. I
mean, we should probably hire
these having a uh an FTE in the
court system to do this for
them, rather
then
Other than the judge saying, oh,
you can hire a lawyer, you can
hire financial guy, um, I mean
the.
We should just do this through
the state budget, the same here,
here's 3 people that are gonna
do this in the state and not
have a, a, a more cost.
Prohibitive revenue stream for
the person that has to do that
because it's got to be paid out
of the settlement, correctly.
Right? Uh, no, no, senator, and
a couple of things. Number one
is I, I don't think I would do
this, um, the reason for that is
it's unpredictable to know how
many of these all over the state
and so you're essentially hiring
somebody to be
potentially very busy or doing
absolutely nothing at all,
wouldn't make financial sense to
the taxpayers to have an
employee with the appointment by
a court of a financial the court
to use its judgment to say,
In in Gallup, there's a person
who has this knowledge and can
advise me and I'll trust them or
else depending on the
Complexity of the transaction so
you you and I talked about this
back and forth, you, you're
counting, I don't, you know, we
go where the, we go with the
expertise is at.
And and can count and be
assigned to do this sooner.
So if the person has an
accountant and decides I'm gonna
use my own accountant to do this
for me, and then the account
robs them.
What have we got?
Uh
Mr. Chairman, so the court would
make the appointment of the
financial advisor to the court,
and I would suspect the court
would probably not appoint an
account to court because for the
same point that
I think others have made too,
there may be a lack of.
In time where you have a
question. I do. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, uh.
Mr. Chairman, for your
presentation. Just really
simply, why are we doing this
bill? What's, what's, what's the
goal here?
Uh, the, the reason center of
point blank is that, uh, a judge
came to me and said there's
essentially taking advantage of
the rent referred to something
I'm, I'm not or whatever it may
be, but there's a very uh good
business in if I'm gonna buy an
income stream that may be spread
out over 1020 years.
Um, I'll, I'll buy it for, it
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I'll just
refer you to page 3 line 5,
right? What, what prevents one
of these settlement companies
from coming in and hiring their
own stream of accountants and
advisors on on settlements and
customizing them in the
direction that they see fit for
them to have the person tell the
tell the settlement.
Nothing.
Nothing this law prevents that,
correct?
I understand your question these
companies have absolutely do
have for the numbers for them
and telling them, hey, uh, let's
pay, let's pay $100,000 for this
million dollars, um, and the
company looks at again computes
what they want to pay for it and
what they don't. I won't take
$100,000 for that annuity, but
I'll take 105th company gets
their actuarials and their
account we'll do that.
And and now they open company X,
Y and Z with a new jingle to,
you know, we can help you save
your money and, and we'll be
your corner appointed, uh.
Adviser
and
they'll lead into the visory
mode that they, they want the
client and the judge to go in.
Uh, they'll have the hearings,
they'll do whatever they can to
get this some of the structured
settlement money.
Uh, they'll just add an
additional company to do this.
It's very simple. They're,
they're large settlements.
They're not gonna chase you for
$200,000 so.
They want a million, they want
10 million, they want.
Fedex 76 million.
And they want large structured
settlements so that they can.
By out and and do that.
Will been
the amount of money they need to
to put people in place in
whatever they need to do in
order to start.
Pushing these in their
direction.
That's the one section, and then
it says on page 3, he says, in
light of P's age.
mental capacity, maturity level.
Understanding of the terms of
agreements and the stated
purpose for the transfer.
What's the stated purpose for
the transfer? Wouldn't that just
be a straight cat? Um.
I'm sure so the the court is
gonna ask that the settlement is
being proposed and so to use
your example, if you were to go
back to your earlier
hypothetical, if you're telling
the, the court and the advisor,
I'm dying. I've got no kids,
I've got nothing left for me.
I'd like to go to Greece for 2
months. That's a consideration
that the court should take into
account and, and to use your
example, whether it's 6 months
to live or the court would
consider the person's age.
But also their mental capacity,
you know, are they able to make
these decisions soundly deficit,
the maturity level and so and
what it says the stated purpose
of the transfer that's what the
issue is. Why, why do you want
the money now in one lump sum as
opposed to the, the stream over
a period of time.
There may be very good reasons
for that.
And then I'm just looking at
page 4 blind 6, right?
And other factors that the court
or the guardian may determine to
be relevant.
I mean that could be tons of
other factors that they could
determined to be irrelevant. I
mean, you know, like a trial
lawyer who delivers pizza at
night and practices law in the
morning to decide he wanted to
move into the system and say,
hey, I can use this word
relevant.
Any factor relevant.
To the south
I mean, they can push it
wherever they want, you, you,
you look at the statutes of the
law and pick a relevant factor
for that person they lost a toe,
that's irrelevant.
What were the other injuries and
they'd say, well, we, we want
the structured settlement and we
don't, I mean.
It adds another layer. It's just
gonna be more costly to the, to
the benefactor. They do need
some protection from this, but
it ultimately at the end the
day, it's like mushrooms, make a
choice, you want them or not.
Right? You're gonna spend your
money now or not?
I mean, it's, it's a, it's, it's
people need to determine their
own fate.
Maybe if the courts when they
had the original order, would
say they're not mentally capable
until they're provenally capable
to make these decisions, but
Something happens to somebody,
it's their money.
You can't determine where
they're going to spend that
money.
Uh, the courts can now be
determine where you can spend
your money.
And
I just
I see way too many games played
in this bill right now, I mean,
the, the office of family
representation didn't didn't
respond, declined to respond.
The Office of the District
attorneys declined to respond.
The DD counseled uh.
was not uh was solicited but
not.
Anything received them. AOC did
not.
Respond
Um
So
Those are kind of my comments,
so.
gonna have a
motion from the committee.
And move motion for a due pass
by.
Mm
I think it's a subst this is not
a substitute bill.
sleep.
We have a motion for due pass by
in her heels.
You 2.
In a 2nd
Senator Padilla.
Senator Brent.
Senator Brandt votes no Senator
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes no, Senator
Padia, Senor Padilla Botia
Senator Steinborn, Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobias in Senator Tobiasson
votes no, Senator.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Mm
Senator Woods boats no. Senator
Shando.
Uh yes.
Senator Shindo votes, yes,
Senator Munoz.
You know.
We have a Tae Bo.
Thank you.
Thank you all very much. Thank
you. You do your next bill, you
know, understand that bill's
going to be tabled because the
money's already in the budget. I
got it, you want to hear a
hearing, let's just have a
hearing on it, just real quick
the other bill before you said
appropriation bill.
Or transcription services when I
say transcript where we practice
law a great deal now, so you all
are probably familiar with the
old subscribing and writing
everything down. We now see
these here courses making
greater use of that technology
and so the appropriation here is
to um make uh more widespread
use of that technology, so we
have a continuing and running
transcript that helps the judge
read and um and makes for faster
that's it.
We, we, this has already been in
the budget for a couple of years
now, so.
questions from committee members
can have a motion.
No we table.
Thiner woods
But
I moved the table, I have a 2 by
center Steinborn.
Any objection to the tabling
motion.
I'll call her then.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brant
votes, yes, Senator Senator
Camposia Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Pavia.
Senator Padilla votes no,
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson.
Sinner Tobias and Bosa, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes no,
Senator Woods.
The woods votes, yes, Senator
Shendo,
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Munoz.
Yes.
when you spokes, yes,
we have a due pass it's been
tabled,
you know this, but uh it's,
we're not used to it, especially
the new members because we're
not hearing a lot of
appropriation bills. This is
standard practice and
appropriation. I was on the
house appropriation, all the
preparation bills get vetoed
just like a tax bill when it
goes to the veto table or table,
sorry
you want beetle bills it's not a
negative statement. It's just
the practice, and Mr. Chair,
before this sponsor leaves.
I did vote no because I still
have a lot of business in front
of this committee before this
session ends. Amen.
Thank you.
I explained that earlier,
Senator Steinbar, I don't know
if you're in the room or not.
Uh
I don't see CYFD what time are
we going to Florida.
Oh she's here 1:30 but let's
hear CYFD because that's a big
portion of the budget we need to
hear about.
Mm
I don't even know what time it
is, you know?
2.
3
One says 11:20, 1 says 115. I
know the time changes tomorrow.
Make sure you want to start as
well she's on her way in.
I'm gonna run the
Garcia.
Um what what CFD was asking for
in addition. So I'm gonna walk
over the past couple of years
and that the uh is asking for in
addition to what the house on.
This high level line by line.
OK, thank you. Go ahead.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, good afternoon. Thank
you, Rachel, for going over
that. I think it's afternoon
anyway, um, I just wanted to
kind of point out there are
those differences we to meet
with LFC, um, after our last
hearing to really kind of point
out the differences and get a
better understanding of where
those are, um, I think you also
have AFD that really just goes
over the remediation order that
we received in Kevinness and
breaks down with each of those
orders number.
required us to do and so I'm not
gonna go over those with you
today. I think it's, you know,
clear, but I will go over kind
of where we have asked for
additional money with respect to
each of those orders, and so,
um, on the next slide that you
have from us, um, which is the
solid revenue stream. So this is
funding that we had requested in
our executive budget, um, in the
base budget and as Rachel
pointed out, a lot of the
funding was not in the base.
budget, it was given to us, at
least some of that through
growth funding, um, and so I
think that's kind of where we
have that difference is, is it
in the base budget? Is it
recurring funding that we then
use for these continuous.
Items that we need to fund or is
it in grow where I fully
understand the purpose of grow
and the ability for oversight
and you guys to be able to
determine, you know, if that
money has been spending
appropriately and most
importantly, are we getting the
investment that we want to see
in the programming.
Really improving based on the
money that, um.
Next slide is our workforce
recruitment retention and
training funding. So in the
remedial order number one,
that 4.
$8 million refers to that order,
which, you know, was basically
ensuring that we have taken all
steps necessary um to fund case
workers and case aid positions.
So we had previous positions in
our budget, we had asked for
funding for 101 positions that
was in our initial request that
I believe was funded through
grow for a $10 million
appropriation over three years
initial request was for case
aids.
Um, and individuals to help our
caseworkers and as we previously
mentioned those case aids help
do paperwork, they do
transportation for individuals.
They call collaterals. They do a
lot of the case that a lot of
the administrative work for
investor in our new request,
we're asking for 50 of those
that would be spread statewide
to support our workers um and
additional in some of our
heavier offices, Donna Anna, um,
San Juan, Albuquerque and Chavez
County where we have
higher caseloads. Um, so 50 FTEs
for that at a cost of $4.8
million.
Um, we also are looking at um 25
new FTEs, um, for an emergency
response team and we talked a
little bit about that in the
remedial order under 2, they
asked us to create new
classifications of workers to
handle on-call emergency and
overnight work.
This would be regional teams as
opposed to creating a team in
every office, although we
believe we need them in every
office. We still have
emergencies that happen across
the state but this would give us
the ability to start it
regionally in each of our
regions, um, with a team that
would be designated to work
evenings and weekends, so
caseworkers aren't called out on
calls or emergencies at night,
um, and they would be available
to respond to those cases, so
this creates 5 teams of 5
workers in each region.
to respond to emergencies.
Um, the next ask that's new is
the 3rd, um, this is to expand
training for CYFD employees, um,
and increase our trainers in
each region.
Um, that total of those and that
was with respect to remedial
order number 3. The total ask of
those new FTEs, the 88 FTEs and
the money for that is 7.5 is our
resource foster parent
recruitment and retention.
Um, we're asking for.
$800,000 for 5 new FTEs for
placement workers, and these are
specific to high need counties
where they've identified the
need, um, for us to really have
a person that's just designated
to recruitment in that county
doesn't carry a caseload and
doesn't do any other work
outside of that county. Um, so
we're asking for $800,000 for
those fine media order number 5.
Um, we're also asking for one
FTE for a supervisor. The next
ask is $9.8 million and that is
um stipends. So as we've had a
lot of discussion on that. Do
they start at about 400 their
way up from there, where A
stipend payments each month.
Um, for care and support for the
foster kids that they're taking
into their homes, um, we would
have $1100 they would so
anything below 900 would be.
Um, and let's see, the total ask
for that is $10.6 million.05 6
new FTEs.
The next request is with respect
to remedial order number 12, and
that's for data and reporting.
There's been a lot of
conversation about the data,
CYFD has used falling colors for
a lot of that data. We have
several different we use for
reporting out. We're building
out our new CWA system. We're
hopeful that it will be ready
for roll out the end of this
year for testing, um, but until
then, there are several systems
that we're using the data, the
reporting requirements are
really difficult.
to obtain because of the
different systems that we use.
We recently entered into a
contract with RS 21 to build out
some dashboards that we can
share that information on our
website so individuals know
where we are with that, um,
we're asking for 6 new FTE and
approximately 10.9.
And
million to go forward with
hiring those individuals, um,
we're also asking for 14 in our
data monitoring and performance,
so they take information, they
work, um, across the agency,
they work closely with the
co-neutrals on reviewing and
Cass and provide data and
accountability for the agency is
aligned with what we need to do
and make recommendations for
change. We're asking for an
additional 14 individuals, that
would also be individuals that
help us right now we have one
person, um, that really kind of
oversees the day to day to
ensure that she works closely
across our agency and also with
um healthcare authority with
their staff on their commitments
to Kevinness and we're looking
to um fund.
Additional positions there as
well. We're not asking for those
14 positions for that, we have
those right now, um, we're just
asking for the funding to be
able to fill them. So CYFD's
request is a recurring request
of $40.2 million in addition to
what we currently have,
non-recurring is $32.3 million
and the non-recurring, as we've
talked about, is to, um,
It's a $20 million supplemental
for this year's budget and a
$12.3 million for last year's
deficit. So, um, we need the
We really want to fill that
deficit so we're not carrying
that obligation over on our
audit findings and affecting um
not just CYFD but the state as a
whole with a deficit in an
agency, um, and the 20 million
supplementals so we can continue
operations at the current level
that we are at this point in
time and so, um, you know, has
been discussed on many
occasions, the federal funding.
I think I was due to lack of
drawdowns of federal funds. Um,
there's been lots of
conversation with really look at
where we were on drawing down
those federal funds, um, this
what we're really asking is not
to take us to the level where
we're budgeted at at federal
funds. We're really just asking
to take us to the level of, you
know, that, that gap between
What we draw down and what's
been at. So we're looking to be
able to just draw down we have,
but there's a large gap in what
we've previously drawn down in
what was budgeted, and that's
where we continuously find
ourselves in a deficit.
Funding that we have never been.
So that is the request. It's a
total of $72.5 million and with
that, I will stand for
questions.
Uh, thank you, Chair and thank
you Secretary. Thank you,
Rachel. Um, so there's a lot of
CYC legislation being
contemplated this session. I, I
have a whole circus of
legislation. I'm working on
myself. I mean, do, do you, and
we have the preliminary come out
FIR come out on that, Rachel,
you did a fabulous job and so
quickly, thank you very much on
what we were proposing at that
moment, uh, but do you have any
um guidance on the, is that
gonna, are all those changes
within what you're proposing
here.
What you're asking for here.
Or is that on top of Chairman
Senator Padilla, the legislation
that is being carried is on that
you want to backfill us with the
FIR for that bill.
Understand what may be coming.
Uh, I, I believe it's somewhere
in the neighborhood on an annual
basis of what is it, 9 to 13
million, uh, Rachel, you have it
there. I don't have it in front
of me.
Um, that is not all. Yeah, and
so I, you know, there, there,
there is a good portion of that
that goes to other departments,
but then I think there was some
discussion around what would
land at HCA I think it's $6
million so there's
It all depends on what passes,
obviously, I know that, but and
that's just on.
The omnibus bill that Senator
Trujillo and I and others are
working on, uh, and then there's
a whole slew of other things
going on too, so.
I just want to call that out
where, where's that bill?
It is in judiciary right now,
and it will be heard again on
Monday is uh is what we're told.
We, we had the, the first
hearing last night. There was a
lot of work that needed to be
done to it. We feel very good
about it.
OK
Any other questions, Senator
Woods?
About that keep you busy.
Yeah
This.
What is uh
Outstanding
Legal ability we have right now.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods,
I don't have an exact figure of
legal liability. I know that
there have been some cases that
were recently um negotiated and
settled, um, but I'm not aware
of any right now. I know that
we've gotten notice of action
for a couple of cases, um, but I
can get you a summary or an.
Yeah.
Because I, I, I'd like to try to
budget for it if I could. I
think.
And I know that um I'm assuming
that GSA would have.
That information.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Woods,
yes, um, GSD would have all of
the litigation that we're
currently in and an analysis of
their anticipated cost, um,
depending on the type of case,
the majority of that does come,
very few of the settlements come
out of the CYFD budget.
And I noticed you're, you've got
some
Some
trainers.
So.
With the right place here.
On, on 13 new FTEs for expanded
training for all CYFD.
employees is that got anything
to do with that?
Chairman Senator Woods, the one
that we're asking for for our
training is for the workforce
development training can ensure
that we're providing at the cost
of those trainers has been
covered in um grow funding
already through the budget. I
believe that's in there. It's a
recommendation through Grow.
We're asking for the position to
be able to do that regionally.
Um, that funding, that training
does provide for staff, um,
several trainings that have
been, been built in to try to
reduce liability. We want to
make sure staff, you know, is
well trained when they're out
there that they're doing what
needs to be done with their
documenting, you know, exactly
what they're doing and that they
have the tools necessary to make
referrals and follow up on that
or anticipating that that will
help to reduce. OK. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Rachel, anybody
else?
Rachel
Tell us the differences between
grow and
Don't have my, I do have glasses
here.
You have the differences in the
girl and her budget requests,
their inro right now that she's
requesting differently.
the
Case workers.
And then
2
Of that 32 million is the
supplement them to get
additional technical assist
either backfilling in the base
budget or funding those
shortfall in federal funds.
where rates should be, um.
Um
So Madam Secretary, just on that
point on that page, on page 2.
Um, which will show to.
I mean, when they wrote the
Kevinesque report was Kevinesque
made aware of those data people
or what did they say?
Um, Mr. Chairman, yes, we do
have some of those data
positions currently filled. We
hadability team, um, we have
under them, we have several
individuals that work on data.
We have people in our EMPO
office that also work on data,
so I believe all of the
positions that we have funding
for right now are filled. We're
looking for additional FTEs and
additional funding to increase
the number of individuals
working and
we, we added them last year.
Why is there a shortfall.
Tell me the reason why there's a
short.
I don't believe that there's a
shortfall in those, the posi the
funding is used to fill current
positions, um, we're looking to
add to that team to be able to
manage the data and be able to
provide the dashboards and the
information in a more timely
basis. We had been using falling
colors, um, who had been doing
the majority of our data that
contract ended the end of
December, and we're looking to
do that internal, um, on a more
timely basis. And my fault. I
apologize for that.
Um
No, I think
This is one of the bigger pieces
of the puzzle we've got to
resolve, and there's a lot of
Floating bills out there,
there's one that's 17 to 19
million, Rachel.
OK, can you gather all the bills
that are out there.
Give us all the the FIRs.
And, and figure out where we're
gonna end up because we could
end end up really short.
I don't think we're gonna end up
over cause there's, we're tight
on money, or we could end up
really short, so we need to
figure out.
Where we're going in and or
we're doing that, Madam
Secretary.
I know that me and Adrian know,
I mean we met you on Monday or
Tuesday.
Hope your mother's good.
That works. If it doesn't work,
just let us know, OK? I don't
have any other questions, any
other questions, Senator Lanier
has one. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
just have one issue.
This is.
So
How, what, how many FTEs do you
have now?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Lanier, we
have about 2200 FTEs, 2,227 to
be exact.
And you're gonna add another
101.
Hopefully
The 101 positions that we asked
for in the Keviness are already
positions that we have.
We're just asking for the
funding to be able, so we're not
adding those 101. I think the
total FTE count, it's the 50 new
cases, um, and then the
6 positions that we're adding,
we're trying to use vacant FTE
positions that we don't
anticipate filling right now and
transferring those where we need
those and just asking for the
funding.
OK, cause that was my next
question.
how many emptytes do you have?
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator Lanier
right now in protective
services, we're at about a 24%
vacancy rate.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just so you know, like, we'll
have FTEs, but we'll have funded
FTEs and unfunded FTEs because
we want to see them use their
funded FTEs to the max before we
allow additional funding, so
they had a 0% vacancy and would
have requested that they would,
they would already had the FTEs,
which she does, and we just
funded those FTEs and maybe had
to change their category.
Senator Brant, make sure you
want to add something real
quick.
to say Mr. Chair, you should,
um, this is this data gets a
little bit old, so this was in
December rate was 3%. Um, they
were vacancies particularly in
juvenile. OK.
Brent, thank you,
Mr. Chairman, um, I see on, on
the second page that, that, that
you were funded when recurring
dollars, 2.7 million.
For the
50 build support FTE.
That's on the top half in
recurring.
He's on page 2, Rachel, page 2
of your report.
Mhm
Yes, ma'am.
Under FY 24.
Uh, Senator Brant, so yes, this
gives you increase in protective
services to protective services,
and that, that's occurring so
that continued. So that
continues in this year's budget
and then.
Next year's budget.
Um
And then the
You said you had a 24% vacancy
rate.
So that's 600.
A
protective services. I think our
protective services workforce is
about 9.
If you have 2200.
FTE
And you have a 24% vacancy rate.
sooner you you gotta do the PS
Celts and, and so they can get
complicated. She may be have
funded, you may have 2200 in
total fund.
Across the entire agency, but
when you get to certain
subcategories of agencies she
may be funded at this level and
have an unfunded level at that
level and but may be funded for
180, but actually only have 150
that are funded.
Right.
It's, it's complicated
protective services. We have
about 240 that are vacant.
Of that 240, um, as Rachel said,
we have about funding to fund 3%
of those 240 positions.
For the rest remain as unfunded
vacant positions,
you can't fill them. Exactly
because you don't have the money
to fill them. OK, thank you. I
understand now.
Although, uh, Mr. Senator I'll
add right now in the budget they
get additional funding to
contract it.
We can track
What
The results are from having that
additional 100 funded.
OK.
Thank you.
magical method.
Legislature.
Senator Shindo
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um.
Go back to your foster parent.
How many foster parents are we
short or?
I know you're requesting for
increase in the foster parent.
crescendo, we currently have, I
believe, 980 foster parents
somewhere around that number.
We still have available beds
right now. We that's, you know.
Kind of, so there are still beds
available if we got a child in
today, um, you know, we, the
chances of us placing them in a
foster home, we probably could.
It depends on the level of care
that we're looking at. We really
struggle with some foster higher
um acuity levels and more
special needs. So we're looking
to instill increase our foster
families, because we still
continue with issues and we have
foster families leaving we're
really trying to look and see
are those.
You know, um, families, I mean,
are those kinship foster family
or that situation changes many
times they don't continue to
foster and they fall off and we
count that as somebody that's
left foster care. Um, and so
we're really trying to figure
out is that kinship posture or
regular foster that we're
losing, um, but typically we
have enough beds, we're really
looking to focus our efforts on
ensuring that we have um foster
families that can deal with kids
with higher acuity levels. OK,
so, so.
Increasing the foster care
payment from what it is to
doubling it with that.
retained some of these foster
parents are they leaving because
they're not pay or what's what's
the situation?
We hear oftentimes from foster
parent support that the the
funding that they're receiving
for care and support in today's
economy does not go to the level
of, you know, taking care of, I
think has Rachel has mentioned,
there's funding and do a study
on that. Um, we're hopeful that
that can really give us a
comparison to other states. We
can look across state care and
support, but it doesn't tell us
what's built into that, right?
Because we have other things
that we pay um for foster
families.
But I think doubling that, you
know, when you look at 4 very
far, um, into today's world,
another question, um, Mr. Chair,
uh, are we anticipating any
increase in
And more children being in care
because of the deportation or
anything that's happening, you
know.
What's the
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Schendo, that has been a
conversation. I think that, you
know, we've had that
conversation along with local
governments and schools and what
does that look like if, you
know, we're trying to prepare if
kids come home and maybe parents
have been, um, then definitely
there's, you know, could be a
possibility of increased kids in
state custody, um, if there's
not another family, it would
still involve if there's no
need, you know, working with our
department.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you
Why hasn't out the six years as
executive been here, why haven't
we looked at that and I mean.
We can look across the state and
do a comparison pretty quick.
Quickly ourselves to what other
states are doing.
Instead of saying let's put
money in for study and figure it
out in a year. It's different
when you're dealing with $400 I
mean.
You have a kid in grade school
and you're fostering a kid in
grade school.
$400 and
It's not gonna keep them where
they need to be.
I mean, to be socially to do
other things, I mean.
Why haven't we looked at this
earlier in in can how quick can
you pull the data from the other
states, let's just fix it and
say we don't need the data, and
we can look at the data, and
what's the differences and where
we short where we over.
The ladies behind you are gonna
be working all weekend now, I
think, um.
But I mean, it's just fix it.
It's to me, some of this is
common sense. I don't need to
study.
I'd rather give the money to the
kids and foster kids and give it
to a beaver study.
I mean, let's talk about real
life.
Really $2 million for mushrooms
when we need to pay foster
parents.
Go through the entire budget
like that.
I mean, common sense tells me.
People should be taken care of
first.
Um, children especially.
Uh, I mean, those are some of
the common sense that just
bothered me when I have kids
that can't have tennis shoes and
nice pair of shoes to go to
school, so they're not teased or
they can play just common sense.
Can you give us that
information, shoot through the
weekend, tomorrow, I hate to
bother you on Sundays, but to
give us a comparison, Rachel, or
do you already know that, that
number.
s ur ro und ing
And that's fine. But I mean,
what's what's the matter with
beating in other states?
Um. Why would it, why would a
rate?
Be too high to disincentivize us
and put us at risk
Oh, that's, I wasn't thinking in
that terms. I'm thinking in the
terms of the children, not, not
what the adults can manipulate.
I was thinking in terms of
OK. So can you, if you guys can
get that, let's try to do that
Monday.
I want to see what happens in
those bills. I'm trying to
figure out how to handle this
agency, because it's, there's a
lot of moving parts right now.
And we don't know what's going
to happen in, and if we don't
get it correct in a bill passes,
a bill doesn't pass, then.
We're in trouble, you're
supplementals and deficiencies,
we're gonna take care of those
other common sense things that
we have to do, um, but the rest
of it is still in play in my
mind.
And you were thinking different
than I were, Rachel.
OK.
Great. Thank you. We'll get back
to you with those figures. OK,
thank you.
