in the Senate finance and I'm
gonna try to track who's on and
who's who's not off online we're
doing a hybrid today so some
members are here some members
If not we'll go to senator
Candelaria.
Senator Steinborn are you there.
Thank you Senator share and
then.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
Pat Woods Senate district seven
curry where in you.
Senator Hemphill are you there
Senator Padilla are you there.
thank you.
Very happy to see you hopefully
will be in person
Senator Gonzales I I've been
coming join us in the second.
Thank you Mr chairman and get
more Lorien thank you I'm Nancy
Senator Siah Correa Hemphill
from Senate district twenty
eight which includes Grant
County Patrick county and most
just occur County happy to be
here thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Steinborn I see on the
screen and of
Good afternoon Mister chairman I
Senator Candelaria.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
good afternoon everyone I'm
Jacob Candelaria independent
All there.
composters walked in the room
good to see a center.
Most of North.
It's great to be here with.
If not we'll just go to
presentation that.
secretary Romero do you want to
start or.
Sen Mary Clark you want to
start.
Thank you members of the
And members should have this
presentation and percent.
Okay so I thank you again for
legislative finance committee or
the revenue stabilization and
tax policy committee but
hopefully will cover a bit of
new detail and we'll look
forward to expanding your
here and I'll respond thank you
Mr sorry I was just I was just
raise my hand to add to the list
when you eventually get there I
didn't mean to throw you off
track madam secretary apologize
group factors affecting the
macro economy the outlook for
some of our largest revenue
sources before turning it over
to secretary Romero to talk
four different state agencies in
the executive as well as the
legislative finance committee.
So when this was released the
timeline the consensus revenue
estimate was wrapped up and
finalized just before
thanksgiving and then promptly
the Omicron Omicron variant was
discovered world oil prices
drop was temporarily temporary
and the price of oil has
basically rebounded and markets
have rebounded as well when we
first presented this to the LFC
in December there was a lot of
subscription economic services
one is moody's analytics the
other is I it H. S. market I
want to cover with you some of
the major assumptions that are
included in their baseline
included and it is that those
would be upside and downside
risks to the forecast the first
of all the moody's forecast for
November twenty twenty one I was
really focused on the delta
but on the contrary interpreters
that might come later and so
that of course did affect the
global economy and still will
continue to for months to come.
The moody's forecast also
supply constraints and frankly
it does get harder to say that
those are transitory issues each
month that goes by that there
continued and I think we will
somewhat since the forecast was
made is that I think generally
economists now think that the
federal act more quickly and
more severely to try to combat
inflationary pressures the most
twenty three about a year from
now notably that forecast both
forecasts do exclude passage of
the federal build back better
legislation I'm so if that
was sort of behind us and that
we would be emerging from COVID.
Next on slide six we look a
little bit at global at I'm
sorry the US economic outlook in
fairly substantially and US GDP
is now right at about the level
it was pre pandemic just about
but there was a small shift
downward from the July forecast
expansion of US GDP.
Next we look at US employment
you can see that again the U. S.
economy lost over twenty two
million jobs at the onset of the
gains we're seeing lately are
fairly broad based but our
strongest in leisure and
hospitality manufacturing
transportation warehousing as
well as professional services
next moving to the New Mexico
economy you know a minute ago I
mentioned that the forecast was
revised downwards slightly for
the national GDP growth it was
experience strong GDP growth
over the forecast period and the
main issue that led to that
larger revision really is just
technical revisions to bureau of
economic analysis data doesn't
compared to the New Mexico right
and read and both peaked at the
onset of the pandemic and have
been steadily coming back down
and actually there's one more
natural unemployment levels over
the forecast period.
Next slide we look at New Mexico
employment by sector and this
so is it was a low point almost
in our state's history has far
as contraction because of the
pandemic so we also provide for
you some verbiage on the right
hand side of this chart about
had increased by three point
nine percent or about thirty one
thousand jobs I'm however if you
compared to one year prior
October twenty nineteen actually
down four point eight percent or
of the pandemic.
Next here's the forecast for a
number for employment recovery
in New Mexico and there's very
little changed versus the July
twenty twenty one forecast the
hundred and four thousand jobs
and we are now expected to reach
that pre pandemic level in late
twenty twenty six that is a
little later than had been
on employment recovery by
industry I will go through this
is all in great detail but you
can basically see that there are
several industries that are
still down significantly but
I'm the next slide demonstrates
the change in oil prices
worldwide in in New Mexico that
expectation has come up pretty
significantly and one of the
of the July forecast so on the
bottom right hand table you can
see the upward revision that was
made for each fiscal years
average oil price and on average
about eight dollars per barrel
not just general fund revenues
but the reserves that receive
windfalls of general fund
revenue.
Next we look a little bit at how
the technology there and rigs
changes so rapidly lately that
it's not even really apples to
apples to compare rig count
today to even probably five
years ago on the technology has
past in the most recent month
charted here in November and
that was still significantly
below where we eat and twenty
nineteen it was rigs are more
productive.
revisions weren't as significant
as they were to the revisions to
prices New Mexico volume did
increase by about twenty two
percent and FY twenty two point
prices and production on the
bottom right you can see the
revisions that were made to the
forecast between August and
December similar to oil the
demand for that natural gas and
some supply constraints that
have also driven prices upward
natural gas tends to price more
regionally than oil I'm having
to do with pipeline constraints
but it underlies something
important about this economic
recovery that I don't want us to
lose sight of
so the good news is that are
withholding has been setting
every pay period so the good
news again is that withholding
is very strong the bad news is
that that's because the jobs
that have been regained the
fastest through the pandemic or
for reasons that are not
economic of those jobs tend to
be hold held more by men than
women and white people and
people of color so I'll I'll
is that it revenues strong but
there is an underlying need for
social safety net that we forget
about.
so here's to start talking about
so you can see the the lowest
wage workers going into the
pandemic are still down five
point eight percent where is the
highest wage workers have
actually seen their wages go up
jobs and have not regain them
they tend to be the lowest wage
workers.
Put another way let's next look
at and gender and color
for communities of color labor
two point seven percent
among Hispanic women for example
league leading the pack on that
decrease of labor force
participation Hispanic women
And then looking at educational
attainment
at those higher wage jobs came
back more quickly and they tend
employment is still down around
eight to ten percent where is
those with a bachelor's degree
or higher have regained just
about all of their job losses.
an underlying weakness in the in
the state economy expected but
there are some changes
legislative changes rolling and
so growth was a really high at
the contraction and pit revenue
that's expected for FY twenty
two and I think that you know
there's a problem really
what's happening there is were
implementing changes to the
revenue being booked as FY
twenty one instead of FY twenty
two and so if you were to care
back those changes would provide
a more typical rate of growth
being bolstered by the new five
point nine percent top marginal
tax rate it's going into effect
and that is applied to about the
three top three percent of
consensus revenue estimating
group but we're we're getting
those works and and I think by
the time we get everything clear
they'll actually be in a much
better position to have granular
of the reports and we're making
sure that the consensus group
has everything they need there
was also the change to
destination based sourcing that
happened statutorily on July
sales.
And of course COVID impact
there's been a lot of federal
funding and other stimulus going
out to prop up the consumption
I'm here we're highlighting
basically for you on the on the
next slide match taxable gross
receipts which is the gross
receipts tax base the last four
months of activity prior to the
retail trade I'm basically
consumers have pent up demand to
buy things and they've been
propped up by federal stimulus
some of the things that they
want to buy however are not
that's the gross receipts tax
based has recovered you can see
that recovery in the steep
uptick in the blue line to the
left but compare that to
employment and you'll see that
rebounding but that rebound is
not felt equally across all
sectors of our demographic.
Next on to talk a little bit
about the gross receipts tax
but in FY twenty two it's also
decreasing by two percent and
that has to do with
it's it's kind of kind of a
of G. R. T. on internet sales
with municipalities where as in
the previous two years when we
were taxing internet sales only
the state right we were simply
distributing a certain amount
settlement payment of fifty
million dollars that was sent to
municipalities and some counties
you might remember that in
November twenty eighteen
settlement payment went out in
recent months and that has a one
time negative effect on FY
twenty two G. R. T..
But in the future your security
markets and then continued broad
based recovery to the economy.
Next we'll turn our attention
for a moment to severance taxes
can just do it for FY twenty one
through twenty three the
forecasts for severance tax
revenues on the left as well as
rents and royalties on the right
and we split that up between
each of these revenue sources a
different five year market value
we're windfalls are transferred
into reserves automatically and
that it had a huge positive
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the Senate finance
committee it's always a pleasure
numbers are actually our actual
audited numbers our reserves
ended at two point five billion
or thirty five percent of
recurring appropriations for FY
twenty two the estimates are
percent but that's before any
legislative action now during
the twenty twenty to legislative
session.
FY twenty three is estimated to
Slide thirty two is the
consensus revenue summary FY
twenty one revenue did not get
to provide as much.
despite a recovering economy and
US secretary Schardin Clarke cop
catch a little bit on some of
the things that it because it
too slow just a little bit of
comprehensive tax rebate and
then also the transfers to the
early childhood Trust Fund began
without adjustments FY twenty
three wouldn't more likely to
number thirty three organs I'm
sorry this is the I'm sorry
hundred seven million in FY
twenty three and two hundred
sixty seven million in FY twenty
four the dotted line represents
the August estimates and you can
percent only eleven percent
eleven million of the fifty four
million is from for oil and gas
industry.
More of the twenty three and
ended up pretty much at the same
place with thirty four thirty
five point four percent reserve
balances FY twenty one reserves
are audited as I mentioned
before
taken by this body.
The next slide is the general
fund general general fund
financial summary and this is
just a recap of the FY twenty
forty four percent in FY twenty
two and you money of one point
six billion dollars.
as we have an optimistic view in
the New Testament thank you
moody's outlook projected
resiliency in August the twenty
twenty one don't think we
reached out
increased and and I think we see
a little bit about.
higher oil prices as demand
increases
up the that OPEC would delay
legislation which we know yes
all.
That's a mistake you the
continue cases COVID cases
increase and now we have areas
that we're considering and and
consideration that OPEC will
increase oil production which
then brings down the price this.
A couple of other risks include.
inflation concerns due to high
labor market labor constraints
on labor market influx could
potentially cause a drop
although I think secretary
increased on the job openings
have reached record highs we saw
that this summer and that we
have a slow employment recovery.
gauge risk and helps plans for
economic crisis or financial
downturn muti conducts a stress
test but encourages each state
to conduct their own.
The strong scenario assumes that
with a ten percent probability
that the national economic will
be stronger resulting in higher
seven cents a barrel in FY
twenty two to sixty six dollars
and fifty cents a barrel in FY
twenty four hi all higher oil
as well as increase the G. R. T.
from Eddy and Lea counties.
And it also has gains in non
energy County.
The moderate scenario and also
ten percent probability.
they range from sixty two
dollars and forty three cents a
barrel to forty eight dollars
forty eight dollars and fifty
cents a barrel in FY twenty four
the five percent probability it
assumes a prices fall to fifty
six dollars and seventy six
cents a barrel in FY twenty two.
Continue to be to a low average
all decline and we experienced a
decline in need he consumer
spending employment and increase
in unemployment
this it also New Mexico also
experienced a decline in G. R.
Slide thirty nine is a ten year
trend graph that shows how far
revenues have deviated.
Revenue fluctuations are
greatest in natural resource
many of us have lived through at
least three different
Here is that we have to actually
it takes a painful cuts in and
this show says that we need that
both healthy reserves and
careful budget planning.
years with revenue above the
trend line may not be
conclude this is the last slides
but breaking loose I want to
draw your attention to slide
forty five.
the sources and uses table for
severance tax and general
obligation bonds.
severance tax bonds for
statewide and local council
projects some of the earmarks
that we that are typically
included severance tax bonds
there's two hundred forty two
water projects and thirty
million each for colonias and
tribal projects you'll also
noted the very top of this chart
that you've bought another
your bonds for conservation
program.
So Mr chair that concludes my
section of the presentation.
legislative finance committee I
speaking to the LFC brief it's
has a blue bar at the top this
is money matters
and I'll do my best not to
repeat a lot of the information
three column you can see that
the December estimate brought up
recurring revenue is two hundred
million dollars about two
hundred million dollars for FY
twenty three on the graph on
that page you can see the make
directly related to oil gas
prices and production so you can
see that most of the increase
about two thirds of that
increases actually driven by oil
and gas related revenues showing
that the increased revenues
stabilization reserve and the
early childhood Trust Fund and
I'll discuss that at the end of
my presentation.
If you'll turn to page two you
can see the general fund
financial summary at the top
the upcoming session and before
the budget plans recommended by
LFC and and the executive
reserves are expected to and at
forty three point nine percent
and FY twenty two and I believe
percent and LFC has those at
thirty point nine percent if
you'll turn to page three you
this is something that's changed
since December that cracked the
top right hand corner showed our
a or I'm sorry inflation is
coming in much higher than we
had expected there some
preliminary reports expecting
December inflation to come out
around eight percent which is
they increase interest rates so
rather than just being three
interest rate hikes this year
there's now expectations that
the federal reserve will hike
interest rates four times so
corner the top three oil
producing states in the country
I like to scrap a lot because it
shows a really telling.
Interesting detail about New
Mexico and that's that we're the
only state to have recovered and
around ten percent from where
they were before the pandemic
North Dakota is that purple line
and they were the second largest
oil producing state before the
pandemic but when prices fell at
has surged past this graph here
shows New Mexico up twenty one
percent for over our pre
pandemic levels surpassing North
Dakota to become the second
largest oil producing state.
orange bars show year over year
percent growth.
Prior to the pandemic you could
see growth averaged around five
percent there of those bars then
the depths of the pandemic to
now so I'd encourage you to look
at that blue line which shows
match taxable gross receipts in
levels.
Ahead of the pandemic we're sort
of steady there you can see that
the page you can see a table
there in the middle FY twenty
two quarter one over FY twenty
one quarter one you can see that
that growth is really being
driven by retail trade and
hardest hits as most people can
get to the stores of course a
lot of that consumption shifted
online and as stimulus payments
came out as strong unemployment
of inflation that we're seeing
consumption isn't slowing down
we're still seeing consumers
accelerate they're spending
especially in retail trade.
recall in the last couple years
you all have made changes so
that the excess of the five year
average of those revenues is
distributed to either the tax
stabilization reserve or the
the way it functions as a sort
of takes the piece off of the
top of those revenues at the top
of the page you can see the blue
lines to the general fund amount
received from the emergency
school tax and the orange bars
estimated to decrease on on that
but because of that
functionality because of that
excess of the five year average
that you all implemented the
general fund is actually
estimated to continue to grow
and you can see for the
impact of the volatility in that
sector you can see the same
thing happening in the middle of
the page with federal mineral
leasing payments for FY twenty
three to FY twenty four the
fund that that reform has had at
the bottom of the page you can
see that graph shows the some of
the two in FY twenty two you can
see where estimating one point
five billion dollars to reach
the early childhood Trust Fund.
corporate income taxes the red
bars show the impact of film tax
credits in FY twenty one you can
see that the film tax credits
strong pretty significantly
industry to return to pre
pandemic levels and you can see
the impact of those estimated
credits from FY twenty two
through FY twenty six that blue
middle of that page this shows
the legislative changes to
personal income tax as a
secretary Schardin Clarke
mentioned from FY twenty one FY
twenty two you see a jump in
the reason why you see the FY
twenty two personal income tax
collections decline over FY
twenty one not because of a
other underlying economic
factors which would otherwise
top of our mind.
Back when we did this estimate
in December Omicron was just
coming out and oil prices fell
pretty dramatically at the
industry is always a.
A primary concern and risk to
the forecast both on the upside
and the downside.
And of course inflation as as I
If you turn to page eleven the
graph the top shows the
consensus revenue estimating
groups stress test which we
shows what we estimate the
impact could be if the economic
recovery proved to be more
robust than the baseline you can
see that the general fund could
stand receive up to three
hundred forty million dollars
to interject here thank you very
much Senator Rodriguez because I
want to make sure the public
have the hand out on the screen
because what we see that we I am
on there for the public if we
can move forward as you share
the screen thank you Senator
they are tracking that on our
senator thank you Mr chairman
of.
So it's going back to the stress
test the two downsides in areas
that were considered by the
group were a moderate recession
and a low oil price and
production scenario
the middle of the page if I
could point you to that first
light blue line you can see the
estimated general fund impact
from the baseline in the case of
point five billion dollars and
this is even with the benefit of
those excess distributions by
making those excess
distributions you actually
insulate the general fund from
the downside risk in a
significant way if you all
to last line in that table you
can see that those distributions
to the early childhood Trust
Fund actually bear about seventy
percent of the bird in in that
downside scenario in FY twenty
low oil price and production
scenario.
If you'll turn to page eighteen
of I'll go over couple last
charts before closing up here.
the dotted red line shows the
general fund reliance on the oil
and gas industry if those
distributions those excess of
the five year average
distributions were never
industry because of that reform
that you all have implemented.
and and lastly it if you could
turn to page nineteen I
mentioned a lot about these
received by that fund or or the
ending down to that fund is
estimated to be over two billion
dollars in FY twenty two and
that's significant to point out
as the programmatic uses the
distributions from this trust
Thank thank you isn't I will go
to questions before we begin the
the next part of the
presentation Senator Candelaria
Candelaria go ahead thank you Mr
chairman I'm gonna go to for
questions so after the next
presentation the interest of
time but I do want to thank
secretary Romero and Schardin
Clarke for is always an
Any other questions all right
secretary sorry I was muted US
Mexico as well in a curious are
you saying lower actual total
job numbers in those sectors.
across many sectors at the onset
of the pandemic but of those
initial job losses the ones that
have come back the fastest tend
to be in the higher wage sectors
and hospitality things like that
so we're we're seeing that the
wages have been lower as well as
the number of jobs.
Okay thank you for that and and
what I'm hearing you say that
it's kind of breaking news in a
way is that we in fact have
lower numbers of total jobs in
certain sectors than we did
for social safety net which you
know I've I've talked about in
revenue estimate presentations
previously I mean I think it's
easy for us is the general fund
to support those lower income
folks who have had a long job
losses thank you for no I I I
hear it is probably not breaking
news to you but I it's it's news
are actually hurting a lot and
it's not just because G. times
are here they just can't
employ people to just or fewer
jobs actually answer sectors
Abbey had taught us years ago
and I don't know that is really
relevant now but that New Mexico
has never had more than three
years in a row or at least in
modern history of continued
show that so as we look out at
these very rosy scenarios about
possible growth historically
speaking never gone more than
three years without having a bus
trajectory but that's all I have
thank you very much thank you
secretary.
Thank you Senator Steinborn
Senator share.
Anything do you have anybody
else.
certainly in
in what Senator Steinborn was
talking about.
It appears that the the people
is not growing and I'm not sure
exactly why.
because we see help wanted signs
in a lot of places I just the
other day I was at sonic and
they said all the stalls were
actually in the place the one
making the food in one taking
the orders.
So there's plenty of of work out
there and I also don't think
that it's necessarily just low
wages
Certainly wages have gone up
wages have gone up mostly
because they're trying to get
people to come to work.
Pays more than fifteen dollars
an hour so why should I go to
work.
I also think there's a problem
about then of getting jobs and
women not and and I just don't
believe that it's purely because
of hatred of women or misogyny
or bigotry or whatever I think
What everybody wishes were not
of most often it's mom that's
taking care of the kids so I
think that's that's out there in
it's just.
we also talked about job loss of
in local government.
Again in Farmington of the
swimming pools weren't open
Guards today and as someone who
likes to swim
that's that's becoming a
problem.
Of it in it's the same with
people taking care the parks and
all the other things that
I would caution us to not take
these.
Well the facts and figures are I
I don't disagree with that all.
There may be more to this than
Especially with the delivery
instead of the way the business
is that's had a serious negative
impact on a lot of cities
especially cities that have oil
But all the holes they poking
grounder in the county and so
now the counties getting all of
that revenue and the city's art
and I don't think we can fix our
While the internet taxes
certainly help cities a lot of
the fact that we've that we've
moved to a lot of other things
out I think it's a problem so
would like to say that we need
other eyes on it we talked about
earlier
on what this data really means
to.
of disappointed The presentation
because it wasn't updated from
the LFC racks in the twenty
twenty two on page three at our
page I am sorry nothing was
get a new one in the middle of
a.
Next month for the first part of
next month on revenue forecast
let me ask you some questions
how much do you weigh in on
Neither secretary can answer.
Mr chairman I just wanted to
mention about the forecast it is
the
hasn't changed too much I
checked in with taxed
Representative chief economist
about that yesterday for example
and there are some areas are
tracking a little stronger a
looking at potential mid session
update if necessary and then I
might go to smile about the
inflationary question as far as
expected inflation or we expect
inflation to be about five
percent and FY twenty two we
currently might be tracking a
little bit higher than that and
that would be changed from
December.
In and so let me ask you a
question.
Everybody under the FedWatch I
mean there's a roll of I think
volumes and then the slow down
to the new forecast.
Sure Mr chair.
watch sort of savings rates
Consumer debt things like that
which are what you mentioned
velocity of money indicators.
And madam secretary does
because the supply chain to
increase prices and inflation
setting in and so as as supply
goes down and demand goes up
on on the reduction I don't
think the feds are going to pass
a new package for a while if any
right thank the federal reserve
said we're not adding any new
the second and third quarter of
next year.
And how did you way that and.
Mr chairman thank you for that
question I'd like to pause for a
were had across the whole
consensus group.
Yes Mr chairman this is we'll go
to the comments for the
appendix to at like to point out
some of the indicators there
like CPI wages and salaries and
personal income and you can see
three we must definitely monitor
those indicators and I come
through.
the data as our national
forecasters report.
and you can see there
so for members what page number
you tracking for that.
Side note is an appendix that
would be appendix two Mr
Chairman
exactly what you're describing
where you see spikes in personal
income with those federal
packages stimulus payments and
then you can see in twenty
twenty two it drops
next question with the the
settlement is pending new money
one point six billion coming to
market how did you guys decide
on the reserve level.
forecasting their stress testing
get to number that says if if
all things happen this is what
it's going to be did you target
presentation today was really
just about incoming Revenue and
so it doesn't go further than
that in to reserve targeting or
reserve level that you should be
looking at to to to fund your
general fund even exacted the
next presentations on spending I
mean so maybe that question one
answer in the next presentation
that you see in there
let me ask you one more thing
madam secretary how many and we
settle the municipal league
What is the dollar amount that
is outstanding out there that
could be protested over the next
year maybe they're not gonna win
a mall but they may not win
fifty percent
Mr chair let me look that up
while we're on here I know that
they the amount that's currently
under protest is over four
million but not of all not all
of that sits in taxed
Representative support a lot of
And while you're doing that
maybe we can answer that the
next presentation we can just
and move on but it's just.
Economics is were all thrown
with the governors of
recommendations of the property
R. eight secretary on the
number.
Right and it quicker than I hope
sixty one point five million
that's under tax dispute but
I've that a hundred and sixty
six cases totaling three hundred
and twenty nine.
the administrative hearing
officer District Court court of
appeals or Supreme Court.
And madam secretary do do you
put a percentage on what may
Five percent in these cases
maybe one andpercent.
Mr chair on.
I I believe maybe once or twice
Enough and you know I when it
was decided it's going to be
expected to go all in one
direction but most of it
it's it's floating out there and
we know that the reserves are
probability to it now.
But it's it's still liability
that that we should be forecast.
Madam secretary Romero do you
with me today he is going to
share the screen with a
presentation and Dr Paul I talk
because I can't do two things at
one time so
delivered you yesterday or on
Friday so that.
There's some things that I'd
like to bring to your attention
in this document are table one
which begins on on page thirty
executive recommendation and
that includes all funding
sources.
on page forty seven that's
proposed language on that that
Madam secretary at all here in
the book you're not on the
presentation so it right.
Yeah just to give you pages
Those members that are here that
there is a there's a book and I
don't think you've got it maybe
get to get online we'll check in
so you may track that in the
book compared to the
going through the pages of the
book other than to give you
those reference points and we
did email the it and also find
you a hard copy so
give thanks to the Martinez the
acting deputy cabinet secretary
of state budget division
director
the in laws and also Dr Andrew
operational things that DFA is
responsible for.
Next line so so just an overview
we're gonna be talking about
recurring spending on
categories this is a very high
level
overview of what is included in
the executive recommendation you
will be learning more about
So recurring spending for the
including the executive
recommendation
just want to point out that the
recurring spending about
thirteen little over thirteen
percent up to eight point four
billion and the FY twenty one
General Fund in the reserve
for FY twenty two or out is
actually two point eight billion
or thirty eight percent you ask
about I think I heard you ask a
recurring spending we always
want to be you know aware of
that everything we have this is
going to be the budget moving
agencies budgets by madam so
what we thought that thirteen
point thirteen percent are was
it was a good target and and and
we definitely met that that
goal.
Next slide please.
On the general fund high level
just of again you know that the
executive recommendation the
of one billion.
Health and Human Services
agencies two point two billion
public safety is about four
hundred ninety nine million
commerce and industry ninety
and forty million and that all
of those total up to be eight
point four billion dollar
recommendation.
Education you know the total
includes the shifting of the
tears for teacher salaries to
fifty sixty and seventy thousand
and then also gives a seven
percent increase for all school
anticipated insurance increases
I can tell you that there are
definitely differences in the
what a teacher's aide for
insurances and that that really
School district's largest school
districts that APS for example
has lower rates in some of our
rural districts and so that we
also we take that all into
consideration there's ninety
of eleven point four million or
fifteen the early literacy and
reading support program.
And then there's eight million
for Martinez Yazzie student and
recommendation is ten million
four before and after school and
summer enrichment programs but
all of that funding is from the
public education reform Fund.
point six million for tribal
early childhood investments
million for pay equity for
private pre K. teachers as well
as two million four hundred
also have three hundred fifty
new private pre K. slots at
three point one million and
almost seven hundred sixty seven
thousand four regional letters
recommendations include funding
for
Schools recruit schools and run
there's actually four recruit
schools into lateral schools
includes you know the point the
current explained his
dispatchers and transportation
inspectors and it also includes
disability in staff to support
state police on in the amount of
for a vendor reentry supports
the program as well.
Want to talk to to little bit
about of the distribution to
fire departments there's
eighteen point two million to
to facilities and there's nine
hundred eighty thousand dollars
to address probation and parole
officer vacancy rates and then
also to provide additional life
this is something that is
matched by the federal
government so it's a one to
three match so for every so for
three hundred thousand dollars
we can count on about nine
there's six million dollars in
okay tap in this in the
executive recommendation and
recurring there's also
nonrecurring
request for an additional seven
inclusion minority business
office
four hundred thousand dollars
for business incubator grants
five hundred thousand dollars to
six point five and two point
three million are each needed
there are on the and and the
need for the cannabis programs
and then finally we have one
Thank you services we want to
see increases to the waiver
provider rate so at requesting a
I'm.
Ninety eight as a three digit
number I think all of us are
aware that now we have to dial
ten digits and and that was all
coverage for post partum
to from sixty days to twelve
months and that the faster that
is fourteen point four million
dollars.
Others need to enhance
services for two million and
also sixty five million of other
state funds for health care
affordability.
For the health care
affordability.
eighty five point five for
opportunity scholarships.
we current that that that'll
actually support thirty five
thousand college and career
million this will actually blow
through the I. N. G. formula.
the due credit program ten
million dollars there's more
graduate from college
so the.
This will provide academic and
that will actually result in a
college degree rather than just
taking an arbitrary classes some
some more emphasis on on I'm
that the dual credit program has
ranged in the past in the place
from four hundred sixty one
thousand two to six million so
college courses and get college
degrees or certificates.
The help adult education.
Okay good tire adult basic
some of more using fund balance
a couple are are the general
fund
so we know that.
American Indian Education Act of
two hundred fifty thousand and
two new programs five hundred
thousand for their centers of
excellence in early childhood
Environment Department the
the oil conservation dition
Division to address the backlog.
Two point three million dollars
just to the state engineers
office for to address climate
Environment Department.
There's we also are recommending
two point five million dollars
for climate change barrel at the
New Mexico environment
department and then also and
The next slide is the
compensation slide so the
recommendation the second
recommendation is asking for
four hundred four million
hundred and one almost three
hundred two million dollars.
the state general salary plan of
thirty seven point seven just
the general fund all these folks
And it also includes a seven
percent increase but the the
plant that this this photo have
developed will actually result
consideration the combo rate
general and also the the the
ranges and they do calculations
off of those to determine how
those salary increases should be
well as apps we WA.
We touched a little bit earlier
about the state police pay plan
it's a three part plan so it's
to job longevity eight so in
total is nearly twenty percent
for the state police eight one.
simple stated judicial
five and exam legislative and
judicial is fourteen point seven
percent so Mister chairman we
didn't the executive
being proposed is going to
address a lot of the issues that
some of these other agencies are
having so we didn't see the need
almost seven hundred twenty
seven million dollars for FY
twenty two and twenty three
the recommendation includes four
hundred and forty two in FY
twenty two and two hundred
governor's proposal four hundred
million for a ten year public
safety initiative.
tourism were requests
recommending twenty million for
nonrecurring for Lida and that
he had mentioned earlier that
the Jacob funding for seven
million dollars.
also included this year is
Then we have one forty million
observation easements and forced
watershed restoration and eleven
million for state police to
education reform Fund of career
technical education ten million
maybe six school district for
eight million and the teacher
executive is recommending
fourteen million dollars that
will be allocated to aid
something this session and and
moving forward there was a
strategic plan that was
developed by the food farming
hunger steering committee they
state agencies are involved
farmers and ranchers were
involved in Christian sessional
speedy based nonprofit
organizations state legislators
and we have some other food
attention was chair is you know
it's anticipated that decimated
that twelve million males are
missing or and food insecure
individuals in New Mexico that
fifteen point four percent and
then we're the third highest in
the child.
Of food insecurity at twenty
three point eight percent that's
nearly six percent higher than
and that's more than three times
the amount that Colorado
Experiences so it is chairman
is a chart or a good description
of who will be getting the money
and what services they will find
it be providing on the slide I
that one
that shows you how the will be
district are the funding will be
distributed to the.
for the hunger initiative Mr
chair that concludes my
presentation.
Appropriations and Senate
finance ordinarily we would
introduce them.
Of in.
Following this presentation will
do a little orientation toward
agency report cards for the
larger agencies performance
reports.
I would encourage you to read
this at your convenience the
program the category amounts and
narratives explaining step from
statutory authority to
discussing performance to
reporting other state funds and
documents are here Mister solely
will present the highlights of
the LFC recommendation which are
in volume one and then I'll wrap
it up with a few comments that
I don't believe it's on trials
and we have to great
technology on these and that and
all the money.
You may have to just hold with
your hand if you can I don't.
You can see in the upper right
hand corner the breakdown of LFC
is general fund recommendation
by major sector spending.
the staff in the committee in
the fall and those guidelines
start the discussion about that
start on the bottom of page one
the special session and undo all
the great things that you had
done
unprecedented revenue growth
total projected new money as you
didn't allocate all of that that
funding in its recommendation.
The priorities for the committee
were to provide opportunities
for strategic growth in programs
those questions of whether the
probation that you're making
House Bill to actually make a
meaningful difference in the
lives of New Mexicans and you
have a set of criteria that the
committee followed to try to
for New Mexicans or that they
could if implemented correctly
in New Mexico state prioritize
spending things on what works in
areas of public education health
You also recognize the committee
were of recognize that
there were still some solvency
measures built into the current
your budget that would need to
cost center for doing this back
filling in the budget is for
Medicaid we've experienced
and enhanced federal matching
almost a hundred thousand extra
New Mexicans on the program that
we weren't anticipating that are
going to be on we don't
anticipate all of them will be
leaving overnight and there will
just one example of backfilling
the other are a priority for the
committee was dealing with other
unfunded liabilities one of the
biggest ones is our teacher
guidelines and our priorities.
The committee also had specific
guidelines and recommendations
to spend the federal arpa state
relief funds so the committee's
the fall you did you advance the
some of that spending proposal
in the special session and
they're still a good chunk of
the State really funds that need
funds throughout the fall
came in at about almost eight
point five billion and
interestingly enough that's
about what LFC recommended
couple of days is the LFC
repressed really prioritized
compensation for public
employees to be more competitive
our economy is probably at full
important government functions
so agencies the what you'll hear
is asking for more money for
unfilled positions.
You'll hear it all the way down
budget and yet they're asking
for even more on top of that so
that's where you'll see HSD come
in for a really big requests
they're asking for a lot of new
to come work for the state an
important fields whether that's
education
our state hospitals and the
like.
that frontier is soaring and
it's already doing what you
intended which is to provide
taken unstable revenue source
and stabilize it coming back in
for a priority for the
recommending to increase that
further through legislation to
forty million
and start using some of that
balance for the a variety of
pre K.
as well as some other work for
supports so you don't need to
spend a lot of general you don't
really need to spend very much
at all the general fund in this
under the LFC recommendation
a lot of that would Grove
children's behavioral health
services expand domestic
violence prevention and other
community oriented supports so
that children and families get
the help that they need and and
don't require foster care or
experience physical abuse.
at about twelve point two
percent.
Or about four hundred twenty one
million and recurring revenue
there's another a nonrecurring
that money into
the state equalization guarantee
the funding formula for a
variety of things under a
framework that the committee has
first is making investments in
high quality teaching and school
leadership the second is
extended learning opportunities
particularly for at risk
students the third is having
accountability that these
investments result and improve
student outcomes.
And so under that first plank
significant investments in
teacher compensation.
salaries to about fifty one
sixty one and seventy one
thousand dollars that would be
partial that's about a twenty
four percent increase in minimum
The extended learning approach
that the committee took I heard
a lot of feedback from public
school folks it would provide a
universal extended learning
that have struggled to implement
the program by providing
flexibility measures if you're a
high performing district you can
convert the the instructional
If you're a medium to small
school district there is
additional funding and the
recommendation as basically for
extended learning a size
adjustment factor for extended
And then for all other districts
that are struggling to implement
this they could convert half of
the half of the a new
flexibility measures.
The recommendation also
increases funds for the Indian
to go into the instruction in
general category to support
institutions main educational
mission there are some targeted
heavily on those as well as some
other targeted initiatives
including one point seven five
for tribal education initiatives
in higher education one point
teacher education programs in
higher education as well as to
support financially people who
want to become teachers there's
virtually no financial barrier
to becoming a teacher in New
Mexico with this budget
Human Services Department you
heard me talk about most of the
money in the Medicaid
recommendation is to back fill
in support of the enrollment
who right now get kicked off of
Medicaid after sixty days after
they give birth this would
extend that care to be able to
engage in services like home
visiting for a full year.
that are recommended as well
behavioral health the
recommendation fully funds the
Medicaid behavioral health
program it also has some
targeted General Fund support
in
The Medicaid program as well as
supporting expansion of some
evidence based behavioral health
interventions.
The health department
That plan would be implemented
primarily with using enhanced
federal funding that the state's
going to be getting over the
next couple of years and then
if that portion of that plan
goes forward that's great if it
doesn't then we've got a
financial plan to help phase in
general fund support over the
next couple years and not have a
judiciary it's about a five
percent increase overall for the
judiciary judiciary is a good
example of where in addition to
for judges and for some
according to Louise for a rural
public defenders as well as
rural and district attorneys.
Public safety
police officer pay as well as
additional recruits schools
corrections department
throughout the budget you'll see
a pretty dramatic changes in
fewer kids in foster care many
of the started well before the
pandemic and corrections has had
its massive drop in prison
population and also started.
programs as well as maybe take
some of the money out of their
the corrections department and
put it into other more effective
a public safety measures like
and protectors and public
safety.
And then let me wrap up
some of the highlights on a
compensation so the LFC if your
scale that back or eliminated
for most employees LFC
recommendation is for the this
fiscal year to start a three
percent compensation increase at
that's a I have a seven percent
into the agencies operating
budgets there's also some
targeted increases for the lower
wage public employees including
there's also a scheduled one
percent increase in employer E.
R. B. contributions that's and
on the books right now the LFC
recommendation is to do an
If you turn to this handout.
That is in front of you
hopefully.
On page.
For there's an inverted
triangle.
recommendation does not spend
all of that.
The LFC recommendation ends ends
up spending about fourteen
percent on the recurring budget
government spending about three
percent of its for the
compensation four the the
compensation for FY twenty three
and about three percent are
Of nonrecurring spending because
there's oddly enough more
nonrecurring spending in this
budget year than there is
twenty five percent because of
the kind of volatility that we
continue to experience we're on
the upswing right now
that you could do out of the
general fund.
Then the committee also had a
plan for using the arpa funds
that the state received both in
them all together to see how how
the full picture comes together
and this is an example of that
so in transportation there's
about for almost five hundred
and supporting local roads the
column to the right of that is
what you have already done
during the special session and
then the column to the right of
that total need to implement the
Economic development broadly
there's almost six hundred forty
eight million in economic
development related initiatives
everything from broadband to
grants that higher education
institutions maybe bringing
additional federal revenue to
the state there's a hundred
fifteen million for water
infrastructure projects
including eliminating the
water programs
that would then increase their
capacity to serve more of your
communities to improve drinking
water.
Finally in in this broad
of the real jobs and natural
resource improvement in the
special session but there still
another fifty three million in
the LFC recommendation for
funding the lottery scholarship
for the next four to possibly
six years depending on how that
the cost structure works out the
opportunity scholarship that the
needs including for teachers
behavioral health workers like
social work and for nursing
you've done some of the nursing
during the special session.
one that will need further
consideration is how to assist
hospitals with some of the
staffing issues that they've got
going on right now and there's
about online forty six twelve
four hundred twenty million the
normal specials and
supplementals online fifty nine
some of these other items like
malpractice liability twenty
million dollars state matching
funds for District Court
upgrades if if legislation can
pass so LFC had about two point
through FY twenty five
And then you all did about four
hundred seventy eight million of
it plus some additional items
that leave reserves that about
thirty percent after all that
spending is taken into account.
I'll turn it back over to the.
Don't worry about it so there we
go we've better horizontal now.
FY sixteen to the present the
volatility of general fund
revenues and spending.
And the the point being bombs
are nice but downturns have been
wrenching for the state
downturns like in June of twenty
percent really tough tough
decisions to make a year and a
half ago in about twenty
seventeen a new legislature came
in and had to unwind a
slight is some caution is in
order when we see downturns of
the magnitude that are shown on
the slide second Mr Slee talked
about already the fourteen
restoring pay it turns out to be
modest growth in overall
spending for person if not in
dollar terms of certainly in
the federal revenue looking at
fund balances in general we want
to save those options to stretch
the dollars for the lean times
well this is million times this
recommendations for the key
agencies and.
One of the biggest differences
between the LFC and executive
recommendation is for Medicaid a
Medicaid budget certainly
there's there's some uncertainty
about how how long the actor
federal funding will come in.
But sooner or later we can
effect is allowing a higher
increases for many agencies we
count about a hundred million of
increases and they're they're
gonna come in agency after
agency and saying we need a lot
up public education very close
and even some of the details
Mister secretary Steinhaus was
an HFC yesterday you'll see him
elements the differences are are
not great higher ed a big
difference are mainly in the
opportunity scholarship.
I want to ask.
Some differences in compensation
you've heard that the seven the
percent I don't know why they
only want for for the
legislature but
and we would.
Treated equal branch of
government and the same with the
recurring appropriations that's
the differences between special
appropriations are significant
the executive has about seven
hundred and thirty million of
special supplemental
appropriation to start recurring
program subset certainly has a
role from time to time to start
a pilot program but when a
proliferates again it's imposing
a cost in the future that you
The total revenues and some
areas like natural resources I'm
pretty sure the engineer and
The our energy minerals
fund it's higher overall but the
end the engineer.
and.
Environment thank you done.
that in our volume three but is
even even as we have spending up
across broad swaths of
government workload is down.
Public school enrollment higher
And so that's that's certainly a
factor you want to look at the
number of people getting served
as these budgets increase.
Mr Saly talked about we don't
time to look at it NMSA chapter
six section three this is the
budget act on this to find parts
of the budget and clearly we
would hope to see budget
recommendations for the for the
there are government will face
real challenges filling the
positions you're gonna hear
later this afternoon for Mr
Conner Jorgensen he's gonna talk
about the LFC methodology for
on Friday unemployment was down
to three point nine percent New
Mexico is down to six point two
percent was over ten in the
earlier in the pandemic
information technology and
project management I would
submit were full employment in
New Mexico so managers will be
hard pressed to grow employment
Because of Mr Torres helped me
out a little bit but if you look
at volume one.
Page.
So.
That red color is downside risk
the later red color is upside
risk.
three to twenty four is.
Two point eight billion which is
about two point six billion is
the general fund reserve
And remember to we want reserves
for other reasons just then to
just cover revenue shortfalls we
Tort claims against the state or
A tax litigation that would
cause a loss of revenue so and
finally general fund reserves at
serve our purpose of liquidity
structure tends to get revenues
at the end of the month taxes
are due on the twenty fifth.
But spending occurs at the
beginning of the month the first
question in our treasury for
liquidity purposes to pay the
bills on a daily basis so Mr
chairman I think we'll stop
right there and answer questions
thank you.
Thank you.
initiatives are or what is the
process for applying for that.
Mister mayor how would you like
me to address you that's my
first question.
little blue car that that that's
there and
just tell us your guidelines and
how you
plan on
Vetting those for.
we're gonna I'm here now we got
you we got you know want to hear
those words ever again but I
guess I'm going to you're on
mute
the hearing today and I'm happy
to be here okay here's or did I
start in November one the there
are three of us will be handling
infrastructure myself Mike
factors in Taos and living in
Kerala's now.
Very much an engineer type
management is coming to us from
Illinois he's an expert in
broadband he'll be heading
you also appropriated all
throughout a half a billion
dollars this last special
session no three point seven
billion in the I. AJ or
bipartisan infrastructure bill
and then of course the severance
spending at the end of the day
this is been said the governor's
a decider in chief I'm just an
advisor but I'm happy to be
doing this and to help
probably didn't in the beginning
of the.
The in in the special session.
But then the three point seven
the bipartisan infrastructure
bill is far more complicated
immediate money summer three
years or five year and so
breaking that down in lan
Leising it is not a simple task
it's we've been very busy
working on that I've been
I offer to come up and sit next
to everyone sit next to me but
nobody nobody wants to next to
me right now
and and so what I did a sense
that this is because the
governor's secretary charges to
we know and is a former
legislator I know that there's
going funding money to go back
to service the needs of local
constituents of the pocket park
sent it to us because we all
know it is a great return on
investment if we can put in make
Mexicos mayors we hope to put in
person this morning we made to
the nation is just not safe
right now so that will be done
virtually and that's part of the
ship of the New Mexico municipal
league and they will be there
the department cabinet
secretaries will be presenting
process next week with county
government any managers county
chairs and as we work our way
about a this is a good idea and
one it's actually been that it
maybe it's Project this in
design maybe it's an expansion
of the airport well but they
were designed to have the funds
from senator Schumer they want
the money out the door as
quickly as possible it is
meaningful way as possible so
some of the early money's easy
we want to do it in a way that
is equitable so it's not just
the high income areas of the
state I can only speak briefly
about a broadband but as we know
instrumented and that is the
lack of taciti in smaller
governments in rural New Mexico
commend each member of the
an excellent recitation of need
in rural New Mexico the wrong
broadband and water
and what we've learned is is
that obviously and we kind of
quarter I don't leave any money
in Washington.
Into once we get it we don't
revert any of that's a cent in
take the money spend it if
you're not gonna spend it don't
take it and so in that regard
passively we know that the
agency believes adding that has
to do we know that major
universities which cities have
it rural New Mexico does not
have we wanna make sure that is
available to them so that they
have the capacity to either
apply for the grant let's say I
work Madam so in that regard the
council's government are
emerging is very critical
implementing the money.
We are and this is me speaking
as a former mayor of we want to
get the money out the door so if
there's a way to expedite that
the governor speaks with the
mayors on Friday she will be
asking them to speak with
clarity is what it is they want
with interest because clearly as
possible as to what we need from
we can expedite that we can save
the process and get it out the
door we have a grant program is
necessary fine if it's not let's
get the data let's make the
decisions is it the money spent
will have priority but I'm
headed up to the house of next
week assuming I'm not contracted
the of COVID to really take a
legislature our enthusiastic
also let's see does it work but
can it be brought to fruition in
a meaningful I'm trying to
actually put again that money to
and I will look forward to
continuing that conversation
the underlying challenge that
the governor's given to me or
with each other so we're gonna
work with you where we don't
have an answer will be the first
to say we don't have the answer
and some of those we don't have
it on some of these federal
funding they have developed the
about that and so what I'm
looking for it and and I think
you'll appreciate how this works
is that looking for the
relationships the personalities
means where we can hello lever
the actual priorities for how
are but in the I. AJ money's
gonna be spent I don't pay
attention to build back better
because it hasn't asked so why
just kind of stand aligned cast
a committee members have a
question for you
I know senator Candelaria you
had a question earlier you
wanted to hold over.
More now I see your hand raised
rig.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
have a question I just wanted to
you were flying I think you were
that Lana when that when we talk
or somewhere along the now this
is my first airplane trip in two
and a half years okay well there
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Padilla you're
next.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you all for your
you know the figures thrown
around we did our work during
the special we didn't do you
know all of the amount that was
kind of being requested what
Defer to David Abbey on this but
I believe you still have a half
a billion dollars.
In arguments and three point
seven billion dollars not alter
I appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Senator Padilla we we we do have
an answer for you Charles are
you because you an answer that
but so during the special
contingency fund so that
transfer needs to occur in the
next week or so the legislature
then appropriated.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Sally thank you Mr mayor so I
guess the follow up to that
would be we we went through an
we have now to help us with a
lot of this
you know to to prioritize and to
provide information on what
we're calling transformative
projects also have you been
briefed on the Mr more I don't
committee but I think it might
be a good idea for you to maybe
be briefed on a few of those
because there are some pretty
big ticket items there I've I've
submitted you know how shy I am
this money is because we would
hate to you know have to send
the money back you when we have
an opportunity to do some really
big things in New Mexico.
Right now for to.
Thank you Mr chairman of the I
guess the question I've got.
Is if I understood this right.
This variety is that right is it
did I hear that right Mr chair
Senator Woods it's my
understanding the governor's
gonna have a nation have with
On their initiatives for your
capital might be pretty close to
the same of what's on there I
see I the less than what's been
what's ready to go and so she's
have priority for cities and and
I guess just cities in that
meeting.
Okay I think I understand.
Keep the hammer known point
here.
That the.
Two hundred fifty million for
Medicaid.
From what I understand this
money is to be made up and it
will probably be last us
through.
August.
Misinterpreting what I heard on
that Mr chair and and Charles.
You may have to explain it to me
difference on the Medicaid racks
of for us.
Or or what are you trying to
yeah that's us for us on on they
public health emergency that the
health and Human Services
department declares at the
federal level that triggers the
increase in the federal matching
And then that
money that the federal
government would no longer be
sending to New Mexico would need
to be replaced with general fund
in FY twenty three budget.
supplemental need goes down.
And and hi and there's a lot of
uncertainty then thrown into the
budget for FY twenty three on
when that would and you don't
want to over appropriate if
revenue as opposed to having to
deal with it through a special.
Okay.
Think of good it may hit a
little bit better.
I had about seven
superintendents.
Small schools asked me about so
I hate to ask it at this point
but if I don't I'm gonna get
crucified back home.
In those REC I was told work
that.
Twenty thirty percent.
And.
Well go ahead Charles you Mr
chairman Mister chairman Senator
the REC are primarily funded
either through grants that they
received from PED or from
More than a decade ago to help
them with cash flow issues so
everybody gets a little bit a
piece of that million dollars
the LFC budget and the executive
from a reduction in some grant
that they might be receiving or
from some contracted in my
receipt be receiving is not
because of the recommendations
of the executive or the LFC.
Okay.
I don't see anybody else's hand
raised.
Madam secretary Romero I want to
go through some of the executive
director.
So Mr chair I'm sure that there
have been some reversions
I I just want to remind members
personnel costs and so and the
whole idea was to get money
reverted to the general fund and
so there may be a little bit of
that I think there were also
talking so there's because of
but because we're shut down or
now we're limited in the number
of people in offices so there
make sure that they can explain
what the reversions consisted up
and why they may have perhaps
larger version.
Thank you and then I want to go
version of twenty two million
one year fifteen million next
year I just want to make sure
that we're not over
appropriating to these agencies
that well we have the money that
A of not for for teachers but
statewide compensation.
We've had a conversation with
with a few people.
And so you have a fifteen dollar
because in in some of our
conversations of how do you
create the balance of the
fifteen dollar increase and hold
some employees
that yes so you know the first
and foremost it was is getting
everybody up to fifteen dollars
an hour and then you have to
deal with compaction issues that
definitely takes that into
consideration and provides the
scaling they actually have
documents that can show you how
making larger are having that
have are at higher salaries are
going to see much lower impact
to their salaries and and that's
the way it really should be so
it deals with compaction that
somebody mentioned that there
was a presentation to you to the
Senate finance committee on the
LLC's proposal I would love to
compaction issue with with the
with the rates and how we're
gonna hire the vacancy tells us
that and the ability to hire new
forward is is how we fix those
pay bands four agencies to hire.
Employees and I've said that
through the LFC almost all
them so we'll get with you and
try to schedule that I want to
ask you about educational pain
creases I see the seven percent
are six month contract janitors
cooks and our own six month
contract how do we increase
their pay so at the end of the
day maybe they're working two
to be in the classroom as
executive looked at any of that
pay then pression and how we fix
the even the eighties.
teachers and people leaving has
executive look at fixing any of
those issues.
Mr chair thank you for the
question so the seven percent
as a best practice in working
with the and and do the same
thing with education at this
point we haven't done that we
have done that kind of knowledge
to see how we can get them the
employees across the board and
then I think hoping the next
step is that we roll that same
idea forward with with public
schools but I can tell you that
Thank you Mr chairman yeah I I
it talking with my
superintendent there are
certain instructors teachers it
within systems that are are not
we're we're we don't employ them
was there any kind of mechanism
built in to make sure that
they're compensated
equitably so that we don't start
a salary increase we're what we
presented to you today is the
general fund but we have another
table that includes what we call
Department that have been open
and and federal funds
expectation is that that they
cover that that that some
present for their the federal
employees I'm not sure how far
appreciate that I'm hoping there
will be some some discussion
again they're not state
employees I understand that but
but when you get it pay inequity
other we start losing those
folks as well if there's some
provide some additional monies
to help pay for that if there's
a mechanism built in since we're
we're we're increasing the rate
dramatically the maybe we should
madam chair and thank you Mr Mr
Chairman.
Thank you madam secretary let me
ask you some other questions we
know we have a problem in our
these increases sometimes for
municipalities well a lot of
municipalities on independent.
As we move along if health
insurance I'm gonna use a six
eighteen percent increase that's
been picked up by the state all
along and then please never
picked up it's gonna be sticker
shock.
At it's really a caution to.
some point where they retire
whether they.
We quit doing it.
There will be a real sticker
PSA I I think that Albuquerque
has a lower rate we're gonna
have to really look at those
maybe in the sixty day session
of next year and how we make
those those adjustments and so
transformational that I see in
this section of the the general
fund budget.
Cannabis and
that dollar amount that the
executive may have expected in
cannabis.
Mr chair I know that there of
has trended down but I don't
have the exact number right now
so if you wouldn't mind please
allow me to get back to you with
what we think Representative
Recognize the revenue for while
and so we need to be able to get
these departments up and running
and then what's that they're up
and running the program of the
have to fund these agencies so
they can do their job.
In M. was brought to my
attention it's the revenue
estimates are now down to about
forty five million that they're
supposed to be our lifeline
we'll see what happens.
In the market.
I do want to ask you about dual
great performance and it really
helps a lot of kids my issue
with bill credit is money should
follow the kids if we're funding
it through the SCG and they are
classes that that SCG money
should fall those kids at some
rate maybe not a hundred percent
but.
Other school districts in Gallup
throwing more money at higher
and when when we already funded
on one side and not funding on
both sides
I do believe in higher ed we're
Should be there but I mean we're
at the point in in the US and I
think all of us that have adult
children will watch your
children leave with that and
Double the the lottery or give
everybody a free for your ride
with tuition and stipends and in
those necessary.
Executive recommendations do you
know why that are from money was
not
Budgeted or given this
projection of at least
Mr chair that's a great question
and I think that given the you
know what's what's come out of
the the court decision we really
the only place I can tell you
managing not just the are but
but all of the federal funds
that are coming into the state
of New Mexico we need to build
systems to track and we need to
have staff we need we're trying
cost definitely something you
want to do so I can tell you
that we do have and you will
hear our request for funding for
more both for administrative
legislature and the executive on
the allocation of those are
funds you know the fact that
that the governor has tasked
more Chavis with with developing
have the plan and we're
depending on really more Chavis
and and others to come up with
that plan.
So that's why we didn't see
that's one year that we we've
kinda lost we don't have a
disagreement on some things we
sing that to the special we sing
that for the U. I. and so I
think target investments but we
overruns and how they're going
to contract those within two
years and complete them within
four years on the R. and then go
into well at the same time go
Mister chair if I might just one
thing I got a caution is we
still have to follow the
requirements and so we've got to
make sure whatever's being
don't spend on something that is
that isn't allowable because we
will have to reimburse the
federal government if that's the
case and so
just one thing to to Taschen the
they push their priorities in
either and are far or STBs I
didn't see a an STB rack from
the executive.
timeline for the gets and the.
Onerous on the legislature the
last minute to make those
recommendations you know when
the executive will come with S.
T. B. recommendations.
statewide recommendations
So with the very very I mean
there's always a handful of
the hello the legislature's
timelines for getting the
information and as far as
capital outlay is concerned but
I think there's still some
discussions that need to happen
Well in in you know in and there
is nothing that requires the
legislature to get one third up
to the governor.
It's done as a gesture I think
executive had to get to us on
the budget but that also
includes S. T. B. so I want to
make sure that we're clear on
what on what's happening do you
So Mister chair I think that
we've done our research and we
don't
think that it that it happened
that includes capital outlay if
it does not specifically state
every July one agency submit
that plan to GST and to DFA and
we have hearings on their on
their projects and that's that's
what ends up resulting in the
And madam secretary I may send
you something just to do that
but I I think when when the STBs
are capital projects it's very
we can move forward and and so I
think that kind of wraps up my
questions etcetera but the I I
know we're running a little bit
behind the falcons Center
rate increase and I just want to
thank everyone who has been such
strong advocates for getting
that people who are on the
there are different levels like
respite providers in addition to
homemaker service service
supports and community outreach
to pay for those rate increases.
Senator that.
Question.
Do you want to answer that
last round and what is the
The next scheduled increase
because you're right there was a
kind of a a rate plan put
that total of provider rate
increase much larger.
Okay excellent thank you so much
Charles thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Padilla at your next.
Are they still across the board
like the rest of everybody else
or did we do something different
there Mister chairman Senator in
the LFC recommendation there's
the a combined fifteen percent
this one so secretary Romero the
state are you aware of we were
tossed around a lot of stuff
related to salaries and and and
percent increases in this and
aware of that ever happening
this might be the summon my
tenth year now and I don't
remember hearing about.
Mr chair Senator but the other
they actually do in this matter
targeted increases for that of
that those occupational
constipation's but with the
spoke plan we really do believe
that it's going to address.
will address issues across the
board and then if we still see
issues moving forward then we'll
have to probably look at at
doing some targeted but but they
do absolutely do that on a
corrections and and some others
so thank you for the question
but we do thank you to the
operator best basically thank
you Mr chairman that's really
great to hear because that's how
the members and they probably
all the committee members here
are concerned about this I mean
you know well I created the
office of broadband access and
expansion with a lot of my
colleagues here to get this
had a whole new cabinet level
individual we had to scour the
planet find someone to be
thankfully we found a rock star
to come in and do that was
willing to take a that we were
able to offer but in all the way
got the head so that the more
plainer not I may have to look
for one of those you may tell me
where I can get him so I can and
it focus I've been doing call
time as we move forward madam
secretary Romero what we're
gonna look forward to reaching
out to you and for you figure
out the pay band issue and and
a conversation with you in the
next week or two make sure were
we're all in sync and moving
forward in in getting money into
New Mexico that's the key thing
Six secretary Clark thank you
for your time of is the weather
so I don't think you're with us
but thank you know move on to
our next presentation members
well if you want your volume
So we can you should been handed
out that my staff if not it was
emailed to you for those members
that are here we're gonna go
over some of the issues and and
when we look at calculating
today and and kind of go through
that so if you're gonna start
gonna start from the hand out.
Yes Mr chair and he's gonna
The from their end so go ahead
and proceed to Connor.
Thank you Mr chairman members my
name is Connor Jorgensen on the
LFC analysts covering
services calculation document.
And you have an example copy in
front of you
It's got a few red circles and
Mr Cillian and Mr Abbey had
talked about earlier.
Right now we estimate there is
around a thousand funded
positions in state government so
million dollars per person that
would allow state agencies to
fill another.
Probably around twenty two
hundred positions.
document before you is sort of
how we tried to untangle a
little bit of of those requests
and determine how much of this
given
I'm LFC recommendation.
So just to take you through
that.
Very quickly I'm on the top part
programs listed we have an under
column Hey the authorized FTE
column B. as the F. T. E. that
are filled and that is for
bear filled appetite I'm of
And as you go across you can see
the the having so we so we got
two columns.
The where we can see the
unfunded vacant vacancy rate and
that's what we're talking about
when we talk about the person
surplus available to fund
currently vacant positions so in
the case of the state engineer
on the very bottom we can see
overall vacancy rate which is
about nineteen and a half
percent of that half of those
positions could be I could be
filled they have a funding for.
of those vacant positions for
which there funding but then
looking at it in terms of like
actually what does this mean
point four F. T. E. that's what
they have budget for right now.
and the last thing I'd like to
point out.
Is
given the LFC recommendations so
in this case we could see that
vacant higher.
Thirteen another thirteen and a
bottom part is in terms of
dollars and we're looking at a
lot of the same columns that
correspond to what was at the
top so starting from J. we could
surplus so we can see that in.
But in FY twenty one The state
engineer had two point two
million dollars in person
surplus.
I'm.
the time of budget initiatives
so pretty recent data in this
case we generally receive it
around August September time
frame so it's it's pretty up to
date.
K..
We see two point two million
dollars so what's happening is
that the actual funding
available to hire people as
increasing.
What we often see
A number of positions in
recruitment and so in order to
address that and figure out okay
well are we actually going to
fill these positions we we find
And say Hey we still have a we
still have a surplus now and in
fact it's larger than the prior
year surplus.
and then the last.
base of the current year base.
And in this case so you can see
again on that last line the LFC
recommendation is actually
with that I would like to stand
for any questions the committee
has I'll also point out these
forms are included with every
one of our budget packets so
that are.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Mr Hansen for the
presentation are there any
questions.
looks like we're going to center
of radius.
Senator Steinborn place.
Thank you Mr chairman in the
area and see in the saddle.
which is a just a question.
With those vacancies that we see
in a lot of departments what are
are generally when when agencies
Authorized purpose.
Purposes that we've created
positions for what's the
rationale usually.
If if they already have.
Typically speaking
requested positions are in the
base so at the beginning of this
budget all of those and of those
employees only three hundred and
fifteen were related to
expansions of the expansion is a
new program initiatives the rest
Got it so so while they may have
vacancies there if they are
very specific and what we
provide funding for.
The correct.
Mister chairman Senator I
believe so these are again
a lot of this goes back to the
compensation question and
whether we are as a state
competitive but yes the they are
related to to the base function.
hard time recruiting people.
How much work is being done to
look at to look at a.
Rushers and competitiveness in
terms of.
think generally speaking that's
a
That is the prerogative of the
state personnel office and as
secretary Romero mentioned they
about eighty percent of state
workers fall outside of one of
those established occupation
groups and so we've have seen a
lot of stagnation in those
salaries.
ray is please thank you Mr
chairman good to see you back in
and doing well thanks for doing
this and helping us here I just
have a quick question because I
I can see it again I just want
to point something to you.
Are you there.
What.
but the here we there it's got
to be posted.
No worries okay.
Wait ask you something because
we did see this in the LFC
meetings that we had but
the dollars for example in in we
got two million two hundred and
thirty thousand there that just
don't explain that to me because
vacancy in dollars to for twenty
two so I guess it's just the
difference of the two years
right.
Mister chairman Senator that is
correct.
Any other questions.
I see none then we're going to
continue to move along Mr
Jorgensen thank you very much
That's it okay so we're at the
end of the agenda members we're
gonna go and stand.
Hi in recess and we'll be here
tomorrow again.
Thank you to everyone thank the
staff and everyone.
