On the web introduce themselves.
Go right ahead.
That the Senate on the largest
online.
He's only yes good Senator
Candelaria one introduce
yourself.
Good afternoon everyone Mr
chairman members of the
committee Jacob Candelaria
representing west side of the
City of Albuquerque V. with Wall
there's always.
And then we'll start with
Senator Woods and come this way
and then we'll go to.
Senator Pat Woods districts
seven curry question you
counties.
You Mr chairman Billboard Senate
district thirty three from
Terrel Lincoln in Travis county.
A bill chair senator from
district one which is important.
Center.
I don't we don't have a Mike up
there before Senator Michael for
this office for the city in the
committee today so for
webcasting me may have to grab
one of those money.
just so you'll have one Senator
Campos thank you very much Mr
chairman states and the combo is
representative of all or parts
of New Mexico and again it's a
great to be here with me today.
And anybody else Jonas Nathan on
the economic and see these are
Senator Steinborn.
I think the switch for those
mikes might be in that.
Have an.
Can you turn the.
Well get started I'm senator
George then yes I don't know
we'll double check where their
members not on.
I may be in another meeting
because I have a council meeting
also go from the same time
if I'm not here Senator Campos
will chair and then Amanda do
you want to start.
All right thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst for the legislative
finance committee I also want to
know for members that executive
analyst for the judiciary branch
this is on zoom so they're more
detailed questions about the
executive recommendation he's
available online.
I'm going to provide a very
brief high level overview of the
differences between the LFC and
Executive recommendations and
then I will turn it over to a
Chief Justice Michael V. hill
and AOC director Artie Pepin to
go over the unified budget as a
whole for you all.
So we should all have a high
level documents that looks a
little bit like this in your
packet and all this does is
compares the LFC recommendation
to the executive.
So the LFC recommendation is
here in blue and then the
executive is here in purple.
I want to note a couple things
for members the LFC
recommendation is going to be a
little bit higher than the
executive in several of the
Courts.
That's because the LFC
recommendation include
sufficient funding in each court
budget for a ten percent salary
increase for judges and a two
percent salary increase for
court staff and that is in
combination with the LFC
compensation proposal for all
state employees so the LFC
recommendation you're looking at
a total of seventeen percent
increase for judges and about
nine percent salary increase
increase for court staff.
Other highlights of the
recommendations both
recommendations include funding
for a new judgeship in the fifth
and thirteenth judicial
districts.
For the most part the executive
recommendation meets each
individual court to request and
so Mister chairman unless there
any questions for me
specifically I can hand it over
to the chief and party.
justice and forty one.
That's level will need to just
in case yes those mikes but.
And our food.
Mr Chairman afternoon and seen
you know while.
Happy Martin Luther king.
Good to be here with by the way
of coming with me start the
party Poppin this year just to
Shannon Bacon from the Supreme
Court
You want to come in the door of
the proceedings so just wanted
to introduce her to you well let
me let me for members that are
online they brought our
presentation to us hard copy of
the settlement my understanding
already did email that to us so
you will get a look trying to
copy for those on the web of our
this is a packet it should be
there any minute.
Thank you Mr
the two so that we're clear this
first book that the very
colorful with the mountains in
the beautiful New Mexico Scott
is the New Mexico but that the
judiciary budget book it's got
our requests and some reason a
lot of information in there much
of which I'm going to summarize
today also be for you because
it's pertinent to our budget
request are number one but
budget request is the state of
New Mexico judicial compensation
twenty twenty one report should
have that.
Then we have some cards I called
and she cheats on there's one
here called judicial
compensation reform it's a point
she with some red bars on it.
And that pretty much summarizes
are requests for a judicial
compensation.
We have another sheet other
teaching
Reforming New Mexico judicial
retirement.
It's got a picture on the back
of a role he is there.
we have another sheet that's
kind of summary of the it's
called validation study.
It's a snapshot of the twenty
twenty one validation study
which summarizes a lot of the
information for us and as far as
our.
A pre trial.
Justice system request is
concerned and then we have a
finally a a new one that kind of
some summarizes everything all
in one.
Hi Sheetï¿½ so with that with
that.
proceed.
The number one priority the
judiciary is to fix a structural
and systemic problem.
According to your own judicial
compensation commission.
Wrote.
Is a significant factor having
an impact on the diversity of
candidates who seek judicial
office.
What is the source of that
problem pundits on the cheat
sheet.
We identify for.
Keep calm keep working areas in
which judicial compensation in
New Mexico is behind.
We are below pay for judges and
other states with comparable
duties in fact we're forty six
out of fifty one while the
state.
The appellate courts hilly
region in the region that we're
in New Mexico ranks eight
hundred nine.
of the Supreme Court.
Second we're below the pay for
lawyers in private practice.
And I just want to highlight the
law firm partner it shows two
hundred and ten thousand five
hundred and two and law firm
solo practitioner one eighty
four for fifty seven I want to
emphasize to you that's a figure
from two thousand seventeen.
The
So it.
Compared to two thousand
seventeen Supreme Court justices
are making twenty seven percent
less than a law firm partner
seventeen percent less than a
lot from sole practitioner.
The and that gap there you
should also have a thing was a.
Part of the some dots on.
And I think it's very
descriptive in what it shows the
bottom line.
This is a recent study the
bottom line is judicial curry.
Across the United States.
I don't think we have that you
should you should we'll get it
to you if you don't but this
this we'll get it to you this
picture shows judicial pay is
flat.
Two thousand twelve to two
thousand nineteen and the top
line shows the gap this is
salary for lawyers.
And the gap is just getting
bigger and bigger and bigger so
and we know that from across the
United States so the figures
that were given to you today
really don't reflect today's gap
which is bigger.
Third the paper senior level
state and local government
employees is on this sheet.
I would point out Bernalillo
county attorney makes two
hundred and sixty three thousand
six hundred seventy four
dollars.
And I'll just point out to a
couple more Santa Fe County
manager one hundred ninety eight
thousand seven fifty Dona ana
county manager one eighty five
hundred eighty five thousand
dollars so within the state.
senior level state and local
employees employers the
judiciary lags behind and it has
continued continually locked
behind.
Finally state judges are way way
below.
But federal judges make.
We are.
Federal District Court judge
which is where the trial judge's
take place currently makes two
hundred eighteen thousand
dollars.
Compared to the current Supreme
Court salary of one hundred
fifty five thousand dollars so.
This is when I mean it's a
structural systemic problem.
This request came about.
Last year when I was first
elected as.
Chief Justice high school went
through many years of judicial
compensation commission report
it was consistent year after
year after year after year The
New Mexico judiciary was at the
bottom of the barrel.
And you have to your small small
raises were given and they were
very much appreciated by the
judges two percent five percent
seven percent I think one time
there were seven and that was
pulled back
so what happens is we're getting
raises but so is everybody else.
And so I just kept the New
Mexico Judiciary at the bottom.
The last compensation commission
reporter read last year's had a
goal of raising state trial
judges salaries to one hundred
sixty five thousand dollars but
they said we want to do it in
five years.
And I made a decision at that
time I said all we're doing is
the same thing over and over and
over again and this is part of
that same thing this is the time
to fix this is to fix this now.
And I mean if my job to try and
fix what I call a structural and
systemic problem.
Because that's not about me.
It's not about just to speak in
for any other judge in the state
of New Mexico today it's about
the judiciary as an institution
and how it can function and and
pro provide its services to the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico.
This is for today and for
tomorrow and for the future.
So the judicial compensation
commission report also
emphasize.
It is critical to improve
judicial salaries now to address
chronic challenges in the
recruitment and retention of
judges.
The quality close quote the
quality of our judiciary depends
on the quality of the
individuals who are willing to
serve in office.
Many current and prospective off
judges other career options and
levels of compensation offered
to judicial officers discourage
highly qualified candidates from
even applying I could bring you
several witnesses that would
testify that they would have but
for this the salary applied.
We owe it to our citizens and
communities to provide quality
service with diverse highly
qualified judicial officers and
employees consisting of the past
and the brightest in practice
now and moving forward.
I want to emphasize something
else the strong judiciary is the
central to a healthy economy.
What do I mean by that one New
Mexico has a strong interest in
attracting and retaining
businesses which generate jobs
and tax revenues and contribute
to economic prosperity.
Economists point to real
economic benefits from an
appropriately compensated
Judiciary.
Many people don't know this but
state courts handle over ninety
percent of all legal cases in
the United States.
State courts to that not federal
and most of those cases are
several K..
State courts are called upon to
resolve issues on such highly
controversial matters as school
funding.
Health care the environment
election reform and social
issues state courts are also the
primary venue for deciding a
wide range of legal issues.
Morton to the business
community.
These include economic
development zoning regulations
tort liability cases contract
basis business disputes oil and
gas disputes commercial lease
disputes and products liability
issues.
To put it bluntly increasing
judicial salaries and improving
the quality and stability of our
judiciary makes business sense.
According to the chamber of
commerce.
A growing majority of businesses
now report that extends
litigation environment is likely
to affect important business
decisions at their company.
Adversity and knowledge and
experience in our judicial
system is crucial.
However the most common path for
District Court judgeship in New
Mexico has been from young
workers with criminal law
experience.
Because it is young prosecutors
and young criminal defense
attorneys that are there have
been the one supplying for these
vacancies for the most part.
The judicial nominating
commission frequently finds
either no or few applicants for
judicial vacancies having
experience in business
commercial long.
Oil and gas law tax medical
malpractice environmental law
family law and other areas of
the civil war.
We must be competitive to
attract applicants from
successful law practice is
returnees handle these kind of
cases complex civil cases of
transactions and who can swiftly
and confidently render judgments
in those types of cases.
This is a little bit repetitive.
But the latest Mexico bar
association survey taken a two
thousand seventeen found that
the average Cheryl holder
partner in the law firm makes
about two hundred ten thousand
dollars the sole practitioner
generally average about a
hundred eighty four thousand
dollars per year in civil
practice right now up to date.
State Supreme Court justices in
New Mexico are paid a hundred
and fifty three thousand dollars
per year and trial judges earn a
hundred ninety thirty eight
thousand.
I asked the question how can we
engage in Turkey's civil
practice who can make so much
more working at a private firm.
In the cap is getting bigger.
The solution.
It's clear.
Everyone I've spoken to agree to
salaries of our judges must be
increased the question is the
real question is how much and
why.
We can all agree agree that
careers in public service to
mess Act by those who joined the
bench must be ready to forgo the
more lucrative compensation
available in the private sector
none the less judicial salary
should be broadly comparable to
the compensation received by
attorneys taking similar career
paths and by other public
servants have a comparable
responsibility training and
experience.
Our request in our budget book
is to increase seeks to print
for pay.
Two hundred and one thousand one
hundred twelve dollars.
Thank you for.
When I when I first started
looking at this I saw that the
pay was for one sixty five for
district judges and for one
eighty some for Supreme Court
justice justices hi there I'm so
then I realized that was based
upon two thousand seventeen data
not current that.
So I said let me reset and look
where.
Where is our competition where
can we look for comparable
requirements.
We're gonna move and so thank
you have to walk up and adjust
the marks in front of our in
this Representative but if you
just come over there when you
get a minute.
Yeah.
We can only truly gets moved
time I'm in your house.
It may take a while he's got a
super okay.
So how to continue with my story
but we started a one sixty five
for state trial judges because
that's what was in the
compensation commission report
but we realize that was based
upon hold data two thousand
seventeen data.
So then I said we're.
Where are the lawyers a puppy
helpline for for judgeships.
When I realized it was the
United States magistrate court.
You know when there's an opening
in the United States magistrate
court you get twenty thirty
applications
from lawyers from all over the
state from the law firm small
law firms solar practitioners
dust prosecutors and defense
attorneys.
And.
The other realization I had was
this.
You know the federal for a lot
of people know this who don't
practice.
Is when you file a lawsuit in
federal court you're
automatically assigned a United
States magistrate judge to hear
that case.
The reason for that is these the
district judges to the actual
article three judges they're
hearing having to hear all these
criminal cases in immigration
cases.
So they turned over most of the
cases to the magistrate judges
them and you must opt out your
medically assigned the judge
then you must opt out the course
of the district judges.
They take note of that when they
get your case because.
Now they've got a had a lot of
the criminal cases but now also
the civil so
alright the judges that are most
comparable to ours hearing the
civil cases heard the United
States magistrate judges.
So what we're proposing.
Is that the highest.
The state of New Mexico.
Receive the compensation that
the lowest paid judges the
lowest judges in the federal
judiciary per rate.
That's what we're proposing.
The total cost for that it's in
a budget book is six point eight
nine eight million dollars.
I know.
The LFC has made
recommendations.
Mr this I saw him earlier he's
here and I want to thank the LFC
and I want to thank Mr Abbey and
all of the staff.
For the.
Really.
Generous recommendation made.
It is generous Unitus.
We much appreciate.
But it's not enough their
recommendation amounts to three
point nine million dollars.
Which is three million short for
us.
To really well for us here
today.
If you find it that is
justified.
And you find it that we really
do need this for our judges all
across New Mexico.
Is to please that.
Another three million dollars.
That'll get us to where we were
we feel we need to be to become
competitive.
So.
A request and I'm happy to
answer any questions about that
our second priority to very
closely related.
Is a conditional.
Retirement.
We're asking.
The legislature this year to
please make.
The judicial retirement fund and
the judicial magistrate fund
salt once and for all.
It's going to have to be done.
We feel for more perspective the
money is there.
It's a one time request not
recurring one time to the
judicial matched judicial
retirement fund what tend to
judicial magistrate.
Are you know we we also have a
need their based upon a comp in
comparison with judicial
retirement plans and other
states New Mexico judges rate
the fourth highest contribution
rate and receive lower pension
payments that a mandatory than
in a majority of states.
What we're asking for in a not
show his thirty five million
dollars.
Place the judicial retirement
fund.
And ten million in the match for
retirement fund these will make
themselves.
Once and for all.
Those are the two.
Hi toproperties I was going to
speak about
with party and I split up our
presentation he's going to talk
to you a little bit about.
A pay for.
Judicial employees has an
introduction.
I want you to know it was
shocking to me.
When I was told.
That an employee working for the
judiciary.
Gets paid ten percent less than
including working in the
executive branch to the same
kind of job.
Pretty much the same job this is
not right it's an injustice and
we're asking you to fix that for
us please.
the session RT.
Thank you I'm a covered employee
compensation for minutes
the request in the unified
budget is for nine point eight
million dollars for judicial
please to give a ten percent
increase to close that gap with
what comparable employer pays
and secretary.
Finally there's proposals I
think the LFC proposed a seven
percent increase in section
eight that's great the staff
person is in addition to that
because obviously if if we got
nine percent which is a
correction that everybody gets
seven percent rate percent
behind still right.
and it does cost about a million
dollars for per percentage the
LFC recommendation puts two
million dollars or about two
percent in to the base budget
for courts that would be in
addition to yes the
recommendation for section and
for a seven percent for
everybody statewide so that was
nine percent that is great it's
an important step in the right
direction I think the the
important message that asks you
to take away from that is it's a
recognition by your staff the
LFC that it's true that our
employees are paid less than
comparable employees and
executives our turnover rate is
about thirty two percent higher
than the executive why is that
because of pay many of you were
here in about twenty sixteen.
We came in for the legislature's
said gosh were woefully under
compensating our clerks yes most
of the people work for us.
In about fifteen dollars an hour
and a turnover rate is
extraordinary we can't hold on
to we just churning through the.
Of the Legislature race are
paying roughly twelve percent
and the next year the turnover
rate decreased by fifty percent.
Okay so we're only paying
sixteen dollars and eighty cents
an hour to the got a twelve
percent range but it made a huge
difference in our ability to
recruit and hold on to those
people because the pay was so
low and that's great now we look
at the judiciary as a whole we
see where we're at I did compare
data published by the state
personal office on the general
paving said got a dozen
different kind of rate
classifications are gonna turn
is in one and engineers and
another I'd never all that
because we don't have a lot of
our engineers we have our share
of attorneys but I figured
another pay one fifty and.
We look at the general favorite
those are the folks who do clerk
jobs record in office work the
kinds of things that are folks
do with the judicial of fun in
the judiciary side of course.
And that's receive up to ten
percent gap in what those folks
are paid and that's why I I'm
sure a contributes a great deal
of why our turnover rate is so
much higher than the executive
because if I if we could hide in
court we pay you seventeen or
eighteen dollars an hour and we
train you up after years so why
wouldn't you go across the
street to make twenty dollars an
hour ten percent higher to do
the same thing that that doesn't
make sense
majority of our employees are
paid less than forty thousand
dollars a year if you can
believe it.
we'd like them to get beyond a
hundred fifty percent a hundred
seventy five percent of the
federal poverty level for a
family of four so that they
don't qualify for federal
services but a lot of employees
would qualify now for aid to
families with children
all kinds of things I think most
of our employees many many of
our employees I would qualify
for a public defender in the
very unlikely event they faced a
criminal charge so there's a lot
of that behind I know Mr
chairman I sent you and
Sure Lundstrom over HSC a fairly
long term all back in November
about all this but there's a lot
of data behind that request it's
not easy for me to convince the
Supreme Court to make
I've heard such an expensive in
significant increase but it is
justified because we need to
keep the employees that we get
you waste a lot of money you've
invested in our employees when
we lose someone we got to
recruit and retrain a new crop
of folks so we're hoping that
you can see fit to increase the
recommendation from LFC I should
say yes as Amanda mentioned the
overall recommendation from LFC
is higher than for from the
executive
the book of that does have to do
as Amanda said with the
recommendation to put ten
percent for judges and two
percent for employees in the
based budgets separate from
those increases in section
eight.
And that's great because it
targets our priorities it leaves
all the courts with a lower
operating budget then at that
and it just.
On but that's okay because it
meets our priorities the things
that are important in the
operating budgets including
those AOC are important but
we're targeting compensation to
try to recommends on please
needs and keep them because that
makes the judiciary work better
and it's a better investment of
your
of the appropriation that you
may.
I also thought I would talk
briefly about.
Now pre trial services we have
significant request two point
two million dollars this is in
the budget but they have as well
And this may not talk about pre
trial services I wanted to.
The server go through very
briefly what we do with pre
trial services because I think
it's kind of important to
recognize that the book a pre
trial services are.
Services that is the people who
are on staff who to whom someone
who's arrested charged with a
crime and gets released which is
a great majority and will always
be a great majority of people
arrested some of them you can
just tell them come back to
court next month to try whatever
we're going to do with you some
of them need to report regularly
so we don't lose track of them
some of the more significant
restrictions a judge has a lot
of options in terms of the
restrictions to be imposed on
someone pre trial.
The aim of pre trial is not to
punish people people who have
been arrested have not been
convicted of a crime that's not
the point in criminal justice
system in which we.
We're not gonna try to keep in
jail because I got arrested for
shoplifting and telling somebody
proves that they shoplift and
then at a penalty which you have
adopted with the penalties are.
So that the point of pre trial
is to get people to come back to
court.
So that they don't skip their
hearings their trial and to try
to assess their risk for getting
arrested again.
we say committing another
offence course the only contract
we only track the arrest.
You get arrested during the pre
trial period we consider that a
failure in terms of public
safety because after all you you
should you must first to be.
Creating at least probable cause
you committed another offence we
tracked that all data very
carefully.
So the judge can use a number of
a restrictive conditions you can
have to report every day every
week to pre trial services you
may have to
take drug tests of your problem
your criminal problems related
to drugs it just depends on the
nature of your
The crime with which you charge
what but if we get back to court
without you having failed to
appear and if you get done with
your case if you want arrested
in the meantime that's a success
pre trial.
we've had read about the study
done in Albuquerque because
that's where pre trial has been
going on for the longest time we
have robust pre trial services
there.
And over three years of data ten
thousand cases the report said a
couple of things two things are
really important are that the
study showed the instrument we
use which informs judicial
decision making doesn't
directive they can do what they
think is appropriate but it's a
risk assessment for both very to
appear and risk of arrest.
this predictive that's number
one which is a good thing that's
why you work hard and.
A risk assessment instrument and
it's not vice chair section of
the country have adopted various
instruments which have turned
out to compounded by an arrest
data in the pre trial assessment
so you're setting a higher risk
to minority communities
regardless of conviction rates
and conviction that is really
what should drive your decision
making that is lots of people
got arrested we don't punish
them for that we.
Punishment for getting a
convicted so it's good to know
that in this large study the
Risk assessments method we use
that we get the judges before
the second person to release is
not biased by race or sex or
ethnicity and those are very
good things to know about the
estimate because with your
generosity we're speaking this
is from all around the state to
implement services of all around
the state as a state you funded
a background investigation unit
works overnight.
Everybody that's arrests in the
state isn't that well in the
jurisdiction for we've
implemented services and we're
good to everybody.
In the next couple years where
we've implement the judge when
they come to the bench in the
morning to see that person got
arrested last night they have an
assessment done by the unit in
Albuquerque overnight to tell
them the criminal Hiscock kinds
of information back from history
and all those kinds of things
and just for that assesses their
risk for Victor Pierre and for
getting arrested.
We've seen good appearance rates
and good.
public safety rates that's the
rate at which people get through
the whole case without ever
having been arrested for another
charge and with the I have a
talk about this is about those
things where we've implemented
right now we're at about maybe
forty five percent of the state
population is covered by those
places would be implemented
because services by the end of
this fiscal year when we finish
with the first Mr which is Santa
Fe Rio Arriba and Los Alamos
counties in the three counties
of the fourth judicial district
more about a little bit and San
Miguel counties will be well
over fifty percent of the
population for getting risk
assessment I wanted everybody
else done because you have been
generous with your funding and
I've I've no doubt we'll see you
have no I hope at least
recommendations we have from LFC
on that investment those are the
two main things I want to talk
about the budget book discusses
a number of other
recommendations I mean request
sorry for funding we're going to
go to the house appropriation
committee first obviously at
least I get the first shot of
house bill two we will certainly
encourage House Appropriations
to adopt those recommendations
from LFC and to consider
additional support for our
priorities judicial employee
compensation two different times
and pre trial services and the
other things are highlighted in
the budget but I've seen thing
in there you'd like to ask
questions about to be happy to
answer them this committee has
always been very considerate and
I appreciate very much your
consideration of our request and
I'd be happy to answer questions
about
any of those things or anything
else that you want to note that
with the judiciary or
particularly the judicial budget
request thank you Mr chairman Mr
Chairman can if I may
party that.
One who wanted to do this
presentation on patrol service.
I learned this past year.
That that was being what was
being used was.
passive on these ankle monitors
his ankle bracelets passive
monitoring.
With that man was okay it means
twenty four south.
I found out about that.
I went through the roof.
And I took party to Albuquerque.
We had a meeting.
And I said we're going to
implement twenty four seven
monitoring of these ankle
bracelets.
An immediate notification to law
enforcement when there's a
violation.
I get pushback no money we that
person we don't have this that
the other a total we're going to
do it.
so Lina the know this maybe she
knows now but I said if I have
to bring Selena Jones and to run
this I want to bring our and.
And we we had a party rob Peter
to pay Paul.
Within six weeks I think it was.
We had.
People working in this unit
twenty four hours a day seven
days a week monitoring these
ankle bracelets.
The way it works is this to get
a notification of a violation
they will do a quick
investigation called the house
called the defendant.
The gentleman efforts to their
mind a true violation or
something is just haywire in the
and the monitor or something
like that.
They will immediately go to the
judge on duty to request
consideration of an arrest
warrant.
The judge deems it appropriate
arrest warrant is issued.
That warrant together with the
the of the offenders last known
location is immediately emailed
to the police department and the
sheriff's department.
It all takes place very very
quickly
hi just investigated a case just
recently with fifty seven
minutes from the time the the
first thing one off.
The police had in their hand an
arrest for.
So that's public safety.
I want you to know that to
expensive.
Of the two point two million
dollars that we're requesting.
Eight hundred and eighty
thousand dollars.
Is to is to.
Then this unit.
So what I say is if you agree.
That that's for public safety.
Please give us the money so we
can do it.
If you don't agree or if you
feel you don't have the money
don't give it to us and we won't
do it.
But I I personally as a father
grandfather.
I believe this is necessary in
the public interest and for
public safety but it is
expensive.
I just want you to know that.
So I'm sorry to.
The time I'm happy to answer any
questions in our years as well
thank you again for the
opportunity to speak to you
today.
Thank you I'm Amanda we do have
some we do have some pictures if
you are do you want to move over
and I don't know if you want to.
Just because we're webcast so
members that are online.
I just.
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee I did have a
couple notes for members first I
would like to point out an error
on your high level page
we caught this so for the first
initial district it looks as if
on this page the executive is
recommending over a million
dollars more than the LFC for
the first initial District Court
which is in Santa Fe that is
incorrect that's not the correct
general fund number the actual
general fund number should be
eleven million ninety thousand
so LFC is actually about one
thousand dollars higher they're
so important correction on the
high level I also wanted to take
a minute for members I feel
madam my opening statements
because we've been talking a lot
about compensation and I went
over the LFC is compensation
plan it is worth noting the
executive has a four percent
compensation increase for judges
and judicial staff so you have
LFC with the ten percent in the
face in addition to our
compensation package for about
seventeen percent for judges and
about nine percent for staff and
the executive with about four
percent for judges and staff.
As the members have the side by
side comparisons.
Let me let me clarify something
that the technology today so we
are webcast but the webcast is
not showing the the visual so
join empty committee room so
they those members that are
online in that and I have I'll
tell you everybody have on the
listener Candelaria Senator lot
Gonzales center Rodriguez and
Senator Padilla if you want on
the left you can either going to
have to reply to maintain or
text me but we are here and so
just so members in the
the
The closed caption is working.
No telling how well or what
words can be said specially if
you're not in the Mike it may
not show anything so just.
From there what will go on
this.
Sen.
Yeah we can hear you Senator
Rodriguez and we can see now
thank you for your comments I
concede the committee room
fairly clear from here I can see
RT and Justice be here when I
see all of you there so the
video it seems to be on the
webcast needs to be fine from my
end to you
Surely there was in a different
link sent out so that's why
Google us to more Canadians the
fans when we got the right one
the public is not permitted so
everything we should be fine I
do have my hand up but I don't
know you can see it whenever you
have a moment I.
Just it read out that less so
the artisan link is working
correctly the legislative
webcasting link is not working
correctly which link it is so
members and we don't have you up
Senator Rodriguez you are on the
list Senator Candelaria I had
you first go ahead and in.
Proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
afternoon Mister Chief Justice
Mr to our analysts
I want to address two topics
today.
All one of the compensation and
pension requesting secondly the
pre trial detention.
The issue from a fiscal
standpoint.
Mr chairman.
I think the the question I have
is is pretty in the weeds and
perhaps it's best directed at Mr
Papen I'm but also the Chief
Justice the the compensation
study that was done by the State
Farm twenty seventeen.
When they came up with the
number for the the average
of a solo practitioner which I'm
assuming someone like me needs
runs their own law firm.
soul soul partner on avid rails
I take all the rest get all the
benefits.
did they base that on sort of
reports of net taxable income.
From the report to the IRS
because right as a solo
practitioner when I'm reporting
declaring it has net taxable
income.
Is honestly about thirty or
forty percent less what's
actually my take home pay as a
distribution as the LLC owner
and what I'm suggesting here is
that the gap we're talking about
is actually quite large.
between what a person can make
doing a civil practice like mine
but also this criminal but
predominantly civil.
Persisting on the bench so
Mister chairman accident that as
the first question thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee yes it's the
net income I believe that's what
they ask for is reported to the
state park that does have
limitations because it's only
what they report when nobody got
the tax returns to verify and
it's not a hundred percent of
the attorneys but I can only go
with that that I got the data we
got a twenty seventeen I would
agree with senator Candelaria I
think it probably understates.
The income but that's just part
of the reason is the chief
justice's saying why we have
trouble competing with the
private sector for attorneys
with that kind of experience
to to join the bench it's a
compensation problem.
Thank you Mr chairman so I think
that that's just important
underscore for today's
discussion is that.
you know as as I understand it
we're about three million
dollars alright between what
what I would consider fully
funding a request on
compensation.
For judges.
and what at least the LFC record
has recommended it sounds like
the executive is is even a bit
lower
but I think that's three million
dollars well spent.
and I want to share with you a
very practical reason why.
you know.
I'm not letting any criticism
against any sitting judge at the
trial level but.
it doesn't matter the breadth of
experience that folks have when
they come to the pension it's
not really a problem.
That I think effects Bernalillo
county all that much because we
have separate petitions.
where I think you have this
problem is all the other
districts for you don't have
different divisions so you have
one trial judge he's handling
everything.
From a discrimination suit to
complex contract issues to
mineral rights to a misdemeanor
that's felonies and every every.
And as as someone who brings
predominantly civil complaints
on behalf of clients
it doesn't matter whether or not
the the judges have any Senator
experience.
and that's a problem because at
the trial court level it invites
I think unfortunately error on
some issues that may not be
necessarily up problematic.
had have you had some of the bit
more breadth of experience and
what that does is it causes the
need for an appeal which is
maddening to everybody
frustrating but also expensive
to the court of appeal Supreme
Court and also really to the
litigants known enjoys following
me to hire me as a lawyer really
because I'm someone you call
when you have to sue someone or
you're being sued I'm
litigation.
so I think it's a three eight
three million dollars well spent
because at the end of the day
not to the braggadocious about
it.
I would take a pay cut going on
to the District Court bench
quite frankly of a significant
amount and it's just not
something doable for the
foreseeable future not that I
think anyone wants music judge
victims and but at the end of
the day that's just the calculus
and so I think it's three
million dollars well spent Mr
chairman.
With respect.
To the retirement piece.
And Mr about this is a question
best directed LFC.
Mr prep and Xcerra
but and then there is to say
because I carried bill but we
did a measure was two years ago.
Mr button can you remind us what
that measure what because it was
aimed at traditional retirement
solvency.
And what we do and what is the
effect in and where we are from
the solvency picture before I
delve into the recommendation
thank you and in one sense thank
you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee senator Candelaria
what you did two years ago was
you directed a diversion of
funds that are directed to your
retirement the for the
legislative retirement.
The time of the time is funded
about a hundred sixty percent
still about their.
And so there's a.
Out of state oil and gas revenue
stream tax revenue stream a
little piece of that is directed
by statute to your retirement
fund you take a little piece of
that you directed it for at
least five years judicial
retirement million two hundred
thousand dollars a year to the
judicial retirement and the same
amount of million to each year
to the magistrate retirement.
The first year that was in
effect was fiscal year twenty
one when we just finished and so
LFC and I mean LFC PR a handle
has the solvency of the funds
and that's a for sure you can
see the impact of that million
to in the two funds what we saw
in the master retirement system
was they had some kind of a
slight of a beneficial impact
overall these funds are both in
going down in terms of the
funded ratio every year for
about ten years last year for
the first time in those ten
years the master system funding
ratio went up seven tenths of a
percent.
So now the magistrate Fund is
about fifty three percent funded
I have the exact figure was
about fifty three percent I
don't think that's the worst the
worst funded ratio in the whole
you're a set of family of funds.
So if we gain seven tenths of a
percent every year about forty
nine years would be a hundred
percent fund.
On the judicial side the
judicial retirement fund
decreased again in its funded
ratio it's around fifty one and
a half percent funded.
that's probably the worst of
funding ratio.
So you know in twenty fifteen
fiscal year fifteen in the in
the legislative session a
fourteen you took the
legislature took significant
measures with regard to do to
show time in terms of decreasing
benefits increasing the
contribution rate by judges and
increasing the contribution rate
by the state state so
contributes last of judicial
retirement and the employees and
in general but the amendment to
the judges pay more state paid
more benefits reduced it's the
only fund I'm aware of that
doesn't get a call and tell it's
a hundred percent funded except
once every three years so the
statue you passed in twenty
fourteen.
If the funds are hundred percent
funded and hasn't been for quite
awhile the judges who are
retired get a two percent
increase every third year.
I'm not not every year lots of
steps are taken as I said to
reform the budget cited
increased contributions trying
to address the
Funded ratio the funds it's only
continue to go down to for that
slight uptick we some matching
fund the synoptic funds the
master fund has a little over
thirty million dollars in a
judicial final over ninety
million and it just does not a
whole lot of judges with about
two hundred and eighty one time
in the state covered by these
funds and then you've got the
retirees so
Senator Candelaria the answer is
you put a one point two million
toward the funds the first year
we order in effect was the
fiscal year twenty one analysis
released by P. R. A. and I
suppose the judicial fund would
have slipped in the wrong
direction further have that
money not been coming in and it
hope the measure time fund
reverse the negative slide and
and doing positive direction by
seven tenths of a percent.
Thank you Mr chairman
Good I Mr chairman I made from
our analysts
Are there any recommendations
this session from other LFC the
executive with respect to the
solvency.
one or or both of these
retirement funds and if so can
you lay those out for.
Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria the LFC framework for
the expenditure of the American
rescue act plans or are but does
include twenty million dollars
for judicial retirement solvency
that would be for both funds you
can find that on page one eighty
three of the LFC volume one
document
as far as the executive goes not
to my knowledge but I would have
to let Mister French this speak
more to that.
A good afternoon Mr chairman and
members of the committee Senator
Candelaria I will need to get
with our ostentation person
subject to finance on that one.
To the floor Mr chairman I
think.
Let me let me ask Miss for a
fast the follow up then
Within the LESC framework.
How much are the money remains
unspent assuming all the uses
already allocated in the
framework for adopted is there
any money left.
Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria LFC recommended all
the funding certainly it could
be rearranged to accommodate
your prior but there was none of
us spent thousands for general
fund balance above the thirty
percent reserve target.
Thank you Mr chairman again I'm
gonna make a no more respectful
suggestion.
that that we that we seriously
look at rearranging the
distribution of the ark of funds
to get as close as possible.
Two full funding of the chairs
for judiciary's retirement
It's it's it's a problem that is
systemic that can be solved with
an allocation of one time money.
I wish that was the case for the
overall care of fun and the and
I really wish that was the case
for the overall he are you from
unfortunately I think those
numbers are so large that it's
beyond practical for the state
to may the level of one time
contributions that would really
solve the problem here I think
that number one I applaud LESC
for beginning with the twenty
million dollar allocation.
but in no way suggesting it
would provoke here but at the
end of the day I do find it
ironic and I will tip my hat
irony that we would not be
having this discussion about how
to allocate more funds but for
the Supreme Court of the state
of New Mexico I'll recall and
remind the members that it was
the position of the executive
branch that only the governor
has the authority to suspend all
federal grant money for the
darkness of its nature.
Relying on a rather flimsy
arguments based on a single
paragraph in the case decided
over thirty some years.
So I I do find it ironic that
That we are here discussing this
thanks to the Supreme Court
doing the right thing in
enforcing the constitution.
and I think Mr Chairman the only
reason I raise that other than
it does to call me as well as
the lead counsel in that case.
and distribute you joined us
there towards the and as a few
other senators that.
is to underscore the nature of
the relationship between the
legislature and port the the
court is not another just
another agency of government and
that's not to diminish the role
that all of our cabinet agencies
do the work that they do and
it's tremendously important.
So this is sort of different
that's a little more important I
mean it just is from a process
and democratic standpoint
capital T. not the party.
This is a branch of government
this is supposed will branch of
our three branch and I think
that the most recent case where
our constitutional power to
appropriate was vindicate.
Underscores Health vital role
that a point system plays not
only in resolving private
disputes but in maintaining the
rule of law and making sure that
democracy actually functions.
In a nonpartisan nonpolitical
way which I submit to you is
more important now perhaps it's
ever been.
So I would respectfully submit
and encourage us to do as much
as we can Mr Chairman reach the
phone number on the retirement.
The last issue I want to explore
Mr chairman I appreciate the
time to ask questions today.
Is regarding pre trial release.
Madam Mr happen into the Chief
Justice I want to thank both of
you personally.
Mr chairman and members we will
likely hear throughout the
session proposals from the
executive and one candidate for
Attorney General to a man
our state laws regarding
pretrial release.
But a year ago the Supreme Court
convenes I think it was a second
rules committee.
To go back and take a look at.
How pre trial release was
working in New Mexico and in
Bernalillo county.
Since the voters approved a
constitutional amendment on bail
reform.
The two moved us away from
primarily detaining people based
on their ability to pay on money
fail to a system now which
places the District Court in a
unique position in American law
of making decisions based upon.
Whether or not.
We can reasonably predict that a
person is going to commit a new
crime.
In addition to ensuring that is
always just in the role of of
pre trial measures which is to
ensure that someone just appear
back in court that's what the
idea begins in England.
People weren't terribly
concerned about presented
preventing future crime because
I think that idea would really
shock the minds of our founders
they were really just concerned
and ensuring that a person
accused not convicted of a crime
would show up to court to let
justice be done.
So the Chief Justice and Mr crap
and participated in that process
as did I as to district
attorneys public defenders
community groups some amendments
were made to the pre trial
detention and one of the key
recommendations of that ruled
Committee was not to recommend
adoption of any refundable
presumptions and the pre trial
detention process which I'll
address in a moment.
But I think Mr happen one of
the.
One of the major certain issues
I have with the discussions
happening this session.
Can you tell us.
Statewide.
Of the cases where a district
attorney seeks.
Pre trial detention bye a motion
just to help orient everyone the
prosecutors to file a motion to.
Basically strip someone of their
liberty and and and for magic to
jail pre trial.
Of the total number Mr
Representative and what
percentage would deny.
Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria
I have to tell you Kelly
Bradford who gave me that
information which I have here
I will be very excited minutes
this question I don't have the
piece of paper my hand but it's
roughly fifty percent we track
it sense the publication of the
constitutional amendment July
first of twenty seventeen we
have a by district we have a
statewide in a very is from
forty seven percent to fifty to
fifty three percent statewide
some districts hire summer lower
of course but on a statewide
basis it's roughly about half of
the detention motions.
Have been granted over that
period of time.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Bevin I
think one of the issues Mr
chairman I want to just again
orient us thinking about this
issue is that.
Under the New Mexico rules of
criminal procedure that applies
to District Court.
In one of these hearings
regarding pre trial detention.
The prosecutor may offer and the
court may consider.
Proffers which means the
prosecutor doesn't have any
evidence is dressed or she's
just making a profit making some
arguments on allegations before
the fourth.
The most important Mr chairman
the rules of evidence do not
apply.
So here's a comes up and
basically anything part of what
reliable comes in front of the
judge to make that decision.
And if the state still under
that incredibly low threshold
cannot meet its burden.
To prove that a person is
dangerous to the community it
strongly suggests to me that
that person doesn't belong in
jail.
Because again under the rules of
criminal procedure.
Those fifty percent that is Maso
menos to nine eight.
That's what the judge being able
to consider everything.
Your state.
That basically but most
importantly the simple arguments
of the prosecutor in this the
process here should be standing
up making a compelling argument.
That's enough.
So I think that we should keep
that in mind as we talk about
what I'm well reform.
To the system.
Mr chairman I want to delve a
bit deeper than lastly regarding
the population of persons that
are.
On pre trial release they have
not been to change the port has
instead impose some other
conditions of relief as the
Chief Justice suggested ankle
monitoring is kind of a textbook
now K. to that.
Of that population how many of
them went on to pick up a
subsequent arrest.
Mister chairman Senator
Candelaria
in Bernalillo county
about nineteen percent in the
other counties where we have
data it's lower than that were
around fifteen percent and
that's consistent with national
experience any new charge that's
from a first degree felony down
to a petty misdemeanor.
So let's assume just round
mountain this on the actual
numbers but let's assume you got
a thousand people who were
released what you're telling me
is about a hundred and fifty of
them on average would be
arrested at some point during
their pre trial on something new
is that accurate Mr Chairman
center Cutler that's for yes.
Mr chairman then of that about a
hundred and fifty do we
understand or know how many are
actually arrested on a violent
felony.
So
sorry.
We have a study from Bernalillo
county that studies that
directly and we have a look at
that that that is actually again
better that is fewer people get
arrested for violent crimes in
the places where we've
implemented outside of
Bernalillo county but in that
same Bernalillo county which I
should note only studied
families because the metric
court doesn't differ Mr chair
you should be assessing.
Risk free misdemeanor arrests
since two but this is only for
families so the more serious
crimes about four point seven
percent got arrested for what is
classified as a violent crime
in Bernalillo county in that
classification is a list of
about sixty crimes that the DA
the public defender the courts
the jails everybody in the
system degree we would counties
as violent offenses so a little
less than five percent of which
something like eighty seven
percent of those arrests for for
for three felony misdemeanor
petty misdemeanor.
So we're so
it is what I'm understanding is
even the definition of what
constitutes a violent offense is
is rather large under the
definition thank god says to
about four point seven percent
is that fair Mr chairman senator
Candelaria yes that's what we
found in Bernalillo county as I
said that that is a little the
numbers are a little lower in
terms of arrests for violent
offenses any other jurisdictions
we have data for.
So I I think this is kind of the
missing piece that Mr chairman
of the data that I've been
trying to piece together getting
ready for today's hearing.
All of that four point seven
percent which again comes from
the number of people whose.
That for
whom the court denied the
state's motion to detain trial
of that four point seven
percent.
You know this is the trouble
running to a deposition you get
to a good point you're heading
up to just try to figure out a
way to explain it what I'm
trying to understand Mr chairman
Mr Representative and then is.
Most people who went on to
commit a violent offense.
What was the original charge do
we do with those people who.
Have been charged in the first
instance with one of those same
enumerated violent offenses and
picked up a new violent offense
or where these predominantly
people who were picked up on a
nonviolent offense would just so
happen to subsequently pick up
of our defense.
Mr chairman and senator
Candelaria the report is chock
full of all the details I have a
lot of it in my memory for the
other give me if I have to be a
little bit
around the numbers a little bit
but.
But it's actually true that
violent arrests these are by the
way these are people in this
really committed an offense I
got arrested from the fence and
I can talk about our combat in
the country but anyway.
Of those who get arrested for a
violent offense during the pre
trial period.
The fewer of them were charged
with a violent offense many of
them are charged with nonviolent
offenses but what we did find it
is as the risk assessment
instrument categorizes people
into about six different
categories in the high risk
categories particularly the
highest risk category the
restaurant is much higher and
it's higher for violent offenses
but it we haven't found a
correlation in the data but we I
mean of course we look at the
data believe ask Miss Universe
in New Mexico look at the data
other folks have analyzed data
we haven't found a correlation
between the original charge
which is of course in the
determination of the district
attorney and of re arrest for a
violent arrests for violent
crime during the pre trial
period and that also is
consistent with the experience
elsewhere it's surprising but
true that a lot of that pre
trial arrest for a violent crime
the current money of right if
people many of whom were not
originally charged with a
violent from.
I think that that is that's
that's ultimately what what
concerns me most about the
notion that.
The law should be changed to
basically switched the burden.
Is regarding justice regard to
some offenses.
That that now instead of the
government having to prove
anything you have to prove
before the state you're in this.
To me it's in order to qualify
does not determination innocence
or guilt but it is use your sort
of proving to the government
you're right to remain free.
And and and Mr chairman that
that that is what ultimately
proves I think the pharmacist
this discussion.
Is when you look at the numbers.
you it's not project.
The folks who unfortunately very
very small number of people have
been released because a petition
for
pre trial detention was denied.
Vast majority of them were
actually in the criminal justice
system to begin with because of
the violence.
So in the interest of politics
we would instead.
Just.
Is a whole lot more people.
And I would remind the committee
that before the bail reform
in which I was here for
thankfully.
People still bought out on bail
is still committed violent
crimes.
That happened.
Three.
so I just want to underscore
those issues Mr chairman that
that when we look at that point
data I respectfully submit that
what the court has done in terms
of actually enforcing and
monitoring.
Yes how you improve public
safety.
And I think a clear example of
someone who has a no contact
order in place with the domestic
violence for household violence
victims internet partner.
The ankle monitors in the
anything unless it's watch
twenty first and I said this is
a criminal defense attorney
you know I want to know if my
client is doing things as well.
We all just need to play by the
rules and I would submit to you
that if if we do anything this
is really gonna bounce public
safety in the state it's
providing the judiciary the
resources it needs to do that
kind of live monitoring.
changing the rules of pre trial
detention sounds good on the
campaign trail.
But it doesn't actually benefit
public it just further roads are
constitution how we actually
protect the public is making the
investments to just.
so Mister chairman I want to
thank you very much for the
opportunity to discuss this
today I want to thank the chief
I think Mr seven are analyst for
your work in summary Mr chairman
I just think another supposed to
be a running list Ross all of
session on these is I.
Especially on the compensation
side I think closing three
million dollar gap is to a one
or staff we submit we should do
that not also hope that we can
reach out some more priority
system to get Judiciary too soon
as possible funding of their
returns possible as I said the
issue of.
we can attract banishes maybe
not as Adam Bernalillo county
we're really affects folks
across the state especially in
the smaller judicial districts
so if we want a consistent
quality of justice across the
state we do need to compensate
for thank you Mr chairman thank
you.
Senator Campos Amanda we need to
clarify something on the page
with with the courts.
And and so you want to clarify
that first.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee but yes there is
an important clarification on
the compensation piece both the
LFC ten percent compensation
increase for judges as well as
the numbers presented by the
Chief Justice in already here
today that three million dollar
gap are contingent on a bill
that would do Google magistrate
judges from the District Court
salary pay structure so that
those numbers do not include
that ten percent for magistrates
and that's an important
clarification and I think
Senator about this has that
built to do Google and the
judicial I think he's pre filed
the bill in so they'll be a
conversation just before I run
to another thing you know the
retirement issue is not gonna
resolve itself especially in
magistrate because they're such
a small pool of magistrates
paying into the fund so we're
gonna look hard at and how we
move the magistrates you may
have to move them into state
general.
And transfer them in because the
the number of magistrates are so
small that that fund will never
completely recover will have to
look at some other of funding
for for the a judicial
retirement how we fix that he's
got some fixes here I do agree
with everyone that that if you
want good judges I don't care
what business you're in you need
to pay that you pay well you
need to pay in the market.
I don't believe in this I may be
wrong on this but after visiting
with CPO I don't believe every
agency is targeting their
classifications inspo an
additional language that they
have added to pay salary I'll
take those off pay salary so
there is some small training
that I think needs to happen
within within the system but we
know that some problem in every
agency and every branch of
government that we need to fix
that payment problem we need to
fix the pay
for EA's being impacted thanks
to pay across the board
so we are gonna look hard I I do
believe that.
If we want to be competitive and
we want good judges and everyone
of us wants good judges expects
to me when and where the
speeding ticket
You what good judges in the
court and you have to pay for
them and it's just like any
other job if you don't have
people that are experienced and
people that are willing to do
that job because it's not a fun
job the judge making a decision
every single day that affect
someone's life in some way shape
or form is not an easy job.
Whether the law provides you to
make that decision or not it's
not an easy job and so I I think
we're going to figure out where
we're going to get I I don't see
an issue on the Senate side with
that
I think that in order for New
Mexico and I said this is chair
last year we're gonna fix one
problem at a time and it's your
turn.
throughout agencies you take the
environment department last year
they got a bump we're gonna fix
other problems that we've had
for a long time in New Mexico.
And that's the agenda that we
need to head down with with the
races with the pension funds.
I'm
thank you monitoring I think
works great Senator can make
Candelaria made some great
points on pre trial services
that they may or may not work in
independent and you don't have
on throughout the state that's
another issue if you take
offenders in Gallup who may have
been arrested for some detox
prom and may have been in the
system and are you shaking his
head a hundred sometimes there's
absolutely no way to pre trial
some of those those services in
say that guy's been arrested a
hundred times you share me with
them maybe we're just public
intoxication or something so.
It's a tough road all I do have
to go to another meeting Senator
Campos is gonna chair he has a
list members if you have at one
on the list either raise your
hand and and make them can see
or take center Campos if you
don't have his number will get
it to you.
We we did figure out the
webcasting prom so everybody
knows L. E. S. C. was in here
prior and they use the
webcasting system and so are
webcasting system we either have
to reboot the whole system and
start again and make it accurate
but we'll we'll make it through
this time and that the north
will we'll figure that out so
Senator Campos you're thank you
very much the center when US
next on the list we have Center
Gonzalez and then Center road
just Senator Gonzales please.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Pretty much what I had on you
know
Senator Candelaria really about
a lot of the points that I was
looking at and then also now
with the addition of order
chairman Andrew mills LOL.
You know what of I'd like to say
is for on.
The many years that I've been on
the investment potential
investment pension.
Committee with the interim
committee.
And we go over this over and
over.
And.
I'm just looking at it from what
I see.
I think it's incorrect to say a
one time fix you know that if we
put a certain amount that we're
going to be that this will be
fixed because so.
You can fix something.
If you don't change what's going
to be coming in.
You know we can get up to a
certain level.
Then what happens is if we don't
change to were the employer
employee contribution.
Doesn't change before we do any
legislation that would change
the in ten years back in the
same boat.
You know so I think could be a
how much federal approach to
approach business so this is one
one time would do but it's
constant because it's always
moving.
The now micro Senator munis
mention certain group you know
of the.
The participation is too small
to to keep it at the level that
it needs to be and that's just
my part you know on a lot of the
very good comments that were
brought up to by Senator from
the Nadia but to me is like a
point some of.
You know in going on a positive
but for forty nine years you
know that's that's a long.
You know I think we need to look
at things a little bit more but
the real level realistic.
And if someone wants to comment
that's fine but thank you for
presentation it's been a very
good presentation and we do
understand the needs that are
out there and we do understand
you know what we need to do us
of state staff from level of
the.
Competitive.
Thank you very much Senator
Gonzales next we go to Senator
Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
granted good afternoon to
justice the yellow and two are
dependent to everyone in the
audience
just as the health thank you for
making me at because you met
with many others knowing how
hard you were working and trying
to get this proposal a lot for
two different legislators and
you met with me as you recall in
the in the year majority leaders
conference room and formerly
explained all of your proposal I
at that time I was writing all
these notes maybe call and if
you can remember I still have
them here look at this yeah
okay.
What I was riding on and we were
talking just the and he probably
thought why he's rebelling I
much when you know a bit it's
amazing how much iPhone arrives.
Second practice that I wrote
because I couldn't I just folder
that fund looking at right now
all of the information that you
gave me with all of the not so
thank you very much for that
that means that addresses
and of course the thank you
already also we're trying but
just let me ask you one question
here on your.
The proposal that you're making
for the salary increases
the increase that you're
proposing for the job this is
would be commensurate with the
increase for a federal
magistrate if I if I can
remember correctly and I wrote
that correctly here I think I
see it somewhere here anyway the
question that I have is on the
sheet that you gave us and I'm
looking at it from that same day
for you put down the fiscal year
twenty three judicial salary
increases the role my full
matrix.
On there you you wrote what the
justices and the district judges
are making today along with the
court of appeals and others in
fiscal year twenty to and then
what they would be making fiscal
year twenty three which I have
here the question I have is the
number that you gave us of of
for the IDF Business associate
justice in two hundred one
thousand one hundred twelve
dollars and the that's what they
get up and Justice would go to
from the one hundred and fifty
three three ninety four the the
and of course the Chief Justice
would be one fifty five three
ninety four today to two hundred
and three one hundred twelve the
question that I have on those
two numbers this if you fight
the request in the discussions
that we've been having all
seemed to go toward the salary
that you're proposing for the
Soviet Jeff which is two hundred
and one thousand one hundred
twelve and that's the number
that got into the six point
eight nine seven million dollars
that included that and the
district judges that we're
proposing I think the question
that I have overall is what
about a Chief Justice the card.
Why the difference between an
associate justice and Chief
Justice recommendation for
fiscal year twenty three maybe a
couple of thousand dollars it's
still something considering how
the local hello we are in the
salary scale and so I just
wondered if your mind just as
the general in your proposal
you're looking at the Chief
Justice also making the two
hundred and one thousand one
hundred and twelve in an
including all justices or
something different because
that's not in the total number
different.
It's this is.
Senator Rodriguez Mr chairman
what I intended was to go
according to the existing
statutory of scale up for pay
which would mean that under even
our proposal the Chief Justice
would continue to make two
thousand dollars more than the
associate justices I don't want
to come up though the water by
putting in too much detail
because it just gets a ball of
confusion thank you for bringing
that up and yes we do intend to
leave the Chief Justice to make
slightly more than the associate
justices just because there's so
much work involved it's not
enough paper to interested
speaking may want more more than
the two thousand but the only
I'm asking for is the the two
thousand thank you for bringing
that up thank you for your kind
words.
Court now let me just make sure
that in the total number that
you're requesting to figure it
out six million eight hundred
not nine hundred something I
have it here that number is yes
the current three thousand
included in there you just have
to wait that number with that
involved or not yes we did yes.
R. I. and the same thing just as
it happened for the different
jobs for judges because you look
at the need for Dr the salary
today would is active on average
for this new one hundred and
forty thousand two hundred forty
right by that judge for chief Mr
would be a hundred eighty three
thousand
let's see if I have it correct
yes because of the different
judges not empty is that one
thirty eight four thirty eight
and we're making one eighty one
if you look at it the same thing
happened there is that two
thousand dollar difference
roughly and I just want to make
sure that in looking at the
final number for the budget that
we are in fact calculated that
in for the chief justices and
the Chief chat online with us
Senator you're just Mr chairman
that's true correct it's also
correct for the chief judge of
the metropolitan court you also
get so two thousand dollars more
the Mitchell court judges.
Yes okay good want to make sure
that and and that's all I have I
think you know your request this
meeting that day that universal
for all it is that you know if
this is truly long over due and
we need to do something
meaningful that for awhile
considering legislation right
and the cost and and and help
low you've been over so many
years it's time and catch up
with this thank you very much
for meeting with me then and for
your presentation today that's
all I have Mister chairman thank
you very much centered previous
we really appreciate that we're
moving along center by the
please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Mister Chief Justice Mr
happen in this Dick Peddie yes
thank you so much very very
helpful information I wanted to
know more about this for a very
long time and I've heard about
it when I've all of this is
reading the newspapers and my
first a here in this committee
so Mister Chief Justice when you
were talking about maybe tying
the the Supreme Court salaries
to the level of the federal
limited jurisdiction a
magistrate judge is that correct
yes are you also proposing that
that the linkage up and down the
two hundred or so judges across
the state and and have you
thought about that measure and
maybe looking at that because
then suddenly you're taking out
this whole having to come back
every year and argue and fight
for and and and have you know
whatever if you thought about
that or did you already look at
that.
We we are we are we did look at
Mr center for the Mr Chairman I
apologize for the protocol yes
we did look at it and yes
current ten is is that if the
federal if this goes through
time to that would be a
provision that if the
magistrates court up say two
thousand dollars for a thousand
dollars that would incrementally
increase the Chief Justice
justice is salary which would
then have an effect on the court
of appeals District Court in.
So there would be linkage Mr
chairman Mr Chief Justice up and
down the yes the judicial
ranking yes okay I'm glad that
you're that you're thinking
about that
What is the I guess frequency
with which the federal limited
jurisdiction magistrate judge
salaries reviewed and salaries
are altered based on on what
what that's going to be set at
do you know
Senator Padilla Mr Chairman I do
not know no idea
the idea was to have a.
Level the level of competition
with them in terms of
recruitment so what we look for
go down we go down whatever it
is they do of course will never
keep up with our retirement
situation and other things that
they have but strictly on the
pay I don't know do you have any
I yes Mister chairman Senator
Padilla I did look at the
magistrates always over the last
twenty years and they tracked
almost exactly percent for
percent with inflation the Chief
Justice of the nicest precursor
Congress and ask for pay for the
article three judges in the
measure gets paid ninety percent
of what the article three to
participate and it's tractor
fortune over the last two
decades state
I didn't find a place where they
said say let's take the federal
judges which include the
magistrates.
Fifty percent higher some pretty
consistent it's been a measure
of inflation which is another
attraction of time.
If you fix this time into the
federal magistrates because they
don't their history has a band
that they get.
Grossly inappropriate rate
increases but the track
information so you don't state
road the value of the so thank
you Mr chairman and this
particular system Mr path and
that's what I want to hear me I
I would hate for us to have to
come back in three years and so
my god what we do now because
nothing's happened at the this
special limited jurisdiction
magistrate judge salary you know
secretary of whatever
did you seek feedback and and
information from the other
ranked a judges in the state did
you did you have maybe into
discussions with them how do
they feel about this this a
linkage
Senator Padilla Mr chairman yes
we have met and budget committee
we manage the church's council
they do support it hundred
percent we did the also at the
beginning.
We realize that the magistrates
we're going to have to take them
out of the form take a lot of
the stench.
So I scheduled a meeting with
all the magistrates across the
state however they could attend
by zoom some attended in person.
And what we learned at that
meeting was that they're not
happy with their salary.
At first there was some
consternation about the no be
taken out of the statute that
and we have no consequences to
them.
But after we had further
discussions as I understand it
the magistrate judge's
Association at this point is not
at all opposed to our proposal
to cut them off the statute
their main concern is as I
understand it is retirement and
so what we're all on the same
page across the entire judiciary
is four seconds thank you Mr
chairman and and Mr Chief
Justice and Mr Burciaga I'm
really happy to hear that
because I mean I'm fully
supportive of of taking judicial
salaries to what they actually
need to be so we can have the
best and the brightest I mean
I've met so many of you along
the way and I'm so impressed
with all of you I don't think
you do it for the pay I think
you do it because you really
want to do something you know
for your community that way and
so I'm really appreciative of
that thank you so full stop I
just wanted to talk about one
other thing this is sort of
along the lines of some of my
colleagues in the previous
questions that were that were
given to you and I'm not sure
who would like to address this
one but something that has
always concerned me
and I guess it's from a from a
salary from the sellers use me a
cost standpoint so I have the in
the C. in my district in
Albuquerque that's the thank you
one of the largest or if not the
largest correctional institution
the state you know there's an
average and there that's added
into my number from my it's the
size of my district to to to
there's all sorts of stuff going
on and all kinds of need some
office working with that group
out there it's a quite the
effort yep
One thing that I'm very
concerned about it and there are
there dollars being thought of
or operational
I know that that's in DC but
that's a result of what you do
The average and I don't expect
to have this right now but
what's the average
you know the difference of the
average age of cell mates and
stuff the reason I ask that is
when we talk about you know
first time in if I'm.
You know nineteen and I made
some sort of a mistake in my
life at that age but then I'm
being housed with you know Wally
for commissioning username but
you know but some individual
that's you know fifty and can't
quite you know because never
learned a lesson is never been
able to get themselves you know
how to where they're at or
whatever you know there's a
whole lot that goes on even
twenty four hours of that
interaction and if you haven't
been there for any longer than
that I the together who knows
what the heck happens at that
point you know with with some of
these individuals I'm not sure
if this is even in your purview
but I would love to know more
about that if that something is
it a cost is is something that
we should think of would you
like to talk about that at all.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
members of the committee of
directors recipe because the
this approach is executive
director of the metropolitan
detention center gets paid two
hundred thirty three thousand
dollars right around the center
and they have to they're taking
all kinds of considerations when
they put folks together in their
pods they look first at risk Mr
primary writer the gang related
to a separate gangs and all that
kind of thing but I can't say
that the effect we've had the
judiciary side on the
population.
About seven years ago
populations running almost three
thousand we have sent people out
of county all over the place we
did a lot of work in the a
criminal justice
community in Albuquerque working
with all the folks in the system
including M. D. C. and that the
the public defender and
everybody.
And that population I rose
around thirteen fourteen hundred
from month instead of three
thousand it's bill to hold
roughly two thousand.
I hope that makes it a little
easier for which.
To accomplish safety within the
within the jail community I have
no idea if they consider the
relative histories of the
inmates when they put them
together they are having
obviously significant challenges
with COVID and everything in the
in the jails but that's a County
system so we don't directly no
funding we don't manage them
that would be a county
commission that you want to talk
about that but of course of
course interact a lot and I've
spent a lot of time working with
the metropolitan detention
center through the criminal
justice coordinating council
trying to work on why the
population was so I not not
surprisingly it was because
people being held pretrial
because a compatible on that
sixty percent of the population
fell into that category which is
a very bad thing for public
safety but anyway so indirectly
I can tell you that we have
worked to get the population
down to where it should be
that's about right for the size
of the jurisdiction that NDC
serve Representative how they
categorizing inmates and and do
that
you have to address that this
county folks that's something we
don't do.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
really all I I have you know a
lot of the questions were
answered for me I just and I
don't know that that was this
really going to be in your
purview to answer I appreciate
commenting on it do you give any
feedback to the cities counties
miscibility good so session
accounts or where the run these
facilities to say Hey you know
you're not what you don't want
to put nineteen year old with
fifty year old because state you
know just in the in the mix they
come out you know what what does
what happens with so please
think about that and maybe we
can talk more about that and
other sessions thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
here for the next reviewing to
Senator Burt center for please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you all for being here today and
the
We seem to learn a lot as we
have these get togethers of the
point of clarification for me
first Mr chairman
you us to justice for thirty
five million dollars to shore up
the retirement plan is that
correct that's correct yes okay
and LFC is recommending twenty
is that correct so is that
thirty five on top of the twenty
or is that thirty five minus the
twenty so our difference really
is fifteen million dollars is
that correct okay and that's a
big help and I appreciate that
one of the quick question to
And not related really to two
budget but.
The chart on the facts and
figures page.
Of forty percent crime.
Categories property crime.
And I just want to verify that
I.
I think investors before but
most property crime equates back
to purchase of drugs
or possibly alcohol mostly drugs
I think is that still a
correction eight months.
Mr chairman senator Byrd
that's fair with so yes if you
want more detail about exactly
that the character dresser but
you're right.
That's fine I just wanna make
sure I've heard that two three
years ago one make sure that was
still tracking correctly so
really Mr chairman that's I just
once a couple of clarification
points I notice a little bit
later on so thank you very much
we'll move along and with with
respect for time Mr chairman
thank you thank you very much
senator Byrd moving along and
then for a second time we're
going to Senator Rodriguez.
Mr chairman and I will be quiet
only because I failed to mention
earlier when I was speaking
about the knife you are in that
I got from just in the hill you
have to figure out thank you for
you brought out all of the
salaries are at least a good
amount for several and you're on
your team for more than the
salary for different facial New
Mexico and it is amazing how
yeah you see it here in the and
one picture how low the judges
and the justices are because you
look at even the city manager
for example county manager even
the state and the state engineer
here and
University of New Mexico School
of Law have Corsetti are there
in the county attorney you just
go on and on and look at the
different salary levels and it
is just way above water judges
in our justices make and to
see that we always knew you were
low Jeff is the hills that when
you see it in the in a matrix
like creative with the actual
title is in the amounts they
make on average you really gives
you a very good picture of where
we are and it's not good that we
have the judiciary at the level
that gives some I did want to
make that point thank you Mr
chairman justice we only do you
have a comment before we we go
on I don't have anything else
but if you like to comment
Senators orders Mr Chairman no I
don't have anything that except
to say thank you for your
comments appreciate.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Senator
Rodriguez as we move along we're
going for the first time to
Senator shares Senator shares
please.
Thank you Mr chair Chief Justice
of.
So I look at this and I don't
disagree that the the pay is.
Probably not right but I am
curious though why do why do we
have any Supreme Court justices
if it's a hundred and ten
thousand dollars less than the.
The Bernalillo county attorney
for fifty thousand dollars or so
less than just private practice
what is anybody want to be Chief
Justice.
There are people that want to be
justices they can't afford to be
chief to go to the court because
they have financial obligations
that children in school that the
children were in college that
would apply but think they can't
afford it there are others who
have like me I've been in the
judiciary I was a lawyer from
nineteen seventy six to two
thousand three.
Before the committee because of
the New Mexico court of appeals
and I've been in the judiciary
receipts I could retire then I
didn't get into this for the
money I got into it because I
wanted I had a unique background
a unique experience and I want
and I thought I could make a
contribution to our judiciary to
the people's state of New Mexico
and I really thoroughly enjoyed
the work there are people like
that there's hope in your
district for the eleventh.
The worst case the chief judge
judge early he's he doesn't need
the money but he's very much
interested by the way you're
lucky to have him because he.
He does some innovations up
there he doesn't management
things up there he does some of
the.
Control the docket things up
there that only a person with
his type of background could do
but until until he came along a
lot of the stuff when we by the
way so there are exceptions to
that and yes it as I said in my
opening statement.
we do expect people public
service to give up something but
not not to that extent.
Mr chairman and chief justice
so.
Yes I'm not.
Arguing that you shouldn't get
paid.
But we heard before that that we
wanted judges with some
experience.
in Seoul I think.
judge girly is it is an example
he's
certainly he has experience.
Why wouldn't we want judges that
are.
That have already.
Been successful in their career
is a as an attorney in our now
retired so to speak because
clearly they would have a lot
more experience than a new judge
of meeting new attorney
That may be interested in this
now because well wait a minute
now I can make two hundred and
whatever to a thousand dollars
but my law practices is not
quite taken off yet so let me
see if I can be a District Court
judge instead so it seems to me
that if we want the experienced
judges Wilder the judges to are
there that attorney's anyway
they've been around longer and
thus have experience I would
assume that thank you and the
rest of the justices are in that
category.
We wouldn't want it to be
counterproductive that now all
of a sudden we made we made to
pay high enough so that junior
attorneys would then be trying
to get in the mix.
Once for your your your
competition is I'm not sure I
understand yes Senator chair
Mister chairman Senator interest
in your question but
On the one hand.
We haven't had retired.
Lawyers apply for these
positions.
Just hasn't happened.
I'm secondly with regard to
young killers are the dealers
one apply but if you're if the
pool was expanded to mid tier.
Lawyers in their fifties and
sixties that handles a wide
variety of cases that have
handled that have been before
the judges that understand the
law on how it works verses eight
a younger less experienced
person those are obviously the
ones that are going to rise to
the top it's it's your but the
way it is now.
You're not getting those
individuals to even apply.
If I'm if I'm.
From its your question at I
think so yes.
I just wanted to.
Often what we do is
counterproductive to what we
think we're doing.
So you know we we incentivize
something thinking it's going to
be a help but what we got was
the the wrong reaction.
And so I just want to make again
not argue in the numbers at all
agree that they need to check
but I just don't want to.
The unintended consequences.
but then I've got another
question for Mr pattern here.
The pre trial assessment is that
like a a credit score to so it's
is you know I've been arrested
twice and so my credit scores
now one hundred instead of one
fifty or.
What is how does that work in is
the judge are there any
guidelines for the judge to say
okay with this happens then you
should do the.
Mr chairman members of
committing Senator the public
safety assessment is
yes it does give you a score it
ranks in the state of limited
number of criteria up to nine
based on risk of rearrest and
risk of failure to appear it's
based on the studies of millions
of cases where they looked at
what projects those two things
the estimated that hundreds of
kinds of that your age your kind
of job all kinds of stuff like
that and they picked up those
that are the most of the most
significant one is prior
criminal conviction it points to
consistent future behavior that.
And so the judge does get a
rating both on the scale for
risk of thank you appear on a
scale of risk of the offense.
Our particular mission also has
a violent scale so they're going
to flag if they're in a higher
elevated risk for violence and
that's all that is given to the
judge along with information
under license the convictions
and all those things so that the
judges were trained in what the
scores mean what lies behind in
can make an assessment and the
store will be telling the judge
of this person is not likely to
fail to appear but there are
risks to get arrested and there
are ways that you can limit
mitigate that risk whether it's
not having them drinking or
making sure they stay in school
a young folks are much higher
risk than older folks so you
want to get the youth in the to
have on ties to the community
that will keep them out of
trouble more or less so behind
all that science is a number a
result of that that the judge
gets the judge knows what that
risk assessment means but they
also have the person in front of
them to have their own
experience depending how long it
been on the bench
box and that then they can
listen anything that the
prosecutor or the defense
attorney wants to tell the judge
about.
What kind of conditions adjusted
set now are I think it's
important to point out that the
judge can't detain the person in
general no matter how risky they
think there are for committing a
new offense without the motion
and the proof by the prosecutor
that the person is dangerous
even if they noted here is some
of the reforms are made in that
study that was referred to
earlier of the interim committee
that's District Court adopted
the ability to make it easier
for the dust to bring those
motions give them more time but
they can bring the motion any
time but if there's a score I
guess a credit score isn't a bad
analogy somebody maybe very
credit worthy but they have a
bad score okay they can explain
why how they got there but by
and large there it's a decent
predictor of how credit risk you
are so that's not a bad amount
you're supposed yes so what
credit score you go into a bank
you want to borrow money so if
you've got a credit score a high
credit score of they're more
likely to just say yes or lower
interest rate or both if you got
a low credit score then they're
likely to say no thank you go
somewhere else.
but the lenders have a a range
where they can do that is that
is that the same with the judge
so is there a range they know
you better do this or you better
not do that.
Based on the range that score Mr
chair yes the the score goes to
the Senate recommendations about
the kinds of restrictions that
might benefit this individual
given the risk category across
the you know the two axes of the
of the scale.
so the judge.
Are the written instructions to
the judge if the credit scores
less than a hundred I just use a
hundred is then you should you
should
Be harsher with them in some
cases I don't know what that
means.
Of the or if it's above a
hundred and go home we don't
care what the prosecutor has to
say.
Chairman Senator members of the
committee a recommendation does
go with the risk score that
doesn't tell the judge you have
to do anything because the judge
does with the years she thinks
is best but it is the yes it's
it's and the conditions of the
lease can be more restrictive
more severe up to detention of
the DA filed a motion improved
it as you go higher risk so in
your case to the lower the
credit score the more collateral
you would want to put up in
order to get the loan this
person is going to have to go
see pre trial Lara going to file
a conditions if not going to get
arrested during echo monitor if
the violate the conditions like
don't go within a mile of the
victim's home
they could be put right in jail
so.
That's how you mitigate the
The low credit risk for her the
high risks for based on these.
And then Mr chair and that the.
Is this a a nationwide
organization and who is it I
mean so the credit scores you
get from trans union and Equifax
and experience who does this.
Mr chairman and members the
committee center sure the PSA
public safety assessment was
developed by ano ventures that's
a of a huge public service
company they're based out of
Texas somewhere around Houston I
think they did all this research
and study and then they of put
it into practice it was about
the first for widest use in
Kentucky so used in a whole lot
of states now the public safety
assessment as a pretrial risk
assessment so that judges can
base release conditions on
someone's risk and not do you
have a thousand dollars to put
out for the bond so boy initial
estimate was developed and
studies of over three million
cases.
Ons are many times that by now
the assessment that was done by
the university Mexico in the
early County look at over ten
thousand cases that had had a
PSA and and how how do with the
PSA said currently with what
actually happened.
can and that's where I found it
is protected it's a good
instrument.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
very much Senator share we have
one other on the listener would
Senator Woods please.
Thank you Mr chair.
You know I have many people at
different times talked to me
about.
Go on the ballot who should vote
for.
No one and we go around and and
many times they say.
Well how can we score how can we
how can we school not I'm asking
Mr chair of of of this this
question.
Should we score.
Judges district attorneys both
here help for retention for for
election should we support them
by a conviction rate.
Mr chair Miss Mister chairman
Senator Wirth I would not I'm
not a policymaker.
That's for the legislature to
make that decision on.
But as Chief Justice of the
state of New Mexico I would be
personally opposed to that I
think it's a bad idea.
you put judges in a position of
Responding to public opinion.
Rather than following the long.
And I think that's a bad idea.
What I'm talking about Mr
chairman and and chief justice
what I'm talking about is
At this time of COVID.
And we can't get jury trials
going.
When we asked for four you know
they ask for a speedy trial then
they want to jury trial we can't
find a jury trial in a lot of
reduced seems to be.
Released but because we can't
make the time work we can't make
that the time.
of a trial working out for me
and we just literally have to
drop the charges
good to you I don't know how
much longer and for which you
you can see real well that I'm
not.
Mr Chairman Senator what I'm.
The the lawyer is because no
talismanic qualities to it
whatsoever it's a job that
people do and work very hard at
sending the judges
we are providing jury trials in
the time of COVID we're not
providing as many as we drive
because we have to keep the
separation and place and so
forth we're working on I'm
giving you ways to advance those
cases on the docket get them
tried we have Justice Thompson
to justice some more on R. as a
special team working from the
Supreme Court to trying to
advance to everything we can to
advance if every county in the
state of prioritizing get the
criminal cases that need to be
tried tried as soon as possible.
Justice bacon and Justice Vargas
are working on getting the same
thing done with several cases so
that and one of the things just
coming up very simply we've
we've learned that we can move
civil cases out of the
courthouse.
So that leaves his space within
the courthouse we need safety
consideration and so forth
for the criminal cases the civil
cases can be tried elsewhere and
and and just and efficient way
in fact the one of the proposals
I've heard of is maybe using.
These chambers when you're not
in session to conduct trials and
I expect that's going to happen
so yes we are working very very
hard to get these cases to try
and get them tried in a timely
way
You can get there is to get
these people sentenced thirty to
get sent.
Well I appreciated the mixture
thank you for the time which is
something that has been brought
up to me especially in the
second district that was really
logging lagging behind on on a
quick trial so thank you very
much.
Thank you very much Senator
would always thank you very much
for the pointed questions and of
those questions that really get
us to think about other aspects
of in this case possibly of the
legal system I I don't have
anyone else on the list I am
going to ask a
few questions and privative and
so as we go forward to just
brief answers but it all goes
back to compensation compaction
it goes back to what the future
is going to be when we start
talking about sustainability
regarding the resources that
each of us wishes to advocate
for whenever we do talk about if
you will our legal system so in
that to being said the first
issue that I would like to bring
up is
Given I to what that compaction
would look like if we do go
ahead and appropriate to the
resources and then from there
does that help to mitigate some
of the problems that we do have
whenever we do talk about
salaries and of working if you
will with CPO into the future.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of course I don't know
what what the conversations I
have with my HR director and we
have all the time if we do this
we have compaction do we have us
our promise we look at that a
lot looking arranges I will try
that CPO has a move the Regis is
such a long time and now hiring
people about a hundred five
hundred ten percent of the range
of we hired below a hundred
percent because we do move the
ranges we get a pancreas for our
employees will move the rain
just to keep up with whatever's
appropriate with inflation
in looking at our cooperation
the percentage there rate of the
salary range yes we very much of
look at all of that and we will
have all that in mind when we
ask the Supreme Court of forget
distribution of any
discretionary races we get if
you gave me if you give it to
the the courts another two or
three million dollars for
employees for example my
emphasis my proposal would be if
we have discretion over how
that's distributed to address
the lower pay rate ranges and
advanced and more significantly
than the higher pay ranges
because as I said we do have a
fair number of people rate below
forty thousand dollars we would
like to get them to a what I
call more of a living wage of if
we if we have discretion over
the rate increases that
compaction of course not insure
the judges because of a statute
that creates levels of pay that
you set off a justice payment
goes on down the line so the
they're always the rate the same
whatever level they're at but
they don't you know push up
against each other but it's very
much a issue alive issue when we
look at salary increases and how
they're distributed for the
employees yes as an example as
phone we start talking about the
salary schedule salary ranges
within what you're devising the
intent is if you go ahead and
you pay a certain amount yes I'm
gonna go and create any of that
compaction or if you will even
some level of distortion within
the compensation package yes Mr
chairman members the committee
action more clear because I know
this.
You don't necessarily we're not
we know follow us but we have
our own sort of personal rules
we have our own set of sour
ranges obviously around job
descriptions are lots of jobs
they don't have but of the
Supreme Court adopts over
personal rules and the way we
run and we we look at what CPO
doesn't I look at this hour's I
pace when I talk about an
average salary comparison
looking at their data but
we we focus a lot on Mr chair
the ranges are appropriate
moving folks within the range
and keeping the proper
distinction between higher jobs
and lower jobs and we study the
jobs we have a way we we started
on so that they have points and
then that's how they gonna send
all parents and all that and we
very actively do that to try to
make sure we avoid any number of
issues that would be bad but
compaction forces one that we
look at all the time and I data
shows is we don't have that but
it's I have to.
I as a director of the A. R. C.
I. oversee the HR system under
the rules adopted by the Supreme
Court and when we get requests
for extraordinary races they
come out a band or something
over there on the executive side
we call them out of cycle races
that's one of the first is a
look at my HR department gives
me the data on where that would
put the person within that whole
range of jobs and what how that
compares to people similar
experience and all that
for for issues of compaction and
otherwise keeping this keeping
the structure appropriate as we
used to refer to the unified
budget as we're going forward
and you're taking a look at the
out of band compensation some of
these issues Madam continue to
rise and how do you how do you
disaggregate that information
and deal with it within your
particular perfume.
Mr chairman with regard to a
what we call our cycle
increases
we look at how that fits within
that usually it's a job
classification look at who in
the whole Judiciary Senate job
losses are you putting this
person on appropriate place
where they belong you know they
have to justify it based on
performance we're criteria for
performance that would allow
them to move independent of any
general pay increase and it's
I can't make them very happy all
the time that we follow the
rules that's what we that's we
set up a really good system it
can't be based on favoritism
something has to be based on
demonstrated performance but one
of the criteria that we use is
houses affect all those within
that job description because we
look at the the state wide
system make sure this equity in
the system not that one court
have more money so they just
gave everybody a pay raise an
offer it's nice but it doesn't
necessarily make the system work
appropriate some of the
qualitative pieces as we go
forward we begin to go and talk
about vacancy rates we talk
about we can't keep our
employees so using a qualitative
and as you move forward how then
do you keep your employees
secondly as you deal with maybe
another band
salary increase how do you keep
those people within the system
so that there is going to be the
stability the continuity and and
more importantly how we gonna
keep an employee for a lasting
career Mr chairman members of
the committee you having the non
ahead with regard to this rate
increases that's one of the ways
we need to do this because we're
losing people to more attractive
pay and even another executive
agencies for similar work so we
want to make the compensation
right otherwise we know that
people keep a job based on
what in joining the person they
work for during the work they do
and getting recognized for that
work okay conversation is is one
way to recognize people but it
doesn't often not always the
primary objective I mean feeling
make forty thousand a committee
forty five you probably need to
make additional money but it's
not always the thing that.
Motivate so we do we find we
offer a lot of training we look
throughout the system to make
sure there aren't inequities
developing we look at across
gender across all kinds of
things age you know are we
looking at a disparities that
have developed within the system
and
We do have of the budget
committee that looks at all
these kinds of things with
regard to compensation side but
on the H. R. side we go to this
record we say we would like to
change this rule for this reason
is having this effect we think
it ought to have this effect of
that kind of thing and then we
administer the rules but it is
interesting that conversations
very important the nature of the
work and opportunities for
training and things like that
helps with retention but we're
not retaining people solely
because of compensation and too
many of our job categories so
that leads to my last question I
asked you a Chief Justice as we
go forward and we talk about
retention what's the innovation
that we can provide so that in
your employees so that members
of the court not only shape that
live it but they continue and
that's the way they spend their
career.
Well.
Number one is getting the pay
work belongs.
Number two is is providing them
with the things that they need
to do their job.
And I think most people are
going to going to be the judges
Want to to their public service
that's why there are entering
into that John is to perform a
public service.
The
Many of them are still looking
at a retirement plan.
Many of them are still looking
at the fact I just talked to a
lawyer the other day and
She says I'm not going to play
to be a to address will not she
says because I don't want to
work to be a hundred to Lamont.
It's so many of these mid level
attorneys that we're talking
about.
That we're trying to recruit we
try to find them through that
are perfect the total return
package is a basis for them to
come in in the mid career and
still get someone of return at a
full retirement but some
retirement that's meaningful to
them that they can look forward
to it in addition to whatever
other arrangements they've made.
As a practicing attorney so
those those are the things that
I would.
Of the two and in the unified
budget does a lot to help judges
express one at a time what their
needs are and then go through
the system and through the
unified budget provide them with
the tools that they need to do
their job.
And I think it's working very
good yes to speak in is working
now to do some innovations to
our budgetary process for
uniformed budgetary process and
the the chief judges that are
working with her are all on
board and very excited as I
understand it to to meet those
challenges to improve the system
so that when we come before you
with the unified budget it has
not only the credibility has
today but increased credibility.
It it's all coming together and
I really appreciate the way that
you're approaching this.
We really appreciate of course
not only the thoughtfulness but
as you go forward the ability to
advocate for those people that
definitely not only need the the
increase in salaries but also if
you will the dignity of the work
and that means the workplace
that means the kind of things
that we're all looking forward
to and most importantly the
training and the integrity that
we can all bring to our state so
I thank you all very much for
the presentation the panel also
in the members of the Senate
thank you as well I don't know
if you have anything else that
you wish to bring forward of
course that would be you are
talked about the budget request
but Mr PYP and I don't know if
you wanna talk about anything
else regarding the
administrative office of the
courts Mr Chairman nope I
appreciate your attention all
the time we've taken up you know
I'm always available to you you
know where to find me if you
have questions which I'm sure
you will going forward and I
hope when the house bill two
comes over here to the Senate
look so good that we don't even
have to ask you for the.
They're only has something to do
I'm sure.
You have you all of this been
very responsive and we do want
something to do so that we can
continue to contribute to the
participate with you so no other
questions I just want to go and
thank each and everyone of you
for being here with us this
afternoon thank you very much
members of the New Mexico state
Senate the people that are
working if you will behind the
scenes that are keeping this
processes going so again I hope
you have a great afternoon thank
you thank you all thank you.
Thank you everyone.
Chairman Mr person thank you
like other folks maybe you're
