Yep, that's correct, Mr.
Chairman.
And just before we, uh,
Uh, before we jump into the
bullets, I just wanted to
mention
Uh, there's
With within Medicaid, we've
gotten a new um forecast.
That showed that the department
has needed quite a bit less
funding than was originally
understood when they made their
budget request back in
September, there's quite a bit
more room within this budget now
to kind of uh maneuver.
Um, I think one of the big, um,
kind of rubs in this budget
right now.
is uh LSC.
Was
Quite a bit lower than the
executive on salaries within the
um.
Uh, income support division.
Um, and I think, you know, some
of the room that we've created
within the Medicaid program, uh,
we've already kind of talked
about possibly
Uh
You know
Um
Moving some of the funding
around within the department
after HAFC HAFC took LFC's
budget yesterday, moving some of
the funding around to kind of uh
deal with that.
So now I'll jump into the
bullets, the LFC recommendation
increased the total budget by
2.8 billion or 23% above the FY
25 operating budget.
While the executive grew the
total budget by 3.2 billion or
27% above the FY 25 operating
budget.
The significant increases
primarily reflect a new hospital
surcharge.
leverage more federal revenue as
enacted in the healthcare
delivery and Access Act last
year.
LFC recommendation increased
general fund revenue to the
healthcare authority by 4% of
the executive drew general fund
revenue 10.7%.
Uh, many of the differences in
general fund revenue and
spending were in the 3 Medicaid
programs.
The most significant of which
LFC recommended the use of
healthcare affordability fund
balances.
And it and and assumed increase
in safety net careful revenue
within the Medicaid assistance
program. For Medicaid, LFC
recommended a 27% increase while
the executive recommended a 31%
increase.
Significant differences included
25 million in the executive's
recommendation for enrollment
growth, LFC did not recommend an
increase for enrollment because
of a 15% decrease in enrollment.
Uh, since the end of the public
health emergency.
The executive also recommended
160% increase for
Um, pace rates and 120% rate
increase for assisted living
facilities.
Well LLC recommended a 26%
increase for each, for
behavioral health provider
rates.
LSC recommended a 5.8 million
increase while the executive
recommended 2.9 million.
Uh, for general fund revenue in
the developmental disability
support program.
The LFC recommended an 18%
increase while the executive
recommended a 23.9% increase.
LFC assumed higher utilization
of services within the program
but did not provide as much of
an increase for provider rates.
The executive recommended more
funding for increased contracts
and provider agreements.
Almost across the board, the
executive recommended increases
for personnel cost spending.
Primarily for pay band
alignments with the alignments,
the executive recommended
recommendation would increase
personnel costs.
By 19.1% while the LFC
recommendation group personal
costs 5.9%.
Elsie did not recommend a pay
band alignment given 4%
statewide salary adjustments
included in the LFC
recommendation, additional
funding for the um that new
salary study, you guys heard
about that from Joey the other
day, the new salary study that's
coming in, which will move a lot
of those.
Like what we talked about the,
the income support division
staff into those new pay bands.
Um, and you'll see that there.
non-recurring spending, LFC
recommended 490 million while
the executive recommended 379
million.
Both recommendations included
funding for behavioral health
services.
LLC included funding for items
such as 24 hour crisis response,
acute care facilities.
Certified community behavioral
health clinics and medication
assisted treatment.
The executive included one large
appropriation for behavioral
health.
With that, Mr. I'll go ahead and
pass it off to Miss Mary Beth
Dinsmore. She has additional
comments.
Thanks Eric, uh, good morning,
Mr. Chair. Good morning,
committee members. Happy Friday.
Um, I, I will just go over
briefly a couple of items that
might be helpful um for you to
know in the executive
recommendations. So, um, I do
just want to highlight the
income support, um, division.
Uh, this is one of the biggest
differences, as Eric said, in
the recommendation, um, it's, I
think 10 or $11 million apart
and it's almost entirely for
staffing and training and
support, um, for the operations
of that division. You'll hear
from the secretary talk about
this more, but this is really
critical. So I just wanna make
sure it's on your radar, um,
that, that these are some pretty
big needs that the agency still
has after HAFC adopted um LFC.
Another thing I'd want to bring
to your attention is in the
developmental disability
supports division.
Uh, the executive has $6 million
I believe LFC has about 4
million, and this is for
allocations, um, now, currently,
the way that the department is
funded, they can only do
allocations to the program once
a year.
So what happens is you get a a
bit of a waitlist build up. And
yes, the next year comes around
and those people will be
hopefully um able to receive
services, but what the executive
has is some additional funding
to allow a continuous allocation
of these services, so it
wouldn't just be once a year, it
would be multiple times a year,
which would allow clearly uh
much more opportunity for people
to get on the program more
quickly, um, and for the state
to keep that wait list.
down, as you know, there was a
lot of uh funding and effort
that went into um clearing the
waitlist over the past few
years. So I think it's a
priority for everybody to keep
that wait list down and not end
up in that situation again.
Um
And the only other thing that
I'll just bring your attention
about the
The pay then adjustments in the
salaries and whatnot is uh the
um the executive has a
compensation package that would
provide approximately 3% for
state employees, as Eric said
the LFCs is 4%, um, but the
executive did prioritize a lot
of these K-band alignments and
um targeted increases.
In several uh programs in this
department, uh, to really try to
bolster their staff and keep
them from being poached from
elsewhere or, or leaving of the,
you know, of their own accord.
So, um, but with that, I'll
I will stop rambling. I will
turn it over to the secretary
and uh thank you very much.
Good morning. Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Uh,
members of the committee, we do
have a
slide deck, so I wanna make sure
that that's going up and there
it is. Thank you so much, um,
good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Carrie Armijo. I'm the cabinet
secretary of the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority, an agency
that directly serves more than
50% of New Mexicans, and which
functions as the largest payer
of healthcare and safety net
services in our state. Uh, thank
you for the opportunity to be
here today to present the FY 26
budget request on behalf of the
agency, uh, we greatly value
your leader.
ship and service to New Mexico.
I'd like to thank the brilliant
and hardworking people to my
right, uh, who are some might be
to my left as well, uh, who are
part of the healthcare
authority's leadership team. Uh,
they work so hard every day,
very dedicated public servants,
and I'd like to think that 2400
staff who come to work every day
for the healthcare authority.
Um, I'd also like to call out
Deputy Secretary Alex Casio
Smith and Alisa Reed for their
development of the materials,
lots of hard work went into
other development.
of this presentation.
I'm moving on to slide 2.
Today, uh, we're gonna focus on
3 key priorities that are tied
to the executive budget
requests, which are to number 1,
adequately fund the agency to
ensure it can meet its state and
federal obligations. Number 2,
ensuring access to healthcare,
and number 3, protecting
vulnerable populations. You can
see in the map on the right of
the slide, the percentage of
individuals who receive at least
one healthcare authority benefit
by county, uh, and this really
demonstrates the impact of the
agency's budget um through.
out, uh, every part of New
Mexico. On slide 3, just a
reminder we're always anchored
to our mission, vision and
goals. The mission of the
healthcare authority is to
ensure that New Mexicans attain
their highest level of health by
providing whole person cost
effective, accessible, and high
quality health care and safety
net services and our vision is
that every New Mexican will have
access to affordable healthcare
coverage through a coordinated
and seamless healthcare system.
Um.
Moving on to slide 4.
Um, most of the difference
today, uh, between the LFC and
executive recommendations is
related to agency staffing, so,
um, I wanted to take this
opportunity to remind you that
lowering vacancy rates at the
healthcare authority has been
one of our key priorities. We've
made a lot of really good
progress on that. Currently, our
budgeted vacancy rate, uh, for
fiscal year 25 is below 10%. So
that's uh tells you we don't
have very many open positions at
our agency right now.
Uh, we are below what the
national target would be, um,
the three divisions that we're
going to talk about today in
terms of uh our request to lower
our vacancy rate, um, or for the
income support division, uh,
that has a negative vacancy rate
today, uh, -14.2%, uh, sort of
unprecedented, that's our
largest division, also the
division with generally the
highest turnover. Uh, we've
really stabilized and hired
staff there, uh, so really
focused on making sure that we
are adequate.
uh resourced, the developmental
disability supports division
with a negative vacancy rate of
just over 0.5% and then the
Medicaid administrative, uh,
side, uh, with a funded vacancy
rate today of about just over
5%.
A reminder that the median
salary of a healthcare authority
employee is $58,5585 so not a
lot of money. We have a lot of
uh frontline workers in our
agency who directly serve uh New
Mexicans but don't get a lot, a
high rate of pay, 20% of
healthcare authority employees
are eligible to receive at least
one HCA benefit that includes
Medicaid and SNAP. Uh, so that
kind of tells you where they're
scaled in terms of the poverty
level here in New Mexico.
On slide 5,
the healthcare authority's
recommendation strengthens our
delivery of essential services
to New Mexicans and completes
key investments, many of which
have been made in partnership
between the executive and the
legislative bodies. Our
executive recommendation total
is $15.5 billion 85.7% of that
budget will come from federal
funds, um, our budget just a
reminder now includes about 264
million.
In general fund that used to be
at the Department of Health and
now is in the healthcare
authority since the transition
of some of those division of
health improvement and the
developmental disability
supports division to the agency,
um, and it also includes over a
billion dollars in new hospital
funding, uh, that's being
financed through a provider
assessment uh through a bill
that was passed last year.
The general fund base request is
$2.2 billion representing a 10%
increase over FY 25, um, and
that is largely driven by
Medicaid program, which we'll
talk a little bit more about the
developmental disabilities
waiver program and our income
support division staffing. We do
have a small number of
expansions and our requests, but
we try to keep those really
small, recognizing that the
Medicaid budget is growing and
uh takes up.
a greater share every year and
so those are pressures on you
all, uh, as appropriators to
really uh try to manage, uh, so
we have about 21 million in FY
26 expansions proposed, that's
less less than 1%, um, and just
a reminder that our FY 24
reversion rate was 0.23%.
OK. Moving on to the next slide,
please.
I'm gonna start by talking about
the income support division. Um,
I'd like to remind you all that
the income support division is
the front door for Medicaid,
SNAP.
Other income assistance
programs, emergency food for New
Mexicans. Some food for
children, supplemental food
benefits for seniors and
individuals with disabilities
and about 90% of all behavioral
health services in New Mexico
are financed through Medicaid,
uh, which means that everyone
who needs mental health services
by and large, um, needs to get
in through that income support
front door.
Um, on slide 7.
Um, I would just also like to
mention that the income support
division is also subject to very
rigorous and complex federal
requirements, um, and at this
time, I do have concerns that if
the executive recommendation is
not adopted, the healthcare
authority will be unable to meet
federal requirements for
ensuring access to services and
benefits for New Mexicans.
Today, the income support
division is narrowly meeting our
timeliness standards. Um, those
timeliness standards under
federal law mean that we have to
provide access to emergency or
expedited food assistance within
7 days, uh, regular food
assistance within 30 days and
Medicaid within 45 days.
The LFC recommendation is adding
a million in new funding for
personnel, uh, compared to the
agency's request of 5.8 million,
leaving a gap of about 4.8
million, almost $5 million. The
LFC recommendation is also
shifting about 6.9 million in
existing funds from the SNAP
supplemental program to support
older adults and people with
disabilities to personnel and
contracts, um, and that means
that we would be reducing those
two programs, that program, uh.
So a $6.9 million reduction in
that program will mean reducing
the number of seniors who
receive food assistance, um,
from approximately 50,000 New
Mexicans to 25,000 New Mexicans
or reducing that benefit uh from
$120 a month to $60 a month, and
I'd like to remind this body you
all made this investment last
year. We actually, uh, increased
the snap supplemental food
benefit for seniors and people
with disabilities from what was
$25 a month, uh, and so that was
an investment, uh, you all
decided to make.
uh, it looks like we, we may be
facing some reductions in that
program right now.
I'd also like to remind you that
if the income support division
is unable to meet their
timeliness standards, we will be
facing federal penalties up to
$90 million potentially lost to
the state of New Mexico if we
can't perform.
On slide 8, just a couple of
notes about where we think that
the LSC recommendation leaves
us, um, we have about 590 FTE
that are supported in the income
support division budget today,
the LFC recommendation funds
about 432 of those FTE and FOA
26 at the same time, our
workload is increasing, um,
You know, you can see in the
table on the right where our
staffing was in February of
2019, where it is today at 701
total workers and the LFC
recommendation at 570 workers,
um, so that would only allow us
to keep about 27 of our existing
158 workers that were trying to
hang on to, um, very concerning
there for us. Each uh caseworker
is currently responsible for
more than 1300 cases. That's a
22% increase in caseload since
2019 and um in FY 26, our
caseloads are expected to
increase to over 1500 cases per
caseworker. That's another 13%
increase. I'd also like to
remind you all that the
healthcare authority is
evaluated by the LFC on two
performance measures that are
related to access to Snap and um
our timeliness of benefit
determinations and the most
recent, the first quarter, um,
2025 LSC report card does
acknowledge that increased
workloads have led to diminished
performance by the agency.
We've made a lot of
improvements. We are now timely,
uh, it took a lot of uh work to
get there and we are concerned
about being able to hang on to
those uh performance
improvements uh under the LFC
recommendation.
On slide 9, I'd like to mention,
uh, that we also have an 8% uh
salary differential that was uh
Uh, funded by actually by the
legislature year over year. I
think it's been over the past 4
or 5 years that that's been
funded by the legislature
through specials, um, to comply
with a federal settlement
agreement. Part of the terms of
that settlement agreement
recognize that our caseworkers
weren't paid enough and that we
were having a hard time hanging
on to them or competing with a
lot of other employers, um, and
so we are requesting the ability
to continue that 8% and may get
permanent.
Uh, so that we don't have to
reduce our workers' pay. Um, if
we don't get that 8%, we will be
reducing the salaries of our
income support division workers
to $22.13 an hour. That totals
$46,000 a year. Uh, so that
would be a $3000 salary
reduction for our caseworkers,
um, and it would be very on par
with what fast food workers make
here in the state of New Mexico.
OK, next slide and we'll go
ahead and move to slide 11.
We're gonna talk about Medicaid.
Uh, here, there's a lot of good
news. I think Mr. Shee mentioned
this, um, that because of the
Medicaid unwinding that historic
sort of uh end of public health
emergency unwinding that we had
to go through um in FY 24 and
25, uh, we are, uh, kind of
through that process and as a
result we've seen some downward
enrollment trends, uh, which are
positively impacting the budget,
uh, and so we do agree that the
FY 26 recommendation by the LFC
is is sufficient for uh the
budget to continue, uh,
sufficient for Medicaid program
today.
The key differences are really
in those expansion items, um,
we, we have requested additional
funding, so I think the key
areas of difference are really
that we requested additional
funding to increase rates for
assisted living facilities, the
LFC recommendation included
some, but not all of the
requests, uh, we, 30 assisted
living facilities have closed
since 2023, um, decreasing our
bed capacity by almost 8% here
in New Mexico, we really want to
make sure that we're supporting
those providers. We are
also requesting uh to uh rate
increase for the PACE program,
and another program that serves
our seniors, um, they have not
received an increase since 2019,
we really tried to in our
expansion request focus on
providers that had not received
an increase in the last 5 years.
I also, I really appreciate the
investments of the legislature.
You all have invested very
heavily in some of the Medicaid
innovations and new programs
that are going on, so I'd just
like to say thank you for that.
The non-recurring recommendation
supports our housing and food
capacity programs that are now
eligible for federal match, very
excited about rolling those out,
um, as well as our uh support
for justice involved
individuals, um, high risk
pregnant women, um, and medical
respite for the homeless.
On slide 12, I'll just talk a
little bit about
Support for Medicaid
administration and staffing, um,
we do have here in New Mexico
one of the most administratively
lean Medicaid programs per
capita of member enrollment, um,
compared to other states, we're
pretty understaffed, uh, some
states have 1000 people managing
their Medicaid program, we have
less than 200 people, uh, some
of them have about the same
enrollment that we do. Um, so
just kind of making that point,
um, on the table to the right or
the
graph to the right, you can see
that the Medicaid program has
grown by 53.2% uh since FY 19, a
lot of that is through rate
increases, additional programs,
trying to really optimize
federal funds, all of those
things come with very big
requirements attached to them.
We've only been able to add 6
FTE, uh, since then, and so we
are really kind of
disproportionately staffed. We
are asking for 700,000 in
general fund to support the
addition of another 16 FTE.
Um, this is a really wise
investment. We can really amp up
our oversight of the MCOs and
our compliance with federal
rules, sort of getting a very
high match for, uh, for those
staff and so for just 700,000 we
can really invest in the
oversight of the Medicaid
program, which I think has been
called out, uh, not just by the
LFC actually, but by other uh
entities externally, uh, most
recently I heard testimony from
plaintiffs against the agency
and the state of New Mexico that
they felt very strongly.
Um, that the agency wasn't
staffed equipped staffed
adequately to oversee the MCOs,
uh, and that there are concerns
about our ability to do that
today.
Slide 13, um, just illustrates
Medicaid provider rate
increases. We want to thank you
for the investment that was made
in the FY 25 budget. We did
implement major provider rate
increases starting January 1st,
uh, we were able to increase
approximately 64,500 Medicaid
billing codes, and now today our
Medicaid rates are among the
highest in the country. We are
paying 150% of Medicare for
maternal child health, primary
care, and behavioral health
care.
Um, and so 70% of all Medicaid
claims include one of these
codes, uh, and so it's really
exciting to see that investment,
and I'll talk a little bit later
about how that's actually
resulting in provider network
growth.
Um, on slide 14, you can see
just some examples of behavioral
health uh increases. There's
been a lot of discussion about
behavioral health, so we wanted
to make sure that you could see
uh how those investments were
resulting in real dollars for
our our behavioral health
providers.
Um, and I'm gonna move to the
next slide, which is behavioral
health.
Um
On slide 16.
There are 2 documents in your
packet that I'd like to call
your attention to. The first
one, is the behavioral health
capacity and gaps analysis. This
is something that the agency
decided to do, uh, this past
year, uh, to make sure that when
we, as we make behavioral health
investments, we're really making
wise investments and we really
know where people are and who's
not being served in the
Behavioral Health Network. And
so I'll talk a little bit more
about that in a minute. We also
have a behavioral health action
plan that was
recently finalized uh by all of
the New Mexico agencies that
have some kind of role in
behavioral health, um, and that
was work that was undertaken to
make sure that we did a better
job of consulting with local
entities and across agencies,
uh, to find out what our
behavioral health priorities are
over the next 3 to 5 years, how
we can really move the needle on
behavioral health.
So, on slide 17, I think, uh,
um, you know, I just wanted to
say thank you. I'm very
grateful, uh, compared to the
other healthcare authorities
divisions, the Behavioral Health
Services Division has seen the
largest percentage increase in
funding since 2019, um, and
we've been working really hard
to make sure we're not reverting
funds. That was, that has sort
of been an issue before uh we
reverted less than 1% general
fund in FY 24 is really happy to
see that progress. Um, we really
are very close in terms of the
executive and legislator.
requests, but there are a lot of
things going on with behavioral
health today, so we'll sort of
see where we end up in terms of
what those differences are. I, I
think one thing I want to call
out here is that um the LFC
recommendation didn't include
funding for that 988 suicide and
crisis line and we can talk
about why that is. Um, there's
also an indication that the FY
26 request does include funding
that the agency requested for um
certified community Behavioral
Health clinics, which we
launched 5 of those clinics in
January.
um,
That seems to be part of a $43
million pot of money for in
non-recurring grants for acute
care facilities, uh, just the
only thing I want to call out
here is that a CCBHD is not an
acute care facility, so if that
funding is included, we'll need
some statutory language changes
there, uh, to make sure.
Um, I am going to take a minute
to talk about behavioral health
because uh you all have been
hearing a lot about behavioral
health and so I wanted to make
sure that we had a chance to
kind of talk about outcomes and
where things stand today on
slide 18, um, just wanted to
call out that we've seen a
really positive trend in both
behavioral health visits and the
number of persons served, uh, we
had an 8% increase in behavioral
health visits, uh, 4.3 million
visits uh in the Beaver health
system and almost 300,000 new
max.
Mexicans, uh, served, uh, that's
a year over year gains in the
behavioral system, I think, uh,
serving more people probably
additional need as well.
Um, on slide 19, wanted to make
sure that you're aware there
have been some really marked
improvements actually in
outcomes, uh, New Mexico's
suicide, drug overdose, and
youth mental health outcomes are
showing improvement. New
Mexico's suicide death rate
decreased by 9% in 2023, um, and
really remarkable, uh, that the
number of Native Americans who
died by suicide decreased by 43%
actually. Um, so we're really
excited to see this positive
trend, hoping that continues.
We've seen a 21% decrease in
drug overdose deaths over, uh,
from 2023 to 2024, and our most
recent um survey of youth shows
a reduction in persistent
sadness or hopelessness,
attempted suicide, vaping,
prescription opioid misuse and
cannabis use. So these are all
trends that we think are going
in the right direction, some not
as quickly as we'd like to see,
but um overall those trends are
positive.
On slide 20 wanted to just kind
of point out what's in your
packet. Uh, we do have this gap
analysis for adults that we're
working on and this is an
example uh around what that will
look like for medication
assisted treatment, for example,
that is what we call this. This
is how, uh, we kind of help uh
individuals who are, um, you
know, in recovery from opioid
use disorder, for example, say
in recovery, uh, and so
medication assisted treatment is
very important to the network
for New Mexico. On the left you
can see with the current land.
Scape looks like. That's how far
people are traveling to get
those mat services today. Um,
you can see that 43,000
individuals are receiving those
services now and then on the
right is what we are really
working in developing. I think
this is gonna be the great value
of this, um, which is the
projected number of individuals
who may need map services by
county who are not currently
receiving those services. So we
do project that about 9130
individuals need those services
across New Mexico but are not
currently receiving them today.
we will have county or region
specific data like this by the
end of the fiscal year. I really
for most of the key uh mental
health services for adults.
On slide 21, we wanted to make
sure you're aware of our
expanded Medicaid provider
network. We've seen growth of
more than 2700 providers since
July. Uh, I wanted to make sure
you're aware we've seen 532 new
behavioral health workers, 228
new licensed counselors and
therapists, um, 96 new social
workers and 70 licensed
professional clinical counselors
at our network and on slide 22,
most of that growth has been in
rural counties 1204% provider
network growth in our rural
state part of New Mexico with
Moura and Dubaca County having
the greatest growth rates, uh,
overall.
And lastly on behavioral health
before you go back to the budget
on slide 23, uh, we just wanted
to mention, um, the executive
recommendation includes $50
million request to support the
rural healthcare delivery fund.
Uh, we are using that fund to
really support expanded
behavioral health access in New
Mexico today, um, that project
is currently supporting 51
behavioral health projects
across the state receiving
almost $71 million in funding,
um, projects are being supported
in every single rural.
County in New Mexico and uh we
are seeing a lot of good
progress. I think I'll just
leave you with this, um, the
graph on the right shows New
Mexico, um, has really improved
its ranking. We currently rank
7th in the country for providing
treatment to individuals with
mental illness. OK. On slide,
I'm gonna go back to the
developmental disability
supports division, uh, and I
think we are pretty closely
aligned with um uh the LFC
recommendation here, but we just
wanted to call out.
sort of a technical issue, um,
there is an assumption, I think
in the LFC budget that we could
carry over a fund balance, we
just need a statutory
clarification that would allow
us to do that, um, that is
something that the Department of
Health did have and so we just
want to make sure that that gets
corrected, uh, because the
assumption of the fund balance
assumes that those funds won't
revert, um, but obviously, uh,
we just need to have that
clarified in the statute. So I
think we're pretty close there.
I will just say on the next
slide, um, 26 that we do need.
poor for additional DDSD
staffing, um, we
There was a legislative, I
think, request, uh, to do a
Study on the organization of
DDSD as part of that study, um,
that external evaluator
recommended the addition of 10
FTE, um, that is because we are
really focused at this point on
abuse, neglect, and exploitation
and making sure that we reduce
that risk and that we're putting
eyes on people, um, DDSDs,
workers are going out, uh, and
visiting uh individuals
disabilities who are served by
the waiver program twice a year,
um, they're doing that on top of
their regular work as that
like an added thing that got
added to their plates, uh, in
the last couple of years and so
we really need to kind of
correct and make sure that we
are adequately resourced to do
all of the important work they
do.
I have gone on a couple of these
wellness visits. They're really
important, uh, and I think it's
really amazing that the DDSD
workers who go, they really have
developed close relationships
with these individuals, and I
think um it's very important,
uh, that, that they know we care
about them. So, um, really
trying to support that
additional staffing for DDSD.
Uh, moving on to uh the
healthcare affordability fund
and you can go ahead and move to
slide 28.
Um, the LFC and the executive
recommendations have about a $62
million difference, uh, and that
is really sort of the level of
support that each, uh, both the
executive is requested to
support for affordability
initiatives that help
individuals uh who are not
eligible for Medicaid or
eligible for employer sponsored
insurance, for coverage through
the exchange, the private
market, um, we may have to
decrease enrollment, uh, through
support for these programs based
on the LFC recommendation, um,
we want to call attention to
this because um there are, there
were enhanced federal subsidies
uh during the pandemic, uh, and
that kind of continued. Those
are now expiring and so that
kind of makes New Mexico's
assistance more important when
those premiums expire, families
could see up to 500% premium
increase uh for their premiums
on the uh health insurance
exchange.
an individual who might see up
to an 800% increase.
Um, this really could affect the
ability of New Mexicans to
afford health insurance, uh,
leaving people to decide to go
without coverage and I wanna
make sure you understand these
are individuals who make too
much money to qualify for
Medicaid. They're working
people, um, and this is really
the cliff effect that has, uh,
been discussed so often, uh, I
think between the legislative
and executive, um, where
individuals may be incentivized
to stay on Medicaid. Uh, it's
going to be more affordable for
them to do that.
Um, seed health benefits. I'm
not gonna spend a lot of time on
state health benefits. You
already heard my whole spiel the
other day on state health
benefits and so I'm gonna skip
over those slides, uh, because I
think you heard it all. I think
the main message is that we are
um we are currently in the need
of a supplemental of $81 million
for FY 25, uh, we're trying to
do a course correction, uh,
right now to modernize statute
and the programs and rights at
the premiums so that we won't
have a premium.
increase it FY20 or so that we
won't have a deficit in FY 26.
So I'm gonna go ahead and skip
through those and then go to the
C2 requests on the next slide.
We were asked to include these
in our packet.
So we have two things I want to
call your attention to, but I'm
not gonna spend a lot of time on
this either because I believe
there's a separate hearing on
the C2 request. Um, lots of
curiosity about where things are
standing with our miser
projects, that's the Medicaid
Management Information System
replacement, that is the most
expensive IT projects and the
most complicated that the state
has ever undertaken. We are live
with uh 5.5, I would say out of
the 9 modules uh for the um
miser project.
are all in full production. We
will be launching the 6th module
in July, that's our claims
payment system.
And then on my last slide here.
I wanted to or second to last
slide, uh, I wanted to talk
about the child support
replacement, uh, system
replacement. Um, we have a
system that was built in the
1990s. Um, it is a green screen.
It is hard to use. Most of the
people we hire don't understand
what it is, uh, it sort of
reminds me of like when I took
computer class in 5th grade
actually, um, you know, it
doesn't even the mouse doesn't
work. You have to use an arrow
to get through it, um.
We have discovered that uh that
we are estimate is that we are
losing about $12 million a year
because of system inefficiencies
in the child support system, um,
the same analysis found that we
would see 34 million in savings
over the 1st 3 years with an
updated system. I do understand.
I think concerns that the LFC
had about funding this, um,
there have been a lot of stops
and starts with this project and
um, you know, I think there have
been some valid concerns raised
about the ability of the agency
to execute.
it, we had to do a full
feasibility study in fiscal year
2425, uh, we are now sort of
very certain that we could
execute this project. Um, it
took a lot of work to get there.
Part of that is because of
delays at the federal level,
but, uh, we are really ready to
go and hoping to get this
funding.
Madam Secretary, you want to
speed that up just a little bit
I'm on my last slide, Mr. Chair.
On slide 36, um, I just want to
remind you again about the needs
for the budget, um, there's a
thank you note in here from a
provider who's receiving rural
healthcare funds, uh, wanted to
share that with you all. You
deserve much of the thanks and
gratitude uh for partnering with
us and investing in these
programs, um, this provider
calls the Rural Healthcare Fund
a lifeline for individuals and a
cornerstone for building
stronger rural communities.
Thank you very much.
Stanford questions, Mr. Chair.
Very well, thank you, uh, that's
a lot of information.
uh just remind the members so we
still have 2 more presentations.
And in all fairness, if we can
keep our.
questions and our response very.
Short
The other part is that uh.
After our members, you know,
what we can do is maybe allow 5
individuals from the audience to
come and maybe 2 minutes at the
most each.
Because I know that there's uh
we've had a lot of concern of um
Individuals wanting to speak,
otherwise we would probably just
have to roll it and do it all
over again on Monday.
So, uh, keep in mind just
This is not a purpose for
discussion. It's just a
question, OK? So we can go with
that. And I think uh
Uh, Senator Brent, you were
first.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, um.
Yeah.
Terry, I, I have a few questions
around um.
Nursing home rebasing, um.
When's the last time the
department did that?
The last rebasing I was
performed in 2007, um.
And so the agency had has
actually done the rebasing, we
just haven't had the funds to
execute the rebasing, so we have
the rebasing study completed.
Um, it's about 18 million in
general fund, uh, and so that is
the price tag for the rebasing,
um, and there's been a lot of
discussion about this and so,
um.
But the simple answer to your
question is that that was in
2007. There have been other
substantial rate increases for
nursing facilities, uh, though
in that 17-year period, so, um,
it wouldn't be true to say that
they haven't received other
increases that they haven't been
released since then.
And secretary doesn't the law
require that they be re-based
every 3 years the funding for
the available funding, Mr. Chair
and Senator, um I can read it. I
have it open here. It didn't say
anything about per available
funding. Mr. Tay and Senator, I
think that's, that's true. Uh,
I, you know, I can't speak to
why it hasn't been re-based till
now. I will say that the agency
did request funding in the FY 25
request that was not recommended
by the legislature, uh, and so
we didn't receive the funding to
do it when we requested it. Um,
we're
happy to work together to
resolve this issue. I think
there's been a lot of openness
and discussion about that. And
we request it this year for 26,
uh, Senator, we did not request
it for 26 because we really had
to, we, at the time that we
submitted the budget, we were
very low on what available funds
the agency was allowed to ask
for in terms of expansion items
that, um,
I, I think that situation has
substantially changed since the
budget request was submitted and
so I think there's more room to
work on that, uh, but we really
did have to prioritize providers
that hadn't received a rate
increase since 2019 and that was
uh how the budget was developed.
OK.
Uh, thank you, I think that's
all the questions I have on
that. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Real
quick.
I appreciate
Staff coming in and talking to
me about
The uh self-employment.
Insurance fund.
Um, uh, I think I heard you say
that we're in a deficit of about
87 million.
This year
My request to you is simple.
Figure out the budget for that.
Figure out a reserve for that
and let us budget for it.
If you're gonna change the
To an 8020.
I mean
That's discussion amongst
yourself.
But I need to be able to budget
for it.
So I'm going to chime in right
now.
Is next year's budget.
Different in that category than
what you have this year.
Are we raising that.
Putting another 90 million in
that.
Budget line so that we won't
have this.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, um, in
order to really fix it, we've
got to fix the statute, uh, and
so the agency, I think we talked
about this, uh, in my prayer
hearing, so we, we really need a
combined strategy, and I think
that's why we're trying to flag
this issue. The answer is yes,
we really wanna, I feel like we
have presented a plan to fix it,
um, but it does require sort of
a combination of legislative
Support and I think that it does
impact the budget and so, you
know, just recognizing the
reality of that situation, we
want to make sure that we have
those conversations with you
all, um, but
I think we can fix that
structural deficit in FY 26 by
coming together and modernizing
the statute, right, setting the
premiums and doing some cost
containment.
Which is what we're proposing.
Madam Secretary.
Do we need a statute change.
To do something here.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Woods,
yes.
Do you have something drafted,
or you, we need to get it
submitted if you don't have it
drafted already.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, we do
have something drafted. It's
kind of just going through the
boss, the big boss right now.
We, we plan to have something
this session.
ready.
Time is Mr. Chair, time is
running out.
Most of this budget is already
decided.
If we're going to do something
like this, we need to have it
ahead of time as far ahead of
time, and I am very surprised
you didn't submit that as your
budget, you know there's a
deficit. I won't beat the horse,
Madam Secretary. I don't mean to
embarrass you at the point at
any point, but it's a concern of
mine that we're not budgeting
for this, Mr. Chair, Senators,
you're raising a really fair
point. I think my only sort of
point of defense here is that
the
ag ency had that fund for 2
months when we developed the
budget when we received that
fund from the General Services
department. Their projection was
that there would be a $16
million shortfall. That was not
correct, um, and it was wrong
and so we submitted the budget
sort of using information that
wasn't the best information and
I, you know, I'm not trying to
cast blame, but I just think,
uh, we had to really do make
sure that we have the right
actuarial analysis completed and
unfortunately,
Um, that's, that's what
happened. I mean, we just didn't
have a lot of time. The agency
only had that program for a few
weeks really Mr. Chair, it's in
the, it's a end of this
discussion.
But Madam Secretary, the guy sat
right beside you.
Had a better projection than
that.
You might think about asking
them what their projected losses
are. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Center.
Thank you chair and I'll be real
brief. I know that uh the chair
the authorized about a couple of
people to make some comments on
the uh Medicaid reimbursement
rates, you talked a little bit
about uh the addiction issue and
the um suicide rates and as a
result of the.
What direction are those going
in because I have Serenity Mesa
in my district and they do a
phenomenal job phenomenal job. I
mean they're just.
I mean, a great model example of
how to do this kind of stuff.
They now have a, a youth detox,
one of the first, I think in the
southwest part of the US or
something like that and uh
they're doing really good there.
So what direction are
reimbursement rate rates going
there because they're having a
difficult time attracting and
retaining uh social workers that
come in with the specialized
skills to provide the services
once the, the detox has
occurred. Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, the, the rates are all
going in a really positive
direction right now our rates
for behavioral health are
probably like 2nd highest in the
country.
Um, and so if there's something
specific we need to look at. I,
I, one of the things that I
think does is needed and this is
part of the executive request is
sort of additional training and
help for providers to maximize
their reimbursement. Uh we're
really happy to provide that
support. There is a request and
I think it's both in the
executive and in the
legislative, uh, to support
additional rate increases for
codes that don't have a Medicare
equivalent that are in the
behavioral health system, so we
have really focused on increases
to the uh
Um
Medicare, the Medicare
equivalent codes, but not every
code is covered by Medicare and
so we have a proposal to sort of
do some additional work in FY 26
to increase those codes as well.
Thank you,
Chair and thank you,
um.
Would it be all right if I
brought them to see you at some
point or a person on your staff
that can help them to better
understand how to get that
maximization in there because
they really need the help, so
Mr. Chair, Senator, of course,
uh, we're sitting right behind
you, as I understand, yeah, OK,
that's our job. We're happy to
help. Alright, thank you, Madam
Secretary. uh, Mr. Chairman,
I'll reserve the rest of my
questions. I know some audience
members want to say a few
things, things.
You send her to bison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
secretary, on page 8, you were
talking about um projected
caseloads per worker and I'm
kind of shocked at the 1500
number there. I don't know how
anyone human gets through um in
the right amount of time that
number of individuals. So what
is the standard number of case
loads, you know, nationwide
compared to what we're dealing
with.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, I'm actually not sure
what the national standard is.
We did do some work on this. I'm
gonna look.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Tobiasson, about 1000 would be
ideal, and that is really what
we are sort of trying to target,
uh, we're pretty far afield of
that and so we
Try to be conservative with the
resources that we requested, um,
but it's pretty tight right now.
And, and I heard you say I think
you have 200.
Employees and states that have a
similar caseload, have 1000
employees, is that right? Uh,
Mr. Chair, Senator Tyas and that
was referring to the Medicaid
program and the administration
of that. It is true that some
states have 1000 or 1100 staff
just to manage the Medicaid
program and we are, um, we have
fewer, we have about 200, uh,
and so we are, we are definitely
and that's sometimes uh pretty
equivalent in terms of
enrollment, um, in dollars, and
so, um, we do.
you have a pretty tight Medicaid
operation going on. We want to
make sure that we're overseeing
our MCOs where you know those
are big contracts where billions
of dollars are going out the
door, um, a lot of requirements
and it's a rigorous oversight
requirement and can you pay play
a Pac-Man or Tetris on that
computer system that you track
child support with I'm just
curious, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Senator, it's kind of like that
pong one.
But you move it in the I worked
on a computer system like that
in the 90s. That's why I'm I'm,
I can't even imagine. So thank
you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Uh, you know, we're
having a hearing and we don't
usually take public comment.
Um, so these are just hearings
and they're presenting to us,
and I'm gonna let this happen
and, and so I'm gonna get 3
people. This is not a back and
forth.
Uh, questioning the secretary or
anything like that.
I don't know who you are, so if
we get 3 or 4 people, we're
gonna do like 1 minute a piece
and oh, you know, this is just a
hearing, and so if you think
you, you want to bring something
to the, to the secretaries.
table bring something up, you
just need to come up real quick,
start lining up, take 4 people.
Um
Thank you for allowing me,
chair.
You gotta say your name on the
mic and make your comment.
talk about
Yeah
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, my
name is Sarah Fitzgerald. I'm
with BWwell, New Mexico's health
insurance marketplace, uh, the
platform we maintain is where
New Mexicans can find healthcare
coverage, um, if they don't
already have it through their
job or through a program like
Medicaid or Medicare, um, just
wanted to speak in support of
HCA's request for a fully
funding the healthcare
Affordability Fund, um, as you
heard, um, we've got some
federal tax credit enhancements
that are gonna be expiring at
the end of this year.
Currently, more than 50% of our
70,000 enrollees pay $10 or less
per month, um, for their
premiums, and we know that once
those enhancements, um, go away,
people are gonna be paying
probably 100s of dollars more
per month, and we know that if
that happens, people will simply
lose coverage. So many New
Mexicans cannot afford that, um,
so I think our state has just a
remarkable opportunity to um
step in and help backfill those
expiring tax credits.
Um, and we asked the committee
to, to please consider fully
funding those. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Vicente Vargas, um, with the New
Mexico Healthcare Association in
New Mexico Center for Assisted
Living. We represent um long
term care facilities in our
membership. Um, I am here to
thank the committee for
considering um Senate Bill 97,
which is an appropriation to
rebase nursing facility Medicaid
rates and is vital for nursing
facilities. If you were to walk
into any nursing facility in New
Mexico.
Approximately 70% of those
residents are, uh, Medicaid
beneficiaries. Therefore,
nursing facilities, uh, 70% of
their revenue is based on
Medicaid. Therefore, rebasing
Medicaid rates to current levels
of costs, um, is appreciated.
Senate Bill 97, uh, addresses
that. Thank you so much for your
time, Mr. Chairman. Make sure
you lobby hard on.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to provide
comment. My name is Katie
Anderson. I'm the VP of strategy
Partnerships and advocacy at
Roadrunner Foodbank. We work
closely with 4 fellow food
banks, and that group
collectively works with 500
groups across the state to get
food out. I wanna thank the
committee for their
recommendation of growth funding
for food banks and support for
food is medicine in this year's
budget, uh, it's gonna go really
far and have a lasting impact.
I also come today to ask that
the LFC recommend, uh, the
recommended budget of $1 million
that it falls dramatically short
of what the ISD agency needs to
function at 5.8 million. That
funding shortfall would mean
potential reduction of ISD
workforce by 20%, 158 staff
members and required activities
like recertification, they take
time, lack of time is gonna
stretch the amount of time it
takes for SNA applications to be
processed.
And that means families waiting,
um, and potentially waiting for
weeks at times. Snap is really
crucial to our state. We know
how important it is. The
Foodbank network works
incredibly hard. We provide
millions of meals annually, SNAP
provides 9 meals for every meal
that food banks provide. So SNAP
is incredibly important to our
communities and we ask that you
fully fund all the elements in
the HCA budget at the levels
needed to move us forward for a
stronger, more.
secure state. Thank you all very
much.
So we don't have the budget, so
people understand that you need
to be targeting numbers.
House.
I mean, once we get the budget,
then we can have conversations,
but we don't have the budget,
so.
Mm
young lady, you're next.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the Senate Finance
Committee. My name is Elaine
Solomon, and I'm a volunteer
with the Lutheran advocacy
Ministry, um, they have been
doing this advocacy for over 40
years and you're probably well
aware of the work that is being
done by them. Um, I would just
ask that you use whatever you
can do to fully fund the SNAP
program, ISD, um, you know.
Lutheran advocacy ministry is
really working on behalf of
people who are in poverty and
without full funding, we're
concerned that they would have
insufficient.
Uh, funding for food and
scarcity for resources. Thank
you very much.
I don't have any other
questions, Madam Secretary,
nobody else is on the list.
I will probably as the budget
crosses over, we'll be talking
to you see where the short balls
are and and where we can try to
help, so.
Thank you.
I thought the Bible is stick,
but man, your presentation was
pretty thick.
Gina, are we gonna have time for
your presentation for you to
complete it, cause I don't, I
don't even know what time it is.
1957.
We should be good.
You're gonna have to be precise
and quick and
You know
Kelly, you're gonna start us
off.
Yes, Mr. Chair, and I'll be very
quick in my presentation,
um, so.
We're on agency code 665,
Department of Health.
And just, you know, um, the HAFC
took the uh
This is the executive or no, the
LFC recommendation last night.
I'm sorry, we were there late
and I'm tired.
The LFC recommendation last
night, um, pretty small
difference, only 527,000 in
between the two recommendations
and
I think that's really I'm gonna
highlight unless what kind of
would like to add anything.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, no, I don't
have anything to add. I'll keep
this quick.
OK
We'll turn over to the
secretary.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Gina De Blasi,
um, cabinet secretary designate
for the Department of Health. I
want to recognize the Department
of Health leadership team that's
sitting behind me to my left,
uh, that I rely upon greatly
since this is my 10th weekend
to, uh, to this role. um, I'll
be quick about, about the
presentation has, uh, Kelly
stated, uh, the total budget is,
is pretty close. It's within
$500,000. However, I do want to
highlight some key
differences, um.
I would like to do just a quick
overview of the Department of
Health 300 a little over 3500
employees. We've got 4 divisions
with 6 centers, uh, 7,
facilities across the state of
New Mexico and 56 public health
offices, uh, within the state.
Um, I'm gonna turn this over to
uh page 6 within the handout,
um, and want to talk a little
bit about facility overview
because this I think is there
are a couple of items here that
where we've got some differences
in the budget.
Um, so we're asking for a
supplemental for our, uh, New
Mexico state's veterans' homes
of $2.2 million that was not in
the LFC budget. Uh, this is a
shortfall of of those new homes.
We've got a high percentage use
of agency staff there, and we'll
need that uh $2.2 million to
cover uh the operating loss of
that facility.
Um, also have a couple of
specials, uh, request that, um,
we're not within the LFC budget
for their facilities, and this
is to offset some shortfalls for
the New Mexico Bay Health
Institute, um, and our Los Lunas
Community program, the uh
behavioral Institute houses our
uh forensics, which is all state
funded dollars as well as um
adult psych where we have very
limited, uh, Medicaid
reimbursement.
So we're asking for $5.4 million
of a special as well as a
million dollars for all of the
Department of Health facilities
just for overall maintenance,
um, of next fiscal year.
Another item, and this is in uh
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute expansion. It's $4
million request, um, this really
is specifically to kind of the
approach that we're taking
through the Senate proposal for
behavioral health with
regionalizing and using
community stakeholders who have
come together to identify a
need. San Miguel County has done
that, um, and they have
renovated a facility that's in
essence almost across the street
from our
Health Institute, uh, Capital
dollars and other funding of 6.2
million in total. Um, they've
asked, um, the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute to
operate that facility.
In the long term, we'll probably
be able to do that without any
additional state funding. They
do have $2.5 million available
to help with that operation
going forward, so this $4
million request could really be
brought down to about 1.5
million, uh, for the next year
and then the plan is to have
that sustained going forward.
Seniors farmers' market, um, we
had a million dollars to sustain
the seniors farmers' market.
This provides Buddhist
assistance to 23,000 low-income
seniors, uh, across the state we
partner with 554 local farmers.
This is really important, uh,
for the, the seniors within, um,
across the state and so we have
a million dollars request in the
budget that was not in the LFC
budget, so I'm here to advocate
um for that as well.
And $3 million for the uh uh
county and tribal health
councils, um, LFC budget didn't
have any funding in there. We
put in a $3 million special, uh,
some of you know that that the
health councils have been
looking for uh some recurring
funding, um, so just uh wanna
call that out and um that those
are mainly the key differences
that we have from a funding
perspective, um, that I think I,
I definitely want to
Um, identified today in this
conversation knowing that we're
uh limited on time this morning
and with that, uh, Mr. Charles
Stanford questions from the
committee.
Very well, thank you, Gina.
Just one quick question, Mr.
Chair, and I know that
This is, this is more of a
policy than a budget question,
and I apologize. Um, but the New
Mexico beef producers have been
asking me to try to get beef to
be included or meat to be
included in the uh double,
double bucks.
On the farmer's market, and I
know I keep, I keep hearing
that's a federal deal, but if
there's anything you could move
that needle.
Uh, I would appreciate your
thoughts on that. I mean, you
don't have to answer me, but I,
I just, I just want to move that
along, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
sir. Very well.
Anyone else?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for being here on, um,
page 6, you've got the $2.2
million for significantly
increased maintenance contracts,
and utility costs, what, what
kind of maintenance? That's a
lot of maintenance.
Isn't that a fairly new?
Building.
Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
so the the New Mexico State
Veterans home, the, the 6 homes
are new. We have the annex as
well, so there's still some
maintenance that needs to be
performed at that facility. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mhm
I didn't see any more questions.
We want to thank you and
Mhm
Thank you again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members.
members
have time.
Yes.
Uh, we will go with, uh,
aging and long-term care
department.
stomized packages for you.
Mhm
each center
Mhm
Mm
Mm
Go ahead and start. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. We'll keep it brief
again. We're on agency code 624,
the AG and Long-term Services
department, um, last night, the
house reparations and Finance
Committee took the executive
recommendation, which was the
agency's preferred
recommendation.
Um, but it was a very small
difference again of only
226,000. The main difference in
that was the executive
recommended a reorganization
creating the long term and care
program and with that, I will
turn it over to my counterpart
for any additional comment.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
Senators, my name is Laurie
Saka. I'm the DFA analyst for
Aging Long Term Services. Kelly
did a wonderful job summarizing
the differences and with that I
will pass it over to Cabinet
Secretary designate Altenbach.
Yeah
There we go. Welcome. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, pleasure to be here.
Sounds like we're moving quite
quickly today. So in the
interest of time, I will keep my
presentation short. Um, as, uh,
many of you know I've been with
the department now for 3 months.
It's been a really rewarding 3
months. I'm really happy to be
back at the department. I was
there nearly 20 years ago and so
it's been a true honor to be
able to be working with our
older adults and adults living
with disabilities. I want to
take a moment and thank our
incredible staff who are here
today, our leadership team.
Sitting behind me here, they've
been great guides and teachers,
um, and as I've been learning
the ropes here and I also
watched just with how how
compassionate they are, um, in,
in serving our adults uh across
the state of New Mexico.
If we just go to slide 3. this
is just a brief overview of our
agency and at the heart of what
we do is ensuring that adults,
uh, older adults and adults with
disabilities, um, can live in
their community with
independence and dignity for as
long as possible. Um, and we do
that by helping people navigate
the long-term care system. It's
incredibly complicated as we all
know, uh, protecting and
investigating.
cases of abuse, neglect, and
exploitation. We protect
resident rights in nursing
facilities across the state, um,
supporting family and friend
caregivers. I'll talk a little
bit about that in a minute and
combating senior hunger and
isolation, which was uh very
serious during the pandemic for
our older adults and encouraging
healthy and productive aging.
Um, moving on to the next slide,
uh, these, these numbers, I, I,
I've been, this is slide 4, I
think our, uh, numbers we've
been seeing for many, many
years, the growth of uh the
population in our state of
adults over the age of 65, um,
we started recognizing that this
was gonna be an issue when I was
first at the department and
those projections are coming
true in the next 5 years. We are
gonna be
the 10th highest in the nation
for the population over the age
of 65. That's just 5 years away.
I also want to take a moment to
just talk about um the
priorities of the department and
as I've stepped into this role
and uh I, I made a special slide
for the first one that's on
slide 5, the next slide, which
is, um, the caregiving
landscape.
Um, the, we really do have an
urgent public health crisis when
it comes to caregivers, um, and
as I just mentioned, we're gonna
see that growth of population
along with the growth and the
need of um of caregivers and
that burden falls on our many
times on our friends and family.
Um, I'm sure many of us in this
room are caregivers ourselves,
and we joined the 270,000
caregivers across the state.
That's 250 million caregiver
hours and that has quite a, a
large economic value, but
unfortunately, that um
Translates into strains
financially on our families
physically and mental uh
well-being of our caregivers,
and so that is going to be a
central priority as we move
forward into this next fiscal
year and reflected in our
budget.
So some of the other um
priorities just quickly and if
we get to slide 6 that shows our
budget request, um, but our
budget requests really reflects
um these additional uh
priorities strengthening the
point of entry for our
department. That's the aging and
Disability Resource Center. That
is the, the point of entry, uh
we have incredible staff
providing benefits counseling
and information referral, um,
but sometimes the phone calls
not enough. We really need to do
those warm handoffs and so our
budget reflects an increase in
staff our call volume in that uh
resource center is increasing
month over month.
We only expect it to continue to
increase. Um, the other
Issue is protecting facility,
uh, resident rights in
facilities, our long term care
ombudsmen are the eyes and the
ears of many of our vulnerable
adults that are living in
facilities and we have close to
300 facilities statewide. We
need to be visiting those
facilities as frequently as
possible, and we can't do that
without additional staff.
Um, we need to reboot the aging
Network. We learned a lot over
COVID. We need to bring folks
back into uh the aging network
into our senior centers and our
transportation and respite
programs, um, our volunteer
programs, but we also have to
increase the wages of the folks
that work in those centers
because we also saw um an exodus
during the pandemic and so um
our budget request reflects that
increase um for the workers.
And um the long-term care
division, um, I'm not gonna go
in great detail. You'll see that
the um if you move I'm gonna
move on to slide 8, slide 7 is
just for your information, but
this is the strategic alignment
of our department services right
now, we have programs in adult
protective services and aging
network and other places. We
need to bring those long term
care programs under one roof,
um, again, this goes.
Back to what I had mentioned
before with the increasing
number of individuals who need
home and community-based
services. This is where our
veterans program lives. This is
where our caregiving program
lives. We can't do uh
I really do a good job without
having those programs located
within a division that already
exists in statutes, so we're
asking for that additional pe
code.
And lastly, um, the last
priority is really addressing
the behavioral health and the
unhoused issues. This uh is seen
most acutely in our adult
protective services system where
we see a lot of older adults who
are unhoused and who are
suffering from behavioral health
and so personally, those two
issues are very important to me
and um an issue I'll be um
raising a priority as we move
into this next fiscal year.
So I think in summary, our
executive budget request is
really um to make sure that we
are given the uh budget amounts
in the right P codes, um, so
that we can do, um, our job, and
so, um, that executive budget
request, um, ensures that those
budget amounts are in the right
place.
And then just really briefly, I
wanna touch on, I know you're
not gonna be making any
decisions about specials today,
but I do wanna, um, just mention
in this.
Uh, I think the next slide.
There we go. Oh no, sorry, we're
on the right side there. Um, I
do want to mention the Kiki
Savera senior dignity Fund,
which is really a critically
important fund for our
department.
Um, again, we have a growth in
our older adults. This fund
allows us to be nimble and
flexible. It allows us to stand
up programs that um are
innovative and can be replicated
then across the state.
I shared last night to the
committee an example where our
aging network, the nonmetro is
doing an incredible job with a
new program, um, which is a
volunteer transportation
program.
Um, we often find that older
adults.
Need transportation on the
weekends or after hours. These
are services that they don't get
through our typical aging
network budget. So they've stood
up as volunteer program and are
matching individuals. This is a
perfect example of how we can
use the kiki Saedra fund to
support those kinds of
innovative projects. It also
supports our New Mexico grown
project, which is making sure we
have a farm to senior center
meals, um, and so,
We, uh, urgently ask you to
support the Kiki Savera Dignity
Fund. Um, this will allow us to
address the, the rise in
population and then.
Again, we have a a IT budget
request. As I mentioned, I used
to work at the department. I was
there in 2007. That was the last
time we did any.
True, um, full overhaul of our
IT systems, and I think you
heard earlier about the the the
mainframes, the old computers,
and I, I joke that, you know, I
had a BlackBerry, uh, when I
worked there. I think those are
obsolete, so you can only
imagine what um the tech
technological advances in the
last 18 years and um we're
losing out, um, and though we
need to overhaul our IT system
and so I think this is just a
small
ask, um, of half a million
dollars to start doing that. Um,
in addition, we have a $1.5
million ask for marketing and
outreach, and again, we need to
get people back into these
services, um, into these
programs, we need to be
innovative in the way we reach
out to individuals that are um
eligible for these programs, we
need to do some more big
campaigns, uh, for example, you
know, we have, you may have seen
some of our billboards around.
Uh, Valentine's Day is coming up
around the corner and you, I was
just surprised at the number of
romance, um.
Brought a scams there are. And
so uh this will give us the
ability to really be innovative
again and reaching out to the
population we serve.
So I will end there, um, thanks
again for um your ongoing
support, um, uh,
A beautiful population of older
adults across our state. I'm
really pleased to be working
with all of you, uh, and I will
conclude, so thank you so much,
Mr. Chair and, and members.
you all. Thank you all. Let me
just ask one question and we'll
go to our members, so.
Um, I guess now not confused,
but the difference between the
providers that do
transportation, and then you
said volunteers.
Well, on the ones that are
providing.
know what's brought has been
brought to my attention several
times is um.
Uh, they just can't afford the
insurance.
You know, that that's something
that is just really, uh, I know
some that have gone.
are not doing it anymore because
of that.
And um just wanted to mention
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I,
I'm, I'm really glad you brought
that up because um the, the
request in our budget really is
going to have to address some of
those rising costs, um, food
costs, fuel costs, insurance
costs, um, and so we are seeing
that impact directly on um local
programs in the aging network.
Very well thank you members.
yeah
Uh, thank you, Chair, and thank
you, uh, secretary designate. I,
I love your enthusiasm. I think
this is terrific. Thank you, and
I know your, your team uh
sitting behind you there does a
phenomenal job as well. I've
worked with them on many
occasions. But one of the things
that I'm always concerned about,
uh, that I, I watch, you know,
pretty closely is that 49% of
all children being fostered in
New Mexico or being fostered by
their grandparents. And so I, I
really liked what you said about
the technology solutions that
you're going to be making, uh,
to the department. But do you
have any plans for sort of
extending
that to the the clients of the
department and the reason I say
that is most resources available
to foster parents.
Um, and to foster grandparents
are online and I'm do we know
what direction the adoption of
the internet is for the
population that you serve,
because that's where they're
gonna find most of these
secondary and tertiary services
that they need to provide to
their grandchildren, we, we, if,
if, if all of those families.
Or to come on to the state, you
know, um,
Cost of providing CYFD services
and fostering services, it would
lopside the budget in a really
big way because we don't even
know how many of them there,
there are out there because
families just simply take them
in and, you know, uh, raise them
and things of that nature. What
are we doing to reach out to
them on a technical basis so
they know about all these other
services available to them.
Great, um, Mr. Chair, and uh,
senator, sorry, um, I think you
bring up a really great point,
um, and as I mentioned,
sometimes that phone call is not
enough into the resource center
and we need to be thinking about
different ways, just in general,
and then obviously to this
population, um, of getting
information out there and, and
getting it on the web, there are
chat options there so that
there's some more immediate um
interaction. Um, we are
revamping our website and so.
Um, that will be definitely
something we uh include is a
clearing house of information
for caregivers, um,
particularly, obviously kinship
caregivers and grandparents. Um,
I, uh, this is also an issue and
a priority, and I've been having
conversations about how do we
also use family resource centers
around the state that are being
set up, um, particularly for
these families who are going in
and maybe interacting with
CUIFD, but
We could also be providing uh
counseling for the grandparents
around their own long-term care
needs. Um, I
I unfortunately had a
conversation with a friend and
colleague who's grandmother is a
guardian of a grandchild, but
she's starting to experience um
some memory issues and so we
also have to be thinking about
the grandparents who now, you
know, what happens to that
guardianship, uh, relationship
with the kid. So anyways, I've
been thinking a lot about
grandparents raising
grandchildren, but I appreciate
the technological aspect and,
and we'll definitely be thinking
about how we can do that.
Well, thank you chair and thank
you secretary designate to your
entire team again, you guys are
doing a phenomenal job, but, um,
and I'm, I'm happy to hear that
because I think that it's always
easier in this day and age for a
business or a not for profit,
well, let's just put everything
on the web. People will access
us through the web or whatever,
you know, grandparents aren't
always.
That easily on the web to kind
of go find that that's the only
option where you can find those
services. So I really appreciate
you thinking about it. Thank
you. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Brent.
Thank you, uh, Madam Secretary,
um, I, I first wanted to pass on
my, my thanks um to your
department.
Um
For the help that they gave my
family and my in-laws were both
on hospice at the same time.
Um
Your department was a great
help.
Um
a couple of suggestions,
however, um,
With uh
You know, a lot of us
my age are just going through
this now. We've never really had
to take care of our parents and
we're just talking about
grandparents taking care of.
Uh, grant, you know, they
Raising their grandchildren, but
there's this.
kids that are raising our
parents.
Finishing their lives.
Um, and I, I don't know if
there's an easy way for us to
find, you know, even like like
a.
What do you do?
Or the things you need to do to
prep.
Uh, what do you do with your,
with your parents to get them
ready.
Um, you know, as they get in
their 80s or, you know, it's
it's a horrible thing to even
have to think about.
But we were just kind of pushed
into having to think about this
all of a sudden a couple of
years ago and it was a tough
time.
Now I couldn't have imagined it.
Having to also be raising my
grandson at that time, but I
know there's people in that
situation.
Right, that they're, they're
raising their grandchildren and
trying to take care of their
parents.
Um, and so, um,
I, I think the department is
great being able to access it
and get that.
Maybe just have like a checklist
type thing of.
Here's the things you need to
do, um, if you're an only child
or all the siblings, you need
to, you know, the power of
attorneys and you need to get,
you know, things set up where
that.
To title will transfer to the
kids and all those things that
need to be done.
to kind of not have to go
through the probate system
because that's ends up being a
pain.
Um, and so.
Just, just a suggestion there,
you know, the other thing I
found out during this time and
it's, it's not a knock on meals
on Wheels, but I found out that
Mills on wheels actually
charges.
To provide meals for seniors.
Um, and I worked with my county.
And they have a program that
doesn't.
George
And so, um, you know, as a, as a
suggestion a couple of years ago
when we had junior money, I
actually funded.
And helped fund that.
Program through my county so
they could help even more
seniors because they were so
helpful for for me and my
family. So I, I, I thank you for
that and just as an idea for,
for some of us, and that's one
way we can help.
Um, is, you know, even middle.
Income seniors.
And they can't make their meals
anymore. All of a sudden it gets
very, very difficult for him and
having that availability for the
family doesn't have to pay for
it. It was actually a huge
burden off our off of us
because.
My in-laws ate so much at the
end that there's so little at
the end.
That that one meal pretty much
lasted them.
2 meals for the day. All we had
to do is figure out breakfast.
So thank you for that and thank
you, thank you again for, for
all the people in your
department. They were all
wonderful.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Senator.
makes sense.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you secretary. It's nice to see
you again. On page 6 of your
presentation, uh, you mentioned,
uh, the federal match for the
AmeriCorps volunteer program as
a former AmeriCorps member. I'm
one.
how many do you have and what's
the match and then the final
question on that subject is, are
you having any troubles getting
through with the RFP. I've heard
other programs that are, are,
are kind of been shut out and
are having struggles right now.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator, I'm gonna actually ask
our aging network, um, Deputy
division Director Amy.
To speak to that program. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, ma'am.
Um, Senator, um, I don't have
the exact number of volunteers
across the state, um, but I can
get that for you pretty quickly.
Um, the match requirement for
those programs is 10% of the
federal allocation.
Thank you and we've matched that
by 4 times. So our, our
allocation to them for their
programs is 4 times the federal.
allocation.
That's great. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you for that
answer, and I would love to hear
how many you have.
Um, and just for the record, um,
George RR Martin is also a.
Um, former Vista member, which
is under the AmeriCorp umbrella,
as you know. Um, on page 9 of
the um the kiki Saedra that $9.5
million. Is that need to be a
reoccurring or is this like a
one-time contribution that
you'll use over the course of
many years or it will grow, or
what is that?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, this
is a non-reverting fund and so
this is a one time amount
request, um, and given that it's
non-reverting, we can use it
over time, but we do only get
authorized to use uh a
portion of that fund in any
given, um,
Fiscal year. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. So is the idea, um,
maybe Kelly, you can help me
with the idea be that it would
grow because 9.5 doesn't seem
like enough to really grow.
Mr. Chairmans committee, um, the
Kiki's Future Fund is never
supposed to be like a trust
fund. It was uh approved several
years ago by the legislature,
and it's received a couple, um,
infusions of non-recurring and
um agency uses that to do some
programming that they feel like
they have need a response for
more immediately than the
legislatures recurring
appropriations.
Um, and that's good for their
flexibility. I would caution us
that that does take away your
legislative appropriations power
in some ways because it's, it
tends to.
The executively directed and.
Plus and minuses on both sides
of that, so that's, it's not
like nutrition but it's kind of
like a.
A little savings account that
you.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that.
Very well. Anyone else?
Senator, just a, just a quick
question. I, I hope that you've
made a budget adjustments.
Because I see you had a, a
pretty good size.
A revision this year.
So I hope you
Adjusted your budget so that we
put it in a place that we could
get it spent, and that's good
enough and to me, Mr. Cha. Thank
you.
Thank you, sir.
Oh, very well no other uh.
Members, we stand adjourned
until Monday morning at 9
o'clock.
And thank you all of you that
are here today. Thank you.
