Leave the room so we have to
wait for voters to.
Well.
With the second twenty thousand
dollars your vote for Senator
Kernan we're gonna start with
you
for those you they're here for
the third time in their life
there's more amendments coming
down I am hearing I'm not sure
I'm trying to figure that out so
we're gonna we're gonna.
We're gonna watch that closely.
Senator shares some you might
have two more minutes Senator
Kernan we're gonna start with
you.
and.
Expert witness start you ready.
Thank you Mr chairman Avenue in
the.
Yes yes we have an amendment.
One but for.
I'll second that motion.
so Senator Kernan explaining
amendment one quick one second
Senator Hemphill are you a who's
who's on springs and is also
under center and the decide no
for.
I'm here okay I just need to see
you for quorum.
Eight Senator Kernan.
Thank you very much for this
amendment destructive to one the
procurement code there were some
issues raised at the last
committee and decided that that
wasn't necessary the real
purpose of the bill is to
address sections to and section
to inform three so I think
basically that's what the
amendment.
And.
The move but sections to for
entering and exiting by looking
at the H. two.
One second.
Start to anyone explained that
they do since so go ahead
knowledge Mr chair members the
committee striking section one
of the bill section one included
an exemption for the educational
retirement board to exempt us
from the procurement
requirements every four years
for a pension administration
system
since we went back the
department of information
technology
indicated their opposition to
our proposal so we're striking
language and we will try to work
something out with them over the
next couple of years before we
go live with this new system.
And that's all the amendment the
amendment that's what the
amendment is Mr chair we have a
motion to adopt.
Sen Lindsey motion to adopt
amendment center sure second
that.
Senator.
Senator was made the motion
Senator second.
Senator Kernan explain your bill
before we go to the audience yes
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee basically this
bill will allow employees of
southeast New Mexico college in
Carlsbad or new new college to
participate in the alternative
retirement plans offered by E.
R. P. and
Then it also aligns the
education retirement act to with
align the age at which the RP
members required to take the
minimum distribution so the last
with federal law and they don't
have to come back and change
that every time federal changes
and all that money expert just
take if there's anything more we
need to now.
Mr chairman of the committee I
believe Senator Kernan
summarized it well when New
Mexico state are when the
southeast Mexico college broke
off from New Mexico State
University last year those
individuals or participate in
the alternative retirement plan
found themselves in a position
where they can no longer
participate because they weren't
specifically named it statute
says Bill proposes to correct
that part the other thing that
it does is it is it aligns the
language in the education
chairman act with laws contain
or iris guidelines with require
with regard to the required
minimum distribution age very
simple thank you anybody in the
audience and support imagine
emissions out there.
when you want to come up very
quickly yeah minimally on soon.
Thank you chairman US senators
but NASA Hawker executive
director for the New Mexico
independent community colleges
and we both the senator for
bringing this bill we strongly
supported these are employees
who had had the ability to be
part of the alternative
retirement plan now they can go
back to that thank you.
Anybody from an image you in
support placing their lobbyist
here you have anything to say
about this new college.
We get all the money transfer
the sixty million I just wanna
make sure that all happens
Senator Kernan can you make sure
that that happens yes Mr chair
I'm sure I would've heard.
Questions from committee
members.
there's no access anyone
opposition no opposition.
Just in case there's no one on.
Have.
Motion for a new passed by
Senator second by Senator.
call the roll because Senator
built on Grumman a rocking
chair.
Senator Gonzales is not on scene
right.
Senator Burt excuse Senator
Campos excuse Senator Diamond
yes.
Thank you Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Senator Woods.
Two sixty senator Munoz.
Yes.
Seven.
Seven seven seven thank you
senator thank you very much and
done and we're going to go to
the next.
I would not be for you there in
the team open right now.
We're doing.
Senate bill twenty.
You have amendments.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is us in
about twenty four.
To give a brief summary on has
that we have received New
Mexico's received today
approximately one point six
billion dollars in federal funds
that was dispersed in three
rounds this bill is really just
a transparency and
accountability actors on of that
really appropriation and there
PED currently does have a
website that displays
information on the funds for S.
R. one and just for two years
indicated that they will do at
some point they will upload
disbursement funds for S. or
three although L. E. S. C. has
reached out to them and they did
not comment back on when we can
expect that what isn't displayed
on the PED website is D. R.
details on those expenditures so
how the expenditures will affect
student achievements the number
of students served from that
funding or how the funding will
help the school district or
charter school progress forward
towards their goals this bill
was first heard and seen
Education were some concerns
originally that maybe would add
additional reporting
requirements and so we address
those in a committee substitute
that came forward that
information is provided to
schools but it's not listed on
the website I have a a special
what he's here today this is
Amanda Eric on with New Mexico
kids can who can ask answering
specific questions.
we'll go to the audience anybody
in support.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody else in.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
cert Gerald senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
the chambers in full support at
this transparency measure as you
heard our state has seen over a
billion dollars extra federal
funding go through our schools
over the course of the pandemic
it's an avalanche of funding and
seeking our districts and
schools a long time to spend it
down we need to make sure
they're spending it first of all
so that it's being spent and not
just sitting in accounts but
secondly to make sure it's going
towards smart investments that
serve our students every New
Mexican and especially New
Mexican parents should have
access to the information around
this once in A. generation
fusion of federal funding into
our schools thank you.
Thank you.
Are there some of the we got
some just ripped.
questions from committee
members.
And.
motion for the past Senator sure
secondly soon let's call the
roll.
Here.
Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Phil.
Yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn yeah.
Senator Woods.
Cinnamon yes.
Eight
would disappoint.
Mr chair.
One just give returns.
Thank you thank you.
Who's doing this Senator I'm
interested with your because if
I may I'll stay with I want to.
That's why the prices are
different pictures right.
I part of the Disney movie about
it.
I.
Mr chair members of the
committee let Senator Steinborn
go into details over this
littering and recycling bill is
we do have amendments are these
your amendment mmhm Mr chair
correct there is an amendment.
The
Senate finance committee.
Thank you for this.
CBS announces.
Senator moved me the most.
Senator would second the motion
for discussion purposes Senator.
Senator Diamond or Senator
thanks Mr chair the committee
that the memo just strikes the
appropriation of the bill.
Thank you.
Remove from the Topsham and.
The centers here and second by
Senator weapons.
Any objections to the.
It amended bill center stand
back on.
Thank you Mr chair committee so
this is a bill that does really
a couple things in the state it
streamlines our state recycling
and illegal dumping
law and great program that
collected for the state every
year grants are given out to our
communities this streamlines the
language in that to allow more
flexibility for the environment
apartment to operate more
funding to go to be a acceptable
to all of our communities for
the diversity of recycling
activities it also strengthens
the
Keep New Mexico clean and
beautiful program a grant
program that all of our
communities use for litter
prevention and it also requires
coordination among Sir state
agencies we've given funding
right now to three different
state agencies independently to
work on litter abatement but yet
we don't require any
coordination this bill also
requires them to work together
on strategies and finally and
the reason we're really excited
and we want to make our opening
pitch to the committee today is
we're Senator Diamond I hoping
to launch in New Mexico
statewide anti litter marketing
campaign.
And of national leaders in
litter abatement say the most
important thing we can do is to
educate people and it's a
continual activity it never ends
but we have a new generation New
Mexicans need to be educated
about being stewards not about
littering and so this we propose
to do this and it's funding
additional funding we would like
added to the New Mexico in the
beautiful program that will be
asking for separately from us Mr
chair on to do that otherwise
they certainly have a fund the
New Mexico clean and beautiful
fund that they give on this
activity so with that type of
the sample questions.
We have anybody in the audience.
Mr chairman members of the
committee model shows registered
lobbyists thousand dollars laces
or do we manage
hauling and recycling from white
sands down to the Texas border
we really appreciate the Sanchez
putting an emphasis on recycling
and litter control we believe
that the central for our economy
and tourism and that we
appreciate the support thank
you.
Mmhm no self serving there
correct.
Anybody in opposition there's
nobody on zoom.
Either way question.
A motion for two passed I do
have one question.
What.
The guys didn't Mr chair and
sent to have deadly you didn't
go through Judiciary with this.
Mr Mr chair Senator no we did
not say that I'm I'm not raising
hell with.
Share.
Those guys would not this
purpose close out here in New
York Mexico.
K. twelve go there.
I would suggest before you take
it to the floor of the Senate
that you not get.
Get an amendment take that out
because.
Those guys are some of those
guys will take it out for you if
you'd go in a month flat through
the four bodies here that away
that's all I have Mister Mister
presents under this all existing
law but I hear you.
Yeah Mr chair Senator will visit
with the chair Judiciary
forecast for thank you.
What is the starting to sell
progress.
You might think I'll give you
the I do have some questions and
instead of telling me the same
that that nonprofits could right
the I.
And there would be nothing else
left for anybody else in FY are
Why do you think they are
proposing that athletes are.
Mr Mr chair it's actually
something that that we included
in the bill wasn't asked for by
NMED it's just because there's a
very strong long established
nonprofits wanted but the New
Mexico recycling coalition that
assist communities and.
You know implementing effective
waste diversion efforts
including marketing and they
play a strong coordination role
and so they're a very viable
grantee and I will just say that
we have other.
We have other grant programs in
the state The do give out grants
to nonprofit organizations I
think the outdoor equity fund
and so these are really
important partners in our state
and so we're including them in
this funded I don't see them.
rating the right funds because
those parameters are set by the
department themselves and the
main beneficiary without
question is.
The communities themselves who
need funding for infrastructure.
Chairman stepped out.
Eight seconds before you.
Okay.
The second pass it.
So I I see the the the part
about right but there's another
part about this
which is been brought up about
of the anti donation clause so
all of these groups we're going
to get paid to do something and
all I know is a member of rotary
we just have our goal cleanup or
mile highway day in so how would
how would we make sure that it
wasn't an anti donation thank so
Mr madam chair center it's a
great question and this is where
if an entity is performing a
service and it's a services
agreement with their providing a
value to the state.
Then.
Then it's a recognize acceptable
procurement practice.
The.
I believe it was only six and a
half seconds.
It was actually thank you for
the.
Thank you Mr.
no center what concerns me is is
if we get too many people trying
to do the control that the fund
will be in so my suggestion to
you is is we limit that to a
certain capacity on the grant
funding and correct that.
I will tell you.
There's litter everywhere right
and certain things are allowed
to be picked up by DOT certain
things are allowed to be pick up
I DO to met the
to go into personally if someone
urinates in this model and
throws it out.
It is written by mail has
they're not allowed to pick
those up and have to go to
medical waste because we see
that you need to provide
financing that can fit within.
I want to make sure that fund
doesn't know and and then
there's opportunity statewide
for everyone to do that not one
just in the same all for other
people out there and so the cost
and then all of my.
Rest of New Mexico suffers from.
Come to the amount to do some of
that stuff before.
For Mr I look forward to
visiting with you and hearing
your thoughts these are long
established programs imprimer so
probably I'll learn a little bit
more about the parameters right
now that might address some of
the.
Them with a number of.
Hi David thank you.
The.
Have a motion to do pass of.
Second the motion.
we call the roll.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes years I don't have any idea
yes.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz.
Yes.
Seven nine nine.
That was.
We're not gonna hear Senate bill
one twenty four today just to
let you know we know to my
expert witness from yesterday
the.
The police chief in the
handicapped person.
To be an expert witness but you
can hop on home and.
And do that Senator Rodriguez.
It's a very large margin Senate
bill one thirty four which
allocated two and a half percent
of the state's bond capacity to
your market for affordable
housing and so the thing is with
the bill was that it doesn't
kick in until next year it had a
twenty twenty four date and all
we're trying to do is move it to
this year so we can kick in
earlier and that's it will
generate up between thirty seven
million to forty million dollars
for affordable housing just by
changing the moving that one
here that's all it does Mr
chairman members of the
committee we have talked about
that several times.
Senate and using I'm using.
Thank you is the same thing
thank you Mr chairman we're good
to go what just address any
questions you may have anybody
in the audience and support.
Anybody in opposition.
let's hear from my eyes are from
all.
We can hear you.
Media are Senators thank you for
having me today I'm here in
support at S. P. three eighty
one R. the revisions to the New
Mexico housing trust fund the
bonding bill from last session
there's a huge need for
affordable housing are
committing Act community are the
shortage of tens of thousands of
units New Mexico mortgage
finance authority have proven
themselves to be very good
steward of the State Farm and I
respectfully request you
recommend recommend looking
forward to the full Senate
wanted forty pack thank you.
Okay.
Questions from committee
members.
Accomplish you raise your hand
no not on your maybe that
somebody to.
This time were you maybe.
Any questions from committee
members.
Then first time back at second
motion by Senator Steinborn
second by Senator Padilla.
Well we call the roll.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn yes Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz yes.
Thank you nineties just thank
you but which one is yes
absolutely thank you unanimously
this is great thank you is the
problem yes.
Under your up next imagine this
is why higher it's here.
Two hundred twenty four million
of I. Angie money that could be
used correct.
Joe Sheppard.
but after.
We can set up your honor in the.
Sean.
Senator.
You have and not forced on.
I do Mr chair it should be being
passed out right now.
How we gonna do this kind.
Mr chair Jan the item called for
house bill two and R. P. S. P.
review so I was going to go
through the LFC packet that's
going to cover where higher ed
funding sits.
After the the house
appropriations and finance
committee and also details our
PSP.
You start for yes Sir.
Start off of the rack above the
house bill.
All right and.
Good afternoon members my names
Conor Jorgensen I'm LFC analyst
for higher education this is the
packet we're gonna work off of
for my portion of the
presentation the first thing I
want to go over.
Is what you will see
in the budget and house bill two
as it was passed by the house so
if you'll take a look at those
three columns over on the right
hand side of the page the third
column from the right is just
titled HFC.
That is showing us all of the
funding that's in the higher ed
budget so if you go down to line
fifty you'll see the the higher
ed.
Funding appropriated in the HFC
version is one point one billion
that's an eighty eighty and a
half million dollar or seven
point nine percent increase over
FY twenty three by and large the
house appropriations and finance
committee this.
I took the LFC recommendation
and then made a few minor
changes to it so if you look
over to the at the second column
to the right HFC over under LFC
you see there's a couple small
items.
The changed in our PSP funding
the first one you'll see on line
thirty four again I'm thirty
seven and another one on line
forty five so those all total up
to just over a million dollars
and changes the big change was
on line forty seven that's
twenty three million dollars
recurring for the opportunity
scholarship and so.
You'll turn with me to page two.
I want to talk a little bit more
about exactly what what that
change looks like for the
opportunity scholarship since.
Yes signal
changing not budget so on the
second column to the right
you'll see the HFC
recommendation if you go down.
that first box you can see the
it's the sources we have a
lottery is the first three lines
followed by other state aid
that's highlighted in the middle
there in blue and then we have
opportunity funds those are
break broken up into.
Into three different categories
we have with recurring
opportunity funding nonrecurring
opportunity funding and fund
balance that was existing carry
over
So starting from the from the
recurring you can see forty five
million dollars in the HFC
recommendation for recurring
appropriations that's up from
twelve million dollars in FY
twenty three so a substantial
increase in occurring there.
In terms of nonrecurring that
went up to seventy four million
dollars that's an increase of
fourteen million dollars over
the LFC version.
This is.
The first packet we handed out
second page.
Yes Sir.
And it's going to be page two is
the opportunity detail.
So overall you can see there is
thirty seven million dollars in
the H. A. F. C. version.
Of the budget that was not in
the LFC version of.
and then so what does that pay
for if you look at that the
second box their uses you can
see the first line is a lot of
and then there's other state
aid.
And then opportunity scholarship
so.
We've broken this out into a few
into a few different categories
the first and most important one
the one that really drives the
projection on opportunity
scholarship is the prior year
tuition and fees which is
estimated at about a hundred
sixteen million dollars that's
what we're going to need
essentially for FY twenty three
and then becomes the base that
we carry forward then there is
an assumption for enrollment
growth the HFC version of the
bill included the
two point three million dollars
for that enrollment growth
that's assuming there's about a
two percent enrollment increase.
for fiscal twenty four.
Importantly of the HFC version
of the bill does not include
additional funding for tuition
increases for fee increases or
to cover the bridge scholarship
that covers tuition costs for
students in their first semester
of lottery scholarship and so
when those cost controls got put
in place.
It brought the overall estimated
costs down to about a hundred
ninety million dollars I also
like to point out for the
committee you're gonna see
language in house bill to the
that essentially says that it
says The appropriation is
sufficient to pay for tuition
and fees apple FY twenty three
levels but does not include
sufficient funding to pay that
first semester scholarship
there's nothing in that language
that actually limits the
institutions power it's just
telling them
what is funded.
So that is opportunity
scholarship.
If you can turn out to page
three.
This is the higher education in
detail the institutional detail
is going to show you every
single budget line item that
appears in house bill two in
sort of a truncated format and
so up at the top there you'll
see we start out with University
of New Mexico online to you can
see instruction in general
followed by athletics right all
the way down to line twelve and
that's where the research and
public service project start so.
And higher ed funding typically
the the biggest single line
you're gonna see is instruction
and general and that's what we
think of as our our normal sort
of classroom education delivery
expense and then there's other
categorical items that are
funded in addition to that
there's only a handful of
women's athletics educational
television and then there is
tribal and teacher education
initiatives and you see those
across pretty much all the
institutions when we get to our
are PSP's these are single line
item appropriations and there
they are typically things that
do not get funded through normal
instruction in general
so I'll point out a an example
of
And our PSP but wouldn't be.
Funded through I. Angie look at
line number eighteen you'll see
judicial selection that's a
function that resides Act The
University of New Mexico but it
really doesn't have anything to
do with University of New of New
Mexico it's a that's an R. P. S.
P. that exists to help
To help AOC.
Actually do vetting and
selection for judges so that's a
pretty good example of of and
our PSP that's not related to an
I. N. G. function however we
have a ton of our P. S. P.'s
that do relate to I. Angie in
the and that that sort of model
so if you look at line fifteen
you'll see on our PS P. that's
titled economics department
that is money that is actually
just instruction money it's
called out in the base in the
base budget and I think the the
question there is is why and and
I would like to give just a
little bit of historical context
there our PSBs are actually
fairly new and higher
educational funding so if we go
back to FY seven there were
only.
Twenty eight R. P. S. P.'s
operating at seven of the
institutions statewide counted
for ten million dollars fast
forward to FY twenty four on the
list you see in front of you
there's a hundred fifty seven R.
P. S. P.'s here
total funding them is about a
hundred sixty three million
dollars so R. P. S. P. funding
has increased really
dramatically over the past
couple of decades.
And.
And I think you know I also like
to flatter one of the drivers of
that has actually been junior
bill appropriations so every
year when
when we start getting junior
bill money and your marks are
made in that bill to higher ed
institutions often times that
money winds up in an R. P. S. P.
line item and sometimes requires
the creation of a new R. P. S.
P. line item and so we have
So pretty rapidly expanding list
of our PSP's and I think it's
it's leading to some oversight
issues I would say when we when
we're now looking at a hundred
fifty seven R. P. S. P.'s
statewide I'd say it's
straining.
The ability to to provide that
oversight
we do have an annual process and
during that annual process
every.
I read institution shows up with
a list of our PSP's and they
present them to a panel that
includes the the DFA LFC.
And AGD staff and that's that's
sort of how their how those are
P. S. P.'s are vetted there's
also an internal betting on the
institutional side
but a number of these are P. S.
P.'s are very very small dollar
and so we're not quite sure that
they get the the amount of
oversight that they ought to do
so case in point the state
auditor recently had a special
audit of the University of New
Mexico to our PSBs in the health
sciences center
what that special lot and found
was that because of the small
dollar amount of these are PSP's
and because of the number of R.
P. S. P.'s there wasn't
adequate financial oversight
from an audit standpoint because
they were falling below the
threshold for materiality so we
think about you an admin UNM
health sciences which is a multi
billion dollar budget and we're
talking about R. P. S. P.'s that
might be certainly less than two
hundred thousand often times we
have our PSBs less than a
hundred thousand they're not
receiving a high level of
scrutiny in those audits and
what led to the state auditor to
conclude.
Was that
those are P. S. P.'s couldn't
those funds could be mismanaged
for years without either the
higher education department or
even the hosting institution
actually knowing about
And so I think.
As as as you as policy makers go
go forward and think about it as
a committee that sh that should
be one of the considerations to
make is thinking about how those
have adequate oversight can be
delivered
and if there need to be some of
those threshold questions for
our PSP size or number of R. P.
S. P.'s and.
And have that be part of the
deliberative process Act
I also want to point out.
So if you see change to page
eight.
page eight of this packet
This is nonrecurring general
fund.
I wanted to take just a minute
to talk about specials and
supplementals.
Because there's a bit of change
here to
So look at the com furthest to
the right that's the change the
HFC over or under the LFC rack
you'll see on line fourteen but
total non recurring
recommendation went up by.
forty three and a half million
dollars in HFC relative to LFC
and I wanted to just run down
the the summary list real quick
and just give you some of the
highlights
The first of those increases are
going to C. line to University
of New Mexico two point five
million dollar increase that's a
native American studies program
line for this is New Mexico the
New Mexico State University that
looks like a pretty big increase
its thirteen and a half million
dollars what that is is ten
million dollars for the
reforestation program that's not
new money it's just it had been
housed Act and nerd
but the reforestation project is
a joint project between New
Mexico State University of New
Mexico
Highlands university and EMNRD
and NMSC was the fiscal agents
of the proper place to put that
money was in New Mexico state
there's also another two and a
half million dollars in state
for online programs line six New
Mexico tech as another two
hundred fifty thousand that's
related to the water data act
one nine it Luna community
college there's two or PSP's
there for workforce development
equipment and additional
computer equipment and a lot of
that particular workforce
development funding was in there
that got flagged as being of
particular interest cause of
fire recovery and then the
necessity to help that help out
workforce recover as well as a
community
line thirteen shows the higher
education department that went
up twenty six million
I don't want to go through all
of them but you can see the
majority of them are from lines
thirty one down to thirty eight
the biggest single one was that
fourteen million dollars for
opportunity
there is an additional.
There's an additional five
million dollars that was added
that's for scholarships for
graduate students in stem fields
that brings our total funding up
to ten million dollars
there's another five million
dollars for health professionals
loan repayments
And that pretty much rounds up
the the big lists of as we had
on the nonrecurring side Mr
Chairman
I think that'll probably do it
for the update on house bill two
and the LFC overview of the R.
P. SP I'll be happy to yield.
Going to.
Mr chair we're we're gonna do
the presentations simultaneously
each of us taking part condensed
it down to for the second time.
Thank you Sir.
We are now into this particular
presentation here first I'd like
to thank my colleagues are on
zoom in in the room of course
this is the council university
presidents I'm Joe Sheppard
present western New Mexico
university with with us we have
James Johnson president or
chancellor of eastern New Mexico
university seminar president of
highlands university New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology Dr Steve Steven wells
New Mexico State University
chance for a resume and over in
northern New Mexico we have
to table their us and then of
course it University of New
Mexico we have Garnett Stokes
with that I'll turn to Becky to
introduce our people.
Thank you good afternoon my name
is Becky rally and president of
Santa Fe community college and
the chair for the New Mexico
independent community colleges
and I'd like to quickly
introduce our members from
central New Mexico community
college president Tracy Hartzler
at Clovis community college
interim president robin Jones at
Luna community college present
it word Martinez at mesa lance
community college president Greg
bush at New Mexico junior
college president there more New
Mexico military institute Major
General Jerry grizzle at a
northern New Mexico college
northern is also part of our
association present Hector
Balderas at San Juan college
president Tony Pendergrass at
southeast New Mexico college
president Kevin Beardmore and of
course Joe Sheppard is also part
of our group to and I'd like to
introduce my colleague Sean pal.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you last edited.
Okay.
I'm sure I'll present of eastern
Mexico universit Roswell and
also the president right now of
the New Mexico association of
community colleges I appreciate
the opportunity to be here
today.
Introduce the members so we have
president Ryan prosper from ENMU
Ruidoso we have Dr Monica Torrez
from an image in a misused on
Anna we have doctor mark calling
from emissions Alamogordo we
have Dr Marlene Chavez to
funding from emissions requests
Dr merry to terror is from UNM
House Dr Sabrina Ezzell from you
Gallup.
Dr Samuel Desormeaux from UNM
Valencia.
And Dr Michael Holdsclaw from
you Los Alamos thank you for
letting us present to that this
year we're now moving over to
the second page of your of your
hand up and it's titled I need
funding would take a couple
moments on this because I think
it's important for that for the
committee to have a of a greater
understanding of I. Angie
intuition Mr chair you and I
have had conversations as I've
had with other members about how
that relates to the opting
scholarship how that relates to
tuition because obviously you
can't have one body constantly
raising tuition well the other
bodies trying to appropriate in
getting those two crossed on
each other just a good business
sponsor like to spend just a
couple seconds talking about
that for every one percent of I.
Angie increase you yield about
the same as a two and a half to
three percent of tuition
obviously we have different
tuitions and so therefore it's
between two to actions by three
point two percent on the tuition
side so if I need goes up to
percent that means we as
institutions don't necessarily
have to increase our tuition by
that that percentage why is that
important oftentimes this body
creates mandates that are
underfunded or not funded at all
if you think about your be at
times when that goes up you
think about competence
compensation at the eighty
percent mark you think about for
example right now there's a bill
going through in New Mexico in
terms of its premiums and some
of the in higher education is
not funded for that so if that
passes we have those increases
to give you an idea of that
relationship and further that
relationship keep in mind the
following the institution like
mine it's comprehensive
institution we have two sources
of funding once I need one
situation but twenty five
percent of our funding comes
from the tuition about seventy
five percent comes from Judy now
let's have an unfunded mandate
or inflation were the basis I
and she's already been passed so
oftentimes the tuition piece
comes into play.
And community college I'll give
you CM for enrollment CNN they
have three sources of funding
one is their their local option
that's about forty percent of
their budget the other one of
course is appropriation about
another forty percent of the
budget in twenty percent of the
budget comes from tuition so
same thing comes into play
something happens there there
board has to take a look at how
do we fund whatever that is that
that this constant friction.
How tuition gets full it gets
passed any institution is
slightly different that health
fees are passed institution I
think this is also important to
understand.
Under under the statutes and so
forth at my institution and
other institutions fees are
primarily driven by the student
government students get together
in the state okay we want the
following sorts things one
athletics we want to student
life we want the following
pieces and so they come together
they're public hearings among
other students and they present
a docket for the fees that then
goes before the board of regents
and that that gets passed or not
were reduced the second type of
fee that's not part of the
opportunity scholarship that
would be like your capital
outlay for so for example let's
say I want to build a a sports
arena at western I go I issue a
bond my debt service is pledged
against the fee that fee is
outside the opportunity
scholarship but never last is a
fee that would be mandated be
paid under the bond documents
there's another deviations to
that.
On the judicial side the board
look at budgets and so forth and
as I mentioned look at what
needs to be funded in the come
to a conclusion about okay we
only have one other source of
funding and that's the in state
side.
Here's Jones with Jewish Jewish
remember is not is not all the
same with in state out of state
graduate undergraduate we have
other shorts deviations to that
so I want you to keep that in
mind too that not all of that is
impacting your opportunity
scholarship the other cost
driver is what's happening
nationally I'll give you an
example university of Arizona
Mister chair I know something
here and here in terms of
familiarity their tuition right
now is twelve thousand seven
hundred thirty six dollars in
terms of their in state tuition
so we like your hand is more on
the seventy thousand dollar more
so all of a sudden that four
thousand dollars and
differentiation they have
runners on a to go after
professors go after staff in
that puts pressure on New Mexico
institutions to have to be
competitive we have to figure
out funding sources because our
tuition is substantially less
issue another example in
thousand three and forty eight
any use on thousand eight
hundred sixty nine dollars very
much different than what's
happening here in New Mexico.
The other piece did it to keep
in mind is athletics here in
this state some states are not
this way athletics is is is
funded on the R. P. S. B.
process typically and it's also
funded on student fees so it has
two sources of funding our PSP
and Zune free side of it and so
to remain competitive within our
conferences most of our
institutions are below or at in
the in the bottom quartile when
it comes to funding athletics in
so Mister chair I just wanted to
to pass on some some additional
information of that relationship
between I and G. fees and we'll
talk about opportunities
governorship in just a second
to drive out thank you Jeff part
of our request also centers on
campus safety and a request was
for eight million dollars in
nonrecurring funding for campus
safety across all of our
institutions there's nothing
that's a higher priority than
the safety of all of our
students faculty and staff this
to this one would be used for an
enhanced training of safety
personnel including robust
mental health training and then
also different types of
equipment like electronic locks
and surveillance cameras license
plate readers monitoring
software gunfire detection and
various things like that and
this the the the price tag on
this has been derived from a
study done by the campus safety
officers so that we've come up
with a figure that is bendable
and that would address most of
our needs.
And so now the doctor.
Mr chair members of the
committee another thing on the
next slide is support for
students success and these terms
were talking about mental health
proposals and would like to add
a six million dollar asking for
the total general fund request
to increase mental health
services on the campuses not all
of our campuses especially those
that are at the to your level
have counselors or social
workers or psychologists
available on a regular basis and
so this would assessed
throughout the state to increase
in all health services for.
And this goes back to.
Dr shepherd.
Thank you Mr on the next slide
and more now on to the dual
credit side.
In the state of New Mexico we
have an interesting way of
funding more maybe not funding
dual credit.
We're at roughly two dollars a
credit hour when we teach at a
high school student at our
universities and sometimes you
think well were you teaching of
some are actually at the high
school some are using people who
are qualified at the high school
to teach some are using are are
actually on our campus sometimes
we have entire sections of dual
credit particularly at at the at
at the community college level.
And enrollment there is nothing
allocated for dual credit in
addition to what's already there
we recommend fifteen million
dollars to be allocated towards
towards all credit this is
something that actually saves
the state because think about
this for a moment if a student
is in high school of their
junior year they could have
their associates degree by the
time they graduate that reduces
the overall cost the things like
the opportunity scholarship and
other places here's the other
the other other piece to that my
little credit students don't pay
tuition so there's no tuition
funding coming to this it's it's
it's a complete cost structure
and I think that needs to be
changed and fifteen million
dollars allocated for that
endeavor drive out.
And thank you the next piece of
our request is a five million
dollar non recurring budget for
cybersecurity I know we talk
about cyber security all the
time the importance of that
obviously it's for technical
safeguards this would be across
all of our higher education
institutions a significant
portion of the funding would go
for cyber and cyber insurance
policies these are one of the
most
significant increases in all of
our insurance expenses across
our campuses I can speak from
experience so it's incredibly
important to have and it's
really will save you if you
haven't have us in fortune need
to use it the funding this
funding also includes the tribal
schools it's five million
dollars above the AGFC
substitute for H. B. two.
Next slide of course went on to
the student financial aid
opportunities scholarships slide
in and I do want to spend a
couple more moments because you
heard Connor talk about the
bridge scholarship and and so
forth and senator but it you Mr
chair I want to compliment you
course years ago with the
lottery scholarship use your
earlier and that you changed our
our state you colleagues at the
time senator Sanchez and others.
In another we have opportunities
collar ship at one point time
that bridge piece what what's
important.
Yet now with opportunity it
creates a little bit of a
disconnect between lottery an
opportunity because I was a
student who's not meritorious I
have right from the moment I go
the opportunity scholarship was
of a moderate I may not have
that if the university doesn't
have the bridge under current
statute opportunity scholarship
is allowed to cover that bridge
difference secondly you may want
to take a look at your
requirements for example under
lottery and and and Mr chair I I
recall last year you this is an
area that that you are trying to
address in just the thirty
credit hour piece workers
opportunity scholarship does not
have that requirement and so I
think at some point time there
needs to be a a good
conversation and a good look at
how those two scholarships those
those marquee scholarships fit
in with each other finally Mr
chair you the enrollment
increase for this past year was
a little bit over four percent I
believe is four point three
percent or somewhere around
there and I would strongly
recommend the funding for
opportunity scholarship has at
least increase equal to what
happened this past year and I
don't think the two percent as
it is a high in a figure thank
you Mr chair and I move this
over as well so Mr chair members
again our priorities are
submitted to you for your review
and they're listed on the last
slides and would be glad to
answer any questions you may
have.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
just quickly and thank you for
your presentation good to see
all of you I I just the hackers
cybersecurity.
We've had some big the break ins
with hackers and scammers and
everything you can think of and
so I just wanted to know of the
five million dollars to to
requesting a nonrecurring
have you in the past had any any
of breakthroughs a rake in
session safe from hackers I know
like the department of
regulation licensing had a huge
break have you in the committee
in the colleges in general for
universities Mr chair Senator
Rodriguez and.
We have had close calls we've
had sweet we yes we have had
some situations I can actually
say when I was in Clovis we had
one where we had to use our
cyber insurance policy so I'm
very familiar with the cost of
it but a couple of our
institutions have had issues so
nothing catastrophic but.
Unfortunately sometimes we feel
like it's a matter of time Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez on the
university side but New Mexico
tech has had had issues
highlands as you may recall a
couple years ago I had a major
issue in terms of a cyber attack
on that one I know at my own
institution we nearly had one
was on a Sunday and fortunately
one of my database
administrators was in the system
and saw an external threat
inside the system trying to gain
access to other critical parts
so it's a very it's a it can be
very costly endeavor if we don't
take care.
Yes this my concern is with I
know of all back we had
presentations from the the
security on.
Security and they were asking
for approximately thirty million
dollars back then and now it's
going to the cost is going up so
much more and especially we have
breaking is as you said it's
much more expensive but I am I
just wanted to to know if the
five million with something
you'll had decided was adequate
because considering the needs
for that it seem like it was
small for everyone but I
understand you're trying to be
reasonable to Mr chair Senator
Rodriguez we'll take as much
money in that category you can
afford to give us what we to
your point we wanted to be
conscientious about budget and
the the the amount that we're
requesting is a start now to
finish.
Yes makes all right in one last
question on your when you're
you're working towards
implementing advanced technology
safeguards across on New Mexico
higher education institutions
are you collaborating with the
I. T. state information
technology system at all or have
or as a separate.
Mr chair Senator Rodriguez it's
we do collaborate with would do
it on on certain functionalities
each of our institutions also
have their own systems our own
I. T. people their own
administer administrators we use
a different system the than the
state because we use an
enterprise system geared toward
higher education which is
different than what you have at
the state level.
Senator do that I just like to
add to that that are just
collaboration has a
cybersecurity element in it too
so the college that are
participating in that will we
will partner on cybersecurity.
Well thank you so much for that
for your good work that's all I
have.
Senator.
But.
We see that.
So I got questions are probably
for comment but also on on the
I. T. a question you did answer
it's got separate stuff but.
Is there anything keeping us
from having one system therefore
we have we can put our money
into one set of of security
instead of eight Senator how
many are out there.
Mr chair Senator share yes
there's a lot of things keeping
us from having one system and it
has to do with the the unique
nature of higher education the
diversity of higher education
institutions and how that comes
together for example at the
state level you typically would
not get involved with the
federal title for you might not
get involved with some of the
federal grants you definitely
want to get involved with
registration and scheduling of
students classes and so forth in
the systems that we purchased
and systems that we have in the
system is being developed with
chess those are all things
geared toward our our business
model if you will should be
similar to say what kind of
Microsoft excel do the same
thing is Microsoft Word and the
answer is no.
Okay.
I'm still Mr chair the these are
things that Connor brought up so
I don't.
You might want to answer you
probably want to.
So we talked about the
opportunity scholarship
increasing and I remember what
it was to to percent.
With patients on now but did we
actually haven't and increase in
enrollment plaster and what was
that increase if we did Mr chair
Senator share yes there was an
increase in enrollment last year
was four point three percent on
a on a head count basis two
point nine percent on a full
time equivalent student
basically you also had a first
year enrollment increases are I
want to say about nine point
eight percent.
Nine point eight nine point
eight.
then on to the R. P. S. P.'s.
Is there something of maybe this
is for everybody here is there
something that we can do to you
know you said a lot of money
came from to junior kind of
bills can we put any kind of
rules do you have any
recommendations for rural say
don't do that if it's only a
hundred thousand dollars those
look recently we had things that
we're not going to fund capital
outlay for less than seventy
five so could we do the same
thing for our PSP's Senator in
our junior we had guidelines
that you can create any any
programs right and it could be
reoccurring money so those
guidelines are followed
correctly which is not in the
room I think the Senate did
there should be any in there
most of that was to local
governments and agencies so that
Mr chair of the are the ones
that are out there already
existing will they go away
because are underfunded.
Mr chair and senator no
The R. P. S. P. funding
essentially turning to
recovering funding line items at
the time they were conceived
there was an idea that they
would come up for periodic
review I think it was on a three
year time horizon because a
number of them were supposed to
be temporary so when you think
about.
You want to start a new a new
academic program within a higher
ed institution but you need a
little bit of time to get that
self sufficient through up
basically in Roman tuition
The R. P. S. P. was there to
cover the first little bit and
the idea was that it it would be
reviewed and you might have sort
of a sunset for it that has not
been the practice of the
legislature recently so when we
think about things like.
The the example that jumps to
mind is health care
those are based I NG functions
it would be possible to say that
yes the the nursing
allocations get rolled into the
base budget
the the one I pointed out
economics department gets rolled
into the base budget there's a
lot of student support services
that are also offered under I.
Angie that could be rolled into
the base budget and those
programs can continue but you
don't necessarily have to have
an R. P. S. P. line item but
that is a policy decision.
So Mr chair they make sense to
me to roll into the base budget.
just to try to clean up
everything so we don't have all
of.
Weird things but if we did that
with that program potentially go
away snatching the base budget
and Dr shepherd could see kind
of like that will put it over
here.
Yes.
I think that's what the that's
been in the some of the
reticence around those
conversations I think that's
also you know the that that very
real concern has also led to
this the you know growth in the
R. PSP is as we've been
reluctant to roll them into the
base or to have that systemic
annual review type process.
So Mr chair I think.
This among many other things it
is where we don't know where the
money's going and we're not sure
what we're getting for we're not
sure what the return on
investment is because we're not
really following up on a lot of
this stuff.
And I you know there's a.
An old business saying we
probably don't say it anymore
because we have computers now
but if you take care your
pennies to dollars will take
care of themselves and these may
be pennies but you throw enough
pennies just turns into real
money and two hundred twenty
million yes so what that is
time.
Anyway so that's why I just we
we might want to consider how do
we how do we take care of these
pennies so thank you Mr chair
thank Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chair and a good to
see everybody here just a couple
quick questions Connor real
quick house bill two how much
are we increasing opportunity
scholarship over what we
initially funded at first of all
nine percent enrollment that's
amazing credible after climbing
in Romans so.
How much are we increasing
opportunity scholarship this
time to keep up with that
anticipated demand for the
coming year.
So opportunities our ship.
Total increase coming over from
the house was
thirty seven million dollars
And that was over the over the
LFC recommendations so we're
we're actually at and it's a
little different in FY twenty
three we had an initial
projection at the time you know
in the summer of of
Twenty to twenty two we thought
it was gonna be about ninety
four million dollars was the
cost
actual numbers started coming in
VAX figure jumped
we now think it's going to be
about a hundred thirty five
million for twenty three for
twenty four and that's I think
your point Senator
The questions will be.
One can you have a repeat of ten
percent
first time full time enrollees
or did we had a peak in the
first year of the program from
which we're gonna see declining
enrollment I don't know that
anybody knows and then the the
next question about actual
enrollment I think that sort of
falls in the same in the same.
Sort of undefined graze on the
other thing we don't know and
what was a big driver in the
increase in opportunity
scholarship in twenty three was
tuition increases came in
significantly higher than they
were projected so we and I the
projection was based on a five
percent increase in tuition I
think that came out to about
fourteen percent so there were
multiple upward pressures on
that cost and we're trying to
wrap our arms around it at a
staff level for twenty four but
it's it's pretty difficult to do
that.
So thank you Mr chair so with
with that Connor I mean it said
LFC no House Bill to came in
thirty seven million above the
LFC recommendation yes Sir and
does that.
I mean I guess well in present
separate you it you it said that
part of what you're requesting
is I think you said two percent
are you two million or
throughout a number that you
said reflects what you
anticipate.
Is increased demand of the
program is that obviously above
and beyond with H. B. two does
and why do you feel like more is
needed I would HB to to.
Mr chair us Senator Steinborn
you're correct what I'd mention
was that four point three mark
keep in mind one piece is
missing from this equation had
recommended the report point
three marking if I heard Connor
correctly I believe the HFC had
had boosted up to a two percent
increase or somewhere around
there so I'm obviously double
that percentage and here's
another reason why I'm that way
you also have to keep in mind of
attrition and what your
retention rate is so if you have
a larger freshman class next
year you're gonna have a larger
software class and so on and so
forth and if that freshman class
coming in is that another nine
percent or whatever it might be
that's going to continue to have
a very strong impact on your
opportunities Garcia and do I do
I think that the number of a
hundred thirty five million is
getting closer to the mark
absolutely because also keep in
mind one other piece that you
have to keep in mind let's go
back to the lottery scholarship
so right now the opportunity
scholarship covers the bridge
semester but after that first
semester those students drop off
because you're not receiving the
lottery so you have those
dynamics at play.
The.
Senator I if I might Mr chair on
that page to.
Look at that look there and then
about the middle of the page
you'll see FY twenty four exact
one slash thirty one update.
That is.
The people of the.
Thanks to where page two middle
of the page.
back header that's called FY
twenty or exact one slash thirty
one update.
Go to the go to the bottom of
that page right as opportunity
scholarship cost.
And that is the executive
director the executive estimate
for the total cost of
opportunity and FY twenty four
and it's a hundred forty five
point nine million.
Correct.
And so.
Mr chair thirty saying that.
The LFC that the the H. B. two
is thirty seven million about
that number one I think I know
the the HFC is thirty seven
million above the LFC number.
Yeah yes this is the just real
quick so the opportunity
scholarship.
I mean it.
It also covers if their
sophomore right.
Is is it kind of anticipated
that the students who got it
your one are going to need it
again in your two or four
opportunity it depends Mr
chairman on on what students
taking so if we have a floor
first time full time student
who's gonna be lottery eligible
they will get opportunity in
their first semester to pay to
pay those first semester costs
and then they get on the lottery
and they might get more
opportunity to cover fees but
bunch of that need is going to
fall off in their second
semester but for returning
students
as long as you're.
Enrolled in your six hours and
you're maintaining your two
point five percent grade point
average
you will be on that you can be
on opportunity essentially until
degree completion or unless you
fall below one of those
marks a quick question for
Amazon
If when the money runs out does
that mean we no longer you said
that we had more demand than we
anticipated so like an
entitlement that we keep funding
it regardless of how much we
appropriate or.
Not so Mr chairman and Senator
Steinborn so the opportunity
scholarship is.
Pretty much cap you can pay out
as much as you have in the fund
but you cannot pay more.
And so that's where that
language in house bill two as
it's written now that's why
that's there it's not there to
constrain the actual institution
but it is there to send a signal
that says this is this is what
was appropriated for to give
everybody a heads up.
One at some Mr chair Senator
Steinborn another factor to
consider with opportunity is
that allows individuals to use
that funding for certificate
programs and some of the
certificate programs maybe a
semester or they may be a year
in length so it's a little bit
of a moving target especially if
the two year institutions grant
final question if we over
appropriated not that that's the
problem we're dealing with right
now but does that money revert
to.
Mister chairman Senator it does
not it will remain with the
opportunity fund remain with the
up to okay thank you for those I
just want to ask about this six
million for mental health
services.
What additive.
Program are you envisioning that
goes above and beyond what
schools are doing right now.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I'll
be glad to answer that question
for the campuses we went in and
asked members of the association
and we have a break out of that
would be adding additional
social workers case managers
would be adding some equipment
for them and to the terms of
laptops and.
Some electronic record platforms
to make sure that their hip and
for per requirement Sir Matt for
keeping that health information
also some soon requirements for
terms of doing zoom meetings for
distance students because
anything that we provide for the
students are face to face we
need to provide for the online
students as well in a similar
manner and then training in
licensing stipends so the the
roll up of what we got from all
of our members was that six
million dollar request okay
thank you you have a a one pager
here it's been handed out so
with the supporting individual
schools or would this be some
statewide macro program.
So Sir if you look at the bottom
it'll have all the campuses that
are participating in addition to
the three native American
institutions August okay thank
you Mr thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
The presentation very very good
stuff good information so just
can you point Connor somebody
thank so they're doing some
really great innovative things
over at C. and M. to kind of
focus on where the jobs are so
can you talk to me about we're
in all of these dollars or some
tremendous taller there what is
exactly focused on that because
that that to me is really where
the rubber meets the road I I'm
I was toured C. N. N.'s campus
right around the.
Don't know December Christmas
holiday or whatever and it was
just really remarkable the work
that they're doing to to the
crew inventing and creating
brand new programs that are
specifically requested on or or
design for when that that the
student finishes there whatever
program there and they just go
right into a job it seems like
those are real programs are
really kind of New Mexico
economy training programs can
you talk a little bit about like
what dollars are being invested
there.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
Padilla
If you look at my packet on page
six.
Online two hundred and forty
six.
You will see CNM.
I think you know as a segue I
think that CNN's actually a
really good example of
R. P. S. P.'s in context take a
look at him they do have a a ton
of innovative programs whether
those are you know some of our
boot camp programs are are very
impressive they have a lot of
vocational certification
programs but when you look at
there are PSP's they have three.
so it's not that a lack of R. P.
S. P.'s inhibits CNN's ability
to to deliver those programs so
I just wanted to throw that out
but
so when you think about a lot of
those programs like like we're
thinking about boot camps that
is actually within the I MG line
is where they're going to be
paying for a lot of that
And then I think it's it's also
important to note the LFC
recommendation has a it's a
language only change you're
gonna see on the house side and
there was twenty million dollars
appropriated last year for work
study funding to the higher
education department and there's
a few reasons why it but it's
been difficult to get work study
money moving the HFC.
A version includes an expansion
of that twenty million dollars
to include some of those
programs that you're talking
about as well as apprenticeships
and internships so there is that
money as well in the back but I
think most of what you're you're
seeing at CNM that's all in the
I. Angie a line item.
Thank you Mr chairman and I just
want to highlight them again and
obviously that's the school that
I Representative here's this
panel and it's legislature but
even if I didn't I was really
impressed with what they're up
to so so just full stop if you
take a look at for economies are
going to be changing schools
like say on the side of the
state I know that we're just.
No pun intended but we're
gushing in dollars are coming
out of that area but that's
always gonna be the case I mean
that you know I I think we all
know that we're headed toward a
probably a big shift in the
economy out there at some point
maybe three to five years down
the road what dollars are being
invested you know or or being
planned to transition that
economy eventually.
Mr Chairman Senator Padilla I
think that's a great great
question what we see
with some of the independent
schools on particularly the in
the oil patch New Mexico junior
college and southeast New Mexico
being two really good examples
there are local revenues are
tremendous and as a result
they're building up
pretty pretty incredible cash
balances that are the right now
held with the institution
so I don't know that that would
necessarily be a state
provocative but they they do
have significant resource and I
know that in talking to some of
their administrators they are
thinking about how do we how do
we make sure that these dollars
are there to support our
operations in the future because
they are very accustomed to
those boom and bust cycles.
And then that Mr Leslie Alaska's
my last question so I know that
I of the community colleges that
we brought this up last time we
were all together are working on
a lot of technology and
implementations of applications
they can all sort of reap the
benefits of economies of scale
and all these things
do we have that happening at the
university level also or is this
just an innovation of the
community colleges and other
doing a great job in that area
so what what we do on the
university side to share
resources share licensing share
all these things that can really
help
graphics like I said economies
of scale and you know one chair
somebody else asks what's the
overall picture here it should
be easy to get a hold of that
information.
Mr chair Senator Padilla it's
it's happening also the
university level what you're
referring to the community
college of those I institutions
that the doctor all if she was
talking a bit more about is is
what we acronym known as chess
what they're looking at doing is
going out and and
redoing their their student
permission systems our financial
systems in two of way the the
the the tie into on the
university side it's called Jack
that has acronym to and so they
they work together on a lot of
interaction lot of a lot of a a
sharing of resources Furthermore
a number of the institutions of
learning and beyond that and
we've gone into the clouds that
we no longer need to have that
database and sources that that
database administrator can
Silvercity that that can be tied
into regions that have greater
access but there is a tremendous
amount of sharing going on
between checks between chess
which is a two organizations
here for but that's outstanding
I think that that she should be
moving in those directions and
secretary Riley wants to make
you come Senator yeah and and Mr
chair I just want to add to that
First rather actually six
institutions now that are
collaborating on a project and
so we have purchased a cloud
based system work days that we
are commonly implementing we
have of the four of us have
implemented the first level
which is that HR finance and
payroll we have a common payroll
the chess offices running
payroll for everyone and for
everyone it's in the in the
group we're starting the student
implementation and in the way to
of the ERP finance payroll
they'll be starting very quickly
to but then we're also in the
checks group too because checks
representative all of higher
education institutions of that's
great I'm glad to hear all that
just keep moving in that
direction that strip thank you.
Let me ask you something
on our PS piece how important
are they to university.
Some of the more and some more I
can say the nursing program
certain things are really
important but how important are.
Mr chair they're extremely
important in the sense of
another source of funding for
things that oftentimes are
underfunded you mentioned arson
that's a good wanted to talk
about because if we're competing
for nurses in the private sector
what we have for example at
western and other institutions
is a supplement to our faculty
athletics comes to mind right
there's another one
This is but a number of them is
Connors pointed out are of
smaller dollar amounts in that
would be an institution
institution question I I I I
couldn't tell you what's
important to you and M. versus
not I can tell you that the ones
that we have to kind of point
someone could easily be rolled
into the base into the Judy
funding portion of it others
like athletics you probably want
to keep separate see hold
accountability because otherwise
as sent Senator sure noted to be
quite easy for a guy like me or
whoever to sail you know still a
report but Mr chair as you may
recall many are PSP's are member
driven I you members of the
legislature driven and we
universities understand that and
the other piece to it is a
number of R. P. espys we're
simply a pass through for today
thank take a look at New Mexico
state with Iraq program in the
department of agriculture I'm
sure number the other
institutions have that we may
just be a pastor so they're not
all created equal so it's a
little difficult for me to fully
answer that question.
I'm gonna send you on a mission.
Two hundred and twenty million
dollars to enter.
Mining CNN because the only have
three.
And minus nursing and we'll get
you some guidelines cut fifty
percent of the.
What are your I. Angie will
fully fund your stuff and
looking very hard and difficult
some may come off the list but
two hundred twenty three million
of our PSBs in and I can give
you four million a Mason lands
right now.
We'll go away completely for.
So we figure out what's gonna
happen so therefore million it
cuts right there that will
happen our PSBs need to be cut
by a hundred million dollars
what are your name G. will fully
fund requests from going to be
difficult to do I don't want any
hidden list from LFC.
Mona make that very clear.
The nothing gets hidden from me
LFC.
But there's a there's some of
these are under stand there's
one for fourteen thousand
dollars how well can that be
fund.
There's one for I'm gonna go to
eastern because I glanced at
years and then sticks for museum
for eighty two thousand dollars
how well could that get funds.
I mean there's plenty of room
right here to to increase your
I. Angie and clean up this last
and and a whole bunch of money
so you guys are raising tuition
of students that are in here and
we'll have a
The steering on the next week
early about cuts.
if there's something that I
catch on the list is not on
there we'll have the state
auditor audit then the next day
and make those requests to make
it very clear that we're going
come to consensus we at fifty
million dollars to your I. N. G.
for fifteen million dollars more
than nursing fifty million
dollars to programs menu CNN
plumbing electrical if we had if
we add that to their base are
there are just pieces are PS
piece that's a better outcome
for us in this whole entire
state.
There's plenty of money to move
around here some of these
legislators that have their
special deals may not even.
They're not around.
Right how well do they service
are really servicing the
students at the end of the day
is that what we're doing best
for the students is giving an
RTSP for.
Thousand dollars I can tell you
what it really does mean that's
the outcome we really want in
that way universities say all
you're on the funding of Sander
funding several times.
Maybe we can have three four
percent to tier I NG and offset
we know that Mason land just
going to wait until the
secretary I think she's gonna
take it over to figure out who's
gonna take that over so I feel
sorry for those students but
that was done by leadership in
the cylinders and we're trying
to make sure the students
succeed and we will make those
who those students succeed and
and get the credits and graduate
and in you guys the table will
help us do that some way shape
or form it's not their fault but
that's one of the things.
The other thing you know we we
talked about this and I'm not on
page of for for higher it but
everybody from higher incomes to
me and says I want equality
equity and I want this and the
only way to really do that is to
figure out the tone faced by
engine what should be.
It'll be fair.
Don't come is somebody's got
more than me that guy's got more
than me and get this I didn't
get that
nine billion dollars in this
budget.
It's very simple to figure out
of fun things correctly you take
when you're not using don't
raise your recurring costs and
so K. these these projects no
longer needed and no longer
necessary to do that but we had
a bill in committee and and mark
otherwise known as Judas was
there.
The only state that does that
breakfast with him and then he
testifies against me.
There's more of a.
Senator Padilla out to make it
used to.
Thank you.
But I'm getting I'm getting a
good understanding my tuitions
to be increased sometimes CPI
increase over the constitution
when you guys increased even
higher than the cost of in state
tuition but it seems like every
time we do lottery we do
opportunity and you have a
declining student population.
You ask for more money it's it's
it's the same occurrence that
happens in in PED decline
populations with more money and
and not very good outcomes I
mean recruitment retention the
reason you're up so much is
because there is an opportunity
for people to go to college and
take classes and they they did
that and that's what drove up
drove up here growth know where
they went or how they do it how
they did that what happens in
the future I don't know.
but we'll see what happens but I
mean if if you really want to
get serious about signing the
Energy correctly and clean up
that's a mess that I don't want
anybody to run their business
like that anybody in operational
standpoint from accounting the
bookkeeping to connect saying
this fourteen thousand dollars
going over here in this eighty
two thousand dollars going over
there Senator seen them because
only have three
You want your I. Angie can you
see what this morning this clean
up that last.
I think that's very important as
we move forward really want to
fund education get rid of the
fat trimming out from the
school.
I think the key point of contact
there listening to LFC hope they
listen very closely
on what's happening with this
all figured out so we'll get a
drinking some guidelines not
nursing.
We'll look at tribal stuff.
How much there is.
There are a lot of this.
That in order PSP's for two
hundred twenty four million I'm
sure that you'd rather have it
in your I. Angie and have it
sitting on your books and not
accomplishing its goals which is
funded so.
I think we're good.
Thank you Mr W..
That more you and you have no I
just wanted to thank mark for
all of his work.
Thank you do this.
On Tuesday as of four states
Friday.
Thank you Mr thank you.
I'm gonna be in the morning and
so.
Thank all that.
