Morning Mr chair and the
Senators.
With the ornaments it's an
amendment.
Thank you for discussing
billion.
lose.
So
the special.
If there's a.
Tell me again so Mr Chairman
name is no keeper.
As well as the new.
Most of the and they work with
retiree health care is good with
what we.
Mr chairman that's correct yes.
So Senator team is playing the
female some point yes
Mr chairman and senators
essentially the amendment
excludes retiree health care
story from the new provisions in
the bill and so there is after
each provision a statement that
reads a the requirements of this
subsection do not apply the
retiree health care thirty and
then one other component if they
want to opt in to and joined to
a powers agreement they can but
that's up to them and that's
essentially of what it does so
it is basically takes retiree
health care story out of these
provisions because it's a
different and to state and we're
all good with that question on
the.
See also there would be a good
trained a little quicker this
morning this why are we
excluding.
**** health care system you said
you took it out understand that
very plainly.
Not good for the goose is good
for the Gander for some reason.
Thank you Senator Woods for that
question and Mr chair
the reason is that the retired
health care sorority has a small
number about twelve thousand of
regularly commercial regular
commercially insured with the
entity called the I. back to
inter agency budget Advisory
Council of which they are a
member along with the three
other entities that we explained
yesterday and that is in in the
bill in nineteen ninety seven
but then there vast membership
is in Medicare advantage
programs and that's a completely
different beast and whatever
whatever it cliche where we want
to use it's just very very
different and so a lot of the
sections of the bill would be
much more difficult or not
necessarily apply to that and
that's a fully insured product
so again the number of the
pieces don't apply.
So Mr chair Senator you're
telling me that it's a
commercially insured product.
That we don't want to screw it.
Mr Senator and presented with
and Mr chairman
the it's a different
commercially insured product
generally the other entities are
self insured but in the
commercially insured under
Medicare advantage which is what
they all offer that's a fully
insured product so that you pay
a premium or are.
And with that Mr chair Senator
it's a completely different
situation a completely different
product.
We should not worry about it
correct it's doing well in and
is overseen by the others piece
risa overseas retirement stuff
interest has lots of the laws
and pieces and that could get
really complicated that putting
this together that's enough
vaccination thanks for.
Thank you Mr thank you questions
on the mint Center for the
amendment.
Okay any objection to adopt Nick
cannon motion to adopt the
minutes.
We have this motion by Senator
one second my center console to
dissect Senator Gonzales second.
timber did you any objection to
the settlement I have.
I'm just double checking.
Any objection to that amendment
seen none you have amended bill
center back on the bill San
Diego had questions on the bill
thank you Mr chair Senator us so
you know when you read the title
of this is that something no I
just asking whether should stay
Mr terrorists they rate that
because that when you read the
title chair of the bill like to
you know and it being a business
owner myself I what happens to
what we pay for all of these
various
Items.
I'm assuming we're we're doing
all of this and putting all this
kind of stuff together for
companies of scale and
cost reduction and efficiency
and demanding higher quality and
I.
All of the above Sir so what
will that mean Mr chairman.
Up that Mr chairman and senator
will mean that will be able to
establish metrics
Inc concurrently across the
retiree health care story can
participate compare themselves
to a it means that we will
negotiate contracts much more
efficiently and effectively.
Significant money that
is is.
One being paid into not being
appropriately recovered for self
insured contract in the self
insured large entity would have
claims integrity payment reviews
I give you an example from my
experience with one hospital
we paid thirteen million and
then we did the claims integrity
reviewing got four million back.
You Mr chairman of those are
exactly the things I was hoping
you'd say as a chief executive
of a of a hospital system
yourself
you what should we expect truly
as a state and we we've we've
got some large bills here I have
with with this we won't hold you
to it but you should you should
hold me to it but okay I was
about the house.
in time it in over the next five
or six years Senator Padilla and
Mr chairman and colleagues this
is the beginning of a process
that will go to the health care
story that will use the law of
large numbers insurance where we
get to hopefully we get the
colleges and the municipalities
because it's so much cheaper
gonna join you're talking for
five hundred thousand people
that are huge contract advantage
for the state to be able to
bring to bear so that in and of
itself will help lower costs
secondly there are a number of
efficiencies and budget design
and so forth that actually like
the one that I passed two years
ago getting people to take away
barriers to mental health and
when you go or barriers to
mental health mental health to
stabilize your chronic disease
costs come down and more than
pay for that cost so it's it's
and the whole number of things
again I said this but I have a
fifty one page paper that
outlines a huge number of
actions for the state to take
and that this health care story
if Patrick Allen heads up he's
done this in Oregon and they're
getting at three percent annual
increases across all product so
it isn't just the states can
save money using a player can
save money and you're going to
because of the measurements
you're going to measure the
health outcomes of the people
they'll be penalties and rewards
for meeting those thank you Mr
chair just one last question
have we attempted that we've
done anything like this before
that you're aware of anywhere in
state government where we pulled
any of the stuff together like
this yes Sir this is this is
there the I. back theoretically
pulled people together but they
didn't go should separate
contracts are thank you Mr thank
you are any other questions
Senator share.
So thank you Mr chairman.
Please the one the comments you
made was to the insurance paid
out thirteen million dollars did
not it brought four million
back.
Great one of the things we're
talking about here is of paying
providers.
so obviously there's going to be
a balance between over paying
for something and not paying
enough.
Is there a balance in here to
make sure that we're paying the
providers yes.
There is in this claims payment
integrity review in house bill
two
it excludes physicians and and a
critical access hospitals
the the money that the that the
claims integrity reviews are
just down on hospital systems
and not on individual providers
because that that can get pretty
expensive you don't get much
back there the hospitals have
lots of software companies that
help them under on bundle claims
and then have a claim.
Requesting more than what should
really than what's negotiated in
the contract and it does it goes
on all the time in the industry
and then the insurers come back
if they're fully insured and and
do the no we're going to go
through the claims and make sure
they're correct so Mr chair and
senator.
Why does that happen I mean if
you've got a contract this is
I'm going to pay thirty dollars
for something.
Why would be billed for more
than thirty and why would
anybody.
More or less than thirty because
of the complexity of D. D. R. G.
billing that was developed in
nineteen eighty four that did
bundle different diagnoses into
diagnostic related groups and
there's probably close to fifty
thousand pages of governmental
regulation and it changes every
year Medicare Medicaid are
particularly Medicare changes
its rules and regulations and so
often times a hospital may not
have caught up with those
regulations and so they're
paying more I mean they're
paying at the they're claiming
more than what they should be
claim because they have caught
up with the Medicare regulations
and put them into their I. T.
engines and then there are also
companies that that teach them
how to legally
go in and and bundle bundling is
something the government has
tried to do to save money and
get it it's it's it's it's a
complex process but kind of
logical things but it I I'm not
trying to defend the industry
it's just been the way the
industry has evolved since
nineteen eighty four so Mr
chair.
This is exactly what bothers me
here we are going to try to pass
a law.
To.
Do a bureaucratic nightmare
created by the federal
government.
I'm not sure this does anything
because it's still a
bureaucratic nightmare from the
federal government that's going
to change.
And I believe they're changing
more than once a year now I
think they're changing daily
because we've got new people in
there said all well listen
better and because you can do
it.
Almost instantaneously on a
computer versus having to mail
something out have somebody
review it and things like that
they're changing the rules
faster than we can change laws.
Far faster than we can change
laws.
I appreciate the effort here
but.
This is really solve anything.
because even with with the
changing of federal.
Rules and regulations so we we
have a self funded of.
Insurance plan here that's going
to take it a lot more people we
can get better deals.
Great.
Is it going to be any different
any better or is it just going
to be worse on a bigger scale.
Thank you that's a excellent
question and having worked in
the industry are probably share
a lot of your observations and
unfortunately are not enforcing
here and in the industry is
subject to the laws and the
regulations of CMS under a
Republican administration or
under a democratic
administration but yes this we
will be better off because this
will start a process in which we
are as a business entity the
state
Dr maximizing value getting
better product outcome better
health for at less expense
because there is an immense
amount of waste in the health
care system.
So finally Mr chair Senator is
includes just state will just
government cities counties
school boards whatever state
government so it's it doesn't
affect.
Might know this only effects the
I back and and governmental
municipal entities
and colleges who choose to
participate in either the GSD
risk management division or
Nancy at the school teachers
outside of Albuquerque.
And and those agencies thank you
Mr thank.
Some of.
Those talks about.
Of this bill would require
agencies to solicit proposal for
self insurance plan and fully
insurance plan the only
insurance plan the employer
offers insurance to employees
with its own funds and face
third party administrator to
process claims and essentially
what what.
Thank the crux of the deal is.
That agencies pay a higher rate
than the Medicare for health
insurance services.
I think the crux of your bill is
that we need to.
Get to Medicare.
Cost but down in the analysis
further it talks about.
It says a.
Study found that prices paid by
commercial insurance in New
Mexico which includes the
state's group benefits program
were two hundred and eighty nine
percent of Medicare reference
price that's a fourteenth
highest rate in the country.
And it talks about the national
averages two hundred twenty four
percent although some states are
as low as a hundred seventy five
percent.
But none of them say one hundred
percent.
So Hey at a at and again one
more Senate's in here not quite
read number for reader.
This is current Mexicans do not
have adequate access to
providers and specials in the
current environment and the
substitute Senate bill for for
the fifty three may create
additional constraints to
providers may opt out and not
practice in New Mexico that
should concern of mine we
already have.
Farley you know you're me if
they on the floor talk about not
having a doctor in Clovis and
Clovis is a great city compared
to to carry when Clayton so I am
very concerned about health care
in our state.
I hope you do something to fix
it but it's as much as
attracting doctors here as it is
to saving money on this year so
if there's a question in there
I'd be happy for you to
consider.
Mr chairman and senator there
there are lots of questions in
there but I'm trying to bring a
simple answer to you this is the
the market's gonna work here the
health plans are going to have
to offer
higher and higher rates and the
hospitals who employed
physicians because of the
scarcity so the positions of and
should do well I mean we're
going to go through a difficult
time but but the market will
start to balance itself on
physicians in regards to your
percentage of Medicare that's
for hospital DRG discharges and
outpatient and we are paying
exceptionally high rates and
this bill starts the process of
bringing that under control to
make health care more affordable
the hospitals except for some of
the smaller critical access and
that that in time will get laid
out but some of the some of the
for profit systems are getting
rates up to five hundred even a
hundred percent of Medicare now
that's a negotiated rate a
hundred percent of Medicare
is is paid by Medicare but most
contracting is is some
percentage of Medicare and the
and usually it goes up.
and it depends on where you are
in the country I've I've I've
worked all over the country as a
consultant and some jobs in in
Omaha Nebraska doctors are being
paid a three hundred percent of
Medicare.
Okay no more questions thank you
Mr chair any other questions
from.
Sir mass question at the end of
the day right.
Would be on this contract would
be I would cross BlueShield
Presbyterian it would be the
providers that are fitting this
type of contract.
Mr chairman and those.
The the about Blue Cross and
Presbyterian always bid on this
contract others have come in and
tried to bid on the contract.
In in the very early days of the
I. back I was CEO at loveless
actually signed the first I back
contract on behalf of of this
there were almost like health
fairs where each of the bidders
and it could be cigna at at now
United
back in the day was love this
press and and I and and one or
two others
but because there isn't a full
competitor process for people
have to re sign up they just go
I'll go where I went so cigna
came in a couple years ago they
got three hundred people out of
a hundred and forty thousand and
they said.
This does make sense we're not
gonna play anymore and so this
we're we're eventually are going
through a number of
methodologies we are trying to
get more health plans to bid
because where you have really
strong competition between plans
and between hospitals you have
lower prices and again this is
basic market economics.
So.
Let me just catch up we did
public comment yesterday.
It will just check again just
for safety purposes so we are.
Senator not question on the
floor
present evidence in anybody in
the room for.
Good.
Your question
I understand some of this but
like Albuquerque public schools
has a different rate in Gallup
McKinley county schools as a
different.
I think my wife works there just
across the shield right and that
was a better plan but other
people could opt in the
Presbyterian then they gonna
drive to Albuquerque for other
services and then the providers
or say we're not gonna do that
start your plan there's always
some excuse and and we got a
prescription the other day six
hundred some dollars it is just
getting ridiculous the.
I luckily I can afford that but
other people have to make
choices of what they want to do
that with their medication they
want to pay their light bills or
they want to do and so I
understand we have to some rate
control but in the end with the
end in rural New Mexico like
center would say will this help
you know to come carry because
they have the provider they're
gonna have to drive there no
matter what.
What will this help them and not
consolidated is yes.
He will force them to open other
places you know the point four.
Mr chairman and senators the I.
back is under the regulation of
the OSI in the OSI and and also
ACA requirements but also
established because states have
a dual technical piece that
could set aside under the ACA
but everything
everything in this contract is
under that so that means they
have to do network adequacy so
this is where these contracts
come into the whether that's a
health plan or third party
administrator which is what the
term we use in self insured they
they have to demonstrate that
they are building a network and
to build a network they have to
raise rates that's what will
happen with mental health parity
that they're potentially going
to pay the problem Mr chairman
is that the OSI has virtually no
enforcement people I mean we got
a few in the regulations that
they have to go through just
went through another yesterday
about diabetes
The tools and pens and needles
and so forth
there is is it's a massive
amount of regulation but they
always side does not have the
people to do it we're hoping I
encourage them next year that
the aside if you want if you
want to be able to get the
benefits applied that way
they're supposed to be applied
than the OSI has to be looking
at it and review.
Said one key thing is if they
got to increase their provider
network I think skull that right
then it will increase rates on.
Right payers for them to do that
so why would we do that if
there's a if there's going to be
a right pair increase on this I
mean I understand it would cost
but I mean right if we bundle
this there should be a cost
savings is there well here's
where the cost savings our and
this is and I think as I've
tried to explain various places
on mental health parity when you
take care of chronic conditions
mental health or others when you
actually get the care the
exacerbations the cute episodes
become much less frequent and
the cost of care comes down so
actually providing access.
Actually lowers costs so paying
more to get that access keeps
people healthier and that's keep
them out of the emergency room
which is phenomenally expensive
which is there on the other
place to go and that that raises
the cost of the health plan so
it is if you bring the providers
and I mean this is thing in
mental health Milliman and other
national actuaries have
demonstrated if you lower mental
health stress your chronic
comorbidities exacerbations
costs E. R. visits and so forth
go down dramatically and and I
can go on to tell you about
personal experience with the co
op where we have the lowest E.
R. rates because we had free
access to behavioral health and
essentially almost free access
to primary care when you get
that access these other
secondary Costa downstream costs
don't occur and that's where you
save the money actually we in
that we were one of the lowest
cost health plans that that
behavior health became our
business model.
So it's in the interests of the
health plans to get the
providers there.
Any other questions from
committee members etcetera thank
you Mr chairman and good morning
Senator and of course Neil and I
had to step out earlier no I'm
not going to have to ask you to
repeat everything for the sake
of time also and it's not fair
but if you briefly just tell me
how did accommodate the reason
for holding this we're working
together tell me how did
accommodate the retiree health
care authority now so that we
make sure there are no loopholes
in there that would hurt anyway
just quickly thank you Mr chair
Senator areas of as far as what
the amendment is how it relates
to the would retire Health Care
thirty I stated we we do have a
lot of our members are on
Medicare so we actually have to
follow a lot of CMS guidelines
there's also federal to come
down to us so items like the
inflation reduction act that's
being passed on to is that is
going to control costs as
relates to prescriptions This
bill could would not necessarily
oversee that it's those federal
ones that we offer through our
different advantage plans as
well as other requirements that
we have to adhere to the filing
of the plans that help and our
behalf so it was kind of
excluded make sure that this
does not affect those in anyway
I see okay thank you very much
that's all I need Mr chair let
me ask on that fourth line for
line and retiree health care we
can only add.
Teachers right and we can only
current pair members because
they're under GST plan with that
GST plan.
Under this retiree health care
would be a separate.
That is correct Mr chairman the
people do we have a retiree
health care Mr chair is parcel
population it is sixty seven
thousand but is based on our
membership as it relates to
Medicare we have about forty one
thousand as it relates to pre
Medicare would be looking around
twelve thousand six hundred but
we also do operate a little bit
differently in regards to how we
collect premiums verses are
other health partners or plans
and that they have section one
twenty five pre tax plans to
some of those guiding rules and
how they can make changes or
when they can drop is different
from us so some of the other
concerns as far as how our plan
operates person those as well.
Senator PM me what we have.
Left over.
And our plans that would roll
into something like this about a
hundred and twenty thousand if
I'm I'm doing quick math in my
head that.
in the number of people have
left NMPSIA Mr chair CNM Santa
Fe because
name C. as in in in a
actuarially difficult position
and that could potentially get
cheaper insurance on their own
because I've got a healthier
population so as the numbers go
down for Nancy the cosco.
Exempt Mr chairman thank you I'm
sorry no but the retiree health
care is completely exempt
there's nothing in there that
would connect okay thank you
it's on a motion by.
Then what.
What would we do this.
When we just give our employees
this amount of money.
And to go federal health plan.
Etcetera etcetera I think and
you may notice but when we in
statute were required to have
health care for employees so in
order to get all employees in
the health care plan we had to
stand up a plan and then they go
out to bid for the providers and
I think there's two providers
you can choose from in the state
plan.
They are pretty.
Process the second incident and
so that were required to do that
I understand by statute regard
to do that but that's what we do
here.
Change that you.
Mr chair if I could explain this
is kind of the insurance agency
Senator which it's it's a very
good question you know why not
give a voucher and and let him
go purchase the problem is that
would they have to spend the
voucher could they keep it is
which we kind of have set up in
savings plans but what happens
is that the sec by insurance in
this sick use insurance and they
use of the money that all the
people who are in the plan
aren't using insurance because
they're healthy about five
percent of a population in a
health plan in general spend
over fifty percent of all the
premium thirty percent of the
people in the plant never use
health care in the year.
But we're just talking.
Mr chair without and pools I
take the question back is not
going to be answered today just
something to think about thank
you Mr chair Senator it is
called the pyramid scheme.
It's called moral hazard
technically you need to have
more people in the payments
going to pay for that because
crying health insurance in your
house buying fire insurance when
your house is burning down
everybody in the room's laughing
but they're all agree with me.
So can have a motion by.
We have a motion by Senator
Campos second by Senator Padilla
we call the roll.
Senator yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond is excused
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn excused.
Senator Woods.
No.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Munoz.
Yes
Senator Burt.
Sixty three in the past and.
Chair thank you want to set up
to make his that television and
broadcast.
Review we're not gonna do that
bill telly shows up center we're
going to do Senate bill four
ninety three so the members know
this afternoon we're not going
to hear Senate bill one thirty
and one fifty eight we're going
to roll those over so if we do
anything unless we can get
I think this is Representative
Romero and Representative Baca.
If we can find them this morning
help somebody is paying
attention I don't.
Hello there have their number is
one fifty eight I'm just curious
is that one version of the one
fifteen is a dummy bill for
appropriation batch of that's
what we were trying to.
There with the code what you
don't mind trick was there
anything I think that's why
people in the room.
We try to lighten the room load.
Intend against this.
Maybe one of them has the cell
phone number of who we're
looking for
somebody knows someone or.
Well you know what we're gonna
have to wait because apply the
public comment.
What we will have to.
Morning madam chair with the new
Senate bill four ninety three
and we do have an amendment.
Okay I move.
Discussion.
This motion for an amendment and
second for discussion can anyone
oppose this question thank you
center this Alicea.
Okay Senator tell us about your
I'm let me expert witness John
hundred from the water
protection division explained
the amendment track it so you'll
know what's happening.
Thank you madam chair in.
Committee.
So the proposed amendments.
Begin on.
The
One one line twelve striking
brackish water right it strikes
the term re use and search the
term use in its place.
So it reads for brackish water
use exploration.
And then page one line thirteen
strikes the term recharge in in
search the terms
characterization for so it right
it reads aquifer
characterization for water
projects.
Then on page one lines eighteen
and nineteen.
It strikes appropriate mineral
levels in the water of and in
search use of naturally
occurring brackish water for
water projects.
And then page one line twenty.
For the word water it in search
the term brackish.
And then strikes re use centre
in search the term use so it
reads.
Conduct activities to advance
brackish water use.
And then page one line twenty
five it strikes appropriate
mineral levels.
for water in in in search use of
naturally occurring brackish
water for.
To read use naturally occurring
brackish water from water.
Projects specified in sections
two and three.
And then on page two line seven.
I'm sure looking back up on page
two line six instructs the term
re use and in its place in
search the term use.
Right brackish water use
exploration treatment and
aquifer and then on line seven
page two one seven strikes the
term recharge and inserts
characterization for so rates
offer for characterization for
projects the budget a lower Rio
Grande.
In the in Page three line nine.
Before the term water it in
search the term brackish
instructs the term re use and
search the term use to right to
conduct activities to advantage
brackish water use and that is
the extent of the.
Proposed amendments.
okay thank you are there any any
comments on the amendments here
from the committee.
Okay questions comments from the
committee no all right so do we
have thank you thank you for no
go ahead Senator yes okay I'm
sorry thank you madam chair so
Mr Chairman item number two on
the amendment I just wanna make
sure to send.
You and I are both business
people and we're looking for
efficiencies everywhere we can
but.
Re use verses used just one more
time what why is that important.
We using fresh water versus
reuse water.
center the.
This would we talk about how New
Mexico's water shortage and
we're talking about the cell
plants and so when we talk about
the cell plant I use the water
after it's it's honest and so it
would be the first to use that
yes okay thank you that's all I
have thanks.
All right thank you can we
Have a motion to adopt the
amendment and they were going to
go to the bill as amended.
Move adoption amendment there's
a motion for adoption of the
amendment and the second anyone
opposed to this amendment.
For yes or would use to pay for
the the amendment.
You want a copy and see my yes
yes thank you.
Or if
you wanna take a moment Senator
to glance at it.
Before the final words obviously
there for the amendment just to
put the amendment into the bill
and then we'll look at the bill
itself as a whole I'm sure you
just don't count on.
Yeah okay thank you so let's go
ahead and do the roll call then.
Senator Burt.
Yes on the.
Senator Campos excused Senator
Diamond.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator stuiver passes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes on the
amendment senator Munoz yes.
Right is there okay have an
amended bill now Mr chair can
you talk about your bill madam
chair Senate bill four ninety
three we talk about brackish
water and how we're gonna do
this this is been a conversation
going on for years that we have
so much brackish water under New
Mexico and how we can deal with
it in water shortages and and in
time talking to the state
engineer talking to the
secretary of vitamin on Twitter
in other conversations that we
we've determined that New Mexico
in its drought years in this
going to be a dry year over a
fight over the Colorado River
which we need to set New Mexico
up for is how do we we use
brackish water currently in el
Paso they're building a D. cell
plant for their use there is two
wells drilled in near Rio Rancho
and of as I have gotten to the
brackish water and now we need
to begin determine how we're
gonna use brackish water what
the mineral content is how what
what is going to take to make it
we use or use it in some other
process for an industry saving
Facebook build another plant and
needs cooling towers and so
that's really what this does is
how do we set the cell plants
New Mexico do the testing get
the results in know what our
brackish water.
Contains and how do we address
that in mineral content and in
sludge worms and John to have a
and as anything else.
yes thank you Senator madam
chair the you know the
salinization is something that
has gone on various places at
each stage for quite awhile as a
senator Senator Paso has a big
piece they're currently working
on I've toured that plant to
look at it.
The reality is though that what
work someplace else is going to
fit somewhat differently based
on our conditions and so it's
necessary number one to explore
and identify.
Not only British Water locations
but quantities because if you're
going to to spend the money to
build a D. cell plant you want
something that's going to be
available long term that's going
to produce you would want to tap
brackish water source it's only
going to be there for a few
years and then and then dry up
and we have to do something
different additionally not all
water is the same there are
naturally occurring radioactive
materials various different
things in any groundwater that
we need to look at and we need
to set the parameters for what
needs to be cleaned out of
brackish water so that it can be
utilized for multiple different
purposes those yet to be
determined
what is feasible in various
areas of the state.
So this is very much necessary
for us to move forward in this
area brackish water is is an
untapped resource that we would
be remiss in not starting to
look at as a as a resource to
assist us with our water needs
across the state.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you John R. I
wanted the audience in support
of this bill all right in how
many are opposed to the bill all
right thank you can we have
maybe a half three eight three
that are supporting the bill
come up only the sake of times
to get to the chamber and then
how many were opposed again I
know Camilla you're one of them
and then I don't know who else I
can see the hands back to but go
ahead and briefly state your
your name and this is gonna.
Our support agent members the
committee claim that be with New
Mexico State University we do a
lot of the research related to
this item as things stand
currently were I would say
woefully underfunded in our
efforts that the water analysis
the test that we conduct are
very costly and so this funding
will provide a huge injection to
the university that will allow
us to continue our efforts we
have world class researchers
graduate assistants graduate
students doing this work they're
dedicated to their work but they
need the resources and funding
so we very much for your support
and we think the sponsor senator
Munoz for bring this for thank
you thank you next person might.
Thank you madam chair might come
in the New Mexico state engineer
when I think of the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward to
it's a critical aspect of the
future of New Mexico to fully
explore and understand the
extent and availability of our
practice water aquifers
throughout the state and this is
a good start start in the in
this direction where we can
begin our program of exploration
and understanding as a Mr
Roderick pointed out that we
need to characterize and
understand the chemical compound
the characteristics and be able
to design the proper treatment
systems and then figure out how
to put that that that that the
new water source to beneficial
use throughout our state so I
appreciate your your support for
the for this this bill thank you
next person.
Madam chair committee member
Steve wells president New Mexico
tech I want to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward I'm not going to talk
about all the capabilities we
have to study but I'm going to
point out that I travel to
Israel and Israel is a water
shortage country and they spent
a lot of effort to look at every
available water resource they
have in this bill supports that
type of activity for the state
that needs to look at all water
resources naturally occurring
water such as the brackish water
that we're talking about the
other point is the
characterization of aquifer's is
fundamental and I liken it to a
bank account that you never know
how much is going in or going
out and therefore you can run
into serious trouble at any
point because you don't
understand how to balance the
water budget this kind of study
will help us do that as well so
based on the science and
comparing ourselves to those
places in the world that do this
I think this is something we
should do and I stand and
support thank you very much
thank you all right opposition
there's one persistent turning
please that was madam chair
Mister chair members the
committee in the Sanchez I'm
just curious part is the public
able to see the amendment so
that we can participate
functionally in the conversation
thank you for that question
wasn't posted with this
ammendment posted and how its
hand what was just presented now
I see okay can we at least
handout with the the bill being
put on right now can you please
hand down amendment to anyone
who wants to see it I know it's
faster we don't post amendments
because we don't know if their
doctor not the could be
misleading to the public of what
yeah and that's why I asked I
wasn't sure have these
especially at the end when we're
so quick that yep please thank
you Mr chairman and madam chair
and members of the committee I
mean it seems like most
legislation that you see has not
been adopted by the committee
and that same amendment helps us
actually participate sure I will
say at least.
The bill as written on amended
is one that the Sierra Club
cannot support I'm Camilla I am
in representing the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club we
agree that our water agencies
and institutions need adequate
funding to provide the necessary
research and oversight for
alternate sources of water
including brackish water.
However this bill is too broadly
written it needs more
specificity regarding brackish
water treatment and use first
the term brackish water needs to
be very clearly defined section
one of the bill directs NMED to
promulgate rules for mineral
levels found in brackish water
however this does not cover all
contaminants in brackish water.
Contaminants could include
naturally occurring radioactive
materials called norm and
potentially injured human
introduced contaminants such as
P. funds.
NMED should be given a longer
time period to do.
Process sorry.
To facilitate the use of
brackish water and aquifer
research of recharge projects in
a manner that protects human
health and the environment and
the committee will making for
brackish water should take place
after the research is funded in
this bill and carried out by an
in this you and and that and New
Mexico tech and that that
research can then inform us
produced water from oil and gas
should be excluded from this
legislation and that's because
the produced water act already
addresses produced water and
this bill could interfere with
and or conflict with ongoing
work and NMED on produced water
for these reasons we think that
the bill should either not go
forward until the full
conversation can take place
thank you yes thank you Camilla
okay
in let me anyone else in the
items that I may have missed
before we go to zoom.
Okay anyone runs in.
If.
Okay thank you can you state
your names please and speak
clearly if you can.
Yes.
Yes we can hear you.
Right thank you so much my name
is a sister Joan brown and I'm
the director of New Mexico
interfaith power lines.
and we as people of faith and
faith communities are very
concerned about water because
water is life and we have been
trying to support in the session
some bills to really care for
water and have adequate funding
for the agencies which we we
need for protection our concern
with this deal is that it's not
clear you know what we mean by
practice water and what that
might be used for we are
concerned that growing concerns
of P. fast and others human
carcinogens it might be in the
water
we believe that the public needs
to be very engaged.
These conversations.
Because it is our future and
water and we also are concerned
about some of the funding levels
and we really need to be working
on conservation of water if we
were really working on
conservation and had adequate
oversight of water use
especially for some of the
larger industries including oil
and gas use tremendous amounts
of water we wouldn't have such
an easy to use for that practice
water whatever that might be so
and at this point we believe
that the funds to be utilized
out much better for the water
future of New Mexico and if
there is going to be limited
research that the information
that comes from that needs to
the really allowed for public
con Madam in reading to
understand all of this before
anything would go forward we
don't believe in done deals.
We really have an ethical moral
responsibility for the future
forces to water and for our
communities so thank you for
you're sharing the state and for
all of the hard work your
economy thank you next person.
What's the name again.
The less the.
Are you there.
Morning.
Yes we can hear you.
Good morning senators and chairs
my name is Melissa Trautmann I
work on Simon Energy for
WildEarth guardians we have over
sixty seven thousand members and
headquartered here in Santa Fe.
I am I'm glad to hear that the
term we use has been changed to
use so I want to thank thank you
for that amendment because use
implies first use.
But.
The problem is with the
implication rather than the
specificity we were very
concerned that practice water is
not defined in the bill or in
state or federal statute and
this is a concern because when
statute lacks specificity it
leaves room for problems to
speak and unintended
consequences
We understand the value of
treating breakfast water for re
use we see some great potential
in that but without explicitly
defining brackish water as a
ground water for the purposes
intended in this bill and
excluding the kind of brackish
water that has come into contact
with industrial chemicals as
with oil and gas produced water.
I think there's a danger that
the term brackish water will
continue to be interchanged with
the term produced water which is
a toxic industrial waste product
and so we really need to see
that that specificity what kind
of brackish water we talking
about here.
and yeah I think this has the
added potential of tarnishing
the value of a clearly defined.
You know of clearly defined
brackish water prime projects
and there's really two very
simple ways that
you know practice water research
and development can be
pushed forward with this bill
while also guaranteeing
protection for the environment
in the public.
And one would be to amend the
bill to define brackish water
and exclude the kind of brackish
water that has come into contact
with industrial chemicals I
think making that clarification
would would be sufficient and
the other the other would be an
amendment to the bill that
requires standards for more than
just minerals I know that
minerals was struck in the
amendment just shared with us a
little bit ago but I think that
it is appropriate in statute to
list all of the different types
of contaminants that might be
present including all minerals
metals hydrocarbons and
chemicals that might exist
underground as part of previous
unintended pollution which you
know as we know as the state of
New Mexico well knows you know
the the problem with per and
polyfluoroalkyl substances or P.
fast
is a real problem and I think
that's something we should be
checking for everywhere
when we're especially when we're
intending to use these brackish
water sources for fresh more
uses anyway thank you for your
time it you know without these
simple amendments to guarantee
that the research development
and rulemakings around brackish
water would really fully protect
are vulnerable water resources
and communities guardians just
will not be able to support this
version of the bill thank you
thank you very much are any one
from the committee any questions
Senator Steinborn.
Madam chair thank you everyone
for your comments and those that
cast kind of a more than a
critical questioning I on on
this bill you know this is one
of those bills that that what is
not said or what's kind of refer
to New Mexico just as important
as what's said.
And and I think.
This bill has a lot of that
going on it and I have some
questions and comments number
one for NMED Sir you're with
animated yes correct to sanity
or for that matter EMNRD.
For that you got a question for
for for that matter state
engineer do we need this law to
start to look at breakfast water
resources happened have we not
been looking a brackish water
resources for years W. R. I.
others.
Thank you senator and madam
secretary and chair and chair
madam chair call anything so
that's a good one.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you for the question so
while there has been some
research into it as a sideline
the issue becomes the resources
in the funding to to delve into
it the rulemaking process itself
is expensive and extremely time
consuming.
The the research as is our our
guests from the university said
is extremely expensive and one
of the issues with any type of
exploration groundwater for
potential use is that we don't
know what we don't know so late
the science comes into
identifying what is in the water
what do we need to look for what
we need to screen out in order
to.
Bring that water into use as
something that is not going to
be detrimental or degrading to
the groundwater in New Mexico
that thank you I appreciate that
so what you're saying is really
is you have the authority just
on of the money.
And but this bill goes way
beyond that
Mr chair madam chair Mr chair is
this I didn't fit in the budget
I asked about the language
yesterday and.
Is is there appropriation in the
budget for this.
Yes there is that we haven't
seen that.
where is it.
It's in the it's in the budget
in which I have to look at the
language section yesterday or
day before that we looked at and
the rack up sheets on the
transfer Mr chair Senator I
never side now the course it was
a fast moving train so.
I missed it but and I remember I
specifically asked if there was
practice water language in
another section and you said no.
That would be a good time to
severance and other sections but
the next thing you know you're
at funded.
So it's kind of the intent but
We're not Mr chairman to have
someone of striking the
appropriation this bill like
every other appropriation bill
that comes to this committee if
it's in the budget.
Madam chair center we we put the
appropriation in the budget so
we need the appropriation of the
bill sets guidelines and sets
timelines in the amendment we
extend the time to promulgate
the rules in the cost promulgate
the.
We know that there's practice
wells drilled it in outside of
Rio Rancho on that they can
begin testing on and see what's
in that water in it and then
Environment Department send
those samples to the university
of the university term and what
those samples are like.
What it looks like that thank
you madam chair Mister chair
Perhaps my last question you
know I'm really concerned.
On page two.
Section two is a really
important section because.
We're basically in a way where
the state engineer.
To make characterizations for
use.
For basically inter basin
transfers as I understand them
if that's the right terminology
irrespective of where the
aquifer is we talk about for
care for use in characterization
for projects to benefit the
lower Rio Grande middle Rio
Grande Permian basin.
So when I say sometimes it's
what you don't see but see that
to me says produced water and
stuff like that
in northwest quarter to six so
what we're saying there is we're
directing the state engineer.
To put we're with this bill
directs a process to
characterize and maybe
appropriate water as I read it
potentially.
All around the state and and so
I guess for you Mr state
engineer I mean normally when
you have an offer for a reason
like this all basin up for lease
that for example of the terror
county
We can obviously try to
appropriate water rights for the
beneficial use of the state.
But that that's really important
right kisses with limited
resources and and we do need to
use use our resources for sure
then I think we all agree with
that but is it normal policy
that we would.
Necessarily re appropriate or
appropriate water rights from
one basin to another basin.
Is that is that comments.
Madam chair of Senator time
where
The the the only time that that
would occur will would be
through a
In a permitting process that
would analyze the move from to
the move to
it does it does happen and has
happened in the state of in some
instances of I mean you know the
Sierra project this is a project
that brings New Mexico's portion
of of the Colorado River water
into the Rio Grande basin
and and there's been some of the
inner basin transfers as well
and and and in the context of
the wreckage of water of
currently the state engineer
does not have any regulatory
permitting authority over that
but it would be this bill would
allow us to explore and
characterize and develop.
The quantities you know make
recommendations on the possible
quantities and also protect
other aquifers that may be above
and around the wreckage Act for
itself which is really critical
to this whole process but at
some point with the when all
that is that work is done we
would need to come back to this
body and determine the
regulatory framework for
permitting and managing brackish
water aquifers in the future.
Thank you madam chair Mister or
we might for we using brackish
water right now for any
beneficial use.
In the state of madam chair
Senator Steinborn there there is
some work done in the Alamogordo
basin
where there is a treatment plant
it's not completely up and
functional at this point in time
there's quite a big federal
research facility there as well
that we would use that
information as part of our
overall study but no Sir there's
currently there is not any
direct use of of brackish water
to my knowledge other than
what's going on in the
Alamogordo basically.
Thank you for that well.
I think this money in the
budget.
They have the votes to pass a
bill that I'll just say you know
I think I can't there's too much
kind of reference to.
Too many questions in this that
concern may and others good
intentions also that I can see
clearly.
but I think we need more
definition.
And
So I I probably in it and I
don't like the fact that we
voted on money funding that.
Is not a parent either where
does it go which part of this
got funded which part of it
didn't get funded what exactly
do we put in motion in that
budget that's part of what this
bill is connected to is the
money and we don't have half the
picture.
It was there legibly but so I I
will propose bills this time
thank you Mr thank you senator I
Senator Woods thank you madam
chair I'd like to offer another
amendment actually on page three
line line.
It there's another reviews and I
was wondering if you would like
to use instead of re there.
Our.
Do we have a process server okay
and in madam chair thank you in
center which wanted respite
there is in the amendment that
was provided Page three line
line the amendment calls to add
the word brackish in front of
water and change the term we use
to use.
The intent of the amendment is
to take the re use terminology
A.
Maybe I should look at the full
amendment.
Sorry about that thank you.
Thank you so the question The
New York thank you senator
Senator share did he step out
okay.
Sorry yes and then if I have a
let's see I got Senator Burt
next on the list and then we
have a question I just and the
engineer
it mentioned it briefly but
I would like to remind everybody
concerning this issue that the
brackish groundwater national
does desalination research
facility funded by the federal
government has been operating
for over twenty years in Otero
county
they've had Israel come over
more than one time David
countries from all over the
world looking at how to better
processes for brackish water
there's a huge amount of
research is starting on the
books about this and Alamogordo
does have an operating
desalination facility they just
don't have the last piece of
that which is a pipeline back up
to the to the
funding pods the or the the
deposit that feed the water
system project so they're in the
process of getting that worked
out there's a huge amount of
research already done because it
and and there are three
different levels of brackish
residue that you can pull up
from the two also basin and so
I'm hoping that the higher
education facilities that do
this kind of research like New
Mexico state intact as well as a
state engineer and and and if
this project should get done
we'll use that facility as a
test it because there's no
reason to reinvent the wheel
there's a ton of date already
online they can help move this
process forward and actually
take another step to to to
resolving this issue.
We always get about what is
being the best beach in the
world we don't have an ocean
however there is an ocean
underneath the Tularosa basin
about size of Lake Superior
which we believe a pass was
drawing on right now from there
brackish water desalination
plant
and so this is a perfect testbed
for something like that but if
we.
If we.
Wait too long to not do
something about brackish water
in the state we're going to be
in dire straits not just from
agriculturally but growth within
our communities without water is
is you know we are seeing the
whiskey's for drinking water for
fighting what's the point that
we're going to get to in the not
too distant future we need to
support funding like this I'm
not a fan of studies quite
frankly but we need to support
issues like this to make sure
that we have enough water in the
state to move forward so I just
want to let the committee know
about that make sure that this
program should go forward as
using those facilities natural
County and anything we can do to
help expedite that I'm more than
happy to work with you thank you
madam chair thank you senator
Senator share your out a minute
ago so we went.
We'll probably madam chair thank
you
There seems to be a of a huge
fear here and I'm not sure what
the fear is because we have we
have science to do things the
gold king mine spill is not
brackish water is really nasty
water came into the river.
The federal government put it
there by the way.
Comes down the river and is
drinking water for people in San
Juan County in further
downstream.
But we figure how to clean it.
Okay Dudley we drink it today.
And it's because we have the
technology to clean things up.
What we need is to is to have
the organized effort here that
that I believe that this bill is
about so that we can really go
down that so I don't think we
have to have this fear of what's
in the water there's a lot of
nasty things in water there's a
lot of nasty naturally occurring
things in our water like when
critters walk through the water
and.
Do what critters do okay that's
in the water we have we managed
to clean that up to.
So.
But this water I don't think
it's necessarily what we're
talking about is is potable
water is that is that true madam
chair and senator who are we are
we only going to do portable
Waller or can we make it clear
enough to put it on our field so
that we can grow better chili.
Senator let John answer that
question.
Madam chair and senator.
So you're right the technology
is there to clean up the water.
And it can be cleaned up to many
different levels for many
different uses of some that kind
of a side note el Paso's system
the sale does such a good job of
polishing the water that they
have to add minerals back into
it to keep it from corroding the
water lines literally pulling
the mineral out of the lines so
the key is to understand in
these various basins what
specific in that water has to be
cleaned up what what exists and
naturally occurring radioactive
materials P. fast in many cases
unfortunately arsenic all kinds
of heavy metals that's the
intent of the science and in the
into the regulation will be to
determine what the screening
criteria is that has to be used
on any brackish water.
Okay and we're talking naturally
occurring brackish water all
right.
To to make sure that it is
claimed up to a level number one
we're if it is discharged it's
not going to hurt our
groundwater aquifer's it's not
going to cause harm that first
and foremost is the requirement
and that's why the media is
involved with the regulatory
process to set those those
requirements then once those are
set then it becomes a matter of
what do you want to use it for
how clean does it need to be for
that use and that's determined
on a case by case basis but
we're we are charged with
setting the baseline what is
the.
The level it has to be cleaned
up to to ensure that it is not
if it gets released if it gets
dumped on the ground is not
going to harm our other
aquifer's that's the work that
we need to do in the rulemaking
process is designed to set those
guidelines in place
to the comment with regard to
what Israel has done and and
others I I will tell you that
I'm a big proponent on not
reinventing the wheel I I
absolutely believe in using
other people's research so long
as it is legitimate peer
reviewed research that that we
can hang our hats on and of
course the regulatory process
includes several components of
public involvement shaped the
regulations feedback from the
public it is a long and intense
process for us to make the rules
again before W. Q. C. C. to be
adopted it's effectively like
going to a court hearing we have
to prevent produce evidence we
have produce expert witnesses we
you know work with.
All entities that want to be
part of that to to get that
evidence it I will not be in a
position of state and we want to
take our word for it has to be
peer review it has to be
acceptable science across the
board in order to set those
rules and regulations.
Thank you
madam chair so.
I think that there's
I'm just not sure the fears
unfounded because there's lots
of natural occurring minerals
like everything on the earth.
So
and some of them are not
particularly bad for you.
In small quantities some of them
will kill you in larger
quantities.
I actually that did not the one
in el Paso de salinization
station they're bringing water
straight up out of the ground
you could see it naturally you
could see it after it ran
through the process yes it
various things like arsenic and
mercury.
And
It in so this one had nothing
except H. two O. nothing except
H. to all.
And as you pointed out H. two O.
can be corrosive fifth up so I
drank some but.
In drink lot because it would
naturally have sucked the
minerals out of my body
in you know cost cultural
problems.
So I know that this that this
technology existed I know which
used in other places and I know
it's used for everything but I
also know that that it can be
measured.
So that it's pure H. two O..
Which can be a poison
but it can also be be balanced
so that it's appropriate for
other industrial uses C. pointed
out cooling towers for something
for agriculture four committee
your tap in which want to do
with it.
So my concern here is like so
many other things that we've
seen here if not now when.
And this is just yet another
industry that we want to make
sure doesn't happen in New
Mexico as opposed to looking for
an industry that can happen in
New Mexico and one that I
believe will be very beneficial
because it puts water out there
for use and that's.
And I think that's beneficial to
all so thank you thank you
senator Senator Correa Hemphill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman I just had one
question with the amended bill
does that include produced water
from oil and gas.
Madam chair and senator does not
that is not any piece of this
this is naturally occurring
brackish water
part of the you know we talk
about definition part of the
regulatory process will be to
define their I might say that
the generally accepted
definition of brackish water is
water that is softer than fresh
water but not a salty sea water.
Mr Chairman this that's if you
make the Pacific Lee says for
use in the Permian basin so I
mean with all due respect I mean
we're directing.
maybe state interpret for
characterization for use.
Doesn't mean it's going to get
use that way but absolutely the
bill
that's the Permian basin ability
thank you secretary.
Madam chair the the Environment
Department is already doing
produced water and promulgating
rules correct me if I'm I'm John
so that is a separate issue that
we're not dealing with in this
bill can we go back to Senator
career Hemphill has the floor
Senator.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your sponsor for shape that
that's all I have thank you
thank you thank you very much
all right I don't have anyone on
the list anymore so do we have a
but if we're the wishes of the
committee.
Four nine three K..
There's a motion from Senator
share second from Senator Woods
call the roll please.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator what's yours.
Senator Rodriguez
I'm I'm gonna vote no and
explain my vote at this time
thank you yes yes thanks to
Senator Rodriguez yes thank you
I should've spoken before with
our but that's okay I just you
know I don't know what I'll do
on the floor Senator but I can
tell you that right now I have
quite a few questions for
clarification maybe we can talk
between here on the floor and
get some answers so thank you
very much that's all I have what
is the market.
The vote number sign.
Thanks to thank you to thank you
thank you senator.
Okay
that's what we have for today
let's see we've got one of these
is.
Which were done it seems like
for today so let me just make
some quick comments
We're waiting for the tax
package been in motion.
Through the night in the morning
so we're trying to get a final
in the house bill two that's
going to be done by one today so
that we can account for all the
dollars are spending the tax
package so
I'll let you know that as it
moves forward but if we're gonna
have to come up quickly or not
come up with the this is the
timing here where where things
are changing real quickly with
language and and bills we know
house bill one thirty will not
be here today probably not here
tomorrow there's some issues
going on with the house bill one
thirty there's another bill in
the house that turned up and so
as bills come across and
We're gonna keep in hold on so
just kinda will have let you
know what's happening trying to
get a final number for the
budget and we have to have that
to get house bill two completed
center.
One is fifteen.
And fifty on that.
That's the General Appropration
that's that's of the main bill
from for the budget case
something happens.
This bill is a placeholder for
the for House Bill to case
something happens.
Thank you.
One thirty yep.
we don't know how long we're
gonna be on the floor today and
you know we have a basketball
game so I don't think there's
anything urgent to get out if we
do come to the one bill that's
on the agenda and maybe the only
thing we do today.
Okay it just that now so I know
on the floor probably to the
capital is pretty much almost
done and we're gonna be seen
that bill after the house takes
action of course on it but the
staff was doing their elected
reviews and then the re
authorization bill is also done
but they're doing the final
review and proofreading that's
about it so we should have the
re off Mr chairman here in the
committee then hopefully by
Friday if we can schedule it
after it's done thank you Mr.
Capitol builders in house uses
yes and the.
Here if we are this year with
the capitol building is there
yes.
