I'm here.
Senator Kernan.
Senator Lopez.
Senator McKenna.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Pinto.
Senator Pirtle.
Senator pope.
Senator severe Lopez here
Senator sure.
Senator Shendo
Senator souls.
Senator Woods.
You have a quorum Mister
president thank you I like to
ask all senators to please rise
Pledge allegiance management
advice senator Josh responses
and the salute to New Mexico
flag to be led by Senator
Rodriguez.
Thank you let us pray second
made me king over eight people
as numerous as the dust of the
earth.
Give me now wisdom and knowledge
to go out and come in before
have not asked for positions
well I honor or the life of
those who hate you and have not
even asked for long life but has
Wisdom and knowledge are granted
to you.
Thank you for the blessings that
you have.
Less this with as we journey
through this life.
And move forward.
Which beauty.
For me behind me hello me above
me.
Once again with I think all the
senators for joining us all
yield to senator Wirth.
good afternoon Mister presidents
Unanimous consent we go that our
this morning with the indication
we very much appreciate that.
so I'll yield to Senator Lopez
and other members of some up
front announcements and now
excuse Senator Gonzales.
And Senator McKenna.
Never mind Mr president
suggesting animus consent to
See no further announcements
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president so for the members and
everyone watching what we're
that enroll the clock and then
you'll Senator when you also
house bill two so with that Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business messages
from the house.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one of return
same here with respectfully
submitted Lisa M. Ortiz
McCutchen chief clerk gentle
show the message from the house
has been received.
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill nine and request the
concurrence of the Senate
respectfully submitted Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk the
gentle show the message from the
The reader to read Mr president
your finance committee to who
has been referred house bill two
as amended has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it to pass
as amended respectfully
Say no objection the committee
report has been adopted.
Mr president your Judiciary
Committee too who has been
referred to Senate Judiciary
Pete Campos senator Kerry
Hamblen and senator cliff R.
Pirtle culture Senator Hamblen.
Mr president I move the adoption
Senator Wirth Andrea Senator
Wirth and I can also the members
of the body that the officers of
the Senate have signed an open
session Senate Judiciary
Committee says two percent of
bill one.
How's for Committee subs.
House for substitute for House
state government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
an act relating to redistricting
of the Public Education
Commission establishing Public
Education Commission districts
providing for staggered terms
and the feeling of vacancies
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill nine.
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go about our business
announcements and miscellaneous
on that order business senator
Wirth thank you Mr president
having eleven fifty nine AM and
morning's session are present in
this afternoon session is no
objection it is so ordered Mr
president I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
Senator Wirth thank you Mr
president unanimous consent we
go to that our business third
reading of legislation ideal to
center when you also for house
Bill to or are order of Business
third reading of legislation
the record show that all action
for placing.
House Bill.
To as a house bill two as
amended of House Appropriations
you Mr president of the body I
think everybody in the states
heard about the what a windfall
New Mexico's had and how great
it is and and how we can make
change in New Mexico and so with
the state to tourism to helping
our nursing staff get back in
place and for a housing and also
and so with that Mr president
all stand for questions Senator
we're debating house bill two is
twice amended we have center by
the to start us off center by
Iglesias on the floor and then
Charles soleil.
Thank you seven yes sea no
objection your expert witnesses.
Welcome to the chamber.
getting this here as quickly as
possible if the sponsor would
yield the ministerial yes Mr
president.
Thank you Mr president and so
just a couple of questions there
the the version that we're
looking at here for broadband
purposes only.
So Mister president in hearing
agencies an agency requests and
million in our per capital money
and sell currently in this bill
a hundred and thirty three
million and sixty six thousand
and eighty dollars appropriated
for broadband.
and then that made million that
certain honestly being funded
but they're ready to rock and
roll ready to move forward so so
what we're is the one thirty
three am going.
Mr president that goes to the
agency of of do it in the new
how much broadband needs to be
put where where the underground
wiring so we have a plan and a
goal to get broadband across New
Cuba area in the Gallup area
rural reservation areas we've
had good conversations with
Amazon and Facebook and starlink
anymore so the kid is knows the
kid is still going to be in the
classroom but he's going to have
to do it from home with
technology and so we need to
make sure that we have that
ability there some language in
with the ease of use of use.
And and and Mr president so of
the twenty six million that was
being debate I was upset and as
coming forward with that with
regard to that twenty six
million or is that going to the
general broadband fund if you
will.
Mr presence in so that was
moved all the are put into
general fund so the legislature
could appropriate that money
under the the ruling of the
court and so when that happens
that twenty five million that
last year we put about a hundred
thirty million dollars in
broadband we had federal matches
that could come up to a billion
dollars we know we have the new
infrastructure plan from the
then the match to get the most
for New Mexico.
I appreciate that Mr president
that level of detail I really do
and so the current version of
house bill two that we're
looking at right now what
Mr president at there's no way
to determine that I think the
council needs to determine that
they're the ones that have to
have a plan and I understand
there is a plan from Deloitte
that that do it secretaries
the secretary in the council Mr
president's one or two more last
question so of the shovel ready
projects you and I Mr chairman
of talked about of what percent
Mr president and senator yes
then then do it and the
secretary or the do a director
of the broadband director I'm
sorry the broadband rector
should be able to come and say
these are shovel ready projects
that the services are one time
in their shovel ready and
they're ready to go so that will
be up to the director of
broadband into the council
determined that thank you Mr
president I'm just really happy
just the exact importance that
it is and all of our lives
distance learning telehealth
telemedicine economic
development job creation and
cetera.
I just I feel very strongly were
and his committees working
getting all this arranged for us
with this part of money thank
you Mr chairman.
Thanks for the further debate we
have Senator followed by Senator
president this is about one
third also matters of the entire
federal money that came to us so
there's still plenty of room to
do some things here and I like
to look at this as kind of a
January and that's where a lot
of these other things that
people say hated belong in there
now.
Maybe they do but that's what
we'll see him but you know we've
got down payments for state
parks we got down payments for
thanks Senate share senator
Morris.
Thank you Mr Mr chairman
governor just want to say how
proud I am that the this is a
that we're debating this bill
because this is still Republic
like she was appropriate on her
Beatles message we would have
our current whip who stood up to
our party's governor.
And filed a motion made a motion
on this floor to override one of
Public was on the line and
there's a lot of silent voted
voices and the fact that we're
here right now is because those
two stood up to the governor and
said no.
putting partisanship aside when
it comes down to protecting our
constitutional responsibilities
we did that on our side of the
aisle gives our governor I hope
the other side of the aisle will
that lawsuit I appreciate it as
a senator our political
differences.
Will remain but we need to
protect these institutions in
this Republic in the future
thank you.
than senator Morris did but I
would like to remind.
The house.
I'm trying to figure out why
this bill began in the house.
Since no one in the house was
to spend money and I want to
echo what my colleague concern
remorse and and think
specifically Sir Baca and
Further debate we have senators
about this.
Thank you Mr president and
colleagues I'd like to take the
guidance on this morning it was
not a challenge to the governor
and it was not a challenge to
any agency spending.
It was really a matter of trying
to protect the integrity of
but but it is and the knowledge
meant and it is respect for what
we do because we work so hard
it's spending money right.
With the committee hearings and
the fact that we have people
been some sense that there would
be a preference for spending in
southern New Mexico under such
an executive that might have
been true.
And I want to knowledge of
this federal money and we didn't
challenge those governors.
And I think that's a legitimate
criticism of myself and of all
of us.
And I think people can ask
about dollars in the billions.
So the reason that we challenge
it now frankly I challenge it
now was because maybe I've grown
into my role as a senator maybe
And so some of that comes with
maturity perhaps or comes with a
willingness to step out of line
and be a little more courageous.
And so I'm I want this body to
challenge in court that we did
with her and I can answer why
but I don't know that it does is
a lot of good to go back and try
and and ask ourselves the wives
of that we are we're we're out
Is it truly a transformative
grasp of the opportunity that
we've been given here today and
and I have to are you perhaps
Yes yield yes I will yield and
and we'll be doing billable time
here.
Senator about us yet well I
appreciate the Senator doing
this is billable time you know
rebuilding the questions can you
just tell us what is the total
sum of the bill that's before us
now what what is the sum total
we're being suggested to spend
seventy eight plus million we're
considering to spend here today.
what the what was the total that
we're now considering that the
point one billion dollars in
Google a lot of money and so
that was our total authority in
this if you look through it
three hundred forty five million
to us that we have to suspend in
that category.
And so Senator I and I probably
should be giving you a heads up
that I would try and and get an
eight million dollars that would
be appropriated by this bill
what percentage even if it's in
brought around numbers what
percentage of the four hundred
seventy eight million dollars is
going to be for broadband
Twenty eight percent to be
exact.
Good not appreciate the quick
math and and again I should be
giving you a heads up some up
about twenty eight percent of
of all of these things but I I
have some some questions about
some of these projects the the
state parks project what what
one of those state parks
projects in the twenty million
dollars that we would
list of state parks that are in
need that have been in need and
so I'm looking at one and that I
I don't know your district
exactly but I'm a look towards
and I'm looking just towards the
south in your district and I may
miss a few but that we can we
can give less but there's quite
dam quite of bit of state parks
urine they're they're spread out
I just don't know exactly which
ones would be in your district
because I know I'm not known by
name and an agency presents I
from the federal government
they're gonna go to state parks
that your committee has already
decided which of those part
projects are going to receive
what funding and how much is is
repairs so EMNRD determine who
was it what state parks and they
provided the list to us and LFC
and then and house bill two to
the the specific parts in the
specific projects in the amount
of money that will be
appropriate each is already
determined is that fair to say.
Mr president center they
determine their the dollar
Thirty one million is a backlog
of state parks repairs in and so
we're funding them with twenty.
and need are not going to be
funded.
Mr presence in I think that'll
be up to the cabinet secretary
and an agency to determine where
the greatest needs are in one
area and then start to build
bill proposes to spend money on
outdoor recreation river
habitats.
Are are those are those
expenditures those projects
habitats have all of those
projects been identified in the
amount of spending for each of
those projects or is that to be
determined down the road Mr
