In rural their workers and
workers can opt out of the
program at any time number three
once employees are enrolled the
owning responsibility employer
has going forward will be to
process the payroll deductions.
So.
Where is it that does not offer
investment advice is.
The employer doesn't has no plan
report supporting and the.
Employer had does not to.
Do any plan ministration and
number four this is the exact
same process employers already
do when they process payroll
this just adds another deduction
that's your total
responsibility of the employer.
So.
I have a is one one is
critically important to
committee understand that
without requiring employers
within five or more with five or
more employees to participate.
We will what this program will
be debt.
So years ago the if if a of
research institute the
preeminent retirement savings
institute in Boston College
together with some you and
people did a study and they
found that much.
You the maybe this mandatory
it's not going to be successful
so that the the book noted state
board did go out to they did
seek proposals and they didn't
get one proposal.
But the FIR points out that one
one of.
Plant program administrative
responded with a letter
this highlighted on page three
of the F. I. R. they give the
point seven reasons why the
program without work without the
The mandatory
requirement.
So
The
Some of the some of you are sure
that letter with yesterday.
And on the third paragraph it
says we found voluntary programs
are not economically viable.
So that's the bottom line and
and this would make it mandatory
the program is dead and we
Stand for questions thank you
thank you senator all right did
this general let's go to
Representative Lujan project you
want to say anything
Representative thank you thank
you madam chair appreciate the
time I just want to just
reiterate the you know workers
at all education levels lack of
plan a savings plan employees at
all earning levels do not have
access to plan in access to plan
differs substantially
substantially by race ethnicity
and gender about sixty four
percent of Hispanic workers New
Mexico it's forty nine percent
of black workers in New Mexico's
sixty three percent of Asian
American workers in New Mexico
lack access to employer provided
retirement plans get together
these employees account for
about sixty nine percent that's
two hundred and thirty two
thousand employees of the
roughly three hundred and thirty
seven thousand employees without
a workplace retirement have do
not have a workplace retirement
plan.
We're talking about parity in
our workforce we're talking
about what we can do to better
the financial stability of our
New Mexicans in our taxpayer
payers this is an essential
piece we're talking about
financial literacy and all these
other things and all these of
the bills and all these
requirements we're looking
through our education programs.
It shows in in the statistics
that we're talking about today
madam chair that we don't have.
We don't have financial security
in retirement age and this will
provide that and given the
opportunity at least to provide
that for our our workforce here
in New Mexico thank you for the
time and then I'll defer to our
expert witness to introduce
himself thank you Representative
and thank you for your incessant
work for employees and workers
in New Mexico appreciate you
gentleman yes madam chair
members the committee again the
on button the I just want to add
to the to the center and
Representative comments that
sixteen other states that are
either considering this working
state programs or or or have
implemented them do so via auto
enrolment New York the only
state that had a volunteer
program but then they switched
to an autorun programs so New
Mexico is the out liar when it
comes to working to save
programs and in fact I think
many four oh one K.'s are are
overruled as role as well so
this is no different so we ask
for your support thank you all
right thank you very much right
anyone well before we do that we
have an amendment that we have
to put on as we said before
Senator the customary amendment
do we have there's a motion okay
to move the amendment do we have
a second on the appropriations.
The second all right and yes
there was a second from Senator
us time hi Center alright and so
any comments on the amendment or
any questions from committee
members and if not do we have a
due pass for the amendment
please do pass and do passed
Senator Woods and seconded by
Senator beside us on the for the
amendment so you have an amended
bill and now Senator this we've
got to go to the audience to see
if there's anyone in support of
the bill anyone opposed to the
bill anyone on zoom.
Okay can we have the person on
zoom speaking please.
Jerry modest.
Jerry are you there can you be.
He was there I guess Jerry.
Okay I guess not okay I guess
there's no one is in okay
committee members I'm sorry
okay and you I apologize madam
vice chair.
That's fine you can go and
briefly state your comments
please thank you good morning
good morning vice chair and
members of the committee I'm
Terry modest I am the programs
and outreach director for the
state treasurer's office the
work in state board is
administratively attached to the
state treasurer's office and
they have been working to
implement the program since this
legislative body passed the
working save act in two thousand
twenty our office supports SB
one ninety four as amended with
the data sharing provision thank
you.
Thank you very much for those
comments are I committee members
whether we just senator share.
to table.
Okay there's a motion to table
I'm gonna do a substitute motion
to the table and and do that we
temporarily table not table the
bill but temporarily so we can
look at it and and see what the
impacts are and so on so
Okay there's a motion in the
second
okay so anyone opposed to the
let's call the roll on that so
can have it on record yes yeah
it's a it's a bill that needs to
be looked at and I don't believe
it needs to be tabled and set
aside immediately so let's take
a look at so now can you call
the roll Senator Burt to excused
Senator Campos.
The case today Senator Diamond
yes to table.
There's a there's a substitute
motion to temporarily tape
Senator right thank you just
want to make sure thank you
Senator Gonzales.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn no.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Munoz yes.
Eight two one and Senator
Padilla explain your vote.
Do you want to vote on this is
cable.
The appropriation was removed
Senator yes Senator Burt votes
we have a nine two one two two
temporary table.
Okay thank you madam chair for
let me explain my vote I was
originally approached by this
legislation I've done a ton of
work with A. R. P. of the past
every bill that they've ever
brought to me and I said to
senator Thomas I think you know
you may want to take this on
you'll be the lead I'll be your
co sponsor we started working
through this and it was clear to
me that
we were gonna get it done and we
did we get it signed into law
and all that and one of the
things we said to our colleagues
was at the time you know
respectfully is that this would
not be a mandatory program and I
made that commitment to our
colleagues it is a public policy
question that we have here and
if it doesn't work for for the
program to come up in the state
are size we have to find another
solution that does work for in
in the state are size and I I
could for permits not even been
kicked off yet I can't.
You know tell our colleagues you
know in the legislature we told
you one thing and now we're
going to do this before the
things even off the ground so
that's why go to the way that I
did I fully support the
initiative
again I've done everything A. R.
P.'s arrest and then got it done
for them big big things we've
gotten together this is just
happens to be one of them that
we're going to have the
difference on thank you.
Thank you very much and
basically this temporary table
means it's it's not out
completely we're just apparently
at this time the the few things
need to be looked at for impacts
and so on as we proceed is my
understanding so
Madam manages at that there is a
seventy five thousand dollars a
visit to I put into my junior
fund for this program and also
there is a re authorization of
from the four hundred thousand
dollars there's already existing
in the programs in the budget
thank you mentioned thank you
very much and thank you senator
and the nice gentleman are it
seems.
We are done with the agenda do I
did I miss anything here no okay
thank you very much.
We're wrapping up house bill
two.
Have a tax.
