Communicating that totally
understanding as we move forward
with the resources that we have
available with the extreme
concerns that we do have as to
the viability of how we're going
to better prepared New Mexico
for the the next generation all
these things are are imminent
they're very important to all of
us as a subcommittee what we're
the way we're dealing with the
information and of course we're
we're live so from there there
are people with other agencies
that are paying close attention
to the work that we're doing
the task this morning is to hear
from the various agencies that
are listed I ask that you
introduce yourselves and then
from there talk about those
significant points in on two
fronts number one what those
points are and then number two
how over a period of time you're
going to be able to help us to
triangulate or if you will bring
your aspect of the agency that
you Representative together it's
going to be crucial for all of
us as we take a look at the
legislation is being introduced
and a lot of those bills are not
coming directly to this
committee released at this time
but in dealing with it with the
use of resources with the
efficiencies and then of course
with the bring threats that we
have which means each and
everyone of you will be a very
valuable part of what this final
solution is going to be this
session so in it the
presentations are going to be
very informal.
As a subcommittee I'm not
waiting to see if we have a
quorum or not about nine nine oh
five we're going to be starting
with the presentations and of
course like I say people be
listening to our but if you can
keep that methodology in mind
however all of us gonna work
this session together to take
care of that significant need of
course as we deal with the
travesties that occurred but
more than that what that future
is going to be for us given the
taxed issues that are out there
we talk about water home we talk
about distribution would talk
about litigation home we talk
about of the forces that we can
is group of New Mexicans to
truly find the solutions so at
this point what I'd like to do
is to turn it over to Adrian
this out and and he has an
excellent staff that continues
to work on all aspects of what
we're doing fiscally not only
through the entire Senate
finance committee but also with
the intricate pieces as we deal
with our water situation and the
issues that are directly
affecting each and everyone of
us after that what I'd ask is
again with the presentations
that you come up be assisting
this possible knowing that over
a period of days as we deal with
this those communications are
going to become much more
significant and stronger in the
the idea again is that this
building if you will the next
generation session it will be
how do we communicate with each
other how do we strengthen if
you will that final outcome and
I will tell each and everyone of
you that you're an important
part of what the final solution
is going to be this is not about
one of us it's going to be about
all of us and I really hope that
as we do come forward that the
solutions are going to be as
unilateral as possible and as
pointed as possible so when you
talk to the media the bottom
line will.
Be that this is going to be here
in trouble alright but within
that that's going to be the
collective piece or part there
so if you will Adrian let's get
started and then from there
we'll go to the presentations
and as the members of the
subcommittee already know that
if there are questions we turn
it into a conversation that's
going to be this process as we
go through the next several days
adri you Mr Chairman was of
committee or subcommittee before
you that three documents the
first is a valid copy of the
Water challenges facing the
state of New Mexico within the
twenty first century it's a
report of the New Mexico water
policy infrastructure task force
which we have the
representatives who led this
initiative over the interim is
here to answer questions in
relation to it on top of that
you have to presentations one
that kind of gives an overview
of this report and another that
focuses on the Texas versus New
Mexico
K. that is being litigated
currently so those are the three
things that are going to be
discussed.
Today and then tomorrow we will
hone in on specific themes we
will bring back the same panel
and expanded a little bit more
to be able to dive into the
specific
micro issues so with that I'd
like to defer to.
The state agencies so we have
the office of the state engineer
we have the New Mexico
Environment Department
among other so if you all would
like to come up and introduce
yourselves and take over.
So if I if I made to the
panelists make yourselves
comfortable
we we just need to make sure
that the the the mikes are on
because we want this to transfer
to the.
Attention to this and so as we
deal with the conversation
itself I'll leave it up to you
course introduce yourselves talk
a little bit about the urgency
is in the parts that you're
dealing with and some people
have a better understanding of
how this is going to work if we
did this one agency at a time in
essence what would happen is one
might take fifteen minutes
another one maybe I another one
maybe an hour and what we want
to do is just get the the the
the crux of what it is we're
dealing with out to the public
so that they know what this
process is going to be in the
long run so gentleman I'll let
you all go ahead and introduce
yourselves and then you know
we'll we'll go from there.
Thank you Senator Campos and the
chair of the the Water of
subcommittee of the Senate
Senate finance the committee
members appreciate seeing you
guys here this morning and and
this is a very important topic
of my name is of my canon and
the state engineer as of one
full year next week and and that
the been my pleasure to also
serve as the this is the chair
of the water New Mexico water
policy infrastructure task
force.
Mr chairman senators my name is
Todd Leahy on the deputy cabinet
secretary and tribal liaison for
energy minerals and natural
resources I was also the EMNRD
Representative two of the water
policy and infrastructure task
force we touch this through are
healthy forests and watersheds
initiative thank.
Good morning Senator in
committee my name is John Rick
I'm the director of the water
protection division with New
Mexico Environment Department.
And we had the opportunity to
have one of our deputy cabinet
secretaries Rebecca Roose on
this committee I was her second
in the background.
The water protection division.
Handles three areas we handle
ground water and ground water
quality we handle surface water
quality we handle drinking water
systems and then we also have
the construction programs bureau
which handles funding through
the clean water state revolving
fund.
the.
The needs obviously affect
everything we do and and we
really touch almost every aspect
of of the recommendations that
came from the task force.
specifically the need to assist
small communities with not only
infrastructure but the method
and the ability to get that we
have a serious problem in New
Mexico with availability of
technical assistance in the form
of engineering support as well
as administrative support for
many of these water systems the
majority of our systems are
small mutual domestics that
serve less than five hundred
homes and and quite often there
are operated by volunteer
committees and operators and so
as we move forward with this as
I say we we touch almost every
piece of this in one manner or
another and a pleasure to be
here thank you.
Also center wanted to the use of
Rolf Schmidt Petersen and also
of my general counsel of the
federal shakers who will also be
assisting and the discussion
with the Texas to New Mexico
part of our presentation.
Morning the chair of the
subcommittee members my name is
John Romero with and M. do team
how we operation division
director and I have a can swing
with our general counsel Office
you know we are we are a big
user of of water in the state as
far as it pertains to have
reconstruction
as we are also part of the
conservation efforts through
smart design in our road we
projects to try to manage
Water more like a resources
opposed to an impediment.
Thank you.
Just in case anyone else that
wishes to going stated.
Not to would like to get started
with presentations and on this
side of the room and I went
ahead and I move the microphone
here so that if there is
anything that you all wish to
state and just come onto your
bill from there again very
informal as we move forward so
we're going to start with the
presentations and if you will go
down and talk about the things
the way that you have it lined
up
there definitely is an imminent
issue and that is how do we work
together and really prepare if
you will our state for the
future of how we dealing with
these prices that that for so
how much are kind of organize
how you want to go ahead and
present okay.
The.
Mr Mr we've we've of.
Since the you know what I was
the you know chair task force I
was going to leave the
presentation and the right
supplement as we get into the
various components of of of of
what the the agencies are
essentially invented and and
this process so we we've got
the.
You know the the governor
authorized me to form this task
force
in in April.
and we went ahead and and pull
together.
Twenty US citizens.
Experts and stakeholder groups
from around the state and we
have one in the audience with
those who was very instrumental
in and participated in the
processes of Mr Boller from the.
portability or teaching
Conservancy district kind of
representing the southeast part
of the state maybe a few other
folks of participants equipment
as well the.
The up.
There's others but that was I
think the US of momentary effort
on the part of the folks of and
and we had several meetings and
and they we had also nine eight
state agency reps the three
Richard here we also the New
Mexico department of ag we had
department of game and fish we
had DFA we had the Indian
Affairs Department
and then and we had the
secretaries involved secretary
to Trujillo and Romero we're
we're directly involved as well
and we also have support from
The Mexico first of coordinating
this as well as great support
from of the NGO community that
was led by the former foundation
with some funding assistance
that funded the center to do a
lot of the research of the
report writing and the
background information so that
kind of sets the stage for for
who all was involved in this
we had the.
Two principal objectives was to
first review and comment on on
the Interstate Stream Commission
craft fifty year water plan that
has been presented to the
governor's office and they are
continuing to refine that which
we expect to to be available in
the near future and then we also
but we're to develop specific
recommendations to address.
Very needed water policy and
infrastructure
requirements given the current
challenges
including not only the short
term but also with the very long
view ahead of us from the
standpoint of the opportunities
presented to us with the funding
and the planning that we all are
are working towards
this this this of actually for
fits and is very complementary
to the draft fifty or water plan
of the the governor's plan as
well as
several other
key efforts going on throughout
the state when we're looking at
in rural infrastructure needs
and some of the the longer term
vision of the use of state
funding and federal funding the
the the task force of self
selected
work groups with the three main
categories of of concern and
interest which is community
drinking water wastewater and
stormwater capacity which which
would with the has been talked
about needing serious reform for
infrastructure and finance
water resources management
planning and river for river Act
preferring watershed health.
the committee came up with
seventeen recommendations.
With brought to a a hundred
percent yes for support in other
words it was designed to be a
consensus development
organization through a broad
spectrum of water users that and
and interest groups and it was
amazing that we actually
developed all of these
recommendations with the the
support that we have across the
board
the route the report is
available also for the general
public at New Mexico water dot
org.
this briefly go through
the the various recommendations
and I think this would be the
time also you know as we look at
this to get some input from my
fellow agencies here for those
that are more impacted by the
work of the task force but
really the we all know the
problem water waste water
systems in the state or central
for a quality of life for New
Mexicans across the state but we
have an ageing water and waste
water systems so that have have
not been well maintained for
variety of reasons particularly
a lot of them have very similar
small systems they don't have a
right base and rate structures
that allow them to self support
so that's one of the issues that
and that's a that's a consistent
message that from everywhere
everybody we talked to is that
capacity is their number one
problem
and and we also have a lack of
adequate of numbers of of of
operators qualified operators
for drinking and wastewater
systems out there too so this
eight community health and well
being at risk
as we struggle with the growing
impacts of climate change the
has been highlighted in in a
report developed by Interstate
Stream Commission and and and
New Mexico of the the tech
Through a variety of of of of
folks scientists across the
state that are saying that of
that we are are expecting
another I do sixty degree
temperature increase over the
next decade on average
throughout New Mexico so that's
going to further stress our
abilities to provide water to
our communities under the
circumstances.
one of the proposals was to
create a water infrastructure
project the thorny that would be
more after what the public
schools have done of the as a
cause of a governmental agency
to actually manage construction
of projects capital outlay to
make sure that they're well
staffed and and and and and
actually cradle to grave from
design build and operations they
they have they have that built
into the public school systems
and so my colleague who is not
here with us today Marquita
Russel who is waffle also served
as as well as one of the
organizing members of the task
force
to actually up.
The look at this from her point
of view and working with the
water trust board and other
procedures to actually have for
water wastewater and stormwater
systems the the they required a
lot of time in development
coordination with multiple
entities
you know design and construction
they take years to develop and
so having a consistent method of
of marshalling those projects
through first on qualifying the
entities giving them well funded
and and have the staff to make
sure that that these projects
are completed from start to
finish has been real close a
real problem for our
infrastructure projects in New
Mexico in the water wastewater
and stormwater arena so that was
a recommendation coming from
from this work group that was
chaired for Marquita and and
Rebecca Roose from the New
Mexico environment department
and then we you know support
regional water system
collaboration there's a there's
a built Senator Wirth bill
that's moving through also
sponsored by Representative at a
that authorizes regionalization
for willing entities to do that
forward enhanced technical
assistance support to small
communities as we mentioned
earlier they really need help
at all levels of their
Management other systems and
then of the the emergency
response.
needs to be of very robust we
found that up during the
response to the fires this this
this spring and summer
and we need of the emergency
relief fund and the ability to
quickly put that on the ground
when necessary so that's there
was another major recommendation
and I'm just bottom line is to
grow the water workforce across
our state at all levels of
government the the the counties
can help with local governments
so can the costs of the solar
conservation districts are also
can play a role in this so we do
have multiple entities that of
the thirties and capacities to
help that the health it's not
just state agencies that we
can't do it alone we gonna have
all of government approach and
so all pause with that and and
the you know of the both the
John and Todd maybe response to
some of this that that their
agencies collaborated on as
well.
Thank you Mr chairman
All these recommendations as a
state or are exceptionally
important
not only to the state the to the
Department and how we carry out
our function of of protecting
the environment protecting the
citizens of the of our state the
water infrastructure projects
authority referenced here
the.
Is envisioned as something that
would go beyond jest deciding
who gets the money what projects
are viable to fund.
The authority needs to be set up
in a manner that that they
provide some of this technical
expertise and administrative
process that has the ability to
review and develop plans and
specifications for water systems
and then see that through
The environment department while
we have community outreach
sections in each of our our
different bureaus we don't have
the capacity to meet that need
and in fact creates an issue for
us as the regulator we can't
plan design and then regulate
there has to be a separation and
so this concept of this projects
authority would be that a quasi
governmental agency that they
could fill that role and then
allow us to assist as regulators
Regional water system
collaboration as.
As Mike stated you know there is
a bill going through now to to
make it easier for systems that
want to regionalization regional
allies to do that and the
reality is it's going to become
a necessity in many areas of the
state for for several reasons
one being the fact that we have
made these local mutual
domestics that do not have a
customer base to support the
expenses associated with project
development and in many cases
the the operation day to day
operations of their systems and
by regional Ising even and
regional rising can have many
many concepts to it sometimes
people think regional regional
allies the region allies size
excuse me but the systems
together is connected I'm hard
packed it right there all get
more from the same source that's
one one aspect of it but the
other aspect is is getting the
smaller systems together
grouping together so that they
can share the cost of the
administrative oversight of
their systems and the the
operators that becomes a huge
piece
you know when we talk about
growing the water workforce we
are seeing uh and aging out of
the the work force that operates
the systems across the state and
we're not seeing young people
come in and now there's two
reasons for that one is a lot of
times young folks don't know
that there are job opportunities
out there so the utility
operator certification program
is managed under the water
protection division through a
drinking water bureau and we're
busy working on outreach
developing outreach team to get
this information out to high
school students to college
students to take their our
careers out here in this field
that's one part of it the end
fortunately the other side of
that is that where the need is
greatest.
Are not the ideal communities
where people want to come out of
college and go live nor can
these communities afford to pay
these people.
To do the job and to be there
and so it we're not able to
attract these folks we had we
did enter into a couple years
ago an agreement with San Juan
college utilizing she may be a
funding to ramp up a program to
train utility operators we've
changed utility operator program
we're now instead of have
holding one or two big sessions
a year that the people that want
to get their certifications and
licenses had to come to we now
allow them to get the training
online and they can go to any
workforce solutions location and
take the certification test by
computer so we've attempted to
make it easier and less costly
to get these operator certified
but the reality is.
They're not there and and so we
have systems that cannot provide
operators the other the other
thing that I'll talk about now
and and will come up again later
on conversations is.
The systems that some of these
communities what to build and
then get proposed are for lack
of a better term their Cadillac
system they've got all the bells
and whistles they do a great
job.
But for a community that's had a
water level one or two operator
on their existing system there I
now they get this new system and
suddenly they have to pay for a
level for operator.
Then number one they're in
limited supply across the state
number to their expenses and so
all of a sudden this this
community now has a system that
they could afford to to buy but
they can't afford to purchase so
there's I need to to work with
the private sector as well and
we've begun to do some of that
outreach and basically the
concept is.
Don't sell Community Academy act
if they just need a good
Chevrolet okay given what they
can afford to operate given what
they can afford to use that will
protect that community and and
sometimes that's hard so with
the communities I've met with
some personally and you know
they they don't understand why
they can't have a waste water
treatment system for example or
drinking water system lack of
Rio Rancho we're in Albuquerque.
Well because you don't have the
revenue company and to support
that and that's an unfortunate
reality but if we communicate if
we educate and we're we're
realistic about the expectations
and the needs then what we can
accomplish is getting systems in
these communities that are
functional they do it they need
to do that that benefit that
community and don't put them in
a in a loan that they're never
going to be able to pay off.
You know this is also where we
see systems they get any system
built it's supposed to have a
thirty year lifespan in ten
years it's failing because they
couldn't afford to maintain or
they couldn't afford to operate
it so.
Did you know this is the answer
is not throw all the money at it
the money's not going to solve
our problem in every instance
we've got to build the
foundation we've got to build
from the ground up and that's
what you know we're committed to
doing and that's what the
recommendations for this task
force really came came to you
know I will say.
That I was very happy to see
that our budget recommendations
we develop actually went along
very nicely with the task force
recommendations we didn't do in
hand in hand but it it.
It confirmed to me that we were
looking at the right things you
know that there are concerns
were also being seen by people
that work hands on and then in
the middle of this and that's
important because we need to
understand what the real can
concerns are
Again.
We're supportive of the
regionalization but it it's it's
going to be complicated is going
to be difficult and it's going
to really take the desire or the
willingness on the part of the
larger governmental entities
like counties.
To be willing to step in and
assist some of the smaller
unincorporated community state
can't afford to operate their
systems to figure out how to do
it.
The and the other unfortunate
reality is you know.
Prices to operate in prices
deliver are going to continue to
go up.
And it's never going to be
cheaper than it is today that's
a reality that we have to deal
with.
Another piece that.
Then again we'll touch on a
little later is.
Protecting groundwater well
there's two aspects protecting
groundwater right one is
preventing it from being
contaminated.
The second is preventing it from
being used to.
And the NMED is is that a lot of
effort going into evaluating
various water reduced
possibilities.
To develop those those aren't
cheap and unfortunately.
To do it with the existing
staffing levels and and
resources we have now.
Makes it a very very slow
process in time is one thing
that we don't have a lot of just
like fresh water.
Thank you.
Very good present to clients
listed in the.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
like to take a moment to discuss
Bullet point number for the
creating emergency fund in
addition to creating the
emergency fund it's vitally
important that we figure out
who's authority and jurisdiction
this post fire recovery falls
under we found with the hermits
P. cap canyon fire that there
were there was a lot of finger
pointing the feds were pointing
at at at state forestry state
party was pointing the Feds the
really a safety is involved
there were you know it everybody
was like always affect your job
and so.
What we have what we have
requested and and if you on page
so I'm I'm looking at page
seventy six of the report in
front of you that has some
recommendations that touch and
there directly one of the things
that of that is recommended here
is modernizing the the forest
conservation act to authorize
state forestry to
engaging post fire watershed
response right now if you read
the forest conservation act
among other things our our duty
as state forestry is to put
fires out once that happens
we're supposed to be done.
This would allow us to address
things like you know the slope
maintenance and and all of those
things that that that come with
the flooding that is going to
occur after a major fire
additionally we believe as my
colluded to earlier as the
temperatures rise and as five or
six degree temperature change on
average means that the climate
in Albuquerque suddenly looks
like the climate in Los crucis
so we believe in fully funding a
reforestation Center and
establishing a reforestation
Center and again changing state
forestry is authority to work
with that reforestation center
to bring trees saplings seeds
from southern New Mexico.
Further up to into to to adapt
and create a climate adapted
forest as this moves along we
believe that vis among other
instances among other options
will enhance water availability
and ensure resilient watersheds
in in the long term.
I I I I could go on there is a
bill to modernize the the farce
conservation act right now that
I'm I'm sure you will be seeing
in some capacity maybe not on
this committee but in in
definitely in your capacity as
as as senators on the floor that
would do these things I will
also say that EMNRD's budget
request job details completely
with these recommendations that
touch and art.
but again as I think is is is
clear but I'll say it anyway.
The EMNRD options here only go
so far right to have this full
of fact we have to find all of
the agencies represented here to
meet these goals that are
outlined here.
But our request our legislative
actions this this session and.
You know but yes R. alts this
report are all in alignment as
far as my the HSD is concerned
but the water doesn't stop at my
agency.
I really appreciate the
resiliency because I.
As part of all this is we're
dealing directly with the
unfortunately it's not finger
pointing is going to be part of
the solution so thank you again
for of the on going efforts that
you all continue to deal with
you really have staying power I
appreciate that.
Next with the discussion.
Chairman members of the
committee I just like to
punctuate a couple things that
have been sent already the first
piece just goes to the
capability capacity and this
additional kind of a semi or
the state agency right that
would be set up for is proposed
John mentioned and I think
across there there's the aspects
of just capital of building the
projects and the operation and
maintenance piece of that I
cannot well I think we're having
issues on both sides right but
for the Interstate Stream
Commission we don't do a lot of
water and wastewater work but we
do where we do it is in big
projects that the federal
government is building or
eastern New Mexico rural water
utility pipeline and and those
of the on the federal side they
have
the ability to engage over
longer time periods in the state
does with contractors and and
with you know they're their own
people to focus on multi year
projects for example of the
Navajo Gallup water supply
project that we are of providing
the state Koster for our
calculating those pieces of it
is up to taking something on the
order of twenty years to build.
Right and if you look at the
state kind of procurement
systems and and even though we
were organized the the idea of a
project taking that long just to
build I think is just not
something we've contemplated and
put in place and we really need
to be thinking about that from
the capital side of things these
are not one time a few months
their multi year type of
projects and then the operation
and maintenance piece of this
I'm hearing a lot from Gallup in
particular related to Navajo
Gallup but I'm sure for others
have this to the the the aspect
of what are the long term
operational and maintenance
costs and is there anywhere we
to get support for doing those
because a lot of the rural
communities in particular as
John indicated just do not have
the the the the customer base to
basically pay those costs and so
they're struggling with both of
those issues and I just wanted
to punctuate those the other
piece I wanted to to the
highlight was a little bit of
this disaster relief fund piece
I think we to the at the I.
S. C. who we have a acequia
program which is generally a
construction program for capital
dollars that come from the
legislature but then also a
couple of other funding sources
and we have something on the
order of a hundred and seventy
five individual projects that
are three staff for working on
with multiple a safety is
when the when the fires occurred
we received lots of phone calls
about how can you know the I. S.
C. help and the reality was we
have no disaster response
capability we don't have any
people to deal with that but we
do know with the the leap ahead
analysis which by the way I
think all of you in your
mailboxes you probably have tons
of things in there but there's a
report from New Mexico bureau of
geology and mineral resources
that we requested of them.
Help fund that goes to the
impacts of a continued warming
through climate change on water
resources I think that's a
really good peer reviewed
baseline document further all
the members of this committee to
be aware of and to look at
because it goes it more than
what we're talking out here
because broadly across the
physical aspects of these
impacts.
The disaster piece of that is
likely to be a continuing theme
that we see either flood or fire
you know as we as we go forward
and being prepared to address
that is it's going to be
important now the Interstate
Stream Commission our commission
it in January authorize the
expenditure of about a half a
million dollars to help a
citizen community ditches with
short term repairs from some of
these fires we're we're likely
to increase that amount in the
next month or so the difficulty
is how we put that money on the
ground because we have hundreds
of more contracts each
individually that we're trying
to do we just don't have people
to do it and I just want to
given the the parties that are
here today homeland security the
I. S. C. and part of the
transportation are trying to see
a doctor if we can find a way to
build the teaming effort to move
funding and resources through
from the icy Tolmin security
over to DOT who has contracts
contractors and staff and
equipment to basically do some
of the short term work and see
if we can put on the ground it's
a nascent right now but it's
just it goes to that kind of the
the the reality that we just
don't have a descent disaster
response capability of any
significant kind I think on the
water side.
Thank you for because we
continue with some of the
transportation issues in the
course of education let's
continue with the informality of
what we're dealing with so as we
go forward.
This week as well yeah and again
I believe you're close enough so
you know just that.
I think my parents are so you
know you can you think of our
state right there's that is for
things that's all over the state
there's there there's there is
water on the road so we're full
into a lot of this stuff.
And you know kind of continuing
on on this gentleman's talk
about you know FEMA and fire and
and for the recovery you know we
do have more resources were
better set up to then manage
contracts design contracts
contractors things of that
nature so we've been happy to
help not only with their own
recovery but with the affected
counties recoveries
the sector recovery and even
private property recovery so
we've been very active and happy
to do that.
as far as how you know we're
integrated into this entire
effort several ways of version
we we do Water Rights and we do
these those primarily to our own
contractors are doing contract
work
the flexibility and the
flexibility to do that is very
important to help us maintains
our workflow and make sure our
projects are are completed in a
timely process not only from
just a timing perspective but
from a funding perspective to
make sure that that funding
isn't jeopardized.
We in our construction projects
you know there's several ways
that we can do with this effort
you know and some of our more
urban areas and and any other
area where there is water
distribution infrastructure we
typically of committee with the
respective.
Utility owners to.
Those street in opportunity for
them to upgrade the facility
well we have the road we turned
up and either ask the do that
prior to the project or
integrated into the project I I
know there was talk about a
project to thirty I think that
would be helpful into making
helpful with us to make sure a
focus point so we can make sure
we have a an organization that
can help make sure the loop in
whatever utilities need to be
duped into our projects but also
help we have our rural we
projects programmed out several
years and we also have a
planning document so that way
this authority can help inform
the respective utilities of what
our plans are and when they're
gonna Kerr so that we any needed
infrastructure repairs can be
planned and then potentially
constructed during our projects.
We also you know since we do
deal with a lot of surface water
and I think there is a lot of
opportunity that for
passive and
active water harvesting we do do
that through landscaping through
some of our design efforts I
think there is opportunity to
improve
but also during construction we
also manage help manage
sentiment controls not only
during construction of post
construction so we do do
stormwater prevention plans
during our construction to make
sure the car number that we have
is a wash down into our
watersheds and then we have a
final temporary revision said in
the control time that is in
effect afterwards until the
district properties reclaimed so
you know we're definitely happy
happy to be part of this
conversation and before to
can continue that conversation.
I really appreciate that any
thoughts or ideas in terms of
some of the legal aspects of
what it is that we're dealing
with and to to let you all know
there are quite a few people
here in the fact that are paying
attention to this particular
subject it's important for all
of us as we move forward and
what we're doing right now is
working with various agencies
and I only bring this up to let
you know that these people are
very interested in working
together to address the water
crisis here in New Mexico so
this is not only very
intellectual but it's also a
very heartwarming because
they're really working on their
particular systems to bring
those together to again help
this the next generation so that
we can address those issues
where we definitely have some of
the shortfall so if we could
maybe just continue a little bit
with some of the the legal
aspects of what it is that we're
confronting.
The.
In the center of members of the
committee one thing I did want
to just briefly point out to is
that there's there's components
within this plan that actually
focus the on on specific
strategies and actions there are
in each of these recommendations
so I just wanted to point those
out so a lot of what we're
talking about are the specific
strategies and then specific
actions for like a hundred ten
different actions that the
committees put together four
for consideration and and really
the overall vision would be to
go to work through a a planning
process
on the regional level
and to help the the regions and
the various local governments
put together their priorities
and their strategies that feed
into whatever type type of
infrastructure and water
resource development strategies
are in anticipation of a
reducing supply or shifting
supply one from our normal run
off from their northern
mountains that are impacted by
severe of fires and and the
subsequent of water should
damage but also to towards a
more intense monsoon will
thunderstorms driven vents that
also because of their share of
damage but we need to figure out
how to think about capturing
that water putting it in our
aquifers in our other water
systems and utilizing that that
resource in a more effective way
as well so so so it's really got
a long scope to it there's a
regional planning bill that will
be coming forth the the session
as well that that will be really
important to feed all of this
and
to the two of a regional
planning process that will allow
for these parties to be set at
those low.
Wells and then also
help us implement.
the settlements no matter
whether tribal and pueblo Indian
water rights settlements or
litigation settlements such as
what's going on in Texas The New
Mexico the that we have both
Rolf and and that here to
address on the status of that
and we're we think it's going
and and what the executive is
put forward in terms of funding
for our agencies SEIC to not
only address what we're talking
about here but also the
implementation of of a of you
know settlement of sorts down
and and the lower Rio Grande so.
If I may just whether chief
executive of the legislature and
of course our constituents as we
all deal with this the important
impact is are we going to
streamline this so I know we
talked about some of those
things but that if I could just
again regarding some changes
pieces that we as a subcommittee
needs to be on
top of that process as well.
Sure
enough to get a right there
you're.
Thank you senator and we
prepared for the committee power
point presentation on texting
Mexico given the informality and
given the interest in privative
I'm not going to go slide by
slide through everything there I
think most of you have heard
that over the years some some
reason have some background with
the with the water issues in the
lower Rio Grande but in general
we've been fighting with Texas
in the United States over how
much groundwater New Mexico's
allowed to withdraw
from the from the the aquifer's
connected to lower Rio Grande
that's been the core issue and
how much surface water needs to
be delivered to Texas and the
proposed settlement that we've
reached with Texas hi would
resolve would would give us
answers to those questions and
the amount of groundwater
pumping the Texas said we're
allowed to do is essentially
none that would have.
Shattered the agricultural
economy of of Southern New
Mexico if if if they had one
they also advocating for
hundreds of millions of dollars
worth of money damages what
we're getting in the settlement
is essentially we have to
deliver a surface amount of
water to Texas a state line
so they have a guaranteed
delivery that's the big thing
they're getting the the they
have the certainty of a
guaranteed delivery but that
guarantee delivery we should be
able to make if we're able to to
reduce our groundwater pumping
but fortunately five percent in
the lower grand maybe between
five and ten percent which
depending on who you ask Miss
sounds like a lot or a little I
think it's because it we think
will enable the lower over and
to continue to thrive as one of
the key agricultural the sectors
in the entire state but we will
have to curtail our groundwater
pumping and it's not just going
to come on the back of one
sector it's it this this Madam
does not specify how we're going
to to get to that point it just
sets the requirement for us and
that gives this committee and
gives the legislature its proper
role in in deciding okay how's
New Mexico going to meet its
obligations under this
interstate compact it's it's
it's gonna be like you know
we're saying all the government
approach on on on our sort of
small drinking water system
problems it's going to be in all
the government all the secretary
approach here some of the same
issues our our our overlapping
there are small mutual domestics
in the lower Rio Grande that
regionalization of those mutual
domestics would help us concert
Water there and reduce
groundwater pumping we're also
going to be looking at having to
do some of these expensive big
projects that we're talking
about the difficulty of doing
importing water to the lower if
that that's that's certainly on
the table and there's also going
to be the likelihood of needing
to
Purchase groundwater range from
from willing sellers likely from
the agricultural sector and
that's you know that's an issue
a lot of folks have you know
want want to be heard on
if we don't do these things of
percent to a collaborative plan
the alternative is going to be
Priority administration by the
state and the state engineer and
we've known since twenty fifteen
that we're going to have to to
be raining in some groundwater
pumping we haven't known exactly
how much
but the Supreme Court told us
would you know there there are
limits on how much groundwater
we could take in the lower grant
and and so if we go the priority
administration route that's
going to be the the route that
people lose their vote ability
to use water without
compensation it's a harsh system
it's not the route we want to go
we think that the that the
stakeholders have ideas they
want to come to the table it
will take money but it's it's we
thank a worthwhile investment in
preserving this despite part of
the state we are happy to talk
in more detail about sort of our
initial request budget wise for
this or about aspects of
litigation again I'm just giving
a very high high level overview
of the the sort of the stakes at
this point given you know what
you what you like to do today in
this committee but that's the
that's the overall picture and
all that Rolf Schmidt Petersen
give the film a little bit more
to thank you and I'll just refer
to a couple of size or three
four seven that's been a really
good job of kind of framing
where we're at I I would say
that on Monday of next week the
special master this case was
appointed by the United States
Supreme Court is yours going to
be a hearing
you know basically legal
arguments of by the three states
right The New Mexico Texas and
Colorado in support of the
decree that just that that just
mentioned and the United States
will be at that same hearing
arguing why that shouldn't go
forward and should not to be
picked up as a recommendation to
the United States Supreme Court
so a lot of effort going into
that today so you know what
what.
You have in front of you is the
framework of a proposed to
create and and hopefully over
the next year so that'll move
forward through the U. S.
Supreme Court process and and be
closed off but it's before that
can happen it's still some some
period of time for preparing for
that I wanted to just mention as
a slide in your packet that just
says as a practical matter what
is necessary for New Mexico to
meet this proposed index and
there's two big categories of
work that tied to funding
request better in the executive
recommendation so the first one
of that is offsetting depletion
this is the aspect of reducing
consumption I that five to six
percent in the lower rate grant
that we see as being necessary
to to basically bring that
system in balance with something
called the the two period said
nineteen fifties trial period
nineteen fifty one to nineteen
seventy eight is the baseline
that we're talking about and and
and that and and there's another
graphic I think it's a different
part of your of your packet that
really talks about how
depletions of changed and I
think it's really important to
recognize that for farming in
the lower Rio Grande the overall
depletions of been steady for
quite some time and they've been
pretty flat even though the
farmland areas decreased
consumption of what they and the
cons and permanent crops is
increase but overall it's flat
what's really not been flat is
the increase in us meniscal
industrial water use down there
that's what this increases come
from and and we recognize that
and we recognize that the need
to pull back on it in the way to
do it is offsetting depletion
first willing buyer willing
seller type arrangements and
then also managing groundwater
over the last fifteen years of
drought
and I won't go into some of the
other reasons but the crown
Water in the.
The lower Rio Grande
particularly in the Misia has
been drawn down significantly
that affects people's ability to
pump and how much cost them to
do that it it affects the
quality of water and it also
affects the river system right
the the river is not as
efficient in
And so the river efficiencies
low in in order for us to meet
the index over time we need to
both reduce depletions and we
need to bring that awful for
system back up and the way that
we're proposing to do it it is
really with a number of large
projects in the ways there's a
options to assist on the next
page that you have and I'll pass
that really go by that one
really quickly go to our
requests so you there's a
recurring quest request that's
in your packet the C. that goes
to staffing levels for the
office of the state engineer and
for the state engineers office
the rap program and also the I.
Essie you'll see in here we made
requests additionally for about
five FTEs as a starting point
for these programs when we've
looked at the lower Rio Grande
what what might be necessary
from a personal standpoint we
think significantly more than
this number staff will be needed
but we recognize the ability
actually hire right away get
stuff set up to do that it's
going to take time just that's
what we've been going through
even today to try to hire people
so that we start out with about
five staff we think we can
initiate this program with some
of these programs with some of
our initial staff and be able to
move forward you'll see in here
that the executive request is
for essentially that it's
funding for approximately four
of those staff and I believe the
LFC has money in for one was the
recommendation I just want to
highlight that that need for
recurring staff is is a real one
and this is just the start piece
of it so that's a recurring
request that's in your we also
have to nonrecurring requests
that I want to highlight and
these are all in yellow on your
sheet so you can see them we
have a nonrecurring request a
special for seventy five million
to be used from twenty twenty
three to twenty twenty a.
Eight to help augment the supply
in the lower Rio Grande as part
of this decree there is a
provision that that when there's
high flows in the lower Rio
Grande there's only a portion of
that counts for the delivery to
Texas of what it would be not be
the state wine any additional
water if it goes past is just
lost and so one of the goals we
haven't actually John Longworth
is here in the office in the
room to is helping with project
elements of this looking to
capture stormwater and I find
ways to recharge that
infiltrated into the aquifer
save that water for New Mexico
prop up the groundwater level
also the idea of brackish water
use in that area from municipal
uses and potentially some
additional trans mountain are
basically translates into
versions a poor nada don't work
though is just north north of
Los crucis if there is a radio
water supply for the Los crucis
area for possible water but that
part of the water is limited and
we need to be thinking for the
long term so the seventy five
million helps is to go after
that into us we'll put grant
applications in with the federal
government to match these funds
if not do more on the ground in
those grant opportunities are
there with the our our retiree
they'll in the B. I. L. so
that's the special request that
we have on the capital side we
have a for this the last page
that I have ever question here
that's highlighted lower Rio
Grande office for sustainability
are requests we actually made a
fifty million dollar requests
over a five year period of
capital and this is for
acquisition of water rights and
potentially land in the lower
grant in partnership with the
number of of entities in the
lower Rio Grande to reduce that
consumptive use our request was
for that fifty million over five
years the LFC has a thirty
million in there right up front
and we so.
At this point in time have an
executive recommendation and
with that I stand for questions.
Appreciate that I'm going to do
at this point is to to request.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
guys for being here today and
really bringing our water
problems forward to the
legislator but I just want to
remind everybody that if you're
coming to the coming to the
legislators politicians to look
for answers we don't have a no
government can certainly take
what is a challenge and turned
into a crisis quite quickly and
so we look to you and to the
stakeholders our farmers are
ranchers to really come together
to identify the solutions and
then as appropriators are
legislators to assist those
efforts the the best
conversations really are kind of
informal round table discussions
about how we're going to dress
our long term water solutions
Aaron you were at that that some
that we had this summer Mike you
were there is wealth and I think
those are meaningful
conversations where we all get a
room for three or four days we
we identify the problems and
kind of come together to create
help cover going to fix these
issues in New Mexico my concern
is that even when we left that
one is there really wasn't a
checklist of what you needed
legislators to do there really
wasn't actionable items of how
we begin with we clearly you
know identify the problems but
sometimes we need to be very
clear on what each each of us
are required to do to start to
create long term solutions I I
mentioned at that workshop this
summer that one of the biggest.
Issue water issues I just will
never understand is this use it
or lose it water system here in
New Mexico I think it's a makes
a mockery of when we try to
mandate conservation right I
would like to see that once the
water is adjudicated that you
don't ever have to prove up on
it again because it makes no
sense to me when we hear stories
about people just opening up the
gates because government's going
to come in and take water if
they don't use it and so put
they put that water to waste
doesn't you know it makes a
mockery of our intent is to
conserve water I still never
understood that and in fact I
agree with Antoinette Sedillo
Lopez when she was saying why
why do we still do this I don't
I don't know why we do that
either
The jump all over the place you
you didn't make a little bit of
a COVID saying that are our
water quality or quantity I'm
sorry I really lack there of
here in New Mexico the
responsibility sometimes when we
look for those two to conserve
water we immediately turned to
our farmers what are they going
to do to save water what are we
gonna restrict their water use
reality as you just said is is
our water users are big water
users are are municipalities are
urban areas and so often we turn
to our farmers it seems putting
the burden on them to restrict
use their views so that we can
move that over to meet the needs
of our urban areas and
municipalities we're gonna have
to share that burden a little
bit more to our bid Water uses
in our in our homes in our
cities I mean and I say this
because golf courses are going
to feed the world you know we
continue to restrict our farmers
more and more on their water
usage and I and I also with on
that same point earlier we
started this conversation
talking about infrastructure
needs what a good place right
now in New Mexico the state
government because we have money
but often what happens is we
start talking about the
infrastructure needs even the
financial burdens we turn to the
B. ID or ditch associations to
have to come in and meet those
costs of critical infrastructure
needs what are price takers
ultimately those members are
price takers with inflation like
it is now they certainly can't
afford that necessary
infrastructure and so at least
we are in a position now where
we have the money to come in and
make these one time investments
finally instead of putting the
burden on our farmers ranchers
because we certainly are going
to be able to get it done at
their I I on that note Mike I
want to tell you that very I
need speaks very highly of you I
have a large constituent base
there I know that you were torn
with meeting the water needs
from several different
stakeholders and introduce and
and I do think that you tried.
To work with us as best you can
if you you've done a great job
when you when you come in come
in to our a southern New Mexico
area.
I want to covered a lot of
information here this morning
which is still before Senate
finance so let's get down to the
dollars here on your budget
request you will come before us
testifying for the seeds from
the back page there's a big
discrepancy here between the LFC
racked and the executive
director you're asking for
seventy five million dollars on
that highlighted area to meet
real grant grant compact needs
can you tell me what that twenty
five the difference of fifty
million dollars
the executive is recommending
the LFC is not.
Mr Chairman representative Simon
person Senator Diamond the up.
The the request is really the.
For a for you know five year
period is from
two thousand twenty three
through two thousand twenty
eight so that would that's how
it was framed when when we put
forward and and the governor
agreed to put that in the
executive budget under under
that time frame so my
understanding is in discussing
this with the LFC is that they
recognize the seventy five
million dollar need however they
they wanted to front of you know
give us an early indication of
the support with the twenty five
million and then they would they
would be the ability to go and
get the funding in you know in
future fiscal years or through a
different mechanism that we're
hearing about now in terms of
setting up funds for for for
water litigation settlement and
stuff like that going forward
that I've seen in Senate bill
two forty one and places like
that but the idea that as I
understood and and and speaking
with the of the you know senator
Wirth notice regarding this
issue is that they recognize you
know that seventy five million
is is a necessity of the twenty
five million was that such low
down payment but the I there's
one issue about it the request
that is very important as far as
leveraging federal dollars
initially when we were in a
Madam mode with United States
before they pulled back
we we were gonna be leveraging
and essence of a hundred fifty
million dollars or more as part
of a settlement contribution by
the United States so so this
was.
To the talented as as that of
Component of of the state pieces
well as what we put in the in
the capital request for actual
acquisition of water and
possibly land depending on how
that goes but the two together
would leverage a massive amount
of federal dollars no there's
still those dollars available
through their normal programs
they've pulled back right now
well we're negotiate you know
working through this consent
decree process of actually
having quote Madam dollars to
give us that would
to leverage but we expect those
dollars to continue to be
available as we move forward
and so at at some point of that
total amount of state eighty
five million this year or of
when you add the two together
the fifty in the seventy five
that was going to essentially
leverage about another you know
hundred fifty million the you
know two hundred million of
federal dollars in addition to
their normal programmatic
dollars that the U. B. ID can
take advantage of with their
water smart grant program that
we can help with cost your
pieces and that's that's one of
the items in the executive
budget to they put on the two
the the the that's on the table
for seventy five million for
match of federal dollars that's
that's our propellers that's in
our a request and then there's
some pieces in there also for
water planning and other things
like that that can help to lower
your grant but yeah that's
that's the the whole strategy
there and the message of having
that to both the Supreme Court
and to Texas and to the United
States is New Mexico serious
about moving forward with of
funding this and implementing a
settlement.
So I am going to go back to.
Rickly the process come into my
with the some of the reports
that are out there we might take
a look in terms of how we
anticipate the resources are
going to be available to New
Mexico over the next several
years and I bring that up
because as we continue to see
the evolution on climate change
the change in energy and these
other things are going to be
able to sustain these type of
issues that we're talking about
so I mean to go on page are
centered on the specific Mr
chair I think that's an
excellent point.
One I want to go back to the
needs if you're requesting
seventy five and it's over five
years in good faith I think that
I join my LESC colleagues in my
chairman and saying we intends
to make that whole but it may
not be in a one time one year
payment so the twenty five over
you know three or four years
make sense but I also you you
just brought up something about
matching leveraging federal
dollars and that's very
important because I didn't
realize that that's in here so
for example if E. B. ID has
access to three million dollars
and in federal dollars but needs
the match we need to make sure
that that the state dollars are
available and so what I'm asking
you as a legislator is to make
sure we are full we are giving
every bit of priority to any
pots of money that can be
matched in that we can double
money coming to New Mexico we've
heard from a number of of
entities that come before us in
New Mexico you so much money on
the table because we can't come
up with our match we see that
our small communities as well so
please make sure that while we
have the money you're being very
clear on any part somebody out
there that require in match to
make sure that we're not missing
opportunities to bring in those
federal dollars and so as we as
we proceed through this
budgeting session here please
please make sure that we are not
you know cutting our nose to
spite our face to by not funding
pools of money that we didn't
realize you know we could we
could double triple and in many
cases so thank you guys again
for being here I've got a
present of bills I I appreciate
this conversation Mr chairman
this morning and as always Mike
I appreciate the work you're
doing.
Senator Diamond singing your
voice anything that.
Thank you Mr thanks for the.
I do have a couple questions.
I guess it should start with
the.
The biggest pet peeve.
Senator Mr Chairman the biggest
pet peeve is New Mexico buying
private land the state of New
Mexico buying privately in New
Mexico that in June and know how
to manage their private land and
small acreage are in large
acreage as well as the of
private landowners now we do
have a lot of state land and I
add that most of it is managed
by in the city.
So I have a real problem and
you're telling me that you know
the lower Rio Grande offer state
sustainability is for buying
water rights and land.
I can see water rights but I
can't see buying the land itself
I think that is better use left
in private hands I realize that
many straws that could be put in
the ground itself from
subdivisions but I think when
you buy the with water right you
could also put restrictions
about some of the other uses of
that land in the purchase.
So that's just my first.
Bush with that as you know.
The other things that of.
Hi I enjoyed the presentation.
New Mexico when you start
talking about a water
infrastructure authority and you
list all the things that you're
the advantages of doing funding
and expertise and all of this
different things that you're
talking about yes.
Many of these small areas rural
areas need.
Expertise they need engineering
they need people who do surveys
are pro logical environmental
engineering.
All the different things that we
need done.
Did you have in mind for that
authority to provide some of
those.
Our our fund some of those are I
have a list of agencies for
private industry to do those
services how is that going to
come about to this authority has
any thought been given to that.
Four million shares the center
was first let me say in the
collected to point out in my
opening comment about the task
force report on page seventeen
we are we list the legislative
advisors that helped us think
through some of these
recommendations that I I have to
thank Senator Woods for his
great participation in that
effort you were one of the most
consistent members of of of our
advisors that participated and
gave us great help and support
so thank you senator for the
super appreciate your your
interest and and and and your
your help and and pulling
together our recommendations
to help open a share of the
state's share with the with with
my fellow of agency reps we we
we envisioned that it would be a
full service type of a system
that would have access contract
you know I'm going
the contracts with the
engineering groups and and
hopefully developing the
Services to properly maintain
those system going forward so
that the call support for the
smaller entities and couple that
with the regionalization process
I think all of those pieces
together and support for other
other groups like the RC AC of
the rural Water association in
those groups of the those are
all the pieces that make the
whole but this entity would have
that expertise
I think that's what was
envisioned.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
that's pretty much the case I
guess you could almost envision
it as a as a co op.
The services are available and
on regionalization level I think
you've got this.
This overall entity that would
would provide the services that
would coordinate for these.
These different municipalities
and and small mutuals as I move
projects forward but I think
there's there's a sub layer to
that that would be more this co
op process where these mutual
domestics who can't afford to
hire their own accounting firms
who can't afford to hire their
own operators.
If if you have an entity that
has services available and those
you know.
Obviously it can't be free but
if those services could be made
available to the smaller
entities at a reasonable free
and they just paid into it.
A monthly amount and you can
figure out how to base it on you
know income levels or whatever
the case
but make those services
available in the long run that
pays off force because you have
better run systems you have
better maintain systems
but it it's a it's a complete
rethinking of how we go about
this and the need to put it
through something like this
This authority to create a new
quasi governmental authority is
is because there are certain
things that we as government
agencies can't hear because of
anti donation laws and things of
that nature although there's
been some changes to it.
That is a different structure
would allow to be done.
And and so that's kind of the
thought process figure out how
we.
How we help support the cost of
of the services make them
available to the smaller
entities.
You know because ultimately we
all benefit from that I use the
analogy the brief we all really
live in a fish bowl what happens
on one side of the fishbowl
ultimately affects everybody on
the other side fiscal and so if
we have small mutual domestics
who are able to operate their
water and wastewater systems
effectively and that creates
contamination of groundwater
that affects us all and so you
know this is affectively where
you need to give each other hand
up to collectively as a group
get where we need to be.
Well and and that brings up
another subject Mr chair and and
I'm not going to deviate too far
from here but do we see sometime
in the near future where we're
going to in New Mexico allow for
a.
Way to you reuse wastewater for
drinking water.
Mister chairman Senator and I
appreciate you bringing that up
we are actively engaged on a
couple of fronts right now the
environment and with with energy
minerals and also without the
state engineer looking at water
re use and in fact are.
National procreation request
that's coming up we ask for
about five point five million to
deal with water re use
activities and that's everything
from.
Audible water re use people
might be.
recognize that Morse the toilet
to tap concept can you waste
water treatment and being able
to to reuse and drink it.
To examining other aspects
brackish water.
Re use and also we're engaged
through an MOU with New Mexico
State University in New Mexico
produced water research
consortium.
And exploring the capabilities
and ability to pre produced
water from oil and gas to fit
for purpose uses and you know
we're not at the stage of
knowing what it says are yet
right now the the impact is on
the science of.
One is in produced water and how
do we create what levels we need
to get to and so part of that
funding that we asked for was to
help us move forward with
creating legislation for that
and we're hoping to to do hi
publicada phase one prohibitive
rulemaking through W. QCC this
year which would continue to
prohibit the discharge of
produced water pretty produced
water onto the ground allow us
to move forward with projects
that are closed.
To do the science that we need
to get done so that we can
understand if there is a way to
utilize is and I believe that
there is
same thing with water reviews
were actively engaged right now
with city of Las Vegas who is
exploring that the possible
water re use concept as a
potential not the answer to the
problems they experience because
of the fires but a mechanism to
to reduce their their need for
as much surface water and at
this.
With your answer.
I've got another question.
Mr chair.
The space Senator sixty percent
of our water loss is in the
river channel.
So.
We talk about saving water
delivery water doing all kind
of.
Water conservation from.
Then she uses.
Have that nature's uses of water
do we do we think about that at
all do we think about.
channeling that channel to to
More prepare in.
lessee repairing evaporation due
to transfer.
The representative evaporation
tell me what's in your model for
that.
Mr thank you senator with with
the we've got a whole program
dedicated to that through the
intercession Commission so all
other often to that after I try
to address it to seven to the
extent that each each river
basin is unique in the way that
the inter interacts with the
aquifer and various other things
as you know up in the San Juan
area it's a different than it is
down in the rate because some of
your grant
many of them have endangered
species issues and requirements
that require certain you know
degree of riparian habitat
maintenance and availability so
so those things are all kind of
factored into a lot of the
things the operational
requirements and and work that
we do
very good you know then and then
our budget request we have
ongoing needs with the meeting
endangered species in the papers
in the Rio Grande and no the San
Juan so that's a the primary
will house of Interstate Stream
Commission so but those are
things we are looking at and
considering we we do have a New
World of of of of higher
temperatures and more depression
so that balance between the
ecosystem and human needs and
delivers for compacts interstate
compacts and all that is getting
stressed a little bit more by by
the increase in temperatures and
higher depletions just overall
in general so so that's gonna be
a real challenge for us but we
are looking at and planning for
its alleged role at Mister
chairman Senator at him for the
Interstate Stream Commission for
decades actually we've been
working with a very special
agencies reclamation others on
efforts to reduce non beneficial
consumptive use right and and as
Mike mentioned you know that
there's there's a whole
different array of permitting
requirements ESA environmental
ones that.
That need to be taken into
account and we we do that as we
move forward at in these
different projects but the it's
really important to realize that
as we move kind of south in our
systems and you look at where
the water is being consumed you
any open water feature is going
to basically be consuming the
most and so if you're down at
elephant Butte reservoir for
example that reservoir on an
annual basis is losing somewhere
between five and six feet of
water per acre of open water
surface that's compared to
Herrin reserve we're which is
you know up on the Rio Chama
very near the Colorado border
above eight thousand feet we're
if each acres you know
potentially using about foot
right so it matters where you
are with your elevation is
temperature and so on but it as
a general statement in the area
let's say in the middle Rio
Grande or even on the Pecos
right open water surface there
is going to use the most the
next thing that is going to use
the most is wetted soil so if
you have a shallow groundwater
table in the water Kappler
friends of that in waters near
the surface that surface that
sunlight is on is going to
basically be consuming almost as
much as open water or calls so
that be like a river bed or in
some cases areas that were
vegetations been removed because
if you look at crop consumption
via the
a cottonwood tree the salt cedar
or pecan.
That are all these free out of
five trees you're looking at
something closer to three feet
of consumptive use in a year the
shell groundwater table rather
than kill for five or more and a
big part of that reason is
because the cheating that
surface and so the sunlight
isn't taking as much water and
the wind is not taking as much
water off of that surface and
then other types of irrigated ag
will be using less right diverse
croppers and things like that
have a look let's consumption
big important piece of all that
is where's your ground water
table so work like in you know
the the various Conservancy
districts irrigation districts
in the state a large part of the
work is to try to reduce the
water table for drains.
Drop that water level so that
your land is not subbed out and
then move that water off and so
we have to look at those two
things in combination and we do
that all the way up and down the
systems.
Senator Wirth.
Well.
I'm exploring things that will
come and completely off topic
and I apologize to you Mr
Chairman get back on topic just
a little bit we lost a lot of
our audience so of us the board
of the death.
So
On the.
On the creating emergency for
street fund.
And the forestry conservation
act.
And we start talking about doing
more slope may it's and you
know.
More management is what we're
talking about we're we're
talking about doing more
management both on state lands
and private lands in order to
achieve a regional flow of water
into our rivers and lakes also.
So.
Has there been any discussion
with the federal forced the the
US for service.
On any of these topics.
Mister chairman Senator it's
been an ongoing conversation I I
will point out that
What we are talking about is in
the in the post fire recovery
world of of doing that that
slope maintenance yes we we
would like to do to be able to
work across land areas we are
working with our federal
partners we are working with our
our tribal partners when their
land is is impacted as well it's
an ongoing conversation of you
know whose responsibility is
what but but those conversations
are happening predominantly
through our state shared
stewardship relationships with
with our federal forest
managers.
Okay.
When we start talking about
these big federal projects the
the U. water project the the
Navajo
Gallup project you know we hear
a lot about well the lateral
lines are included in this we're
we're not able to get the water
to the chapter houses
I'm assuming.
Those are in the process of
being designed and and pushed I
know the big lateral line is
being done in the and and the
gentleman that ran that project
for the.
Of.
I don't remember whether it was
in terrier tail lamb that was
this page.
Hi Matt Nate make note that he
was named after me.
The only store the alarm ever
done.
But the
He tells me he had a you know he
had a huge problem with right
away.
So I know when we start these
laterals we're going to have
troubles with red ways to do it.
So.
But they are in the planning
ground and that's all you need
to tell me is they are in the
planning ground and some day we
will get water out there on the
roads that we.
We've been told annually that.
You know my constituents don't
have water.
so there is a process that
that's going to happen through
the federal projects and I worry
about them not being able to
afford the maintenance and
operations of that.
we push a lot of water Lotta
infrastructure monies to them.
Is there any way that we can.
More hold their feet to the
fire.
To get the bills projects done
in a timely matter.
Mister chairman Senator it Pat
page of very good manager of
large projects that I'll just
say that right off the bat and
we're actually.
We missed some I mean if they
have good manager does but Pat
had put a lot of years and has a
lot of knowledge in that area
you're absolutely right that
with the main trunk lines off of
the collateral in the San Juan
lateral that this is the major
pipeline that would go to window
rock in Gallup that that doesn't
then take water from the main
trunk line in some areas and
carried out to all the chapters
out there in fact that's really
difficult to do just given the
the how far away things are what
it certainly does is make it
significantly shorter distances
for parties that haul water
which in itself I think is very
valuable and and the Indian
health services actually through
the B. I. A. is the the entity
that has been doing a lot of
these connector lines and they
have funding and Navajo Nation
as some funding to carry those
things forward but it you know
as I mentioned the the the same
on lateral part of this
assuming the federal government
authorizes an additional cost
ceiling increase that still up
twenty twenty nine before that
lateral would be completed and
operational and so there's quite
a bit more that needs to be done
just on that piece and then the
lateral connections would happen
I think over a number of decades
after that with additional
preparations now the NM issue is
a very significant one is
actually something that's being
discussed in the bill process
with the the Senate right now
and actually it's Center lawns
office that is leading a lot of
these efforts for the Navajo
Nation itself there's an
opportunity for a waiver for
some period of time for
operations and maintenance but
that's not the case for hickory
Apache nation that we get water
off of the collateral and then
also not for the city of Gallup
they're both benefit.
Trees but not settlement numbers
and and those discussions are
ongoing and there's no been no
answer to them as of yet.
Thank you re us lease a lot of
water.
A lot of their San Juan water
out coming in San Juan Chama
that's a Karia water right Mr
chairman and senator there's
actually two parts to that
hickory Apache nation has
settled Water Rights on the Rio
Grande that come through the San
Juan Chama project that inherent
reserve work about six thousand
acre feet a year and up over
twenty thousand acre feet on the
same one system in Navajo
reservoir and currently the IC's
leasing that water.
Okay so but you're actually
correct they have a significant
amount of water available for
leasing and they're also have a
significant amount of water that
the we're leasing to the power
plants in Farmington and I
understand they're willing now
this is me hearing things.
They're willing to lease a lot
of that water for inflow water
and the of Colorado in the San
Juan to help with.
Are some of our obligations is.
Is there any negotiation going
on on that so Mister chairman
Senator I'd be happy to talk in
detail with you about that but
that's the least that the the
cremation and the Interstate
Stream Commission have
negotiated over the last four
years I think it's one of a kind
actually that I'm aware of
within New Mexico sovereign to
sovereign type of contractual
arrangement and we are paying
the nation right for use of a
certain amount of water per year
and we're doing that in
coordination with TNC also and
then we're going to be releasing
water probably starting this
year initially to benefit the
endangered species better in the
San Juan river so with modified
operations there that that
basically helps with endangered
species recovery in compliance
for all of the water users in
that area.
For the hickory a nation when
the San Juan generating station
basically started to be
decommissioned they lost a major
income stream.
Through that that reduction and
so one of the things that they
came to the icy to say is look
up if the state of New Mexico is
interested we would like to work
with the with New Mexico to New
Mexico's benefit and our own.
With our water but if we can't
do that we're gonna have to look
outside the state because we
need revenue so we we took that
seriously and we have a great
partnership with them we'll use
this water initially for the
endangered species purposes but
the intent long term is to
actually create a pool of water
in lake Powell that is available
for New Mexico's use if we get
into a compact curtailment
situation on the Colorado River
and so has potential very very
significant benefits to New
Mexico over the long term and to
the nation I agree with you I
agree with you good job thank
you for the job.
And Mister chair I know that you
have many questions to ask so
will will be quiet thank you
very much Sir thank you very
much and.
The.
Conversation for today will
continue tomorrow I just really
appreciate the work that's going
on there are a lot of issues
that the need for us to all
operating common sense responses
to those and so again I thank
you all thank you for your
respect and for the ability of
each other please get the word
out to other agencies I know
that the department of education
if we can coordinate let's say
for example are going to be
taking care or future operators
as we continue with
reforestation how are we going
to go ahead and align them
properly and deal with that with
of course our water rights and
water issues as we do with it
how we coordinate that you all
been very helpful to the and the
people that are paying attention
to this realize that this this
is a not only have complex issue
but one that is going to require
