Great thank you Mr Mari.
Thank you Mr chair and then we
do it in the vice chair what
we're if you can imagine we're
both sitting on the witness
stand right now if we were in
person I'll go to get started
and then I'll turn it over to my
co sponsor
house bill two eighty five is
our capital outlay billing for
you all who are new to the
process of this is the bill that
helps fund a lot of the local
projects that we all care about
in our local communities this
particular bill authorizes five
hundred and seventeen point
seven million dollars for local
and state entities for project
statewide.
The funds rate down is as
follows four hundred and seventy
seven million from severance tax
bonds eight point six million
from the general fund and an
additional twenty two million
from other state funds.
The bill proposes approximately
two hundred eleven million
dollars for state owned and
operated facilities statewide
higher ed institutions of
special schools this bill also
includes thirty million for
tribal projects statewide.
Well approximately two hundred
and seventy six million dollars
of this bill are what we divide
it between house members Senate
members and the executive to
specifically address local and
regional projects these could be
roads water systems health and
public safety facilities
cultural facilities and other
community facilities Mr chair
members of the committee they
said with me today are are out
vice chair on as you know the
guess who is the Senate sponsor
of this bill as well as our
expert witnesses and really the
people behind the madness and
the people behind the magic Mr
Stevie Olson and his leave the
key hole from the legislative
finance committee and I'll turn
it over to you madam vice chair
if you want to say a few words
thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative Martinez you know
I don't have anything else to
add you've done a great job you
and very pleasant I'm working
with you and with all of that
contributed to the thank you
very much.
Europol to questions thank you
any questions from committee
members.
Make sure.
Give me one second Senator
Campos can get on the link you
sent it to my office so we make
sure we got him on here.
Eight and do we have any.
Public comment doing.
Chairman members of the
committee now we do not.
For a call the roll Senator
complication walk in the door
Senator Burt you have a question
thank you Mr chairman I just
wanna make sure this is the the
overall capital outlay.
Listen we got I think yesterday
is that correct all all the the
county projects and so on so
forth.
This is the one right Mr chair
Senator Byrd this is the one
okay yes Mr lush okay hello I
just want to confirm that thank
you.
Thank you.
Senator sure you have a
question.
Yes Mister chair I know there
were a couple of amendments that
needed to be done or adjustments
or I'm not sure where those all
taking care of this bill we're
not doing any Senator when I
mean in this bill in any way
shape or form.
So we're just gonna run.
Okay thank you I just want to
make sure the Republicans don't
think we overspent.
Mr chairman I I think the the.
Senator sure was one about the
money for us quite on some
items.
What is here now so.
You want to call the roll real
quick.
Okay sorry needed to pass most.
I move in the past Mr chairman
so.
Motion by Senator Rodriguez
second by Senator Hemphill
hello.
Yes Mr chair okay.
Senator Burt yes Senator Burt
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes senator Candelaria.
Yes Senator Candelaria yes
Senator Diamond.
Is not here Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Ten yes and one excuse.
Past.
It's amazing that this bill came
out with so much money and and
everybody agreed.
Thank you Mr chair up lots of
credit to to you and the vice
chair and your staff is you know
we've been working on this for
two months now nonstops I really
appreciate you all supporting
our work on the house side and
getting this done and again
thank you to the staff.
We don't have a lie human life
after.
Shares of yesterday.
Whatever they are I agree Mr
chairman there's a lot of other
things in people's lives
happening that that we need to
be aware of in our world.
In their world so thank you are
you guys and I see that.
Sanchez are up for the next bill
we do have an amendment on that
bill.
You know the amendment does it
takes out the county portion of
that you have seen.
So you want to explain the bill
house bill two seventy eight I'm
going to do that first.
Representative Harper.
I'd be happy to chairman if
that's appropriate.
Representative Harper your.
Okay just thirty seconds
chairman so.
This bill started in the house
it was kind of our menu of
options to do some gross
receipts tax reform you had
about eight components in it all
together but that many was
pretty expensive and so requests
staff with the chairman.
Martinez and we substituted down
to just two items and only
released described the first one
since that's the one that will
get through
so we are one of.
I think only like less than six
states that taxes manufacturing
equipment with the with the
gross receipts tax or sales tax.
All of your big businesses they
get around this by getting an
IRB.
So it's really your small
businesses that end up paying
this tax and it's and it's a you
know another punishment gross
receipts tax on small
businesses.
And so what this does.
It does two things first is the
manufacturing production from
gross receipts tax so any size
business now doesn't have that
Trinity.
And the second thing it does is.
Manufacturing manufacturing
services are defined in three
different places are statutes
they don't really quite jive it
aligns those definitions makes
the more clear those three
different places.
that is the thirty second
explanation chair.
Thank you Representative more
tension in that.
Let me know that Mr chair is
that this bill really
complements what what you're
committee and and are committed
with two ninety one providing
relief for working families this
bill really does provide
targeted relief to small
business Mexico and I'm I'm very
proud of it thank you.
We do have an amendment.
In a motion to move the
amendment for the special
purpose.
Mr secretary.
Representative motion by Senator
Rodriguez.
By Senator share but then it
back up this is my amendment on
this portion of bill and what
happened this this bill for
about nine million dollars and
we don't have that much room
left in the budget so we we took
out the accounting portion of
this page scored about six
million.
And so that will bring it down
to about three million.
Hundred percent correct in my.
Chairman representative correct.
Questions on amendment etcetera
what.
Mr headed up on the bill what do
not just wait for the bill if
you don't mind.
Junction to the amendment.
School year.
These hand raised.
In amended bill make them and do
we have anybody in the audience.
At chairman members of the
committee that yes we do we have
no one in opposition and support
we have to individuals first we
had Ashley Wagner with the New
Mexico chamber of commerce.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
really appreciate the work in
the thought that the bill's
sponsors put into this we
believe that this bill is going
to help small businesses and
help aid in our economic
recovery and we think it's we
think we really appreciate it
thank you.
And next we have JD Bullington
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
thank you Mr chairman members
the committee I first want to
say I think you all have done a
very excellent job the session
under challenging conditions the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce supports this
legislation because it addresses
at least in part some of the key
problems with New Mexico's gross
receipts tax system that
contribute to making New Mexico
more expensive place to do
business the parenting problem
with the gross receipts tax as
an impediment to economic
development whenever we have a
chance to continue reducing the
G. R. T. paramedic we should do
it and the chamber appreciates
the paramedic reduction efforts
on the part of this legislature
thank you.
Chairman members of the
committee that includes public
comment.
Thank you senator would you have
a question of the bill.
Yes Mr chairman the question I
have.
In a really don't I certainly
don't know the answer is very
much in that in his very barn he
has quite a bit of equipment to
take that milk chillers
chillers.
You know quite a lot of
stainless steel.
In this bill is it considered
manufacturing chairman.
Sen Roseanne which.
So chairman and the Senator was
thank you for the the question
I don't I'm not one hundred
percent certain.
my understanding is that we've
essentially taken all the
permitting out of the
manufacturer of the
agricultural.
Those folks already don't pay
gross receipts on on those kinds
of.
Is a requirement so this this
bill one impact that but I'll
just all equipment and I'm I'm
not aware percent sure.
To early in the morning thank
you Mr chairman.
What we're supposed when the sun
came up Senator Steinborn you're
next.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
Representative Harper would you
explain to me I see that we're
given a gross receipts tax
deduction.
Would you explain to me the
permitting part of this bill the
in.
Yeah great question chairman and
and Senator Steinborn and all
I'll be very brief I could go on
for quite a long time but.
The the impact of the parent
meetings essentially the rolling
up of gross receipts taxes at
multiple steps of the commerce
chain right so for example I
like to use is if you're
building
you know so some widget right
like an iPad or something New
Mexico you'll get taxed when you
go out for the design contract
for the design of the tax man
when you buy the the raw
materials Abbey taxed when you
we appreciate the materials into
you know the could based
components that's tax equipment
all simple together that's taxed
and so when you roll all these
steps together
I believe right Richard Anklam
presented that depending on what
sector of the economy here and
in New Mexico it's not an eight
percent effective tax you feel
would be up to a seventeen
percent effective tax that.
And then how on earth can you
compete with other states that
don't have that same you know
tax current on your coming out
of the gate already at a you
know eight percent disadvantage
and so in this particular case
manufacturing equipment.
the business that goes out and
buys like a laser cutter or food
sterilizer or you know the the
main piece of equipment for
their work we tax that under the
gross receipts paradigm Mr small
business you don't hire a David
Buckel's to going to yourself
and industrial revenue bond so
that you don't have to pay it
well we're big businesses to all
of our big businesses hire
lawyers and get investor revenue
bonds and that makes it so we
don't have to pay the gross
receipts tax.
So Mr chair representative when
you how many other states.
Don't charge a sales tax or
don't have the structure that
you say that we need to do this
because disadvantage arts
fundamentally unfair how many
other states don't do that.
It's so I I believe it should
begin the session Mr chair and
senator and it's forty two don't
do this.
They don't charge a sales tax or
they eliminated some one on one.
Forty two do not charge sales
tax on manufacturing equipment
and I think the balance of
states that don't have a sales
tax obviously you know don't
taxes.
Okay thank you well I'm a little
bit a conflicted on this bill
because.
We're kind of once again back in
the cycle of tax credits and
Swiss cheese but with all due
with all due respect I I know
you've been from an ideological.
Effective you've been fighting
this battle philosophically for
a long time and obviously you
all also fought for a quite a
bit of revenue so it's not just
bring one side of this concerned
but but the concern is there so
back appreciate it
Representative you're still in a
fight yeah and and and chairman
I could take thirty seconds to
respond
so we have over the last several
years past about two thirds of
that big tax reform package they
put together together.
In our state all of those two
thirds have either been revenue
neutral revenue positive when I
do the mast we brought in about
another five hundred million
dollars of revenue from that
package noticing okay can we can
we do a little bit of the other
side of that coin and I don't
think it's three million in
exchange for five hundred is too
much to ask.
Yeah what we should do those
deals with any right but I
appreciate that thank you Mr so
I have thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr president
I guess my challenges this Mr
Chairman.
In the original version of house
bill two ninety one or two
nineteen effort at this point.
there was as proposed by senator
Wirth.
A reduction across the board.
Of one point two five percent of
the state's gross receipts tax
us.
And I recall very vividly during
the testimony and in the FIR Mr
chairman and members sort of a
response from the business
community is specifically
Albuquerque chamber of commerce.
Stating that an overall
reduction of the gross receipts
tax rate just wasn't important
for business that it was a pass
through costs that was put on to
consumers.
And so Mr chairman I I I I I but
I I take the business committee
at their word quite frankly
that.
A reduction in gross receipts
tax at this time isn't necessary
to stimulate the economy I just
find it challenging Mr chairman
that in the context of a broader
tax reform that would benefit
working people
reduction of the gross receipts
tax was seen as something that
was unnecessary.
That didn't help business that
didn't affect the bottom line
that was all just a pastor cost
onto the consumer and was not a
challenge on economic growth.
I I I wonder Mister chairman how
much more economic activity we
would have seen that we've done
so I'm gonna respectfully oppose
this bill because I think we
need to be consistent as a
committee I just we're going to
take the position that.
Every New Mexican including
working people in the poor don't
deserve a cut in the gross
receipts tax because the
business committee opposed it I
don't understand why the
business community gets to come
with their own starters specific
sweetheart gross receipts tax
deduction if we're not
considerably fairly.
and those are very specific
claims made in the Albuquerque
chamber of commerce daily email
that I'm looking at right now
but how it just didn't matter if
we cut across your seats tax or
not.
So Mister chairman I'll be
voting no thank you.
Thank you senator Candelaria see
anybody else's hand raised.
View comments.
We're really changing Mexico.
And.
Finally.
We're gonna have to step up to
the plate in one year incentive
cited dollar changes we want to
help and hold.
And figure out what works best
and move that plan four step by
step for little by little and
senior action but we just kind
of just got committed some stuff
and not get insurance and work
so hard it thank you here and
then I'll get chopped up.
That.
Incentive plans are gonna have
to figure out how to budget
these are hold.
Keep that in the budget and make
those changes for everybody.
We look at the G. R. T. we are
going to do that we can do
everything that we did yesterday
with the with the with the
working families elector in
order to get the G. R. T. and.
What.
Next year is going to be a lot
of one time money I don't know
how we're gonna figure password
from there and Senate finance
but it's going to be have a long
haul after at.
With that.
Have a motion Mr Chairman house
bill two seventy eight
The health care community
committee.
Amended amended yeah.
Motion by Senator Rodriguez
second by Senator Burt what we
call the roll.
Yes chair Senator Burt yes
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria no Senator Candelaria
no Senator Diamond is excuse.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator that's also you there.
Senator Hemphill.
I'm sorry Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Hemphill yes senator share
reluctantly yes.
Madam chair yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn right now.
Senator Steinborn no Senator
Woods yes.
Senator what's yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Senator then yes yes that is
eight yes to know and one
excuse.
Thank you chair really
appreciate it.
They need some help on the floor
let me know we'll get that
credit.
Thank you.
I guess I just want to.
Thank you everybody.
On here hopefully next year will
be able to meet in person.
will be able to go to LFC
everybody again a lot more
understanding about the budget.
Process and how it works.
I'm really proud that you know
we don't always agree but we try
to agree on certain things.
What kind of work together and
next year Senate finance will
run a lot more sweetly will have
a lot more time to gel with each
other over the summer and get to
know each other and that that's
the most important thing is that
we build those relationships so
we may not agree on politics
right now then what we spend
but.
You know we're all gonna come
together be friends and we help
each and everyone of us show but
it the other street don't we on
passed away at but and then the
day I respect each and everyone.
Thank you for being on the
committee.
Want to thank you for allowing
me to make some mistakes as a
freshman and not trying to beat
me over the head with them and I
appreciate that so thank you
guys.
We'll see Senator United top
chat about some bills early
summer for.
You can go your committee
members helping any of our
