transparent, but when amendments
come on.
We don't have the capability of
a scanner.
So you can't scan and put them
in.
With all due respect, that we
don't post these amendments,
these documents.
And I just think we should, I
think, um, it's public
information and I just think
nothing could be more important
than $10 billion budget from a
policy standpoint, everything
contained in it. So I think
Sean, I mean, with all the other
committees and the legislature
amendments because of that rule,
what is the common practice of
things being.
online and
Time
Um
How
timely are those really
a year or so ago, last year was
the first year of implementation
of the amendments or when
they're put on in the committee,
um, is the role of the committee
secretary and committee staff,
but from the council service, we
do, uh, that's going to be
before a committee. Um, and the
only exception is that um our
duty of confidential directly to
you as legislators who
distribute that amendment.
And then they get put online
while they're being discussed.
OK. Mr. Chair, in the, in the
Senate, that has been the
practice last year.
OK. And, and we've done that as
soon as they're adopted, but we
can't put the amendment on
because we don't know if it's
gonna pass or not. So, the
amendment in the PDF is not put
online and they just told me
until the amendment passes
because we don't know.
What it does, I mean, we have
copies of the amendments, the
sponsor could give them to
whoever they wanted, if they
want to share the amendment. If
you don't want to share the
amendment, that's a legislator's
prerogative.
Um, but they're not put up there
for discussion purposes until
they're amended, uh, and if you
want to amend the bill, if you
want us to dra draft an
amendment amend the bill
entirely.
We'd have to get the amendment
drafted in the bill.
And then bring the bill back
down and then know where the
amendments are, which could be a
one or two day process depending
on how big the bill is. Anyway,
Mr. Chair, to the extent
possible, I, I, I just
personally like putting it out
there, um, ahead of time,
including putting it online,
which probably can be done just
as well as after the fact. And
um so just like a bill we vote
on, that hasn't been adopted,
but anyway, I'll just, that's
how I feel about it, you know,
mister, and the same usual deal
so appreciate.
The discussion. Thank you. Now,
we all have text messaging so
the the lobbyists probably had
some play in the amendment
process anyway. Senator
Gonzalez. Thank you and uh we
also have to take the advice
from counsel.
Sometimes he turns into a
substitute.
Any other questions?
We're gonna be transparent as we
can, but you know.
We get moving in certain times
and in.
It's just we can't, I can't
manage every little detail.
You're here to talk to us about
bills and
sing the old song.
So I was requested, Oh, wait,
we're we're now Senator
Gonzalez, we're gonna need to go
into executive now.
Gonna make a motion.
Mr Chair some move that we go
into executive session.
Second Senator Sindo, any
objection to going to the
executive.
