What's going to happen in our
communities
right we learn through that
process reporting codes would be
burdened someone taxpayers it
would be difficult for the
agency program.
So we went back to the drawing
board our drawing board was
called the smartest people we
know so that's who we have here
today to present what they're
able to do with the R. P. five
hundred data and R. P. eighty
data from taxed wrote in the
idea here is that we can make
informed decisions based on the
data we can help say what is
going to happen in a community
we can now drill down into the
next codes and show what's
happening with attorneys
architects.
Hi when we see a tax bill we can
now ask the system to tell us
what's going to happen or at
least what's happened
historically so with that I'll
turn it over to the tech team
so we can see what they've been
able to do.
Mr chairman members of the
committee because tomorrow from
New Mexico tech associate vice
president for research more
issues one of our technical
centers that the many of you are
aware of its called the
institute for complex additive
systems analysis that was
created by you in two thousand
and one the focus that's been on
national security problem sets
we focus a lot on the US
government and the department of
defense and the intelligence
community helping them
understand their data helping
them understand their problems
and coming up with solutions for
them.
About five years ago the
institute for complex set of
systems analysis right Hossam
begin working on some of the
problems in New Mexico Saudi
take that the twenty years of
experience working with
government data for collected
information trying to get us
understand problems around the
world.
That are in our national
interest how can you take those
tools that we have built at a
cost of the plan to the issues
in New Mexico to make.
New Mexicans better off so in
the slide that you see that says
I Costa on the upper right
corner is the former district
attorney about the of the second
judicial District Court in
Albuquerque.
And we were helping them look
at.
Criminal data how do you look at
criminal networks and how do you
have data informed prosecutions
so we begin going through forms
of data working with the
sentencing commission and
Senator center roof used to be
on this committee representative
Ely worked on that and then the
the you can look at they look at
different types of critical
infrastructure items so all
these things become additive
complex systems that's what
they're specialist at so when
the problem arose of looking at
tax data in in the public how
does that relate to the tax
policy health legislators make.
Important decisions we turn to
the the agency really worked
turn to our institute to begin
looking at that problem helping
develop some tool sets to help
people explore the data that's
available create the data lake
so they can easily explore ask
questions of those data in this
particular case taxed either.
So if you turn to the next page
on slide number three this is
the R. P. eighty reports so
that's a monthly amount of the
tax reported by each business
based on the location and the
reported industry and then the
R. P. five hundred reports track
the disbursements back to the
local entity.
Based on their total G. R. T.
collected and that is reported
by that the RP also so there's a
bunch of spreadsheets right in a
lot of our places like New
Mexico finance authority agency
believes Association comes LFC
look at these data and so when
you ask questions of of those
economists and those staffers
they begin to look through all
the state we want to be able to
provide
Some tools to allow for better
exploration I'm gonna let
directly whose at the institute
and his colleagues go through
the rest of the slides you can
understand what they've built
and.
Pre-filled feel free to stop us
at any time if you'd like Mr
chairman to stop in and explain
anything they're working on on a
turnover stuff thank you thank
you Sir Mr chairman members of
the committee good to see many
of you again after working up
here for a while I went back to
New Mexico tech and working at
the institute where actually
started as an intern and all the
way back in two thousand one so
it's good to be back doing data
stuff.
and with me is Charles Brock
he's one of our senior software
developers and really leading
the team that's been working on
integrating and ingesting and
then processing this data so
that we can display it and so I
will I will briefly go through
some of the slides though I
think we're really geared up to
do a live demo of the portal
that we've developed fingers
crossed that that goes okay
but essentially Charles will
walk us through a couple
different views and some things
to note I think we have data
these files are on the TRD
website publicly hosted but as
Carlos mention Mr chair members
of the committee the
spreadsheets are very noisy
they're formatted in a way
that's very difficult to
understand without subject
matter expertise and perhaps
most importantly for the
purposes that we've talked about
they really only give you a
month or a quarter of time of a
few of the data what we really
like to be able to see you
ladies are the trans or the the
various you know moving averages
things like that so that we can
you know retrospectively look at
what policies have what affects
what industry perhaps are moving
in certain areas on the basis of
the tax collection and then our
ultimate goal is really to be
able to do kind of forecasting
analytics with some of that data
to maybe be more proactive so so
so Charles is going to give a
demo we just had screenshots on
the paper here in case our demo
didn't work because technology
is fun and so really kind of a
couple different views the first
one that he's going to bring up
committee to the full state
overview.
So this is essentially so a
couple things the R. P. five
hundred is that disbursement
side the payments that go back
out to the municipals in the
counties and the other tax
entities on the basis of the G.
R. T. collected the R. P. eighty
is the collection side of that
we've gotten the R. P. five
hundred data completely ingested
into this portal and are working
on the R. P. eighty data as we
speak so this this view that you
see on the screen there is a
sense going all the way back to
we can go all the way back I
think the two thousand nine in
this case we're looking at
twenty sixteen to eleven and
this is just everything in the
state these are all the
communities the cities counties
and tax districts the
disbursements by month over time
if you scroll down one of the
things we also implemented which
is based on a report that the
municipally compiles internally
each month is also a look at
each of those entities that
shows you here's what they
collected in the last cruel here
are there changes month over
month and then here are the
changes from that same month
last year so you get kind of a
red yellow green ability to see
what's moving so that and then I
believe that report was always
compiled manually the previously
it was intended to Mr chair the
we were we intend to use this
and hope uses for communities we
can now look at the next code
switch industry level data so we
can see what's happening inTaos
we can see what industries are
moving in the right direction
which industries are flat which
industries need help and we can
do that by community now what's
happening in Vegas what's
happening in Gallup we can
actually show at the industry
level what the trends are.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee and that's the
view that the the Charles has a
now
we're essentially you can see
the donut there right this is
for that for that particular
period of time
here are the various industries
that contributed to the tax
revenue that then went into the
disbursements that were made to
those individuals communities
and I think you know this is
this is really a preliminary
effort I think there's so many
different things that we could
do with this in terms of time
series analysis better
visualisations of that data it's
a truck but so as you can see
there we've also got the ability
to drill down into some of those
different categories and then
select I know there's things
that we'd like to get done for
the league and for others that
might be interesting the such as
moving average and various types
of analytics that I described
there so
so yeah the
Yeah so I think the other thing
to note about the yes Mr chair.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
excellent good work this is
really really great is that a
couple of questions this is
going to be public facing we're
focusing going themselves and
just simply look around fish
around without changing date
obviously you're putting
anything in but are we looking
to make this a public facing
tool.
Mr chair the idea is it it's
data we want everyone to use
right this is not something that
is exclusive to the league but
hello Sir the true need for us
is internal and external
internal all of our membership
is ultimately going to want to
know those those industries
trends for you all we want
everyone to have the data for
your communities
NMFA counties us right we need
to do our day a daily jobs so
our idea is to make sure that
anyone can can access the state
as far as a the public facing
portal I don't think we're there
yet.
Mr got up sorry Mister chairman
Senator Padilla that yeah that's
one of our goals we call this
our data science in the public
interest projects we take some
of our funding that you find as
we go after and we received some
of these projects and the goal
of that is to help people
understand data the users of
these are the consumers of the
information Mr chairman concern
for the are you as policy makers
but also the public right the
city's the counties but also
that the public is paying the
taxes and trying to understand
those
How best for those individuals
to consume I think that's going
to be important but this is all
the information so we can find
it in ways that they can better
consuming through visit with
visualisations or even providing
downloads of the data that's
something we want to be able to
do thank you Mr chairman and so
yeah I mean I I and I'm sure
specially folks on this
committee we get any number of
questions we have city council
is here today and and different
folk that ask us all sorts of
things and great to be able to
send them somewhere to say Hey
you can drill it's deeply into
this is you need to so so so
that's what and then you know
full stop would be really great
and I'm sure maybe you're gonna
show this to its next I I maybe
I should look at a little bit
but when we're about to run into
a roadblock or a or a cliff of
some kind is there going to be
is will the data sort of have a
Ding Ding the can guess what
you're heading toward a major
folder in the street you're
about to hit it you know see you
should swerve or you should make
an adjustment because that I
think is going to be truly
correct helpful to us here in
the legislature I I was here
when we had to take money back
from school districts and what a
horrible thing to do but sure it
had we have a better
understanding that early enough
I know it'll take time to get to
that but that would have been
very helpful Mr chairman and
senator Padilla some of the
tools that CENIC casa has
developed over the years find
for trend analysis so they
develop these very is hidden
Markov models in these these
models are based on cond
utilizing of vast amounts of
information to recommendation
models to come out when those
models begin to show outcomes
that are of the same.
They created a
alert the monitors the world
internet for fishing worms or
viruses they get put people
trying to hijack information
they did that for the US
government in waters currently
monitors the world internet and
can alert certain agencies once
there's a problem the same thing
could happen here Senator says
here as you're talking about as
these models begin to see that
there are things that are
happening in the in the data
that could cause problems it can
create alerts and Mr chairman
and senator those are some of
the things we would need to
understand right so you're the
subject matter experts at the
economists the league the
association counties have
subject matter experts in this
area understanding what some of
those areas of concern are so
they can condition those models
over time that's great you know
thank you Mr chairman I think
which working on this phenomenal
keep doing it to keep making it
better it would be great if it
were intelligent enough to start
warning us you know on things
that are there had heading
toward us in in in the last
thing I'll stop asked me with
others that have questions but
these are wonderful tools do you
plan to go like on a road show
and show up in every town city
county everyone that would have
data here sit them down like
this little for around ask you
questions and figure out how to
use it for them for their their
their community.
So Mr chair Senator.
We've started that manually
Italy so else in the clothes are
our policy director can now.
Bill the revenue streams on how
your communities are funded on
an individual basis she can show
our councils what level of of G.
R. T. property tax fees
eccentric go up the funding the
local government this now gives
us a tool to show us within that
G. R. T. bucket what industry
are actually funding so we can
now do that so the next step for
us is pairing Representative
would when we see a tax bill
right then we can ask the
question okay if you craft a tax
bill attorneys accountants
architects we can now look at
the city's individually and say
what is the tax base what is the
total tax base for these
industries for these communities
we can better estimate fiscal
impact because right now it's on
average right it's.
Committee will be a hundred
forty million on average as you
know your communities are very
different from each other so the
all the effect of that come
together.
Thank you Mr chair.
Correct.
Mr chairman and senator one of
the one of the things that we're
we would be able to do as we
develop the state really because
to have as you suggest the hard
path analysis that's looking for
things but also the coal path
how do you then go through and
explore those data ask questions
of the information begin to
propose if we made this policy
change back in nineteen ninety
two what would have happened to
our tax policy and run those
models so that you could see
what would have happened by
looking at cond at at that data
repository as we put more
information if you put state
budget information you put you
know workforce data you put all
these things into their into the
data like you can begin asking
questions of it and exploring
the state and and and really the
policy people having an
opportunity to provide good
policy analysis based on data
that's available thank you Mr.
You're going to continue
Like short with that Mr Mr
chairman members of the
committee I mean I think we've
got a couple different views
that we can continue to walk
just some examples of capability
I do which aired Center the
issue the comments I think we've
been brainstorming with the
league and with others about
those same kinds of features and
phenomenon you know and it's.
The sky's the limit really as
far as what what trials and the
team were able to put togethers
maybe one that would be
interesting is the industry
comparison chart or so this will
basically get the bills need to
look at different in side by
side as well I think that's a.
I stand what are the you know
what are the differences by
those categories is different
different locations and then
the ability in the current
version of the portal where you
can basically pick any number of
those different entities and
then kind of filled out of but
but I think the you know I think
maybe the the point to make here
with what you've seen is that
this is right now this is
running off Charles laptop but
we also have the version of the
portal that will be deploying
for the league and others
running inside of our the
datalink in the cloud that's
hosted at a cost of and so very
much we'll continue to plug away
based on what they and maybe
what yourself Mr chair.
The committee would like to see
in the portal of we do very much
anticipate I think having an API
access available for folks who
are wanting to get to that level
to be able to access the data as
well without having to go
through the web interface or
even custom reports that get
developed to be able to download
those in a format that analysts
are may be used to seeing and to
work with and then I think
navigating navigating the the
public data of this versus what
maybe we find in terms of
advanced analytics to folks that
have partnered with us to help
support the development of the
platform and in those terms if
you have anything else that you
wanted to to show all.
The.
But the other thing is you know
very much want to make this an
interactive tool that when
people use it's not just
economic data that you can you
can zoom in zoom out and
hopefully have those trend lines
and things pretty soon in some
Mr chairman members of the
committee it's I think we're a
step where we we are open to
questions from you all what
would you like to see from the
the taxpayers right we have
Janet peacock or doctor Clifford
over and we look at the
spreadsheet we can burn days
Coming up with ideas or
questions for really we want
questions from all of you what
would you like to see based on
what type of package tax package
look put together you have you
have to act as an asset we want
to use.
Senator.
Thank you.
First of all just going back
over ten years.
When I asked for something like
this and we put four hundred
thousand dollars in the budget
to buy something like this I
don't know if it was twenty
thirteen to twenty fourteen but
was in that that time frame.
Then TRD wouldn't give LESC a
single drop of.
Nothing no data at all previews
would contemplates tech and now
the TRD gave you everything on
everybody in the state.
Mister chairman Senator I I I do
remember that study very well
and.
For our purposes we Senator
correct it's it's difficult for
internal finance staff right
they have to sign a document
says I can look at the data but
I can't share the data so they
can share the data we can't
present
This this is why we needed tech
there's a lot of public data
it's in very large unworkable
spreadsheets and so that's where
tech has the capability to take
massive datasets to make it
real.
Mr Chairman I'm thrilled that
somebody now has something they
can work with because I've been
asking for this for ever and
here it appears in front of me
just like magic everyone heard
you all before.
so this is all great go by
industry an industry what's
going on and what communities
but what if something new
happens so I certainly have a
tax package that's coming that
is what I hope is real tax
reform and the the what I'm
looking for is it simple still
enough to pay the bills but it
it's attractive it brings new
industry I love oil and gas I
love cold to.
But I also want something else
because I know that oil and gas
does that which is why we have
to go snooping around in the
super and the school
superintendents couch looking
for quarters to bring back here.
How does it account for new
industries potential potential
new instant would have a new
industry yet the potential.
Mr Chairman center I think I
don't have an answer on new
industries.
This far as we've gone this far
is trying to look it in current
industry so we can estimate the
lost individual cities based on
proposed changes we have to have
we have to good data to make to
to make that educated guess on
what comes next so with the with
the a new industry I'm not sure
we can do that forgetting or
close to it at this point Mister
chairman Senator we have the
daily compiled we put all this
information in there.
We work with your economists
work with and they develop a
model we have data now to run
through their model to see what
would happen we have historical
information we can look at
trends it gives a better
information to be able to
protect out into the future
so those are some of the ways
would have to work on the models
with the economists and what
they're what the livers are
pulling in the you know the put
lever the tax policy is pulling
or pushing or eliminating and so
and then by having a vast amount
of data you have you have more
information to push the.
Would hopefully give you
a better expectation of what
would be happening into the
future so Mister chair of along
that same line.
So when I sit in front of tax
committee next week there is
going to be at least one
probably a dozen individual
companies that are going to
stand up say that if you do this
to me you're going to destroy me
I'm gonna leave the state of New
Mexico you should burn in hell.
Their company is so important
that they don't care for the
entire tax code of the state of
New Mexico is the worst in the
world.
Their company so important can
this give us some data what
that'll do to that company that
industry anyway.
Mr chairman and senator I don't
believe we're at that point yeah
we're at the Representative the
proof of concept point in in the
work Americanist misdirect he
feels that how how much they are
in their data collection but the
goal would be is rig gnostic
right we're just looking at data
and we're looking at models in
so we can tell you to the to the
certainty of the model what we
believe the outcome would be
that industry exactly.
So I in I think that I as well
income already upset because
there are companies out there
that believe they are so
important that the entire state
of New Mexico should be
destroyed to protect their tax
or lack of.
So but that's what was it with
really destroyed I mean you know
most of my don't want to destroy
I just want them to join in.
The the reform to make everybody
else strong.
But that's why I was asking
could we do this with with any
particular industry I'm sure we
both oil and gas question is can
we do with anybody else because
well today all part is just.
So thank you madam chair thank
you senator anyone else Senator
Campos and then Senator Woods.
Anyone else.
Thank you very much madam chair
just a couple of questions when
we start talking about this
aggregating data.
is there a way to set this up so
particularly for the smaller
communities will have better
analytics in terms of how we can
help them in the long run and
the only reason I bring that up
because the aggregate as a whole
it looks good sounds good but
it's driven if you will buy
those that do have more of the
the necessary if you will Tax
base but the smaller communities
are going to definitely be a
component that that I would
really have an interest in so I
I maybe you could just comment
on that thank you Mr
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Mentor.
Senator I think so because with
those with those next code that
industry level data we can.
We can have a much.
Better estimate on.
Where the revenue comes from in
Las Vegas we have a better idea
in Raton where the money's
coming from right per industry.
And so for when I say our
internal focus would be working
with our members to say here's
the trends within the industry
in your community right FY ours
are always on average.
This hundred six of us because
there's no on average and so now
we can say individually.
Where the money's coming from
per industry and I think that's
really valuable right the
changes you all maybe even with
Lita a few years ago now they
can make informed decisions were
put those dollars so so madam
chair if I may and the point of
getting to if you have angel
fire wagon mound see my own
incorporated and unincorporated
communities and we're trying to
break down that information
within counties and we talk
about these industry is going to
be specific to if you will the
manufacturing is going to be to
to logging in to some of the
other issues that we deal with
so in in in dealing with those
comprehensive components the
issue is how do we really get
down if you will to the smaller
communities to ensure that we
have that vitality and then of
course it translates to a to a
better tax system thank you very
much madam chair.
Yeah madam chair and Senator and
actually if you look at the view
that's up on the screen right
now
I think that's that's what
you're getting at in terms of
being able to see those
individual sectors and maybe a
little difficult to read but
you've got the Health Care
wholesale trade mining oil and
gas construction manufacturing
center and so what this
particular view is looking at is
a comparison right for for
different industry losses by
date but I think the point that
you raise is is a very
interesting one that might even
be a feature we could consider
which is how could we look at
groups of municipalities
counties and you know maybe in
economic development region or
some aggregate to understand for
that region but I think very
much then we have the ability to
look at each of those entities
individually and understand what
their contribution maybe means
to the so so madam chair in
terms of the the to as we
populate information the issue
would be if we brought up by New
Mexico within that aggregate.
What does it look like when we
start talking about
transportation rail and most
those those components and and
is is that something that is
that is vital when it comes to
the tax base or are we
indicating in general within
regions this is the way that
we're going to to deal with it
it could just be something down
the road because I realize that
you're getting this going
it's it's it's gonna take a lot
more of the the research to to
put together the components
that's that's all I have chair
thank you madam chair Senator
Campos that that screen shot
there is so that in that on that
models the City of Joe and so
then you can look at the city of
child for you can pull out and
look at the whole county and so
you can with these data and and
look at the data over time what
has been happening to our tax
base over the past ten years
what do you see this happening
based on historical data what do
you see it going without any
changes those types of things I
think those are that's vital for
the small you know I think some
of the larger cities and
counties have the analytical
staff Mister chairman Senator
Campos to to help them
understand their data this is
going to really help a lot of
those communities that don't
necessarily have those
individuals readily available to
them so they can explore their
data so madam chair I think data
I was going to stop there but
just do you happen to have the
information from them to go
to a corporate committee.
Mexico.
In the.
That's on a chair to the break
it down by Senator
thank you Mr chair my question
Mr chair it is how much is your
budget every year.
I'll be there.
The leaders that Mr leader the.
The cost of this program.
Yeah you have a program that
I'm assuming as a standalone
Mexico taxed at a.
What do you do you have a
individual budget.
A monster you know inside your
your university budget that just
goes to do.
Mr Chairman in center with so we
have a research public service
project line item the goes to
the institute for complex set of
systems analysis I was to be
spent on seventy okay I think
forty forty so we allocated
about forty thousand dollars to
explore this problem so these
are all the advantages I custom
built their own software
programs these are public
software engineers and and and
architects and data scientists
so we they build everything
themselves so all of these
programs that the government has
been tens of millions of dollars
building we can now apply for
pretty low because it's just
labor hours going into this and
then some funding we're looking
from other sources to help
continue the project will.
She.
And I appreciate you guys doing
that I know that you're gonna.
Really.
Or in from Peter to pay Paul
here but I appreciate what
you're doing here
So.
Is this service available this
is portal available.
To everyone.
R. as it soon to be available to
everyone Mr chair Mr chair
Senator so I think the agency
pulley was the pilot so our
board allocated the funds within
the minutes fully budget to to
help start this this pilot so
our our border located I believe
eighty thousand dollars for us
the pilot this okay okay okay
that makes more sense
I I used a.
Certainly not this in depth the
program that it did.
Go through the.
Excel spreadsheet and.
And.
But all my.
Individual.
Our reserves.
Information down to the the
field level.
To try to figure out to where.
Where the opportunities were in
management.
And.
It reminds me a lot of that when
I see it up there on board
because that's
That's what most management have
to do is figure out where
they're.
Where they're making money we're
not making.
Where the revenue streams are in
and where there's one of bills
for the LFC.
And the sometimes that's a lot
of foreman for the hell of it of
course there's not much money.
But I appreciate the this
information and I think it will
be a great tool for us in the
future so getting back to that
if.
Senate finance wanted to know a
particular.
The lack of what is the most
common reason.
That capital outlay projects
were being delayed.
We do have enough data yet ours
are you just concentrating on
one tax data right now.
Mr chair Senator just taxed at.
Yes yes okay well I can see how
this would be a great program to
really focus down into problems
and and we wonder why the city
and the city.
One is prosperous one is not so
I think that's a very good deal
and I appreciate Mr chair thanks
for the time.
Thank you
And the Senate finance
committee.
Mr chair members the committee I
believe that would be possible.
Senator calls oscillation.
The lady also
I.
We see this semester Mr chair if
I may I just.
So in the Senate district eight
there's thirty six incorporated
and unincorporated communities
but if we're going to deal with
the tax analysis it's going to
be that that would be a great
example but there's other big
districts and I and and that
that raises the concern.
How are we going to develop the
analytics so that there would be
a bit point well taken thank you
very much Mr the one units
operation in order to look at.
You can be almost impossible.
On the.
Mr chair yes as long as they're
in the distribution list we can
get severance and that they get
a distribution so every
corporate so you'll hundred six
we can get data for us December
and then if we have some rooms
roll up we have some runs
industry level data so we can
show some room where the money's
coming from and this.
Large masses of.
Measures in Los Alamos is this.
In the.
Mr trump.
Explore.
And lost by panels.
If you.
This.
It's not incorporated.
For New Mexico City entities to.
Yes I.
Shows I it's in the.
Service center.
As I.
That.
Thanks in to make Mr Mr chairman
of the committee may just depend
on the way that those are done
in terms of the data you may
just see you know you may see
spikes like that you may see
something where there's a much
lower reported volume depending
on how those corrections are
reported but I.
Sure.
Just a all or part of the human
donor over.
Yeah.
Mr chairman and we talk about
having enough data and having a
dental X. you can ask questions
of the data six accord  asking
all these questions and then
having them seen you can look at
okay what we want to look at
this district I would look at
the secretary I want to go all
the way down to to the smallest
community even the any tax
district or whatever else.
Our.
All six four.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the presentation of.
So.
For example like Padilla school.
They're not incorporated.
So what you would be getting is
just a picture of Taos County.
And so if you wanted to like
really get into all the smaller
part to really see what will be
happening there can that happen.
Mister chairman Senator not not
outside of the incorporator
because they're not they don't
receive distribution they don't
receive distribution we don't
have the next code for where
that ended in in Mr chair
Senator right industry right
whether receipts are collected
is where where the reporting and
stuff right so if you're in an
unincorporated area it's
unlikely they'll be a lot of
business activity therefore
there would be really no data to
show.
well Mr chairman for example
input L. school there's probably
at least.
When the state eight to ten
businesses there than they would
just be part of the.
The county the county mmhm.
Mr chairman the incentive with
service so we're just getting
the publicly available
information I think the question
you're asking are the taxes
being paid by individual
businesses on their address and
zip code reported that would be
the the revenue this the inputs
into the tax department that's
a.
That's what we would need to
talk to TRD about the
availability to get some of
those types of data and then
being able to take up to a high
enough levels we would identify
independent individual business
right so we have to make sure
that we have we follow the rules
so that there would be an
interesting problems that they
have it be a different source of
data.
If possible that I think that
could find what Mr chairman Sir
was on was Center compass was
asking for also a lot of these
historic communities that are on
incorporate.
Mr chairman of the last part of
this is so to and your screen is
on.
I think they have attempted all
you know that I'm aware of at
least maybe three or four times
try to incorporate.
And it always turns into a big
thing because they feel that
they're going to pay more taxes.
And maybe something like this
would help them you know at
least to be in a better.
Place to make a decision.
But every time they take because
they have a vote on that it's
turned down.
Just one more question.
So AG all.
How does so Janet peacock fit
into this how does she work with
on.
So Mister Mister chairman
Senator Sen Janet.
But Mr we call nerd sessions at
the office so we have Janet Dr
Clifford we have Allison we have
that the tech team over and
we'll spend the day asking
questions trying to decide.
Rectus this technical questions
that we we want to know the from
I think speaking for Janet but
she's very policy focused as you
all know and so when we when we
ask these questions she wants to
know from a policy perspective
what's going to happen or when
you all put a tax bill out from
a policy perspective who are we
helping what industries should
get the general fund and so
that's why we love love having
Janet because it's very policy
focused.
Well thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator Steinborn.
Thanks a good to see you guys
this morning good morning just
if you're gonna be preparing
reports proletarians can I ask
you to prepare one for hatch New
Mexico as well thanks for their
corporate area I represent an
additional Los crucis of course
thanks.
It.
Mr chairman for us it.
Right this is the beginning and
we've asked a lot of questions
of the data set up and when I
described yes they do describe
it as a state asset those of you
who haven't been there it is an
amazing place and right the
university's amazing the point
when you go behind that fence
it is.
Pretty incredible the work they
do
Much much different level so it
it's an impressive place anyone
hasn't been there I know a lot
of you have
to take the time to to the
ticket was.
Mr.
I saw a car get blown up at New
Mexico tech.
Your counterterrorism program.
Yeah that's and that's cool Hey
your car.
Fortunately the I would a loaner
cars.
The people can always doing a
course of good.
To be considered the cost.
Any other questions from
committee members etcetera and
also Mr Chairman thanks so much
for The presentation very
exciting information and Mr
chairman I think that we should
plan on interim LESC committee
meeting there to to do a tour of
the facility and see the amazing
stuff that you guys are doing
definitely a jewel and in New
Mexico and we really need to be
investing in the work that
you're doing because it has it's
just super exciting and has huge
implications for for the future
so thanks so much for being here
thank you Mr chair like to blow
up a car over there.
What color is your car some.
The Center on these thank you Mr
chairman just very quickly good
morning to everyone good to see
you thank you for for this new
innovative ideas and new things
you're doing we appreciate you I
remember Carlos he used to work
Mr chairman members of the
committee I don't know maybe
some of you were here some more
for the NMFA from way back in
and did a wonderful job we we
hate losing you you're doing a
great job there thank you for
all that you do and of course a
J. and make it is the market
tell me your name I always
forget what your name is there
there on a white wrote down I
it's not market or what it pays
thanks other passport so.
Thank you there are yeah anyway
limit limit just down briefly
mentioned that one of the things
we have found in LFC as we're
working through projects and in
trying to make big decisions yes
this throughout the state in
every district is a lack of data
and so you know so we can have
finally comprehensive data that
is accurate to be able to make
good decisions and this here
truly provides a tool to
extrapolate the data quickly and
sufficient and adequate data to
be able to make decisions I
think we're far behind in doing
this for many years so this is
very good information especially
with even with cyber security
and everything else going on the
hackers and scammers and
phishers they column and who
knows what else anymore so I
want to thank you for this I
think it's a great idea
appreciate all you're doing.
Thank you thank you presentation
yep you'll get how quickly can
you get a those numbers back.
Mr chairman
as soon as possible.
Will a I don't want to put
Charles in his team under too
much of a gun so I mean I give
you didn't Gallup rate which I
think I see on this one chart
yeah yeah right have you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee as far as being able
to just pull a screenshot of
that entity as long as it's
unincorporated entity we should
have the data to be able to or
to put that together it's a
matter of just taking that data
and putting it into a document
and you know making sure it
looks we would like to do a
little validation as well before
we send that type of information
out because we are in a pilot
phase Mr.
It's just a little hard to see
over there and it just and it's
hard to see over here for the
bigger than yeah make sure when
you come to our members receive
that and there minimal without a
ten X. this Mr chair what I
would like very much to see the
data four of the incorporated
parks in unincorporated part of
the eighty calendars.
The there's there is some.
Bills that there is a bill to
change the destination of gross
receipts is what I'd like to see
because there is that
destination factor in there
seems to have affected those two
counties quite a bit of those
two downs Hobson and prospect
quite a bit.
Mr chair Senator we've actually
done that that was one of the
first questions because we
wanted to see the what the data
showed is in respect to
destination sources changes so
you can see in the first
distribution month of one house
bill six destinations forty took
effect you can see shift.
See where the revenue what to
the city and then shifted that's
what I election one of those
graphs have that of policy
change change revenue for those
down and out and had increased
revenues for the for the
counties.
And then maybe we can try to
figure out if there was
anything.
That went somewhere else.
But to the state.
The card is.
I think that's the reason this
is Andrea how long a period
right there.
Mr chair Senator that's from
January twenty twenty through
November of twenty twenty one.
Yeah I'd like to go back further
I'd like to go back to
of state.
Twenty.
Twenty two of twenty twenty two
if you could do that that for.
Can do a few years.
In Mr Chairman center we'll see
as the trend together until the
end when the state some sort of
defect in this distributions
went out to see.
So those picture Mr chair or.
I wonder how they would track
with the price of oil and gas.
Mr chairman and and etcetera
what's that's the nice thing
about creating a data lake as we
import more and more information
in there it's as easy as as is
what Charles is doing right
there he's pulling the data in
live on that series and you can
see them comparing to each other
I always tell people Mr chairman
and senator rob any conclusions
this early based on the data you
see sometimes takes a bit more
exploration there may be other
world events or or things going
on that may be affecting those
yeah so Mister chair Senators
you'll see this is and I know
it's hard to see from a distance
but the bottom line is County
the top line is Carlsbad you can
see from the start point in
twenty ten the trend together.
That being on top but then you
can see with destination
sourcing took fact you see the
media for the.
Across the yeah.
Okay.
Thank you guys for your
presentation.
Yes.
Only thing in a couple days with
the reports and we'll go from
there.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Everybody knows we're going to
lunch the bus will be on the
side right.
Leave here about ten fifteen.
Be back right around eleven
thirty I think.
