We want to make sure that.
Where a available to do that
forced on.
Representative Lundstrom I think
we can get started with you and
we shouldn't be too long at all.
Okay well thank you Mr chairman
and good evening committee
making gradually on the
committee for a stellar job
today on the Senate floor I was
watching for some of that and
that glad to see that the two
committees of been able to move
the general appropriations act
this evening Mr chairman and
committee I'm here to discuss
house bill six and wanted to let
everyone know that there is a
wonderful collaboration between
myself speaker egolf and pro tem
Stewart on coming up with this
compromise bill.
We do have a chart Mr chairman
that we can share with the
committee but basically we do
have a great compromise and we
have the proposed Senate
Education Committee amendments
to house bill six if it would be
of approved Mr chairman I'd like
to go ahead and ask Rachel to
but the chart up or Joey.
We'll do it so if Senator minnow
secure there we.
Thank you thank you Joe eight
what we have is a side by side
comparison of the bills
regarding the funding removing
the funding formula credits
commonly known as the impact aid
credit.
We have the section there are
what house bill six did what
Senate bill forty one as amended
dead and then and then we have
the proposed amendments to house
bill six and I believe we got
out of the Senate Education
Committee unanimously I remember
correctly.
what we basically do is wait to
remove funding formula credits
from the SCG calculation.
Under number two the additional
revenue is not restricted but
school districts and charter
schools will prioritize funds.
For the Indian Education Act
capital outlay and purposes
allowed for at risk program
units number three.
In terms of the capital outlay
what we decided to do is that we
would be using a five year
rolling average based in that
will start in FY twenty five.
Revenue from S. B. nine and
house bill thirty three X.
thirty three at expenditures for
teacher housing must be
excluded.
So the PS C. O. C. will adopt
rules defining capital expenses
from unrestricted revenue after
consulting with the school
districts had another
stakeholders.
I really like this part about
the accountability they came
down from Senate bill forty one
the additional educational plan
a new spending and outcomes
report and what the statewide
online financial reporting
system we would say that
information.
We know specifically what we
want reported a narrative
explaining how school districts
or charter schools will use
federal and local revenue
actually uses of that revenue
health programs and services
improved outcomes for students
and budget as CJ in the three
categories from line to.
There would be a report to the
legislature that would go to L.
E. S. C. at LFC by November
fifteenth.
And we did not in this create a
separate tribal consultation.
So Mister Mr chairman and
committee this is the high level
it is a like I said a great
close collaboration with Senate
Education Committee Senator
Stewart so with that we would be
happy to answer any questions.
Representative.
It is in the budget I forgot to
mention most important issues
all the way this is structured
is in inside the budget.
We get.
For public comment.
Hi chairman I do not believe
that we have missed Mr chairman
this is Senator from what I've
heard that.
Lots of people are in them with
us right now to get public
comment.
Advocates so.
Not sure which bill therefore
but there's.
But to folks with us
Representative.
I guess that is what this has
comments on house bill six as
amended.
Public comment on house bill
six.
May have to just speak up
because I'm trying to scroll
through everybody get their
hands right.
Body in there with any public
comment so question from
committee members.
Sure.
Mr chairman I know that this is
been a.
Of vetted Heffley between the
various parties and if it's the
right time I'd like to make to
pass motion Mr.
Thank you senator I'm just
double checking.
Quickly I have any questions
commitment Senator Rodriguez you
have your hand right thank you
Mr chairman and I know emotions
already been made but I just
wanted I don't have any
questions because this is
something that has been
discussed and negotiated and
sometimes lamented over the fact
that that for many many years
you know and this is the way
it's been and it has been a very
unfair process so I'm happy that
we're finally stepping up to the
plate fixing this putting the
funding where it needs to go
where the intended purpose yes
and so I'm in full support of
this and I want to thank god.
Representative Lundstrom and
into speaker egolf and everyone
that to did this in yourself and
others will work hard on trying
to fix this situation that's all
I have Mister chairman yep a
motion the second already by.
Two other in the committee.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
thank you for working with
Senator Stewart and now we this
is a big issue for district and
specially for the children and
that's what it's really about
it's not who wins award Bill
Gates pastor out of sign it's
about those kids and the federal
funding that you want to know
all kind of go that we all agree
nowadays.
In the wrong place but past that
so with that I do have a due
pass motion by Senator share
Senator Rodriguez second that.
We call the roll.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Is issue Senator share yes.
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn yes
Thank.
Senator what yes.
Senator Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Thank you mean yes.
And yes and one excuse.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee you know today's
St Patrick's day Senator shares
that is green on so I'm a call
at St traces stated that because
we got this bill out after this
many years and I want to thank
everybody both Education
Committee and certainly Senate
finance so have a good evening
thank you.
You
we get public comment up and
running at.
At chairman I am not sure I have
to say very has come back fully
and whether or not they email I
tried to send out earlier was
received.
Mr Chairman standpoint for what
it's worth I got an email from
someone saying that they did
receive all information so again
not sure who's here for which
bills but.
I think they receive your email
Nathan.
Yeah we're trying to figure that
out who's here for what I'm
trying to.
I know there was one advocate
said she was on I don't think
she we looking into many
mistakenly sent out the wrong
way.
Cautious proceed with anything
else expressly are on the tax
bills that we have in front of
us.
We get that public comment in
there and I believe our expert
witnesses and there it's hard to
tell because on my exam I got
like fifty.
People.
In in our side and as soon.
I don't know for what.
Mr chair you can do a little
straw poll and people could
raise your hands I might give
you a sense of eight males and
I'm trying to get money out.
All right.
So Mr chair.
Bill ninety eight okay.
One second Senator share thank
if you're in Arlington you're
not an expert witness here here
for testimony when you raise
your hand quickly I know who's
what and I'm I'm.
You're not an expert witness.
Make sure.
I have.
When we find people rather.
Madam.
Ingle with public comment.
I just don't want to proceed
without public comment because.
People will.
Right.
Three one tax legislation and I
know that some people want to
comment though.
Other than the six.
Six people.
Are we able to.
Amendment yet either.
Chairman add we can add opposed
amendments and it looks like
only a fraction of the
individuals that it signed up
for public comment I've actually
been able to join us.
You know which bills comment on.
Yes I believe I.
Mr chairman and senator
Rodriguez here I may just
interject for a moment that
apparently for house bill two
thirty two I'm getting messages
that they're all in they did get
a link is what they said so just
wanted to let you know with that
the information I'm receiving.
People in order to do that are
making public comment I don't
know how many or text needed
yeah not be.
People.
You know what I think we need to
do is is specially to ninety
one.
House Bill Page.
Two ninety one.
We're gonna have all of the
other one.
No problem a lot of public
comment and.
Two thirty two and ninety eight.
What we'll do is.
We can get that.
With
one more time.
The public comment in our and
then we can get in.
Which spells.
House bill ninety one.
You.
If
we have any public.
People that are in our June.
Four five.
It looks like only a few people
that I think it requesting
online and and House Bill to
ninety wind would join that
being.
Two thirty here it looks like
only at the department plans how
you.
House Bill all ninety eight one
out of three requests is online
and house bill one eighty four
only had one request but they've
been unable to join us.
We're just calling for the
ninety.
I want to make sure the public
comment is there are some people
can't complain.
Well we will come back in the
Senate finance tomorrow morning
Mexico I think nine thirty
tomorrow and get the bills out
but I I need to make sure that
public comment before we proceed
expressly with tax legislation.
The public.
Thank you guys for that.
We'll find out who are in our
that provider in the capitalism
and put on our site so people.
Providing the internet.
Finance committee members
tomorrow at nine thirty I will
try to call you after the
meeting make sure we're all
good.
Have your package would probably
won't have any more bills to the
agenda.
Thank you guys have a good night
thank you guys first of all
thank you guys for House Bill to
thank you for all your hard work
and I said on the letter or.
Appreciate each and everyone was
a learning curve for me and it's
a lot of money and we all work
together and that's the main
thing.
Thank you guys okay.
Good evening everyone.
