ing en ate Bill 401, which will
enhance educational technology
infrastructure across our state,
which I know we all want. The
bill seeks to achieve this by
amending the severance tax.
That binding act to provide
funding for education technology
projects, and it creates the uh
what we're calling the ETI.
That the education technology
infrastructure fund and it
transfers the oversight of that
fund to the Office of Broadband
Access and expansion. Why would
we want to do this? I'm sorry,
the key provisions are the
amendment to the severance Tax
Bonding Act, uh, creation of
the, uh, ETIF and then transfer
the oversight. Why do we want to
do this? Uh, number one is
enhanced educational access,
improved learning outcomes for
our students across the state.
Um, it is a, there's a large
component to this that's related
to economic development and then
streamline the administration of
this so that
projects get more efficiently
analyzed, uh, reviewed and
approved and acted on. We do
have a lot going on, uh, in the
state and they were fearful of
is the, uh, at the moment is the
$675 million bead money that's
um
That we uh are are that's at
risk at the moment, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I've actually written
a letter to the president on
this because uh we we need to
have that money.
So, bottom line, that's what it
is. I'm gonna ask uh the
director of the acting director
of the Office of Broadband
Access and expansion to say a
few words and then we'll, uh,
chair, thank you for the
opportunity to talk about SB
401. This simply moves the
public school facilities
Authority oversight of the state
education network over the
Office of Broadband. It's
something we're doing through an
agreement already. It's a year
by year basis, and we want to
make this transfer permanent. We
have support of the public
schools facility Authority on
doing this, uh, and last year we
also moved the personnel in
House Bill 2 from the public
school.
Facility Authority over to the
Office of Broadband, but the
accompanying legislation did not
happen. So we're looking to to
make that happen this year. Uh,
we want to make sure that we
have the ability to do this
going forward and use this asset
to make sure we can keep connect
communities connected and
schools connected.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you anybody in the
audience and support?
One
Anybody in opposition.
No on Zoom.
We'll take one and one. Come on
up, man.
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Matt
Munoz.
I'm here on behalf of TAG New
Mexico to stand in support of
this legislation.
Uh, we thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward.
Who do we have on Zoom?
I
Can you hear me?
Um, just barely me.
OK, I'll move closer. Hi. Um,
good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Diane Lindstrom, and I'm
a volunteer advocate for ARP New
Mexico.
We support SB 401 because it
brings all of the state's
broadband networks under the
Office of Broadband Access and
Expansion. This allows the
office to use federal e-rate
funding and federal rural
healthcare funding to build our
state's middle mile.
This middle mile can be used to
connect community anchor
institutes like senior centers
to high-speed, reliable and
affordable internet services. We
respectfully ask you to support
SB 401 with a do pass vote.
Thank you.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members.
Brent.
I think Miss Chairman Senator,
um, so we're wanting to take $10
million from the public school.
Uh, from Pesodas.
And put it into.
Mm
The Office of Broadband.
Uh, chair, Senator, uh, thank
you for the question. This is
severance tax bond funds that
are directed towards this
purpose under PSFA and quite
literally just transfers that
same authority over the opposite
broadband. So it does not go to
any other purposes than the
state education network over at
PSFA and doesn't go into any
other purposes if it gets
transferred to the office of
broadband, Mr. President, um,
Directors, that's not gonna be
used then to connect to senior
centers like our
online person said.
But Mr. Chairman and uh and
senators, so we'll wind up
happening is it's gonna help us
uh with resiliency, number one,
and it's by, by moving the, the
responsibility for it, it'll
bring it uh to a more efficient
utilization, streamline it, take
all the 15 other steps that are
in the middle to actually get
things done. I think that that's
one of the key reasons we want
to have it done this way, Mr.
President, can I, do I need to
re-ask the question?
Is that gonna be used to connect
senior centers or is it only
gonna be used to connect
schools, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, I, it, it's uh to
connect schools, but it'll also
bring resiliency to other areas
as well. So it is possible that
it could be senior centers. We
don't, we just don't know that
at this time. Well, the, the
Skoda is specifically for
schools.
And that money is specifically
dedicated to be used for school
facilities.
It has to do with the Zuni
lawsuit.
Um
It concerns me when we're taking
money out of that fund.
And putting it into broadband
that already has 100s of
millions of dollars.
That's concerning to me.
That money is supposed to be
used in our schools to keep our
facilities up and to be used to
build new schools and to connect
to them.
To the internet and the
rural areas that don't have it.
It's not supposed to be used to
connect anyone else.
So Mr. Sherman said, I think I
better understand your question
now. So and the answer that I
was trying to give, and that is
when you, when you take uh bolen
would be a great example. So,
um,
This was when Senator, um, we
were able to bring a gig through
Plateau to all of the public
schools in Bolen.
That's essentially what this
will continue to do with these
dollars, all those schools, but
all boats rise, uh, together
when broadband is increased at
say the area public school,
everybody around that school.
Uh, we'll benefit from it as
well. And that could possibly be
a senior center.
That that's where I was going
with that doesn't mean that
that's what it was for. It's for
the schools only, but everybody
around it's gonna benefit from
it.
Mr. Chairman Senator.
I understand what what you're
saying.
It concerns me that we're taking
money out of the control of the
public school capital Ole
authority
that that money is.
Because bonded.
To be used
For the schools.
I don't understand why we'd want
to move that to someone else.
The chair and senator, the
sorry.
Yeah, so, so we made a decision
as a legislature to unify all of
our broadband access and
expansion, um.
And and and that's to gain the
efficiencies of all of it, and
that's essentially what you see
happening with these moves here.
I mean, we've last year did move
the staffing out of there. Now
we're gonna move the funding out
of there. And that, that they're
all, every area and aspect of
the state government's going to
benefit by doing it this way
rather than all of these
scattered because you would, if
you can get multiple uh benefits
out of a singular move. Why
wouldn't you do that?
But it, but these dollars are
directed just at the schools,
but the example I gave you
earlier that I was talking about
I was literally there the day
that they flipped the switch in
Bole.
Everybody around that, those
public schools benefited as a
result of what happened at the
Mr. Chairman, um,
Doctor, do we have?
Schools and school areas that
aren't connected.
And chair Senator, we are down
to our last two schools hooking
them up using E-rate services at
this point and in the ongoing
years, e-rate funds are going to
be used in category 2 area to
upgrade the equipment uh in an
ongoing basis and additionally
with this funding, we have the
ability for the state education
network to have schools come and
go on that platform and it is
something on Senator Padilla
said, where he goes to the
schools, but offroadband has
additional funds in other areas.
areas that we can leverage to
enhance the network and to make
sure that as Senator Diidia
described those communities can
get additional services in those
areas. And this is where we get
to work very closely with our
providers.
And chair and senator just
because a school might be
already connected to, to the
internet doesn't mean that it's
high quality, up to par, etc.
those schools that are already
are also gonna
Receive the benefit of all of
the things we're doing across
the state. So as a result,
there, those that are already
connected are gonna increase
their speeds as well.
they'll meet FCC standards and
make them competitive on the
other side of the planet, etc.
Mr. Chairman Senator, I thought
that we didn't call it connected
until it meets those standards.
There's a number that's what
I've heard in here. Yeah,
there's a number of ways to look
at it, but I can tell you that
there's a, and I don't know if
you have that data, Drew, but,
uh, there, there are schools
that are connected that are
still woefully underserved that
are then you have access to the
internet.
Uh, chair, senator, so schools
that are not on the state
education network can select
from the speeds that they would
like to to purchase, right? And
so they may not be meeting the
current uh or paying for the
current, you know, gig standard
that's that's been increasing
over the last couple of years.
They may be buying 50 megs per,
per second, right? They may be
buying, you know, 150 for the
entire school. Uh, and so this
is where some of the
efficiencies come in with the
state education network where we
can actually help increase some
of those, those speeds.
Thank you. Things like bulk
pricing, etc. Thank you,
Senator.
Senators, uh, thank you very
much, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the Senate Finance
Committee just to go back to uh
what Senator Brand's talking
about, so with the E rate and
the schools that you're talking
about, uh, how does that work
with the bron we'll say the
broadband resources and the
E-rate resources at each
individual schools is there a
partnership as you go forward
and have you already entered
into many of those contracts,
and then secondly, you indicated
that
All the schools with the
exception maybe two school
districts uh are not aligned
yet. If you can better explain
that, um, because I'm still
concerned also with the E-rate
itself and I know that uh the
districts, uh, work hard to go
and secure those resources,
create, if you will, fiber and,
uh you know the T ones all the
way through the, the whole
system, uh, and maybe you can
help me to better understand
exactly how this is going to go
ahead and be fully connected.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, chair and senator, uh, thank
you for the question. So I'm
gonna answer the second part
first. So over the last, uh, you
know, 89 years, the public
schools facility Authority has
been working on those category 1
projects to hook up fiber to
each school. We're down to 2
schools that are in the process
of being hooked up to fiber. OK,
so we've, we've been making that
process, uh, to your point
about, about getting the
internet services, you know, for
the schools themselves, uh, that
is an ongoing process where
The staff that were at public
schools facility authority
previously and were transferred
last year to the Office of
Broadband, continue to support
the schools that need the help.
Uh, so that's filling out the
form for 70s, you know, that
need to be submitted to the FCC
administrator UsA, right? Uh,
and so that is services that's
being provided out of the Office
of Broadband today. Uh, so we
continue to do that with the
state education network.
We can actually take one step
further and instead of having
just help filling out some
forms, we can actually go
through the RFP processes with
any of the schools on the
network. So if they choose to
join, it actually takes the
administrative burden off of the
schools and we know that there's
a lot of turnover in staffing
and procurement staff and IT
staff there. Uh, one of the
other big goals of the state
education network is providing
uh cybersecurity services for
that network. And so that takes
that burden off of the schools
as well. Uh, so there's a lot of
benefits to schools joining the.
network, uh, we will still
provide those services for those
that do not want to, to join and
we can help them with those form
470s and find their projects to
upgrade their equipment and
technology, um, but we are
providing those services now
under a contract with the public
schools facility Authority, and
we just want to make this
permanent. So, Mr. Chair, as you
indicate that you're uh entering
into contracts with the school
districts and you indicate that
you have two districts that.
Um, I guess that's what you're
lacking. Are you talking about
all of the school districts in
the state or, or at what level
are you at and percentage wise
in terms of the 89 plus school
districts, the charter schools
and others, um, how far along
with connectivity are you?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right
Chain,
uh, so we have connected, uh, we
actually just turned the state
education network on last July
1st. We connected our 1st 8
entities, which was uh 5 charter
schools and 3 school districts,
including APS. Uh, so that is
the first wave that we have done
this year. We're moving into our
wave to. Uh, we're going to see
probably a couple 100 extra
schools come online in the next,
you know, year to year and a
half years with that wave too.
And ultimately we're going to
put out a wave 3 to try and
simplify some of the processes,
and this is something that the
broadband is identified that
we're gonna look at just doing a
statewide price agreement so
that schools can come and go,
uh, you know, as they, their
contracts end. That makes it
much simpler for them to make
those choices to opt into the
network or choose to go, uh, you
know, directly with the provider
and do the services, you know,
themselves.
uh, Mr. Chair, in terms of the
uh Era in the 470 applications
who who submits those to the FCC
is it uh is it the department or
is it gonna go and be the
individual school districts, and
you offer the support.
in order to secure the resources
and then to go ahead and uh
implement if you will, the work
that is going to be necessary
for each one of the school
districts.
Uh, chair senator, uh, we have a
contractor, Eate Central, uh, as
well as a secondary one that
usually deals with the charter
schools, uh, you know, between
those two support systems, our
staff, if they are on the state
education network, we submit the
forms for the schools that have
opted in.
If it is a school district that
uh is doing this independently.
Uh, they usually work with one
of those contractors that we
have as support, and they end up
submitting through that
contractor to UA for those 4
470s to be approved by the feds.
So, Mr. Chair, in terms of the
uh and by the end of course as
we move forward with this, uh,
how long do you anticipate it's
going to take us in order to go
ahead and have the full
broadband network, uh,
coordinated if you will with our
school districts uh throughout
the state.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, and, uh,
Senator, excellent question.
I'll ask the, the director to
give you the specific timeline,
but, you know, the, the cost to
do this because of the
topography of New Mexico is, uh,
you know, what is it, uh,
forty-sixth in population, 5th
in land mass.
To to stretch the high, the, the
appropriate amount of broadband
to all of our school districts.
It it's, it's a lot of, of, it's
a lot of money. So it's going to
take in all of the above
solution, E rate, the bus that
this legislature has put into
this, these dollars I was
talking about with the beat 675
million and, and I don't even
think that gets us completely
there, but I think what you are
going to see is, like I was
mentioning before, you're going
to see these schools come up to
FCC standards uh with their
competitive all over the world,
that's going to benefit the
entire community where that
school is located. And I think
that's a very positive thing for
all of us. It cannot be lost in
this conversation because you're
gonna
have distance learning that will
be um available now, even
outside of the school, you'll
have uh economic development
opportunities that folks can get
on the on and sell their
products, goods, services, get a
job on the other side of the
planet, bring those
economic-based dollars jobs into
their community, telemedicine,
telehealth, all those things
will benefit in that community
when that school comes up to
par.
So, so Mr. Cha and center but
the uh, it's a, it's an
excellent plan and as you
indicate 670 million is not not
gonna be near enough in terms of
setting it up and of course as
we all know, uh, as soon as we
set up, if you will, the fiber
at 5 and it's moved on and then
from there, if you will, control
centers, um, and then tying in
the cybersecurity, what we're
actually finding is that it's
going to take quite a bit more,
but what happens in communities
like
Maxwell, um, Springer, Vaughn,
the smaller communities where
possibly they don't have the
expertise to work on, uh, maybe
the, the application for the
E-rate resources and or uh.
How do we tie this in broadband
and do you provide, if you will,
some of the expertise to help
the smaller school districts
prepare, if you will, for the
future of what the technology is
going to entail.
Senator, uh, we provide those
services today. We actually uh
provide, we have multiple team
members that have that technical
capability and can help those
school districts pick out the
right equipment, uh, that will
help them with their, you know,
internal network within the
school or within the district.
And uh that's part of the
services that we already
provide.
And so, Mr. Chair, the last
question, uh, are those services
provided at a cost or how does
that tie in, if you will, or is
it included, if you will, in a
470 application whenever we they
apply for the rate. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator
Padilla. So Chairman Senator
Campos, um, so yeah, so we did
move the uh staffing uh over to
Obay last year, so that that's
one piece of it. The other thing
that when we built the office,
uh there was the objective to
have a project management office
within it.
And, and there are project
managers right now that work
with communities, school
districts, etc.
They put together an analyze the
situation like we would have if
you've done this as president of
the university, I'm sure. So,
um.
And, and you put a plan
together, then it's, that's
having the plan is one thing,
but this office goes beyond
that. It actually helps you go
identify the funding sources,
helps to identify what, what
other permitting uh egress,
ingress, uh, rights away, you
may need to clobber in order to
get this done for you. And then
the actual project management of
building it out and implementing
it. So this is a sort of a full
suite solution that's very
efficient, uh state resources
that I think in a very efficient
way.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, just a closing
comment, uh, particularly for
the smaller school districts in
the rural and frontier areas.
Uh, I really hope as you
continue to deal with this that
uh if it does take, if you will,
the extra effort in in to ensure
that they do have these
resources that you continue to
go and do that and again, Mr.
Chair, thank you, Senator
Padilla. Thank you very much for
the, uh, the vision and for the
ongoing work that you continue
to do. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to our presenters. I
only have one question though.
And so Senator.
Campus was mentioned in in one
of the small areas.
Um, does it help when there's a
tower close by?
Mr. Chair, I, I, I never
professed to be the technical
person, but I do know it
happened to something about
this. Yes, that would, that's
always great whenever there's a
tower nearby. Because again, the
topography of New Mexico is sort
of an all of the above solution
with how it's the how things are
delivered, including some of the
satellite stuff, radio, um, the
like bounce or something like
that. There's a number of ways
to deliver broadband. So
anything that might be in the
area, they also look at that
through the Office of Broadband
to make sure that maybe a little
bit too um.
Senator Brent's question.
Yeah, so an example is uh.
Like we're I live.
You know, we didn't have
servers.
And then we're right next to um.
Solid Methodist university
branch campus.
And they went with the tower, so
then immediately we could get
some.
So,
You know, it just comes with it,
I guess it's like a radio
station, you know, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, thank you so much for
bringing that example. That's
what I was trying to communicate
to Senator Brand earlier, which
is that school gets lit up
somehow. Everybody around it is
going to benefit from the the
literally the neighbor next door
like yourself, economic
development, uh, tele
telemedicine, um, you know,
distance learn all of everyone,
all those boats around that boat
rise together.
And uh the last part of Mr.
Chairman to Senator Pa.
Yes so
There's a level of the tower.
Well, I don't mean in height.
I mean, in power.
Does it stay the same always.
Uh, chairman and the senator,
it's hard to say because some
towers might be line of sight,
some might be where there's
other towers they bounce or
other things they bounce off of.
Yeah, but I think he'd be able
to give you a better answer on
that, but that's how I
understand. It's usually line of
sight, but yeah.
And, and what I'm trying to get
to is um.
Do they control the power.
To
The actual tower.
Uh, chair Senator, there can be
some different models out there,
but generally the tower owner
has secured the power
requirements, and you're going
to have multiple devices on a
tower and so they have to split,
you know, uh, the power, you
know, for those different
devices. And so you may see, uh,
something that requires
significant power, you know,
that they have to upgrade uh the
power that's going to that
tower. So it kind of depends on
the situation and what the
technologies are to the
senator's previous point, uh,
and if I can just say that we've
already leveraged the education
network to do some of what
you're talking about.
We've used uh the Connect New
Mexico Student Connect program
to
Ward schools.
We can put a tower up and
connect their students directly
in the house. And we've actually
now awarded out 10 grants uh for
that uh for a total of $19
million. So those students can
get connectivity through the
state education network directly
into their communities in a
place where there's no 5G, uh,
so we're, we're already doing
this type of thing to make sure
that those students stay
connected at home and have those
extra resources from the school.
Very well, thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Senator Tomason.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, OK, so
I'm trying to just like
summarize all this in my head
and as you know, I'm, I'm in the
metro area, Mr. Chair, but I'm
in the acres where we don't have
5G and actually the front part
of my property, if you have
AT&T, you have some kind of
connectivity and if you go on
the other side of my property
and up the street, there's
nothing, literally nothing, um,
so I can see where this would
even benefit where I am in the
metro area, but if this is
helping schools get better
access to connectivity. Students
get better connectivity at home
and then as a byproduct, it's
actually growing the local
economy by connecting them in a
way that they've never been
connected, that also that
economic growth should feed into
student enrollment. That's the
idea, because more people will,
will be willing to work and grow
their families in that area. Um,
am I on par with what you're
doing, chairman and senator, you
said that so much.
I tried to say that earlier, but
you said it's so much more
eloquently. Here's my bill if
you'd like to post. I mean, I'm
willing to help you terrific,
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Woods, you have a question.
Just one quick question, Mr.
Chair.
So we're gonna.
The reason to do this.
Miss
Is that we think there's more
expertise.
In the
The broadband
authority, the broadband.
Than there is in the public
schools capital outlay
Authority.
Yeah, I noticed you're gonna.
Take money from the capital
outlay authority and put it in
the education infrastructure.
fun.
So the question is, is it
because of the expertise.
A broad band
Uh, knowledge.
Or is it in the fact that they
know the schools better.
To do this.
Uh, chairman and senator, it's,
it's really everything you just
described, I mean, but we also
picked up that expertise and
staffing group from
From the group and moved it over
to Oe. So they brought all the
Information, all of the
experience, all of the
knowledge, all of the work
that's been done up to this
point with them to that, to this
office. So now you have a
further streamlining of how
broadband gets delivered. So Mr.
Chair and Senator.
You're saying that we, we move
staff from
Public school capital outlay and
moved them into the broadband.
Yes, that was done last year,
this simply moves the funding
mechanism so that it's all
linked up now.
And, and with that Mr. chair,
how, how does
How does that work exactly? I
mean.
We fund public school capital
outlet a certain way.
So how does that work? We, we're
changing the statute.
Now take that funding directly
to the broadband.
For a what we're calling the um
Education,
technology, infrastructure fund.
So it is still for education
purposes only.
And it had a reverting to.
The, uh, 7, so it's a
non-reverting uh fund, but the 7
tax bonds can be used for up to
3 years.
And, and how much money, Mr.
Chair, right now is in that
fund.
chaired Senator, uh,
Over the last two years, uh, we
have secured through the PSCOC's
authorizations 9.8 million and
6.4, uh, for the last two years
that we've had this as um on
contract, right with the tools
facility Authority. I would have
to to get you the numbers of how
much we've expended down on
that, yeah, that's, that's what
I'm getting at. How are we
spending that down? How, how
fast are we moving that money
out of there if we've got a
problem, are we getting it on
the ground? Are we going to, how
are you picking your
Contractors.
To provide those services.
That's kind of the stuff I'd
like to see, and I know that you
may not have that information
right now.
But um I, I'd like to see that.
I know we've got some excellent
providers out there, especially
in my part of the world, you
know, and, and I know they get
the work done.
If there's, if they're directed
to do work, they get it done.
So I worry sometimes in this
particular deal that we have
contractors that they get
contracts and don't accomplished
the purpose of the contract, so
I, I know we have a lot of
middle mile out there done.
And so I'd like to see where
that middle mile is that you're
talking about or if this is a
middle mile problem.
Or if this is just a
A single school district
problem.
That you're trying to figure out
either to use tires or
Or
Or actually hardwired to it.
So anyway, those are just
general questions and I'm not
gonna try to pick your bill
apart at all. I'm just
uh, I really worry about this
industry because we've got
Lots of money out there already
to do things.
And the ones that aren't served,
it, it sometimes makes a big old
question mark in my mind how far
we're willing to keep putting
money out and not serving.
I mean there's some of these
people are set so far out in the
country that
Judas cannot
Landline to them.
But they may not even have
electricity in there.
Homes where you want them to.
Sure
I had a, I had a, a, a case of
that, there was a very critical
of the local server up in Union
County.
Because this one particular
ranch family found out that all
the neighboring branches.
That service run into him.
And they did
But under further
Further investigation, there's
no one that lived on that ranch.
And it wasn't
In service into that range.
So, you know, just because
someone doesn't have it where
they desire it.
In that particular motivation, I
truly believe, Mr. Chair, was.
We can make more money on a
resale if we have internet
service in here.
And
They had, they had already moved
the crews out of there, there,
you know, it would have been
very expensive to go back in.
But I mean, so sometimes I
question.
The map that served for you
guys.
One particular map showed a
grove of trees, so they wanted
service to that grove of trees.
There wasn't anything there but
a grove of trees.
You know, so.
Sorry, I'm through. I'll quit
preaching. Thank you, Senator.
I could I just one small little,
so one of the things I put into
the office when I set it up was
that there be and one of the
very first things that this
office did was the inventory
every structure in the state.
That way, when we went to the
feds to bring in, that was
another reason we're able to
bring this $675 million down
into our state is now we know
exactly, essentially we're
absolutely every single bit of
every single thing is now.
What's, and then there's a heat
map that's developed on top
layered on top of that, say,
well, here's where broadband is,
and here's where it isn't. Let's
focus on this area where it's
not. So there's a little more
organization to this than we had
previously.
I should say a lot more on that,
please share with me.
That area. I think I know that
area, but please share with me.
Where we are still underserved.
So, and you don't have to tell
me right now, just share a map
will be fine. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, uh, seeing me
for your question. Let me ask
you some, I'm gonna ask you the
first question off the FIR.
How's it, how's this gonna
affect this in your lawsuit.
I mean, that's the front line of
that.
Chair, I think uh you're,
you're, we're we're, we're uh
smack dab in the middle of a
redundancy project for McKinley
County, which I know you're very
well aware of. There's been 11
outages in 10 years, and the
Obay office actually is, is
getting the fiber in place for
the statewide education network,
which like I said, will raise
all votes at the same time and
provide that circular redundancy
so that when, when something
does go out, it doesn't affect.
I remember last year it was, was
it last year? Yeah, last year
when you had that, uh, in the
entire town.
out of yellow, right? Well,
McKinley County, this is going
to build that redundancy. I, I
didn't go out. I had Starlink.
There you go.
Like I said before, all of the
above solution, Mr. Chair. $164
a month.
No, but how's it gonna affect
this any lawsuit because there's
any law suit says if you have
one native kid in the school and
say he's in Springer or one of
those schools up north.
They could bring that lawsuit
saying you didn't serve.
That student who was a Native
American, and so I mean that's
the big question here. I, I got
a few more.
And I mean that's the, that's
the ultimate question is how do
we avoid
Getting back into that.
Box
Insane.
You pick a town, mascara, there
could be a Native American kid
that's going to school at
Mascaro and, and if you do not
serve that kid.
They could come back and ask the
judge to rehear the case because
You did not, you, you did not
serve him.
I think, chair, you heard
earlier that we're down to the
last two schools that that need
to be brought on. So I think
that's good. I think if you were
to look at in the time we've
been in the Zuni lawsuit.
The uh the proliferation of
broadband and how it's gone. I
think you're gonna see it.
You're gonna see an upward trend
in almost every uh part of this.
Number one, and, and number 2,
We wound up in the Zuni lawsuit
with the way things were.
Now we've made some massive
decisions and, and we've that
but again, you do the same thing
over and over again, that's
insanity. You're expecting a
different result. Well, this
actually has changed the really
the face of broadband in New
Mexico and I think it's going to
continue to do that. So I think
that's how this will actually
help uh um.
You know, the Zuni lawsuit. And
then like I said, for the
specifically for the McKinley
County area where ZUNY is
located, um, again, you know,
we're, we're, we have this 6
month resiliency um um
implementation project, which is
going to help resolve that as
well. So I think
I don't know how much of that
you heard, but that's, yeah, I
heard it all. I mean, that's the
problem is we're trying to get
out of the lawsuits and not
trying to poke the bear again,
insane we we brought Addiqui to
all schools.
And so that's, that's the number
one question. I think you're
gonna have to resolve that
somewhere along the floor
because that's gonna come up.
Uh, we, we, we, we've reduced
non connectivity since I've been
in the legislature from 27% down
to 11%. That's a huge, huge
piece of performance doesn't
matter to the courts.
Performance matters to the one
student or the number of
students that aren't getting
service. That's what the courts
are gonna rule on.
Um
The other thing is,
You're taking that you currently
have 25 million.
Sitting in, in the office of
Broadband for schools.
He that hasn't moved yet.
Uh, chair
We've actually awarded out $19
million over the last two
months, uh, for the Student
Connect program. So we are
closing the gap and we have more
applications that we're
reviewing right now for this
assistance-based grants to get
connectivity through the schools
directly to students.
OK, and then, and I'm just
reading from the FYR before I
read from the bill. I mean, then
it takes all the broadband uh
funding control from uh away
from PSCOC and gives it to you.
Is that something that we should
do? I mean, that's, we designed
PSCOC.
Because the Zuni lawsuit and now
we're taking all their authority
away from broadband and what if
they say,
Hey
We got someplace we got to
serve, maybe mention the two
schools that are not serving for
me it's the, the director there
to do that, but, uh, PO PS PSCOC
was supportive of this move when
we made the move for the staff
last year. It was, it was
leading about a two-year effort
to get that done. Now we're
simply moving the funding is to
streamline all of this, so, but
who are the two schools?
Um
Senator, I apologize I don't
have that memory. I'll grab my
staff to get with those two
answers. Uh, I do want to just
highlight, uh, you know,
22 things, you know, for this.
Um, so with
With, you know, the connectivity
for the schools, we're able to
bring extra uh funding to bear,
right? With the Connect New
Mexico funds and making sure
that we can actually, you know,
get students connected. That's a
really big you know piece with
this. PSCOC is very supportive
of this. They've actually been
giving us the authority under an
MOU, uh, we've been
administering it for the last
year.5 almost 2 years now. And
so they are very much in support
and unfortunately, Director
Romero had an emergency this
morning, but I did drop off a
letter from the previous
committee of PSCOCs and PS
PSOAs.
support for, for transferring
this to the Office of Broadband.
They want it to happen because
it's an administrative burden.
We want it to happen because
it's an administrative burden,
and we, we'd love to see this
happen. Thank you.
OK, 2 schools are say a guy,
which is Pueblo Pintado, which
is pretty much in the middle of
nowhere but jack rabbits and
deer.
The other one is Lybrook.
And in the BIA school does not
have access out there. There's a
BIE and they don't have
broadband at the BIE school. Do
you know that that's true?
You know. Uh, chair, I, I can, I
can ask my, my team. I believe
that if they're eligible for
E-rate that uh we've we've
gotten to all of the schools
that are eligible for E-rate out
of this program.
I mean, those are two schools
that are Native Americans kids
are.
Well, Pablo Pintadose guy.
100% needed and Lybrook is
probably pretty close to the
same.
Sure, so if, if they're not
eligible for E-rate, you know,
then we wouldn't have gone to
them out of that program and
that funding source, but to
your, your question, to your
point, right, about what is the
benefit for the office of
Broadband have this is our
mission is making sure that New
Mexicans all around the state
have connectivity and we can
bring other funding sources to
bear out of the B program. We
can bring other funding sources
to bear out of the, you know,
the ARPA funds that we're
already working on multiple
projects, in fact, Oso, uh,
connected the first couple of
homes out of that project. So
it's going to be an ongoing
process and multi-year for this
especially the fiber to the home
project.
But all of that is our mission
in the Office of Broadband
making sure there's connectivity
around the entire state. I'm
sure you saw that in the in the
FIR chair on the top of page 4,
those two schools are here.
And so then if we have all the
schools connected, what do we
need additional money for?
Well, just because they're
connected doesn't mean that
they're uh all at the at the
speeds that maybe they need to
be or, or the resiliency.
There's a number of things will
have to happen once they're all
connected.
But the good news is once
they're all connected, every
community in in the areas where
they're at will rise together as
speeds go up, as connectivity
and resiliency takes place. No,
I get all that. I, I can get
connectivity and redundancy and
how you connect and when there's
an upgrade in one system and
It changes the whole system. The
other thing I want to offer to
you is that I, I don't see a
sunset.
And I drew this is no thing on
you. I mean, I think you kind of
changed in and made some
movements in OBNB, but I think
we do need to sunset in this
bill.
Uh, just to make sure, because
you're gonna get 10 million a
year to fund.
And it's it's gonna go forever.
And if we don't see performance
in the fund.
There we, we need to look at it.
That's one thing and so in
section 2.
Um,
I don't know where to places
are.
Section 2, John comes back up
here.
I'd like to see a sunset in like
2029.
gives you a good 4 years to
to get 40 million out the door.
About 5 years, 2030, I don't
have a problem with 2030. I just
want to see a sunset at some
point to to to know that we're
just not sitting there building
money like we did with broadband
for a number of years, and it's
not moving.
one of the big purposes of this
fund is to leverage federal
dollars out of the FCC E-rate
program and that funds that
program isn't has no sunset. And
so there's ongoing operations
and maintenance that happens for
all of these schools on a 5 year
cycle in these category 2
projects, how this fund is used
for this category 2 projects is
that the state matches, so 90%
of that program is paid for by
the feds. If we come in with 5%
on those category 2 projects,
the feds will come in and
another 5%. And so my one
caution, you know, on, on having
the discussion about sunsetting
is that in 5 years, you know, or
4 years, you know, what, what
are we going to do to get those
extra federal dollars out of
this program for the ongoing
maintenance operations in all
the schools. Well, you just come
the year before, two years
before and say, hey, we proved
this program, move with the
sunset.
Very simple
I mean
We, we watched about 700 million
to a billion come up and go down
and.
Not get out and I mean, I think
the sunset is very important.
Um, Senator, would you?
And very important to to gauge
that, I mean, you can come early
for a sunset doesn't mean
anything, it just says I want to
see performance.
And then it makes me feel a
little more comfortable with the
Zuni issue, right? That we're
gonna try this.
And that the Zuni issue is, is
could be looked at and say,
well, they're going to try it
and it's got a sunset in there,
so like that's something.
Well he's doing that.
Then on page 12.
It says up to 10 million, but
you struck up to 10 million.
Um, so you could get whatever
you needed for the deficiency.
Do you want to answer that.
I just wanted to say that I
think, I think you're right on
the right idea, uh.
Have you come back in in 36
months, 3 years from now.
Even if you can't get 5 years
2020 30, I mean if you know, I
know, but, but come back to
maybe remove the sunset in 3
years because we we we can
demonstrate that I'm full, I can
we train, you know, so I'll wait
to try to make that motion to
accomplices maybe you want to
think about it's gonna belong to
John. You visit with center
compos where you can play that
in section 2.
And then
uh let me just there.
I'm sorry, I'm not an attorney.
I'm not good enough. I just, I
can read, but I'm not the one to
place it in the bill.
Then on page 12, it strikes a
$10 million right? You expended
each year.
What happens if you have your
fun billed 20 or 30 million, all
of a sudden the feds come in and
say, hey, if you can match us 20
million, we'll give you 100
million.
You think that handcuffs you in
a way?
I think that actually leaves it
open. I think that by striking
that, I think that leaves it
open.
To whatever amount we can, we
can.
Providing the funding is
allocated, shall be expended
within 3 years of its
allocation.
So you struck all that.
And, and so, Drew, give me an
idea of like when these federal
matches come in.
What number do you look at,
right? If you have 10 million in
this fund.
And say you have 10 million,
what number do you match from
the feds?
A chair, so we take the 90% of
the project that's already been
funded and then we have to match
5% of that 90. So it just
depends on what the cost is,
that's been approved from UA for
that school.
OK, so the projects.
$2 million 200,000.
Yeah
Then we get an additional
$200,000 from the fences.
On and get additional 200,000 or
additional 2 million. So, so if
it's uh, so if it's 2 million,
right? 95 and we put in the the
5%, right? Uh, so, um.
You know, then we would
basically get the additional 5%
on top of that. So the dollar
for dollar for that match. So
it's 90, 90% and we get the
extra 5%, so the feds. I thought
you said 90 9 9090, sorry chair
so we, we end up getting 95% by
matching 5.
OK.
OK.
Then I, then I help me
understand that section of the
language.
I think that's kind of it,
Senator Compos, did you get that
kind of work done.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we're gonna have that
language shortly and uh we'll go
ahead and close that as a as an
amendment.
right?
And then
I just, my main concern is
I think with the with the Zuni
lawsuit sitting out there it has
a sunset and then.
Say a guy and, and.
Lightbrook are gonna be served
within the next year, right?
This is all just mainly for
upgrades and technology. Every
school in the state is going to
have been served.
And it's all for really
upgrading the building
redundancy and you know, and
maintenance, yeah.
Yeah
Yeah, I won't say what I'll say,
but this is the only
where we fund them completely
fund you to dig, we fund you to.
To build, we fund you to do
everything and then you get to
charge us back and we get
nothing in return. I mean.
That's the way the system.
So
You turn off that light.
We should see all the droopy
faces behind you when the truth
has to come out. I mean, but
that's the only way it's gonna
get done.
It's the only way that you're
gonna do it cause they're not
gonna invest in going down the
road to service 5 houses and
think they're going to recover
their costs. I mean, it's, it's
a subsidized program.compos, you
ready? Oh, thank you very much,
Mr. Chair and members of the
Senate Finance Committee, so the
proposed amendment would be um
Section 2.
Page 4.
Uh, before lines or between
lines 17 and 18.
It would be a section E.
The provisions of this section,
uh, shall.
He repealed effective July 1st,
2030.
We'll take that as a friendly.
have a motion to adopt the
amendments. So, Mr. Chairman.
Motion my Campo, second my
senator.
Uh, Tobias and rent, whichever
one you want to pick the most
waved at me at the same time
couldn't see that.
Any objection to that. I mean,
any other questions from
committee members?
See none can I have emotion.
A motion for de passed by
Senator Tobias and seconded by
Senator Gonzalez.
We call
Oh, wait, wait, wait, is this?
This is not that bill, Senator.
This is Senate Bill 401.
Don't confuse me.
Um, or on a motion for due pass
we call the wrong.
Senator Brent? Senator Brant
votes no.
Senator Senator Campos Senator
Gonzalez.
Gonzalez, Senator Linier.
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
votes yes, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson
Senator Tobias, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes, yes,
Senator Chao.
Senator Sindo votes yes, Senator
Munozen votes yes, we have a 7
in the affirmative, 1 in the
negative. Senator Shindo, you're
gonna do Representative Lite's
bill.
OK.
Senator, when you sit down, we
do have an amendment.
We're gonna pass that out, make
sure you got it, Madam
Secretary, you have seen the
amendment.
That amendment should be 900.1,
he's gonna give it to you right
now. Steve, will give it to them
first.
Yes, that's what we're doing.
Really?
Uh, we're ready. You wanna
explain to me, thank you,
Senator members of the
committee, uh, House Bill 218 is
really kind of a large scale
cleanup of our tax code.
What it does is clarify an
existing statutes as well as
repealing unused and expired
statues with me as our secretary
of uh
Tax and revenue.
And so I will turn it over to
her for further explanation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, would you
prefer that I talk about the
amendment or the bill first? Uh,
let's just quickly touch on the
bill real quick and then we'll
see, we'll go over what the
amendment does because this is
rather large.
Bill.
Mr.
Cherry too.
I appreciate that, Mr. Chair.
The members of the committee,
this is a tax and rev agency
bill. You'll recall that every 2
years, uh, in the 60 day
sessions, tax and rev comes
forward with tax code cleanup
proposals, House Bill 218 is the
main tax code cleanup bill and
just to highlight a few of the
themes and and as the committee
goes on, I'm happy to go through
as much additional detail as the
committee has appetite for, um,
but basically, we're shortening
the tax code, we identified 81
obsolete sections that can be
repealed.
Um, there are a couple areas
where we're fully reflecting
destination sourcing that we put
in place for the GRT a few years
ago through some cleanup
language.
Uh, another area that we're
touching is, is uh repealing or,
or removing this inefficient and
unnecessary attorney general's
review of some, uh, certain
refunds and abatements and, and
closing agreements can talk
about why if there's interest,
um, we're allowing tax and rev
to electronically file tax liens
with the Secretary of State's
office. Right now, we have to
file them in paper, in person in
33 county clerk's offices. It's
time to e-file liens.
Uh, we're standardizing personal
and corporate income tax credit
language across dozens of
credits throughout chapter 7,
but not making any substantive,
uh, changes to what's eligible
for those credits or credit
amounts. And then there's just
many other areas of cleanup.
Um, all of these changes were
identified over the interim by
the department as well as, um,
based on feedback we receive
routinely from tax practitioners
and taxpayers about what's not
working for them. And, um, the
FIRs on these bills have a
section by section summary to
try to aid in, in review of this
really voluminous bill, and we'd
be happy to stand for questions
or we could talk next about the
amendment.
Um, we're good. Let's move the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Thank you have a copy of the
amendment. Do I have a second?
by myself.
So write that any objection to
that, OK? We're on the
amendment.
Mr. Chair and members, um, this
is an interesting one. We made
this the substance of these
amendments a couple of days ago
in the Senate Tax Committee, but
afterwards there was a clerical
error discovered in the line
numbering of a bill. I guess
there was a one line difference
between the official printed
version of the bill and the
online version that, that the
amendments track to. And so
these exact amendments were
already adopted in Senate tax,
but the amendment before you
today because of that clerical
issue.
Uh, amendment number 1 strikes
all the Senate tax amendments
and then makes them again one
line different to correctly
match the original printed
version of the bill. And if
you'd like, Mr. Chair, I can
talk about the substance of,
there's 3 parts to the
amendments that I'm happy to go
through.
just the realignment is, is what
you said now there's other
substance in the amendment, so
it is just a realignment to the
amendments that were approved by
Senate tax, but since they're
before your committee, I'll
defer to the committee if you
want to know more about what
they are. The, the main one, Mr.
Chair, is, is that we remove any
uh cleanup related to the
taxation of skim oil, um, and so
that takes out most of the
positive fiscal impacts to the
bill, but it also resolves some
issues that were brought up by
the oil.
Natural Gas Association.
OK. Questions on the amendment.
can have a motion to amendment
questions on the amendment.
OK, we have a motion by.
Ocean by uh.
Senator Woods.
Taking my Padilla.
Any objection to the motion?
See none. We're back on the
bill, madam, you want to go over
the bill?
Questions on the bill. Senator
Woods. OK, we've got a, uh, a
revenue increase of $200
million. So where are we getting
the revenue increase my, my
impact is in I reading this
wrong, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator Woods,
could you
where you're looking.
I'm just looking at the
financial impact report.
And it says revenue in thousands
and it's a positive.
$201 million.
So these are 200,000.
This is thousands of millions.
Dollars and thousands. I'm so
sorry.
I thought, man, you're coming in
with a a big role here but.
Not so much
Senator Woods, um, section, what
was section 91, I think it may
have been renumbered, but
there's it in the, by the out
ear FY 29, there's a 201,000
positive impact. What we
discovered in the tax code is,
is there's an investment credit
that is supposed to be pegged to
the state GRT rate, but instead
of just saying in the law.
The credit percentage is equal
to the state GRT rate. It
actually had 5.8%.
So when the GRT came down by
0.25%, it was, so we're raising
a tiny bit of revenue here by
making the
Investment credits in the future
current GRT rates of the state.
So
Miss Ja, Madam Secretary.
Why did so many Republicans in
the House vote against this
bill.
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods, I
believe they're concerns were
related to the skim oil
provisions,
uh, basically the, the bill went
through the House Tax Committee,
it's main hearing in the House,
and after the house Tax
Committee, the Oil and Gas
Association came forward and
said we have some concerns. And
it was determined that it would
be better procedurally to make
that change in the Senate
committees rather than on the
House floor.
No and that was the change we
voted on.
Thank you.
You questions from committee
members.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, just to,
just quickly, and I, I really
appreciate this, Madam
Secretary, as you continue to
clean up to modify, if you will,
the process as we go forward
just uh quickly, Mr. Chair, and
Madam Secretary, if you can make
a statement regarding the
benefits of the cleanup, uh, to
the operation to the uh
to the state and then to the
taxpayers.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair and
Senator Campos, I appreciate
that question. Um, there are a
lot of.
A lot of different marginal
improvements made in this bill,
um, shortening the tax code is
good for all of us, right? And,
and in this we repeal 81
obsolete sections and we can
dense some language that's very
repetitive to make the tax code
shorter, which also allows rules
to be shorter, that, that all
tie to those sections. So that's
kind of good for everyone at the
department as well as
Um, and then some of the
procedural changes that this
bill allows the department to
make will be more efficient. For
example, e-filing liens with the
Secretary of State will just
save a lot of time, uh, for
department.
Employees having to go to county
clerk's offices in person with,
you know, in 2025, we can
accomplish that in a smarter
way, um, another improvement
that I kind of glossed over, but
removing the Attorney General's
um approval of right now in
statute, there are 3 things that
the Attorney General approves,
and those date back to a time
when the Attorney General really
was the general counsel for the
department, and that hasn't been
the case for, for a long time.
So what's happening is that we
find that most of the time the
Attorney General's office
doesn't
have someone who's knowledgeable
about tax law.
And instead of training someone
and having them perform that
work. They commission an
attorney of the department to do
that on their behalf.
So that's, that's not helpful
and it's just adding another
layer of um approvals that slows
down taxpayers waiting for
larger that is another thing
that's to the benefit of
taxpayers and the department.
And uh yeah.
Mr. Chair just uh closing
statement in terms of the work
that continues to go forward. I
I appreciate the way you
continue to not only take a look
at the uh tax code, but continue
to make the uh.
Yeah
Clean it up as you, as you
indicate, but deeper than that
as we move forward, uh, what do
you anticipate particularly
given the situation as we move
forward with the federal
changes, um, are you keeping up
with, uh, what those changes are
and how that might also um
affect, if you will, the uh our
state tax code.
Mr. Chair and Senator Campos,
it's a great question, and I,
you know, was involved in, in
the background work to prepare
the Craig economist a couple of
weeks ago to come before your
committee and talk more
generally about the federal
changes, um, of, of course,
there are federal impacts that
New Mexico could experience if,
um, for example, if the federal
workforce is, is reduced, that
impacts our wages and salaries,
which affects personal income
tax and then flows through into
gross receipts tax, or questions
there are questions about
Medicaid sizing and things like
that that could all be impacted
for New Mexico based on federal
changes. As far as the tax code
goes, um, we, we are monitoring
whether the 2017 um quote
unquote Trump tax cuts will be
extended, that looks likely. If
so, uh, New Mexico conforms to
impacts our tax code.
Mr. Chair and Madam Secretary,
of course, Senator, thank you
very much for not only the
responsiveness, but uh your
suitability to continue to go
and keep us, if you will, uh, at
a favorable level as we deal
with our tax code and uh taxes
for New Mexico. Thank you very
much, uh Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions?
I'm looking for, I seen a word
in here.
Notwithstanding in the tax code.
I'm getting there.
Um, it's, it's, well, it's in
two places then,
notwithstanding.
Is in page 88, section F.
Says in responsible time the
department and notwithstanding
any other provisions.
And then there's uh Charles'
ears are perking up, there's
another notwithstanding in here.
Um
Mm
Page 92.
Line 18.
And now, notwithstanding any
other provisions.
And then there's one more.
There's 7 of them.
I just not we're notwithstanding
just means.
We can do whatever we want,
really.
And, and in a tax code, I've
never seen it in the tax code
notwithstanding, why would we
have notwithstanding language in
there,
um, I'm still looking through
all 7 instances of that word,
but I want to just clarify those
were existing, not added in this
bill. And, and I would also say
that they are notwithstanding
provisions of the tax
administration Act, which is
not, which is not, I guess I
would say it's not to say do
whatever we want, but it's if
If there's another more specific
provision that's also included
in
Chapter 7, Article 1. So I'd
have to look at each of these in
detail, but for example,
Uh, timely refund claims can be
paid or assessments can be
abated, notwithstanding other
provisions. I have to look and
see exactly what other
provisions might apply, but for
example, maybe an assessment.
Um, can be abated,
notwithstanding if there's
A criminal matter going on or
maybe there is a, I, I, I don't
know, I don't want to get too
far ahead of it, but.
Those notwithstandings are
limited to 7-1. here's one on
page 173 section E new language
notwithstanding the provisions
in the section 1771-26.
Taxpayers shall not claim, and
the department shall not allow a
refund.
Uh, with respect to any optional
refund.
Contribution that was made by
the department at the direction
of the taxpayer, that is, it is
technically new language on that
page, which I think is page one.
72173, but it's just being
reorganized and recompiled from
elsewhere and, and what this is
about is there's a whole process
where the legislature has
created optional places that
someone can choose to contribute
their pit refund.
So, when you file your tax
return, you have something like
20 different um funds you can
choose to contribute your pit
refund to. And what we're seeing
here is that you,
notwithstanding
That you have
Something else conflicting with
that. For example, a, a taxpayer
might submit a return and they
think they're getting a refund
and they direct us to contribute
it somewhere. If their return is
adjusted, and they actually
aren't owed a refund. We will
not contribute it there.
But that's also an existing law.
We're just kind of recompiling
it in one place. I mean taxes
need to be crystal clear, can
have notwithstanding, you can do
this, notwithstanding, you can
do that.
I mean, they should be crystal
clear in what they're doing, I
mean.
Uh,
uh, you know, we can argue all
we want, but I mean, the court
did take notwithstanding
language up.
And in, in the budget, I can't
can't remember who did that, but
the notwithstanding language.
Gives you the authority to do
whatever, really whatever you
did decide or determined, and I
don't think that's fair to a
taxpayer.
Mr. Chair, I, I would say that.
Notwithstanding from a budgetary
perspective might be a little
different than the way that this
is used. This is basically
carving out that there might be
something more con uh more
specific elsewhere in the tax
code or
That gets in the way of this. So
this is sort of saying you can,
uh, in this particular instance
on page 173, you can, uh,
contribute your refund to this
place unless there's a problem
doing that.
And it, it still does remain
crystal clear.
Maybe John's listening back
there, but I mean,
notwithstanding that allows you
to do whatever you want, and
says shall not, and shall not,
notwithstanding.
I think that's, that's a lot of
flexibility and notwithstanding,
especially in the tax code, how
many times, 7 times?
7 times, I mean, we couldn't
clarify it down to 1 or 2.
7, notwithstanding languages in
there,
uh, for example, the, the
notwithstanding that you're
finding on page 173.
I
Equal to the deletion of
notwithstanding on page 175. So
there's two of the 7. If you
look at page 175, paragraph D on
line 4. That's the same language
from existing tax codes. It's
just being moved and recompiled.
He struck it on page 175 though,
right? And then the same
existing language from statute
is moved.
But why would you strike it and
then put it back in.
Mr. Chair, we're basically just
cleaning up the way that the
that the um the language flows
and putting it in a more
sensical place.
And consolidating.
the concept.
Um, another example, Mr. Chair,
that
Page 236. There's an existing
notwithstanding, notwithstanding
the provisions of Section 718,
which has to do with
confidential confidentiality
returns. It's saying that
notwithstanding the
confidentiality of returns,
which is 718 TRD may disclose
certain um credit eligibility
necessary to basically
administer the rural jobs tax
credit. That doesn't, I would
say, Mr. Chair, that doesn't
allow anybody, there's, um,
Conflict of law that's being
carved out here, so that to
administer a tax credit. We may
disclose
er junk can you come up here and
tell me what the meaning of
notwithstanding is.
Senator Lopez is just thoroughly
excited. We're looking at the
word nutswithstanding.
You probably can do it from
right there if you want.
In context of tax law, maybe. I
don't, you're not a tax lawyer,
but.
help me get comfortable because
I don't feel comfortable.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Uh, you
are correct, I am not a tax
attorney. Can I see that new
provision he's talking about,
but notwithstanding the
Um
There's, yeah, there's 7,
there's, but there's 1 new
provision that he's referring
to,
I think specifically is not.
It's just moving the same
language.
It's page 173 I think
was
uh, Mr. Chair, I mean in this
context, I, I would interpret
that as meaning that although
it's possible that you could
draw, you know, a potential
conflict with Section 7126, the
notwithstanding there is to
clarify that um that potential
um ambiguity.
Aside, um, in this context, the
taxpayer is not allowed to claim
that and it's uh uh outlining
the duties on the department,
um, and what's available to the
taxpayer. Um, I don't, I don't
interpret that as a legal
problem. Um, that in, in context
that seems to make sense to me.
OK, I just know the word
notwithstanding really doesn't
mean a whole lot. It means you
can do whatever they want in,
in, in certain contexts.
In particular context, Mr.
Chair, but in this particular
circumstance, I think that that
the use of the word is proper.
OK, I just want to make sure
that you feel comfortable with
it. Any other questions from
committee members? Can I have a
motion.
And motion for Du pass by
Senator Tobiasson's second by
Senator Vanilla.
Cholera.
Senator Brantley Reed.
Senator Capos Senator Campos
votes, yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes
Senator Linier.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin, Senator
Tobiasson Bosia, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Sendo.
Senator Shino votes yes. Senator
Munozen votes yes, you have a do
pass 7 in the affirmative, 0 in
the negative. OK.
Thank you.
Thank you members.
Thinner
coupleso you're gonna share.
OK, we're gonna do 181 1st and
then 535.
1535 1st. We're gonna do 181.
OK. How's 181. House Bill 181 is
a ele uh LOC uh rec bill.
Um, it requires DFALC to, to
look and jointly develop
oversight mechanisms for pilot
programs, uh, funded through
Bro.
We all know that we appropriated
grow last year, uh, as we were
here and it's a 3-year pilot
projects, and it tests Mexico's
approach is improving outcomes.
We wanna know what's happening
with our dollars or tax dollars
in New Mexico, and this allows
us to track it, allows us to uh
get all the information to know
if if they're working, if
they're not working, if they
should go into the budget, uh,
through the growth system after
3 years or did they, did it show
that the pilot project did not
work and it should not be
funded.
Uh, shows good results, uh, in,
in there there's the 6 things
that it really does.
Identified program goals and
outcomes.
Describes how programs
activities will be achieved and
they expected outcomes.
It summarizes evidence or
research on program and
effectiveness. It includes a
plan for monitoring and includes
an evaluation.
plan to assess casual impacts of
the program, and it describes
the benefits and methods for
statistical statistical analysis
and timelines for reporting
results.
And with that we'll stand for
questions. Do we have an
amendment on this?
OK,
no, for sure, go to the audience
and we here in support of House
Bill 181.
The opposition
Anybody in the Zoom?
OK.
All right.
Go to the committee for
questions.
So pass Woods, seconded by
Senator Campos.
Senator Brent.
Senator Campos, Senator Campos
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalezia, Senator Lanier.
Senator Padilla, Senator
Padillas, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Shchino. Yes.
Senator Sendosia, Senator Munoz.
Yes,
we have a Du pass 7 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Thank you. So we'll move on to
Senate Bill 535. Thank you, Mr.
Chair Senate Bill 5:35, the over
overview will be.
kind of a little
technical in because we're
dealing with 22 situations in
here.
One bill didn't get out of
committee and it has to be
fixed.
The other one we just caught
through the exact.
And so what Cinabel 5:35 does.
It increases the workers' comp
administration operating through
the increased fees and necessary
to continue providing uh and
increases the funding for
telecommunications relay
services, an increased surcharge
that is essential for
accessibility to our citizens
with hearing and speech
disabilities.
Uh, creating the fund of the 988
Lifeline Fund and establish a
non-reverting fund that will
save lives in New Mexico's
facing mental health struggles,
alcohol or drug use concerns.
988 hotline was in trouble and
we need to shore that up.
And this will add critical
assistance to people from across
the state.
Um, Senator
You want to come up here, I have
that with me, yeah.
Um
The workers' compensation fees
have not been raised since 1990.
The agency is funded through
quarterly assessment and fees
when you pay your 941s, uh, the
current revenue is slightly
above 13 million while the
operating expenses have reached
over 14 million and the gap
continues to grow each fiscal
year.
The funds from the agencies'
reserves have been depleted.
Through their interagency
transfers and will drop by
nearly 300,000 by the end of the
school year 25.
Remodest increases over a
10-year period will provide for
current and future additional
workers' compensation fees.
Uh, telling me
telecommunications relay
service, the bill increases the
telecommunications relay
service, uh, at a rate.
Uh, 0.33 to 1.66.
The moun
Collected 20% is transferred to
the telecommunication Access
Fund, and 80% of it's
transferred to the 988 Lifeline
crisis.
Um, that's a crisis hotline.
where you call when you
Uh, and so it creates a fun
Wester chair, I think we'll
stand for questions. We do have
a verbal amendment. Senator
Lopez did catch something that
we need to amend, but let's go
through the bill and then we'll
talk about her amendment. OK.
Um.
Anybody here in support of the
Senate Bill 535.
You what couple you come on up,
anybody up and support?
OK, so go ahead and to support.
Come on up, there's a mic
somewhere there.
Mr. Chair, members of the
Kennedy, my name is Rhonda
Gilliland Lopez. I am the
executive director of the
mechanical Sheet Metal
Contractors Association.
We ask that you support this
bill. Workers' comp is such an
important agency to workers and
to business people, and they
need to have this continuing
funding to help us have our
services. Thank you.
You
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson for a
disability rights New Mexico.
Um, I want to highlight two of
the really helpful things that
this bill does, uh, it does
establish an ongoing funding,
funding mechanism to support the
988 um helpline and all of the
services that are connected to
that, it's really important to
our community has mental health
issues to have that as an
ongoing um support service, um,
it will also with the amendment
that I think you're going to be
dealing with, um, we'll give a
little bit of financial relief
to the uh New Mexican.
of commission on the Deaf, which
operates the relay system.
Um
Uh, because they'll be able to
tap into the, the existing fund,
uh, a little bit uh more uh to a
greater extent, so they have a
little bit more money.
But I would be remiss if I
didn't point out that this fix
is still tied to a percentage.
Of, um, telephone, uh, telephone
bills, and the problem that the
commission has had for years is
that.
Yeah, the LSC and uh other folks
DFA always assume you're gonna
be getting more money and uh um.
When you use that percentage
basis, it turns out that for
several years, the amount of new
money coming into the fund is
going down and it's going to
continue to go down. So we'd
encourage you in either now or
in the near future to look at um
tying the tying that fund, um,
setting a specific amount, which
is what has been proposed in
Senate Bill 372, I think, rather
than a percentage of fixed
amount because the percentage
is.
melting in lower income actually
every year to the fund, so in
the, in the long run we'd
encourage you to uh fix that,
but this bill does some really
good things and we encourage the
bill to go forward. Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, Ellen Pines
representing the Disability
coalition we advocate for, uh,
the interests of persons with
disabilities of all types, which
includes people who are deaf or
hard of hearing and people with
mental health conditions, um, so
we have somewhat mixed feelings
about the bill as um Mr. Jackson
also expressed uh we very much
support identifying a permanent
funding source for the 988
system. It's a really important
system and needs to have.
end able funding and that's part
of the problem here, um, the,
uh, uh, relay fund funding has
been problematic for years, um,
every year for years there's
been a shortfall and uh the
commission for the deaf has had
to seek a special appropriation
to cover those costs because the
income is coming down, um, this
bill would not address um their
long term funding problem and it
creates the same problem for 988
by relying on a.
percentage of a uh diminishing
source of revenue, a flat fee in
the long run would be a better
revenue source, um, we do
understand that there is an
amendment coming that in the
short term, um, would kind of
cover this over, but in the long
term, um, you really need to
look at a more reliable funding
source for both 988 and the
relay service at the commission
for the deaf. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you on Zoom.
Morning.
Go ahead.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
honorable senators. I'm Marnie
Goodrich. I'm the current chair
of the advisory Council on
Workers' Compensation. The
advisory council is made up of 6
members appointed by the
governor, 3 members representing
workers and 3 members
representing employers for the
purpose of monitoring and making
recommendations related to the
adoption of rules and
legislation regarding workers'
compensation. The advisory
council supports SB 535. The
base assessment fees have not
changed since the 1990 work comp
Reform Act.
Um, in the last several years,
interagency transfers from WCA
reserves and other agencies has
left the WCA fund nearly
depleted, with this moderate
increase in assessment fees, the
WCA would generate enough
revenue to support the agency,
the programs and the resources
they offer for workers, injured
workers and employers that are
critical to the continued
success of our workers'
compensation system in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you.
Nobody else.
OK. All right. Now we'll go to
the committee.
Or do you wanna um move them I
haven't done this before, so I
don't know how we're gonna
handle this amendment. Senator
Lopez.
You're now gonna be my
co-sponsor on this film.
That's awesome.
And so we have an amendment and
this will help the 98 fund
center Lopez, let's just, can we
have a motion to discuss it can
have
a motion here. Senator Gonzalez,
seconded by Pat Woods.
Remove the amendment.
Thank you, Mr. President. The
reason the amendment is
necessary is because the funds
in the the funds have kept
decreasing. In fact, they've
decreased about 99% since 2010,
and the reason for that is that
the megabytes, um,
The taxes because megabytes and
bundled data plans have, have
become more popular, um, the tax
collected has been the same
percentage, but the number of
the, but the cost to the user
has gone way down. And so, um,
the tax is just been uh uh
decreased. Now in 63-9F-12.
Creating the telecommunications
Access Fund, the commission for
the, for the deaf and hard of
hearing for deaf and hard of
hearing persons can spend not
more than 10% of the amount
deposited. So because the
amendment, because the amount
has gone down so much there and
the cost of services they
provide and the technology is
increased, they are, they have
had to come in the last few
years, year after year and asked
for a special appropriation.
They did so again this year and
they
got half of what they asked for.
They needed uh 4000 in a special
appropriation to do what they
needed to do this year, and they
only got 200,000 in the special
appropriation and what I learned
is we needed a permanent fix,
and that's why Meredith Dixon
and I proposed a bill that
passed
352, which set of flat, flat
feet.
So that we wouldn't have this
problem with the declining
revenue. It would be a flat fee
for each phone, but I think that
Senator uh Munoz has a
suggestion that really takes
care of two problems, the 988
fund funding, which is great and
also with this amendment allows
the commission more discretion
in what they can spend out of
the fund.
Because it's a percentage.
It's gonna run into assuming
that cell phones and data plans
keep going down in price, which
seemed to have been the trend.
Eventually this blend is this
fund is going to get spent down
and there will have to be
another fix. I don't know. I'm
not a, I haven't done the
numbers, but I think probably in
5, 1015 years, we're gonna have
to come back.
However
This takes care of an immediate
problem. So the amendments that
um Senator Munoz is going to um.
To propose allows the Senate,
the state budget division to
approve an expenditure of up to
100% of the amount deposited in
the telecommunications access
fund during any fiscal year,
they probably will not be
spending 100% in the early
years, but this will solve the
problem that they've had, and
they won't have to be coming up
here every year for a special
appropriation or an author uh
authorization to spend more than
10% of the amount deposited in
the telecom.
Communications fund apparently,
um, Senator Nancy Rodriguez has
been helping them do that for
for years and it's just not
sustainable. Um, what they
ultimately need is more
authority to spend from the
deposits into the fund, and then
eventually,
Uh, a more sustainable solution,
but this solution is gonna be a
great solution, at least I, I
think at least 5 years, but up
to 15 years, depending on how
much you spent.
OK.
Any questions from the
committee.
We'll check the uh
motion by Senator Gonzalez.
Yeah, this, this one, this sizes
don't work.
Senator Brent, thank you and
and.
Um
We're still on the amendment.
Yes, I know.
Um, I, I have, you know, I, I
spoke with um.
The was it the the head of the
director of the commission
Nathan yesterday and I, I do
have concerns though 100%.
Um, coming out, and that fund
would have nothing in it.
Um,
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, senator.
100%
of the deposited.
The the fund has, I think it has
over a million, a little over a
million right now, but the
commission is not authorized to
spend right now more than 10% of
the amount deposited.
Um, and so that really limits
their ability to help.
If it's up to 100% of the amount
deposited. Remember they only
get 20%.
Um, of, uh, in, in Senator
Munoz's bill, they only get 20%,
80% goes to the 988 funds. So
it's 100% of the 20%, um, which
will allow them more
flexibility, and they won't have
to come here every year asking
for authority to spend more than
10%.
And
And or a special appropriation,
which is what they've been doing
for the last several years.
Miss Chairman, Senator, what's
the fund?
Now it's used for them is it
just an emergency fund or?
center, they're not eligible to
use the fund. They're only
allowed OK.
So it's basically going in and
out.
Yes.
OK, thank you.
Thank you for the question, Mr.
Chair.
What is the pleasure of the
committee?
OK, let me, let me state the
amendment because we haven't
written correctly.
So I move that Senate Finance
Committee substitute for this is
we're going to substitute this
bill so members know, I move
that Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 535
to issue a 0.2 version of the
bill that adds section 63-9-12
in mens Falls increases the
amount the state budget division
may approve for expenditure from
10% deposited up to 100% of the
amount deposited into the fund.
And the new 202 number would be
231-747.
Southern Woods, we have two
sections of different law.
We're, we're in this amendment,
we're only amending.
Section, which is current.
In this amendment, that's all
we're doing and we're allowing
them if the deposited funds were
$100 today.
apparently they don't be able to
spend 10.
Very well, so.
So do you have questions as
amended? No, no.
Yeah, then we adopt the
amendment very well.
We have a motion to do the
motion to adopt the.
A moment is presented by the
chairman.
Or any opposition to it?
See no
We're back now again to the bill
with the two amendments.
And uh
I have a question also.
Alright, thank you, chair. um.
And Senator, just real quick,
so, uh, I guess I'm, I'm, I'm
struggling with um.
The determination of the fees.
Uh, on, on megabytes, what, what
exactly?
It's not just the flat
percentage of your phone bill
regardless of what it is or
where does this come from,
my bill that was presented in in
tax, business and finance
yesterday, I believe it was
yesterday, uh, 3:52 would change
it from a percentage.
To a flat fee on each telephone
of 51 cents.
Um, and the reason is because
the cost of communication.
That is related to
To um
To the voice megabytes or
whatever, um, keeps going down
and it's gone, it's gone down
99% since 2010.
And because of that,
The amount collected on this
0.033 tabs.
Keeps going down and down and
down and it's just. Mhm
and Senator, how's that tied to,
to, to megabytes or what
what do you, it's tied to
megabytes. Oh, thank you, cause
you're the.
You're the megabytes key. Um,
the reason it's tied to
megabytes is that um thank you.
But I'm not the chili king that
that dude's sitting next to you
over there so it's tied to
megabytes, my understanding, it
took me a little while to
understand this, is that mega
megabytes are connected to data
plans and sold in bundles so
that the amount that they can
tax on the voice data, it's just
gotten smaller and smaller and
smaller.
Because that's the portion of
the service that's being
utilized for these services.
Yes, yes, and that's, that used
to be, we used to have this
surcharge on landlines.
And, and because of the advent
of cell phones and then these
data plans that have voice data
plans, the, the part that is
is taxable.
Has shrunk. Now, if you ask me
more than that, I don't know if
I can answer, but that's what I
understand. And perhaps we have
uh Nathan Gome, uh, I know
Nathan very well. Yeah, he's the
executive director of the
commission, um, and he's the one
that explained this to me.
In a way that I could understand
and that's what I understood
and senator, why wouldn't you
just do the flat percentage on
the phone bill.
Uh, because that's what we do
the surcharge on 911, we passed
this through the Senate
recently. I mean, it would just,
it would, it would adjust itself
as cost escalation happened or
inflation happened or
Over the years or whatever, and
you never have to, you really
wouldn't have to come back again
and ask for this.
Um, Mr. President, I believe,
and again, this may be beyond
my, there is under the Federal
Communications Act.
There are ways in which the
states can
Charge for these services under
the FCC and
OK, I get it now. OK. So you got
it? OK.
Yes, OK. I, I, I'm not sure that
I agree though that the FCC
would, would, would, would
You know, tie our hands behind
our backs on how we collected
these fees though for our people
in our state.
My understanding is there are
only certain ways you can
collect this fee pursuant to
FCC, um, regulations and
I'm, uh, beyond that is a little
bit further than my knowledge
goes. I think I understand now.
Thank you. Thanks, Chair.
Well, Senator Woods.
So,
This chair
We were increasing funds.
From the workers' comp
administration
fund created.
So we're talking about
On page 2.
Line 5, we start talking about
Mm
Increases.
And then
We get, you know, it's a charge
to the employer and employees.
And then on
On page 3, section 2, we're
jumping to a different law.
Then we'll start talking about
Telecommunications.
So how is this not?
Log rolling, we're talking about
two completely separate laws,
two completely separate deals.
So explain that to me. I'm not
an attorney, as you can plainly
see.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so I, I'll take
that one. So if you look at the
relating to
Line on page one, line 11.
Relating to public peace,
health, safety, and welfare. So
it, it's broad.
It's not focused just on
telecom, it's not just focused
on workman's comp. It's, it's
very much fraud. And all of
these elements that are in here,
for example, the workman's comp,
it's dealing with the fund.
Right? The surcharge on telecom
gets deposited into a fund, and
you're creating the 988 fund and
then the amendment that was just
um adopted by this committee is
bringing in the other fund. So
it's all related to funding.
Um, so that's how it's all able
to be in one bill.
So so Mr. Chair, so
So keep this from being log
rolling.
We're saying because this fund
is funded from two different
places, we can talk about both
of those two different laws.
To fund this Mr. Chairman, no,
because the initial bill, which
we call now.
Relates to peace, public
welfare.
Emergency bill. And so that
allows the capability of this.
when it's transferred.
Not be a love rolling.
It just under definition that it
is a, a emergency.
Bill
Just that definition alone
allows us to do this.
Not that definition alone, but
the other language below safety.
Relating to
Uh, peace.
Public peace, health, safety,
welfare, increasing fees.
OK, so
Mm
As long as we're talking about
increasing fees, we can put
anything in there.
Well, you can in in a emergency
bill when the language says
relating to public.
Public peace, health, and safety
and welfare.
OK, that's the only language on
the bill that allows you to do.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Brent.
Thank you as chairman.
loose interpretation.
courts would probably end up
having to decide that at some
point if someone sued.
And I would really question how
workman's comp has anything to
do with public peace, health,
safety, or welfare.
But I'm not an attorney and I'm
not gonna sue over.
It's not my question.
My question comes in.
When we're, we're
Dealing with
The 988.
Why are we
Uh, how, how is that funded now?
Uh, Mr. Chair, so currently 98
is based on annual
appropriations, and as of right
now it's not in the budget, so
if this bill doesn't pass 98
uh Chairman Senator, so it's,
it's not a federal program
that's funded federally.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I believe part of
it is, but not all of it.
OK, so it's partially funded
through federal.
Was created during Trump's first
administration.
Um
But we, we completely fund it
now.
just couldn't come up and answer
that question.
Mr. Chairman, the federal
government uh gave state uh.
Hotlines up
With the intent for them to be
self-funded.
Over time through these types of
relay fees.
That that helps me tremendously.
Thank you. That was my only
question. I was just trying to
figure, figure out how that was
funded before and
Um, that makes sense that they
Did it that way, um, cause I
know it's, it's used through the
Veterans Administration also, so
I, I didn't know if it was
partly funded by the the VA is
connected to the 98.
Thank you very much.
Well, we had a motion for a due
pass from uh Senator Tobias.
Your second.
seconded by Senator Padilla.
Senator Brent.
Yes. Senator Brandt votes,
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes yes. Senator
Linier. Senator Lanier votes,
yes, Senator Padilla. Senator
Padilla votes yes, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes. Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Woods.
Center Woods votes no Senator
Shindo.
Senator Munoz.
Yes. Senator Munoz votes, yes,
we have a due past 7 in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
Very well.
OK, thank you. Um.
That we'll come back this
afternoon sometime after the
floor.
The Special subcommittee, uh,
Senator Padilla.
Uh, and then we're gonna wrap
that specials up.
up House Bill 2 over the next 2
days.
Um, we are gonna hear some house
bills in tomorrow.
Need to speak to this. I want to
clarify something again on the
other day when we talked about
House Bill 11. That was a review
for our committee. I wasn't a
hearing on the bill. It was a
review for our community and
they have another one for the
gun bill this weekend.
we can start reviewing those
bills, so we completely
understand them as a committee.
Where we're going.
Um
We're saddled, we got saddled
with a lot this year.
Um, you name it.
And so we need to understand in
this community.
Yeah,
I just had a question on the tax
package.
It was any sort of an update on
where that is. I have no, I
haven't been updated. I don't
know where the text of a lot of
items we're trying to get built
into that thing, uh, quantum,
um.
The microgrids, all this other
stuff you'd have to talk to
Senator Hamblin, Senator worth,
the tax committee. I have no, I
haven't been updated. I have no
idea where I get the sense that
they have a phone book size list
of things that people want to
get in there, so you got a
better sense than I got because
I have no idea.
We get it, maybe you could
invite.
Hamlet over here to give us an
update or somebody to tell us
where that is. I mean, we're
getting awfully close and we
don't want to be making a bunch
of rash decisions, like, you
know, too quickly or whatever,
so.
Yeah.
So the and senator.
Uh, Lopez just told me in the
tax package just causes me tax
committee so then once it hits
the floor and comes over and I
don't think we can question it
right now cause.
You don't know what's in. I have
no idea. I'm just, I haven't
been involved with it and I have
no idea. Well, they, they, and
I'm just respectfully, I just,
you know, I think that they um
they did what when I was on that
committee for 9 years. They put
everything in a parking lot over
here.
Can we at least get a list of
what's in that parking lot.
We last Senator Hamlin today
should give us a list of what I
think that'd be helpful they're
looking at.
Thank you. Thank you.
word and
will.
