Um
Representative Chandler.
You want to tell us about House
Bill 11.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, good to see
you this morning, um.
I thought it might be helpful,
Mister Chair, if I kind of
explain the evolution of this
bill. I know those of you who
have been in the legislature for
a period of time, have seen it.
Um, I'm sure understand at least
the original version, but there
have been some changes made, and
I'd like to explain how that has
happened.
So originally this bill that
passed the Senate last year, I
think.
Um, contained a provision that
allowed um new parents, 12 weeks
off with job protection.
And um uh wage replacement in
the wage replacement is very
similar to the part of this bill
that is what I'm thinking of as
an insurance piece.
wage replacement was full wage
replacement for minimum wage
workers, and then 2/3 of wages
above that up to a cap of the
median wage in the state, and
that is similar.
To the family wellness piece of
this bill with one change, um,
and that is it's now 6 weeks,
not 12 weeks.
The other piece of the and the
um so that would have covered um
parental bonding and the other
categories of leave that you see
in the current bill.
Over the course of um this
session and frankly over the
course of last summer, we were
listening to stakeholders both
from the business community and
from um the advocacy and from
citizens and, and from members.
And there were members that were
concerned that um it was too
expensive for employers.
And it was too expensive in
terms of the premiums that were
being paid for employees.
There was concern about the
length of time that was allowed,
the 12 weeks has now been pared
down to 6 weeks, and there was
concern that the state did not
have any skin in the game.
Meaning there that it was a
fully supported program by only
the employers and the employees
in the state, and we listen to
that.
And we tried to work to come up
with a compromise that would
address most of those concerns.
But still met our policy
objectives. So what are our
policy objectives. One is, of
course, to support families who
are having children in the
state.
And to give them some financial
foundation so that they can take
off the time they need to spend
with a newborn child or a newly
adopted child to advance a
strong parental relationship and
to advance a strong foundation
moving forward or as they
So they can prosper as an early
child, as a young child, and
then uh productive adult. And we
know that bonding with a child
is important.
Um, we also know that there are
many uh employees in the state
who don't have access to what I
would refer to as a short term
disability policy.
And disability, so if there's,
you have a serious medical
illness, and you need to care
for yourself or you have a close
um person who is close to you,
um, and that person needs
assistance and so that's the
second part of this bill. So two
pieces, one is uh working with
um parents who just had a new
child and the other piece is
essentially what is an insurance
program. You might call it a
disability insurance, uh.
with a little, little extra
tacked on to include things like
safe leave military exigency,
bereavement, and that's always
been part of the original bill.
So, I would like to think that
this bill would be even more
appealing to you all, um, Mr.
Chair and members, then the
bill, many of you supported last
year.
In that it addresses concerns
that we've been hearing
frequently.
The state has skin in the game
and that the, the welcome child
portion would be supported
through state appropriations,
and we're still supporting new
parents, um.
We have pared down the length of
time, um, that, um, employees
can take time off for, so we've
we've addressed many of the, I
think, employer concerns, Mr.
Chair.
But we have still maintained the
kind of the core fundamental
policy basis for the program and
I would hope that the fact that
we listened to employers and
some of their concerns and
address them, probably not to
their full satisfaction, but
nonetheless have addressed them
would weigh in our favor in
terms of support for this bill.
And I would like to think that
given the uh relatively strong
budget that we have, you would
see merit in providing financial
support directly, Mr. Chair, to
new parents, um, so with that,
Mr. Chair, I'm happy to
entertain questions and provide
further explanation.
OK. Uh, we're gonna go to the
audience first. Show me, give me
a show of hands at who's in
support.
I'm just trying to, let's get 6
in support.
We get 6 in opposition. How many
do you have on Zoom now?
with me.
About one minute apiece.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jessa
Cowdry. I'm the vice president
of operations at Common Spirit
Saint Joseph's Children as the
largest provider of home
visiting in the state of New
Mexico, we journey with hundreds
of families, prenatal until
their child reaches 3 years old.
When asking families in our
program how this financial
assistance would impact them.
This is what Nicole W said.
This support would be a
tremendous financial burden
lifted off my shoulders, I would
have been able to focus my full
attention on taking care of my
newborn and soaking up those
precious moments. My situation
of being a single mother facing
my son's diagnosis of cranial
stenosis going back to work with
something I dreaded. We know
that raising kids is expensive.
And so this bill will help in an
urgent time during infancy and
pregnancy, and we know this is a
step in the right direction.
Well it's not the original bill,
we, uh, ask you to please
support HB 11. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor, uh, representing our
35,000 plus workers throughout
the state, we do stand in
support of this measure. We
stood in support of this measure
when the original uh group of
legislators, uh, crafted the
original bill and I also want to
thank not only the the two reps
that we have here, but also uh
our pro tem Mimi Stewart for all
the great work that she's done
in this measure as well. We
continue to stand.
support because that a
fundamental level, we believe
that all workers deserve, uh,
the right to have paid leave.
That is a just a fundamental
right, whatever that looks like
at this point, we will take and
we will figure out how to maybe
do more, but this is the
committee. My name is Isaiah
Torres. I'm the statewide policy
manager at the Center for Civic
Policy, um, I will be reading,
um, our political director's um
comments on her behalf based on
her um having to um stay at home
based on faces some
complications.
with their bone marrow
transplant. Um, I've been
fighting for my life since
September in battling stage 4
cancer and surviving a bone
marrow transplant, having access
to comprehensive paid family
medical leave is the reason I'm
able to speak before this
committee. We should stand in
strong support of Pay Valley
Medical Leave that addresses the
needs of all New Mexicans,
especially those that are facing
their darkest hours, battling a
serious disease like cancer or
caring for a loved one
undergoing treatment. However,
we must return to a
contribution um based model that
outlines.
Mexico's values that we take
care of one another, uh, we must
raise medical leave to 9 weeks
that gives adequate leave for
cancer patients, like my boss,
and we urged the legislature to
work with impact the communities
to address our needs and support
a Paley policy that um that
works towards these goals. We
want to thank the Senate and we
want to thank you for the work
that you do for the state of New
Mexico.
My name is Frank Smith. I'm with
the New Mexico Veterans and
Military Families Caucus
speaking in support of HB 11.
New Mexico's military families
face unique challenges. When a
love don't, when a loved one is
deployed, injured, or called to
duty on short notice, family
members must often make
difficult choices between work
and their responsibilities at
home.
Federal law recognizes this by
including military exigency
leave.
And I'm pleased to see that HB
11 retains this critical
protection.
The bill provides financial
stability for thousands of
military families in our state.
So they don't have to sacrifice
income when facing the realities
of service. It's a commitment to
those who serve and those who
support them. On behalf of the
Mexico Veterans and Military
Families Caucus are in support
of HB 11.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Danielle Duran. I'm the
intergovernmental affairs
manager for Los Alamos County,
and I'm here in support of HB
11. We thank the sponsors for
this bill as well as the
chairman for bringing this to
the floor today, um, to this
committee today, um.
Los Alamos County has a large
number of federal workers to
whom this would not apply, but
the rest of the community is
made up of small businesses that
have to compete with the
laboratory in order to keep
their employees. This is one
that measure that could help
them, um, provide a benefit to
their employees to keep them,
um.
And employed by a small business
rather than taking employment
with the laboratory.
Additionally, the
The Council of Los Alamos, uh,
believes that this should be a
benefit for all New Mexicans and
that workers should not be
disposable at the most life
changing points in their lives.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Meredith Main,
um, and speaking on behalf of
AAUW and the League of voters
for the concept for the policy
of paid family medical leave,
um, and I'm asking this
committee to take a leadership
role in getting this safety net
through our legislature onto the
governor's desk, um, there have
been many changes, as you know,
you just heard from the
sponsor about these changes, uh,
but for 6 years they've been
changes and uh we know that
people need the safety nets and
you have done brilliant work on
many, many other areas like with
uh early childhood trust fund
and so on, and we need to have
something, um, with people,
elderly people and people who
are facing, you know, dire uh
circumstances to not have any
safety net is is unconscionable.
You know, they've paid into the
system and um with new babies,
we need to have them to have
good starts. We have the
brilliance in this room and we
have it in the legislature,
we've got to do something and um
I, I urge you to put your minds
to making something work rather
than digging and trying to dig
apart this bill, um, thank you
very much.
Thank you. That was 7. Let's go
to in support on Zoom.
How many do you have?
OK, we'll take that one that's.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Henry Lopez and I'm speaking on
behalf of Yucca. We are in
support of House living 11 and
strongly urge you to make
amendments to restore vital
components of restoring 9 weeks
of paid medical leave for
military and safe leave and to
also ensure the fund is stable
over the long term. As a young
person in the state of New
Mexico, it is essential that we
intentionally support our
communities in meeting their
basic needs to improve their
quality of life as
collective. My community and I
grew up in difficult
circumstances where our families
needed to work long days and
nights to keep their families
afloat, so much to the point
where a drastic change such as a
new baby or a family emergency,
was able to make or break
someone's ability to keep food
on the table, clothes on their
backs, or even a roof over over
their head. We all know what it
looks like for families to be
burdened with systemic poverty,
and at the moment, young people
and families in my community.
have had to step away from work
with no financial support to
address a family emergency or to
even welcome in a new baby. I
hope this bill passes, so that
so that working families um have
better support for their overall
quality of life. We strongly
urge you to support House Bill
11. Thank you.
I think you will take 6 in
opposition in the room.
Oh, don't everybody get up at
one time.
Holy moly, that was almost a
crash.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Jim
Copeland, executive director of
the Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community
Providers. I'll get right to the
point.
Whether you call the employer
contribution a premium or a tax,
it is an unfunded mandate for
the DD waiver providers. House
Bill 395 data from 2023
collected from all DD providers
showed that direct support
professionals were paid $248.5
million in 2023.
That did not include the
administrative and other support
staff. House Bill 395 data for
2024 is being collected now the
15100% of $248.5 million is
$372,750 this amount is not
included in the rates currently
reimbursed to the providers. The
employer contribution becomes a
double unfunded mandate when the
provider agencies have to pay
for the replacement worker to
cover the employee on family
leave.
Required staffing ratios have to
be maintained with staff that
are trained to work with
particular participants.
To not understand or consider
how these New Mexico fee for
service contractors are
reimbursed could further limit
the availability of DD services
in New Mexico. This could
subject the state to potential
litigation or possible
intervention from the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid
Services as of February 3rd,
there were 11 counties in New
Mexico that did not have a
supported living service
provider available.
There were 15 counties that only
had one supported living
provider available. The the
ability to pay wages that can
allow providers to recruit,
hire, train, and retain a
qualified workforce will be
further compromised with the
implementation of House Bill 11.
There are over 8000 New Mexicans
and their families who benefit
from the services in the DD
waiver for all these reasons we
would ask for a do not pass on
House Bill 11. Thanks for the
opportunity to comment.
trying to keep it to one minute
so we can. Good morning, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Terry Cole,
President CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
Our reasons are very
straightforward for opposing the
bill today. This bill still
imposes a tax increase on
employers on every worker in the
state of New Mexico, especially
amid a multi-year billion dollar
budget surpluses, the state can
afford to provide these benefits
and simply pay for it.
The physical analysis shows a
high likelihood that the family
leave part of the bill will be
underwater within a very short
period of time, causing payroll
tax increases. There is no
funding source identified for
the welcome child refunds. It
paid for by the general fund
this is nearly a $200 million
hit at a time when there is
uncertainty about potential
federal budget, uh, reductions.
This legislation makes New
Mexico less competitive.
Unless attractive as a place to
do business, please vote no on
HB 11. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Bill Lee, President and
CEO of the Gallup McKinley
County Chamber of Commerce also
speaking on behalf of the Rio
Rancho Chamber of Commerce this
morning as my colleague you have
from the Albuquerque chamber
pointed out we have the same
concerns over some of the
solvency issues, certainly over
the broad overreaching
definitions in the bill that
open it up to abuse as well as
the really untalked about extra
cost to small businesses for
trying to find higher and then
train and put into.
temporary employees or pay a
large overtime fees but beyond
these fiscally irresponsible
problems we'd like to address
the concerns of workers who must
pay taxes for at least 6 months
before they can draw any benefit
from the family wellness portion
of the bill that tax payment
comes out of their take home pay
once eligible for the benefits,
they may only receive up to 67%
of their wages and then they
will be taxed again on the
income that they paid for. They
will then have an additional
burden of filing a 1099.
And by the time the employees
are finished paying taxes on top
of taxes, they will only receive
around 35% of what they've paid
for. Gallup, like most small
communities in our state is very
tight knit. Thursday night my
wife and I went out to dinner
and at the cash as we went to
the cashier, she recognized this
and asked us to please tell them
we can't afford more taxes, no
matter how small they think it
is, it all adds up. She's right,
it all adds up to the largest
tax increase hardworking New
Mexican.
I've ever faced on behalf of our
business members, our city, our
county, our school district, but
most importantly for the
thousands and thousands of
people they employ, please vote
no on HB 11. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Carlos
Santag, president and CEO of the
New Mexico Business Coalition.
Uh, you know, there are people
do not want this. I know it's
with good intentions, but we've
had over 602,000 emails sent to
the legislature in both the
House and the Senate in
opposition and this is employees
as well as employers.
Employees need the money that
they earn right now. They can't
afford a tax, no matter how low
it is, and the biggest problem
that employees have when they
really understand what's
happening with this bill. They
understand that they're gonna be
paying into a fund for a very
long time that they probably
will never use, and they don't
want that. They want to keep
their money. But more
importantly, you're looking at
an unfunded mandate that could
cost the state over $290 million
in the first year of operation.
Between the operations of the
fund and the well baby gift.
This is coming at a time when
oil prices are falling,
regardless of what the feds do
with our budget, we're looking
at New Mexico's budget. We have
lost, we're down about $14 a
barrel.
Just since the beginning of the
session, that's a hit of $650
million to the state's budget.
This unfunded mandate is going
to make it very, very difficult.
Thank you for your
consideration. I hope that you
will vote no on this, and we
appreciate your service.
Thank you chair members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce standing in opposition.
We need to support new families
and new parents, but putting a
mandate on businesses with no
guarantee on how to pay for it,
hurts future economic
development. It hurts our
current businesses, and it hurts
employees.
The state's own fiscal impact
report shows the fund becoming
insolvent within the first
couple of years. That means
higher, higher payroll taxes,
fewer jobs.
Sorry, an eventual taxpayer
bailout.
Although we've been relatively
in good financial shape for the
past couple of years, we cannot
risk the consequences of this.
They're insurmountable.
The bill leaves too many
unanswered questions as far as
who qualifies, how businesses
comply, and how disputes are
resolved, creating legal risk
for employers. New Mexico is
full of kind, generous employers
who do work with their employees
when it comes to times of
hardship.
But forcing them to pay into
this mandate that many of their
employees do not want because
they won't use, sends the wrong
message. We all want families to
succeed, but House Bill 11 is
the wrong approach. Let's find a
sustainable solution that truly
works, and please vote no. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members, my name is
Tom Patterson. I serve as
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
On behalf of the New Mexico
Cattle Growers Association.
And our friends with the New
Mexico farm and livestock
Bureau, we oppose House Bill 11.
One of our biggest challenges in
rural New Mexico is finding
labor.
This bill assumes we have the
labor supply in rural New Mexico
to keep milking cows twice a day
and picking chili when employees
go out on leave.
We do not
There is good reason for the
opposition to this bill.
The sponsor's expert in the
house admitted that 95% of the
labor force will receive no
benefit.
Among those 95% are the 8500
agricultural employees in New
Mexico who would have to pay
into the program to subsidize
it, but would never receive any
benefit.
Because they work fewer than 150
days a year.
Please, we urge you.
Do not pass HB 11.
Thank you.
I mean we have on Zoom.
Mm
Well let's take 2, I guess.
One minute, so whoever.
Howard, you got one minute.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Howard
Hutchinson with the coalition of
Arizona and New Mexico counties.
Our rural counties do not have
temporary agencies in order to
hire on people to replace an
absent worker.
Many of our small businesses do
not have.
The resources nor the
availability of skilled workers
to fill positions.
In a county government.
We have a procurement officer.
Without proper certification,
that procurement officer cannot
function.
There's many other positions.
In the sheriff's department 911.
And other positions that simply
do not have the skilled.
Employment capabilities of
replacement, uh, during leave.
We currently have personnel
policy that attempts to work
with our workers and
Uh, we, we bend over backwards,
uh, we're we're grateful for our
workers, and we hope that you
will not pass.
House Bill 11. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, just to know if
you're registered lobbyist and
you're paid and
You have to be in the room.
What do we have next?
Carroll.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Carol
White, and I'm here to testify
on behalf of a coalition of over
30 business organizations and
their members. We have been
meeting since last year and have
tried to offer credible
solutions to make this bill a
solvent choice for New Mexico.
However, the insolvency and
potential tax burden mentioned
in the fiscal impact report
would be devastating for New
Mexico's working families. The
members of this coalition that
stand opposed to House Bill 11
are
Asian American hotel Owners
Association asphalt pavement
association of New Mexico
associated general contractors
associated builders and
contractors, the dairy
Association of New Mexico
Farmington Chamber of Commerce,
Four Corners Economic
development, Santa Fe Chamber of
Commerce, associated contractors
of New Mexico, the greater
Albuquerque Hotel and Lodging
Association, the Greater Las
Cruces Chamber of Commerce,
homebuilders of central New
Mexico, NAOP, New Mexico.
asphalt association New Mexico
Cattle Growers Association, New
Mexico Hospitality Association,
New Mexico Restaurant
Association, New Mexico utility
Contractors Association and the
Rio Rancho Chamber of Commerce.
We urge you to vote no.
Thank you. Let me set some
guidelines, uh, in conversations
with the speaker, he said on
this bill either the way it is,
no amendments on the bill.
Uh, so I'm just making the
committee aware that I know
there's an amendment out there.
I don't know whose amendment
that is.
Uh, I won't single you out.
Although I assume they may have
singled yourself out.
So we're gonna go to questions
from committee members.
We're gonna go through one round
of questioning of committee
members have questions, and then
we'll
Come back again, so let's start
a list, who wants to starter
stuff?
Senator Trujil, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um
I outed you last night on the
floor for the budget, so it's
fine that I outed myself today.
I did have an amendment, um, and
that's simply because
I think there's 2 programs that
have been kind of contorted
together, um, that I support
both and I want to make that
really clear right off the bat
that I am a strong supporter of
early childhood.
Former Head Start teacher helped
create the early childhood
department that have been an
advocate for it ever since.
And I absolutely support the
idea of a guaranteed income for
new parents.
I don't like the idea of it
going through Workforce
solutions.
And I don't like the idea of it
being just simply for parents
who have been working.
I think that that is something
that should be afforded to
Mothers who have chosen to stay
home as well as mothers who have
chosen to work. And I think this
discriminates against those
mothers who have chosen to stay
home and, um, care for their
families. That's number one.
Number 2, I think this should be
going through the early
childhood department.
I don't think this is a
workforce solutions issue. I
think this is a guaranteed
income, and I think it should be
funded through the, the early
childhood department.
I'm gonna leave the funding
source up to my colleagues to
kind of to to add, you know, um,
yeah.
I'm wondering, um,
So I just want to make that
clear. I support paid family
medical leave. I'd like to see
it longer than 6 weeks. I'd like
to at least see it at 9 weeks,
and that's what the amendment
would have done.
I support
Guaranteed income for new
mothers.
But I don't support it being
through Workforce solutions.
So the exemption, um, I'm trying
to figure out, so there's a
language in here that gives uh
private or public entity, um,
the ability to apply to the
workforce solutions and get an
exemption from participation in
the program. And I, I recognize
that there's language that says
that the workforce solutions has
the authority to develop rules
to implement that.
Um, but what we've heard is that
there's a tremendous cost in
other communities who have
Put an exemption in there for
the entity tasked with
overseeing it, making decisions
about what's the standard for
the exemption.
Do you have any information from
other communities who have used
an exemption and how it's worked
in those states.
Um
Mr. Chair and uh senator, um,
this is a standard clause in the
paid family medical leave Act
that I'm familiar with. Um, I
don't know that we have any
specific information on how well
it's worked, um, and truthfully,
uh, Mr. Chair and, uh, Senator.
I believe my expectation is that
some of those employers will
view this program as more
beneficial and opt in to
participating.
Because it is very affordable.
And it would provide a
standardized leave program
across the state, um, so I, I
don't have specific information
on how well it's worked, but,
um, I have confidence that the
regulations will help because
rulemaking, as you know, um, is
an editor of process in
collaboration with the
stakeholders, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um, Madam Chair,
chairwoman, um.
In regards to the
Welcome baby fund.
Has there been any consideration
taken
Regarding the cliff that that
might create for families.
The cliff that they may have an
uh increased income. Many of our
working families are still
collecting food stamps. Many of
our working families are still
eligible and using Medicaid as a
source of healthcare.
After you've had a child is not
the time for you to have to go
and fight to keep those
benefits, nor is it a time for
those benefits to be cut off.
And so I'm wondering, was that
taken into consideration when
this was added in.
Um, madam.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and, um, senator,
certainly the cliff effect is
discussed every time we provide
a benefit.
So, of course, um, and it's one
of those issues that we are all
struggling in the legislature,
Mr. Chair, to address. I'm on
the tax committee, as you're
well aware, and it comes up
every time we talk about some
sort of child income tax credit,
some other program, so yes, of
course, in every situation we're
working with, with families on
family issues, the cliff effect
is something that we all need to
consider, but Mr. Chair and
Senator, we need to be
considering it in the global
sense.
Not in a, you know, a statute by
statute, bill by bill basis, um,
um, Mr. Chair and Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, I happen to
disagree with that. I think we
have to consider it on an issue
by issue because it's each issue
that raises a family up to that
point and at some point, they do
go over the cliffs. So I do
think it's important for us to
think about it.
Is issue by issue, um, I'm
wondering about there's language
about it.
Um
Increasing the
Baby benefit increasing.
Um
based on inflation.
I usually see that kind of
language based upon cost of
living versus inflation. Why was
the word inflation used versus
cost of living.
And is there a difference, Mr.
Chair and Senator, this is, I'm
not sure where, where you have
seen it, but this is standard
language that we get from
frankly the Legislative council
service. Um, this is not the
first, um, CPI that I've worked
on, Mr. Chair and Senator. This
is language that um is
recommended to us by legislative
council service, Mr. Chair. OK.
uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
so you don't know what the
difference is, because I don't
know what the, I'm asking you a
valid question. I don't know
what the difference is.
Sure, if there's any, well,
that's the Mr. Chair and
senator, I don't think there is
a difference inflation and cost
of living to me is the same
thing, Mr. Chair and Senator.
OK, OK, that, that, that's a,
that's a I don't know answer,
but I appreciate it. Um, I also
note that
The, it will go up, but it will
never go down.
And that makes me a little
concerned. I know that's
typically how that's how we do
the wages here in Santa Fe, um,
the cost of living always can go
up, but if the cost of living
drops, it'll never go down. I
just want to point that out.
Um, and then I just have two
more questions, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um, and I know
this is not family medical
leave, the federal, I know it's
not FMLA. I recognize that, um,
but under FMLA, an employer has
a right.
To ask for a return to work,
medical release.
And I don't see that anywhere in
here. And in some cases that
release, if you've been granted,
uh, you know, a document that
says I'm in I'm very, very sick.
The employer likes to have
something upon return that says
that the doctor has released you
to go back to work and I don't
see that language in here. Do
you know if it's in here and I
just haven't found it.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, I
think I'm sorry, I'm Linda, I'm
one of the co-sponsors on the
bill. Apologize for coming late.
My streamer stopped. I didn't
realize it, so I apologize. Um,
so the answer to that is, I
don't believe there is one.
However, on when the when the uh
leave is granted, it is for a
set amount of time. And so the
presumption is that that person
is then ready to come back to
work at that time or has
expanded all of their uh family
medical leave that they have
available.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative, and it's
good to see you. Um, we're
neighbors, we share the same
name, so there's a little
symbiance there, um, I do think
that, that, that lack of having
the ability to require a medical
form upon return can be a
liability for an employer and it
can be, it can be problematic
because an employer may want to
and need to make accommodations
for an employee that hasn't
recovered from cancer, even if
the doctor said, yeah.
You can be out for 6 weeks
because 6 weeks is what we're
gonna pay. It may not be that
that employee is fully ready to
come back to full-time work, and
I think an employer has a right
to know that information.
Upon their return, so, um, Mr.
Chair, Representatives, thank
you. I appreciate the work that
you've done on this and I, I
really do support both of those.
Sinner Padilla.
OK, thank you, uh, chair, and
thank you sponsors and uh thank
you to everybody that showed up
to actually give us direction on
your thoughts from the the
community on this and thank you
chair for. So, um, yeah, I was
this, uh, one of the chief
sponsor on this bill, uh, the
first year when it was a Senate
bill, and then last year, uh
whipped the thing through the
Senate and then it went over to
the house and had all sorts of
problems and, and here we are
again, and so, but I, I, I'm
sort of having a hard time
completely recognizing
everything that we called paid
family medical leave. Uh.
Um
So I'm gonna start on a couple
of things here.
Uh chair and sponsors. What,
what, what are the processes uh
for opting out if you believe
you're an employer that already
Offs this or better uh leave for
your employees.
And I'm gonna describe what I do
in my business, but, but I'd
like to hear from you first, Mr.
Chair and Senator, the employee
does not opt out. The employer
has the potential for opting
out. If I said that wrong, I
apologize. I meant the employer.
How does the employer get to opt
out of this? Well, um, the
employer, Mr. Chair and Senator,
will be able to opt out, um,
pursuant to the rules that the
workforce solution department
just as it was when you helped
whipped the bill through the
last time. The process is
exactly the same. We haven't.
any of the language the employer
has the capability of opting
out, um, in accordance with the
rules that are established by
the Department of Works or
Solutions that was in the
original bill, um, Mr. Chair and
senator so how, what would those
be? I know that you're saying
that the rules need to be pro.
Give us some examples of how
this might work.
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator, the
employer would provide
information to the Department of
Workforce Solutions, describing
the plan that they offer to
their employees if it is
substantially similar than the
um workforce solutions
department will have rules which
will divide substantially to
similar and issue a ruling.
And so what would the employer
need to submit a certified
payroll, a document that says
here are our, our, here's our
policy. I'm just trying to
understand, I mean, these are
just questions. I'm trying to
understand how does an employer,
I, I think if you leave it just
to promulgation of rules, those
could come out.
In all sorts of directions.
Um, so I'm, I'm concerned about
that now just because I
supported, you know, in the past
I want to make sure I understand
it now.
Mr. Chair and senator, as I
said, the rules will describe
what documentation would be
necessary. Now it, I would
imagine it would, it would be a
an insurance plan.
Because essentially that is what
we are talking about here, and I
imagine, Mr. Chair and senator
that providing a description of
that plan or perhaps a summary
of that plan or some
documentation from the insurance
company describing the plan
would be an initial step in
establishing whether it's
substantially similar, Mr. Chair
and senator.
OK, so chair and um sponsors
then uh what percentage of
companies already meet these
requirements that are in, it
would be in the law in in law if
this were enacted.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I don't know.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, I don't
have the exact numbers. We do
anticipate a lot of our larger
employers would fit these needs.
We know that a lot of the labs
do, a lot of the oil companies
that work in the Southeast also
do, uh, many of the multi-state
operating, um, you know,
companies do as well. Again, we
see this as a insurance
opportunity for, you know, with
the access almost a tax rebate
for those who are investing in
it and so um for that in that
sense of it, we anticipate a lot
of those larger ones would um be
utilizing it. I don't know if
you have additional numbers on
that.
Yeah, that's, that was some of
the presumptions we were looking
at. We're looking at the
budgetary aspect of this.
So I'll then uh transition over
to the uh welcome, uh I'm sorry,
the um the
fund, yeah, the welcome baby uh
piece. I might go back to the
other here in a little bit, but
I heard that one of the sponsors
quoted in the newspaper that the
early childhood trust fund could
be used for this purpose. Uh, it
was a direct quote. I, I wanna,
as you can imagine, I helped
create that department and so
did the uh my co-sponsor over
here to my right, and um it was
very much specified.
these funds would be used for
early childhood education and
care.
Just wanna understand better why
that was, why that would be an
option. It's $193 million that
has to come from somewhere, so.
Every year.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, uh, I
don't, uh, you must be referring
to me since I was quoted and I
was not quoted as saying it
would come from the early
childhood Trust Fund. What I
said was, um, Mr. Chair and
senator was that the monies
would come through the early
childhood department.
Uh through the appropriation
process, Mr. Chair and Senator.
Thank you chair and sponsor.
Then can you lay out for me how
this is early education that I
don't see it that way because um
where's the education component
with it, I guess.
Early childhood component um,
Mr. Chair and senator and my uh
colleague here will help explain
that further.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Senator for the question. So,
um, as we know the early
childhood care and education,
uh, budget is intended for
primarily for, you know,
children 0 through 6. We have
seen most of that funding in
many ways, but, but in many ways
go towards the 3 to 5 aspect of
it because that is the uh the
parent stipend, if you will, for
paying for childcare.
When you have a child, the
resources for having early
childcare to get back to work
from the ages of 0 to 3 months
is nonexistent. So for example,
um, when I, it's, it's nearly
non-existent. In fact, in Santa
Fe I would argue that it is
nonexistent. Um, when I had my
child, my second child, uh, we
hired somebody to come in and
help me take care of the child
while I worked, and I would take
breaks for feedings, uh, etc.
because there was no way else
that I could have someone else
care for it. So from that
perspective, again, we often
talk about is that this fills a
gap.
It's not only in New Mexico, to
be quite frank, uh, finding
childcare for 0 to 3 months old
is, is, is very difficult. So
this does fill that care gap,
especially for parents who who
need to return to work.
And so then chair um and
sponsors and what sort of an
impact is this going to have on
the funds? We, we believe the
fund is, you know, valued at
somewhere around $9.2 billion.
How exciting for the people of
New Mexico that this thing has
worked out so well. Uh, it's
only, it's done everything it's
supposed to do, it's only done
it a lot faster, which is very
exciting. But, but give me like
a, maybe a 35, and 10 year
outlook. What, what, and is this
money to be coming from the
corpus or is it to be coming
from
Uh,
because if you take it from the
investment dollars, then that,
that really shrinks the amount
of money that's going to go to
ECECD to do their work. So I'm
just trying to figure out how
all this is gonna work. Senator
Padilla, Amanda Briding, I'm the
uh chief of staff over at HAFC,
uh, the house is Adrian, if
that's helpful. Um, as far
Then it's Adrian, not the house.
Adrian's in the Senate, you said
that
OK, um, so as far as the early
childhood education trust fund,
uh, returns, house Bill 71,
which increases the distribution
for the early childhood
education and care department
for this year. Um, the increases
that distribution by an
additional 200 million. So
what's proposed in uh the
committee substitute for House
Bill 11, potentially could be up
to 170 million. There
a really good analysis from SIC
that shows that the estimation
um that we've predicted that,
you know, 11 billion $12 billion
dollar figure on, um, is based
on a 5% return on investment.
That fund is actually been
showing about 5.5 to 6%. So, um,
we've been working with the DFA
secretary as well as SIC to show
that it would have almost no
impact on the fund to take even
300 million out for the next few
years.
But with Mr. Chairman, so would
the fund grow at all, or would
it simply just remain at the
current value that it is, I
guess.
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, um,
I can share the SIC analysis
with you, but even with that
additional 200 of $200 to $300
million we would still be
looking at $12 billion in 2029,
so it would still grow.
OK, just not as fast.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Padilla,
that's the same growth rate that
LFC is predicting right now.
I guess I'm having a really hard
time with math then this
morning, I'm a little tired.
I've been at it every single
day, and that we all have. Thank
you, fellow legislators, but if
you're taking 190, 170, 190
million. How is it going to
continue to grow at the same
pace?
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, I
apologize. I was probably
unclear. Um, the return on
investment that we've been
assuming for this fund has been
relatively conservative. So in
reality, the fun is performing
much better. We've been assuming
about 5%. It's really performing
it closer to 6%. So because of
that gap in our assumptions, we
can likely afford to use more of
that fund without uh the growth
slowing.
OK
So we, we've seen a, a continual
No fault of our own, but we've
seen the stock market taking a
nosedive here recently. Uh, do
we, do we still anticipate this
fund to maintain its its current
rate with what's going on in the
world right now.
We didn't make this happen, but
you know, it's happening to us.
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla, um,
I would look back at the SIC uh
analysis, but the way this fund
is invested in the federal
mineral leasing source, um, is
not invested in the typical sort
of stock market in the high risk
scenario, so I would imagine so,
but I can definitely follow up
on that for you.
Thank you.
And so, um,
I'm still, I'd like to go back
again and maybe the sponsors
want to answer this piece, Mr.
Chairman, is where is the
educational component.
By using these dollars.
And how is that programmed and,
and, and brought to bear for the
child because I think, you know,
that's one of my number one
reasons I'm up here. I I we all
put ourselves through this for
one reason or another, but I
want to get this thing done and
get this stay focused on the
earliest opportunity to help
these children succeed. I love
what you're trying to do, but I
wanna, I wanna to just balance
how is this education for this,
this little baby
Chair and
Senator.
Um, early childhood and
education is what's at issue is
addresses the early childhood
component, Mr. Chair, and
senator in that it allows, it
gives the parent an to parents
an opportunity to stay at home
with job protection so that they
may bond with the child. It's an
alternative to what our original
bill was in terms of the bonding
leave, Mr.
Chair and senator.
Mr. Chair and Senator, what I'd
also like to point out is that
early child education doesn't
look like math books. It doesn't
look like, you know, things like
that. It's very different and
I'll, I'll give you an example.
Uh, I'm very lucky my children
gone through wonderful early
childcare programming starting
at age 3 months and even 6
months. And when we get their
reports back, right? It's very
much she handed another child
this thing. She walked on this
log that is showing growth.
So we have happening now is we
need parents to have time or or
caretaker to have time to bond
with the child. That is early
child education in and of itself
because they're learning those
interactions. The opportunity to
do tummy time for 10 minutes a
day is early childhood education
because you're developing those
gross motor skills. The
opportunity to, um, I mean, the
opportunity to um read with a
child every day. Again, that is
early childhood education. So
that bonding experience in and
of itself, because we're talking
about 0 to 3 months in
particular.
is vital for long-term education
for our children.
I think.
Thank you, Chair, and so
sponsors, what, uh, what did the
early childhood education and
care department have to say
about this?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, we
have not heard from them about
this bill in any sense, Mr.
Chair and Senator.
There's been, I, I don't, I
don't see it either sponsored,
but so there is no analysis from
ECECD on this.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, not
that I've seen.
I'm really surprised to hear
that. OK. The thing I, I, I
haven't seen it either. So I'll
transition over. I don't know if
it's OK if I keep going a little
bit. So chair, uh, and, and
sponsors the, the payment of
the, the $3000 a month or $9000
and then I, I guess you can
split it between the 4500
between, uh, I guess the two
parents. How is that going to be
administered? How's that going
to be worked? How are we going
to make sure it gets to the
right people.
Uh, Mr. Mr. Chair and Senator,
again, we're looking through, to
go through workforce solutions.
We want to make sure this fits
in with uh with any concerns
that may result. So we see this
in many ways as a, as an
instant, if you will, uh, tax
rebate opportunity. As you will
see, we have a two-year
implementation uh opportunity
here and so that will allow for
that development to happen to
ensure that uh, that it's
happening in a way that most
benefits the child.
I I have a couple more. I think
I'll listen a little bit longer,
Mr. Chair, if I could be put on
maybe, uh, I'll let you know if
I want to go again. Thank you.
Thank you, sponsors. Good job.
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, sponsors,
um, just to give you a frame of
reference of where I'm coming
from with my questions. Um, I've
been a business coach in New
Mexico for just over 18 years.
I've coached collectively with
my firm over 1000 business
owners in our state, and I've
helped them add over a billion
dollars in revenue, mostly here
in New Mexico. So I think I'm
coming from a little bit
different angle, but um we're in
the FIR does it show the
potential loss in GRT and tax.
Corporate tax, business tax.
Where does it show that?
Mr. Chair, um, and, uh, senator,
I don't believe it's addressed
and I'm trying to connect the
dots myself, Mr. Chair and
senator. Sure, um, Mr. Chair,
sponsors, let me help you, um,
you're talking about and I, we
did hear from some of the people
in opposition of this bill, the
burden it will place on
employers, especially those
employers with specialized and
certified employees. Those are
employers that in no way, shape
or form have a line out.
door of potential temporary
hires to backfill workers that
will take these weeks off of
work. So there will be loss in
GRT and loss in tax to the
state, and I don't see that in
the FIR.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I
appreciate the point you're
making. However, I do want to
make this point as well.
The 6 weeks that are potentially
available for a serious medical
condition, do not, does not
change the fact that these
employees are already leaving
potentially, the availability of
the leave does not create the
need for the leave. So I think
the the answer to your question,
Mr. Chair and Senator, it will
have no impact on GRT because
these individuals will leave the
workforce if they have a serious
illness.
need to care for someone anyway,
and that so-called backfilling
situation will exist regardless
in this situation, Mr. Chair and
Senator, uh, uh, research has
shown and other programs have
shown the um employee who to
whom the employer has cre um
given a great deal of investment
in terms of training and the
like will return to work, Mr.
Chair and, uh, Senator.
Mr. Chair sponsors, um, my
research shows that the 10
states that have had this type
of program in place for more
than a year, every single one of
those states has had to raise
the tax burden, the tax rate on
both employees and employers
because quote unquote, they
didn't expect the demand to use
the program. So that tells me
that really there are untold
amounts of people that will find
a way to utilize the program in
continue with um some other
concerns I have, which is
where's the oversight? Who
actually enforces any penalties
when an employer and employees
don't participate in the plan. I
is there such a thing?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, that
would be the Department of
Workforce Solutions. And Mr.
Chair, is there a whole another
department now within Workforce
solutions that will do nothing
but look to make sure that these
taxes are being collected by
basically every worker and
employer in the state. Um, Mr.
Chair and Senator, that will be
implemented by
Employees employed by the
Department of Workforce
Solutions and Mr. Chair I'd
point out there is already a
division that relates to
unemployment insurance, who does
exactly the same thing. They're,
they're they are, it's they're
collecting fees from employers
and employees are implementing a
program. This is very similar,
Mr. Chair and Senator Senator,
just along the same lines uh to
answer as well. Um, $35 million
is already in the budget for
implementing this program. So
again, as they started it up,
that will be in.
as well. OK.
And Mr. Chair, I'm sponsors, how
does ARPA affect the employees
that will be using these
programs.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, um,
could you explain what you, what
you're asking me, URA, um, ARPA
is, um, the American Rescue Plan
Act. It was signed into law by
Biden in 2021 and the
requirements to report were
lowered to $600 and that act
actually shows that these
payments are not considered
wages. Therefore, whether it's
welcome child or paid sick
leave, every employee that takes
advantage of those
payments will be forced to fill
out a 1099, and they will be
paying double taxes actually,
um, they'll pay all the taxes,
um, not just the employees part.
The employer and employees part
on a 1099.
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
for that explanation.
Well, Mr. Chair, sponsors, I'm,
I'm shocked actually that that
also is not in the FIR because
that is a massive burden on the
workers of the state who maybe
go into this situation thinking
they're gonna come out with, I
think I heard 67% of their
normal take home once they fill
out a 1099, which by the way,
they probably have never heard
of a 1099 most people, they have
no idea that they have a
requirement to fill it out. They
also have no idea that they have
to hold back a good.
Portion of that to pay all these
taxes, and I think they might
come home with maybe 30% of
their normal take home, which I
think a lot of people would find
themselves in a world of hurt um
by the end of the year, not only
when they get that payment and
realize they're not getting what
they expected, but then at the
end of the year when they find
out that they, they have a very
big.
Um, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
and, uh, Senator, um, just
wanted to point out that it's
not typical for um LFC to do
what is referred to as dynamic
scoring, which is beli I
believe, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator, so that would not be
included um in a report that
they would be providing, Mr.
Chair and senator.
Mr. Chair, I just, I find that
concerning, really concerning
for every citizen in New Mexico
who, if, if you're working this,
this affects your life and I
think that that puts workers at
a distinct disadvantage, um,
just two more quick questions,
um, the Welcome child payment, I
heard when we um heard from our
analyst that it's either one
payment or that payment can be
split equally among parents, um,
what about estranged parents.
How, how does that work?
Um, uh, Mr. Chair and senator,
uh, again, so this is all
reviewed by Workforce Solutions.
The objective is that this will
be, you know, again, to benefit
the child. So if you have two
parents that should a child be
born and they are estranged,
they are both benefiting the
child. They're both caring for
the child.
Um, then that's when the case
when it would be uh uh split in
that case, and that is for
workforce solutions to
developing rules. Uh, should it
not be, should it be
fundamentally one that's taking
care of it or, or again, maybe
one takes off, you know, 6
weeks, then the other one takes
off 6 weeks. It's to bond with
the child. That's also another
case where it could be split.
Mr. Charam confused though it
let's say I'm, I'm this mother.
I have this new baby. Maybe I'm
not even married to the father.
What is to stop that father from
filling out a form where he can
get half of, half of that
payment, right? And I don't even
know that he's filled it out.
I am 100% taking care of this
child. What happens then? Do I
have to go to court? How, how am
I fighting to get my other half
of the money to take care of
this child, Mr. Chair and
senator, yeah, absolutely,
that's, this is why you go
through why workforce solutions
will develop the rules around
that. Primarily because this
fund, the Welcome Child Fund, is
to benefit the child. It's not
just necessarily benefit the
parents in that same case. So,
again, in the application or in
that process, that would be the
opportunity to do that.
That sounds a little nebulous to
me. Doesn't sound like a really
detailed answer where I would
feel real comfortable that the
appropriate parent would be in
control of making sure that they
get the appropriate percentage
or payment. Um,
11 more question and then I'll,
I'll leave it to my colleagues.
If a family member, we heard
that more than one family member
can take time off if let's say
the mother is ill.
So let's say my mother's ill. I
have 10 siblings. What's to
prevent all 10 of us, maybe at
the same time, um, taking time
off to take care of her, who's
who's overseeing that. Thank
you, Mr. Cherry. Thank you, uh,
Senator. So there's, there's two
aspects of this, right?
Actually, there's really 3. So
one, if an employer feels
somebody is utilizing this fund,
but not actually providing what
they intend to do. Um, they can,
they can submit a complaint and
there's an entire process on how
they can
dispute the use of this. So they
say, well, um, you know, they're
not actually taking care of
their mother, they're going on
vacation, you know, that's
something that they can dispute
with workforce solutions. 2,
should a person actually abuse
this, then they will not be able
to access uh the fund for 3
years. Um, you know, in
consultation with the business
community, a lot of folks said
last year had been asking for
them to be cut off from the fund
for a year, you know, originally
why we want to keep it strong is
to avoid that kind of fraud. Um,
but then 3, and I will point to
the example we've seen from
other states, um, when somebody
takes time off, they have to
list out and I, I bring this up.
This is my mom's that she did
for me when I was pregnant and I
had a baby and, uh, you know,
complications. She listed out
exactly what I was out with, why
she, what she would be doing to
take care of me. And this isn't
just, you know, hanging out with
my daughter so she's not lonely
after having a new baby. It's, I
will be feeding her, I will be
taking her, uh, to the restroom.
I will be making sure the baby
is also fed. I will be taking
care of night feedings. This is
the, the responsibilities that
an individual would care for.
Now that's in the case of
pregnancy.
If you're assisting someone
who's going through dialysis. If
you're assisting someone who,
um, you know, has, has a serious
leg injury. You will have to
explain what that duty is. And
so again, what would prevent
that is that a doctor who is
also in this is the other piece
of it, if they, if they are
fraudulent on these forms, they
are also held responsible as
well, and that could affect, um,
their practice as well. And so
they have to be honest in how
they're serving this person. And
again, if there, if, if an
employer feels that that is
being abused, they can
absolutely dispute that with
workforce.
institutions and we, we made
those a lot stronger after
consultation with uh different
industries.
OK. And Mr. Chair, just
It's not a detailed enough
answer for me because that
employer isn't going to employ
10 of my siblings, and now
you're putting the burden on the
employer. Now I have to hire a
private investigator to follow
all of my employees and dig into
their lives of who's taking what
time off. It just sounds like an
absolute employment nightmare
and I can see the lawsuits when
employer um fills out a form
against an employee and they're
wrong and then the employee has
some kind of lawsuit against the
employer for.
You know, going that route with
workforce solutions. So it just,
it just seems like
I understand the intent, but
there's so much detail missing
and so many potential scenarios
that could come into play with.
So many things in this package,
um, I'm very concerned. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Steinber.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
sponsors. Good morning. It's
been a, a long road to get here.
Um,
Thank you, everybody who took
the time to come here as well.
You know, uh, Mr. Chair, there
are moments where I'm cognizant
of who's in the room and I'm
cognizant of who's not in the
room.
And realizing this is an
economic issue. There's a lot of
people in the room, but there's
also a lot of people not in the
room. And it's good to be
cognizant of.
Sometimes the people things
benefit aren't able to come and
you have uh disparity of
a voice sometimes who can afford
to come.
etc. etc. but not to diminish.
You know, the weight of those
that are here.
Um
Madam Chair of the House
Judiciary Committee.
Um, sponsor is this bill, as I
see this bill and I've seen how
it's changed.
Does this represent a serious
compromise in a sense with the
opponents.
Of this measure and how.
Um, Mr. Chair and senator, uh,
yes, and
you know, I in, in my opening
remarks, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator, I went through the
evolution of this bill and noted
how um employers were raising
concerns about the amount of the
premium.
In the length of time that was
being afforded to individuals
who may have a serious illness,
and as you can see, we have made
the plan much more affordable.
So that an employer would be
paying less than $1 a week on a
minimum wage employee as a
premium and that employee would
be paying about $1 a week, um,
uh, uh, as a premium.
And the amount of disability
time that would be allowed or
serious illness time has been
cut back by 50%.
And so I think that represents a
significant compromise, um, Mr.
Chair and Senator on an
unwillingness uh and sign of our
willingness to listen and to
work with those who have
provided input, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and and
Madam Chair. So I mean, you've
you've cut the benefit in half.
I mean, you know, we talked
about compromise and if only
they would work with us on a
little bit of copper. I don't
know how you can.
Be more bold in in trying to
reach a compromise on what
you've done in a way, I mean,
not in a way, in fact, reducing
it in half.
I thought the solution on the
child wellness program.
Um, was interesting and
innovative and innovative way to
deal with that piece of it,
which is such an important part
of it.
And um
I just want to say, you know,
doing a little bit of research
on the value of bonding, like
the investment in
Helping a mother take time off
to be with her new no.
Can you quantify like
In terms of, we talked about
economic value and the cost.
What is the economic value of
investing in a, in a newborn
child and.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, thank
you for that question and I, you
know, I think it's, we talk
about the learning potential
that children have and you have,
um, you know, a very different
cliff sense you really have this
growth in these 1st 3 months is
wildly significant. And that
bonding time, and that's why
there's so much in like uh
research done into uh the value
of breast milk early in the
stages. The, the value of a, a
chess time, you know, uh, a lot
of fathers now will, will bear
chests with their kids because
that skin to skin contact is
such.
A formidable for them. And when
they enter into daycare later or
when they enter into school
later, they are found to have
better relationships in those
times, talking with a lot of,
you know, early teachers, 1st
grade, 2nd grade, and again,
pre-K also, the kindness that
they're looking for and the
ability to learn and listen is
is fundamental. Um, learning to
love reading at an early age
because you were read to. And,
and I'll even go back, reading,
uh, to a newborn is not words.
It's black and white picture
books that you're sitting down.
You're bonding with them to read
with them. And you develop that
love early so that you develop a
love of the written word longer.
So I, I believe that it's it's,
it's exponentially more
important in those early months
than than later on.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair, and if
you do some research on early
childhood development.
I mean the value and
intellectual growth, emotional
growth.
You translate that out to the
life of the child and every
other investment we make here in
this building for the rest of
their life.
This is gold. This is
exponential, um.
So quite frankly.
You know, it's totally
appropriate that we would use
early childhood money because
this is a crucial part of early
childhood investment and
I just want to say at the
beginning of this comment, I,
you know, Senator Padilla is
literally
say a hero of mine, but somebody
I look up to immensely for what
he's done for the state.
And his vision and his just his,
his life.
Story and, you know, what, what
he's accomplished through that
and why, what drives his
passion. I think the early
childhood department has been a
major success story.
And the fund itself, I mean, now
at $12 billion is amazing. We
started it with a $300 million
appropriation. This is now a $12
billion.
So, I think when you consider
the value of the investment of
300 million to allow others to
bond with their infants
economically, like it, I think.
We should, I think in my mind.
We can, um, that's easily uh
valuable enough to include, and
I think appropriate, appropriate
to draw those funds.
To do it, especially given
You know, our budgetary
situation where we need to have
dedicated revenue streams. Um, I
think it's actually appropriate.
Without jeopardizing.
Even the growth of the fund or
the growth in the funding of the
mission in the department. So in
total, I know there are some
little details that maybe people
could have about some parts of
this, myself included, but as a
whole, you know, I commend you
for trying your very best to
work with.
People who are concerned and
reach a compromise and come up
with creative ways to fund this.
And uh and I'm
Support the legislation, so.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you.
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning.
Um
This tax, Mister Chair.
Well, the good thing about
asking questions towards the end
as everybody's already kind of
exposed to what's going on, so
I'm gonna try to keep mine
pretty short.
So
I own a business.
I work for a family owned
business.
My business has 5 employees.
I work for a company that has
150 employees.
Both are right on the state
line.
So my question is, and I've
asked this before.
Is this available only for New
Mexico residents?
Mr. Chair and Senator, it's for
those who pay for the benefit
within while working in New
Mexico. So yeah, so it's those
that are employed in New Mexico,
um, that, uh, are paying into
the fund.
OK, so
Let's say I have a
A remote worker.
For example,
And they're in another state,
so.
How, how does, how is that going
to work?
Mr. Chair and senator and nice
to meet you. I think this is my
first interaction with you, um.
That person is if the employers
in the state, employer lives
outside, they'll be paying into
the fund and I, they will be
eligible to receive the benefit.
If they pay in New Mexico taxes,
Mr. Chair and senator. OK.
So we could be funding this, Mr.
Chair, for
People that don't even live in
our state, Mr. Chair, but work
for you, Mister Chair and
Senator. OK.
But if that employee.
Doesn't live here.
So they're buying all their
goods and everything else in
another state.
Yes.
The state of New Mexico is going
to pick up that tab for them.
Mr. Chair, if we're talking
about the well uh.
The family wellness component.
The state is not picking up the
um tab for them, the family, the
welcome child piece is a
different analysis, Mr. Chair
and senator, they would not be
eligible because they're not a
resident eligible for a welcome
child piece that's the $3000
payment for the 1st 12 weeks,
Mr. Chair and senator. So Mr.
Chair, let me, let me back you
up there just a little bit.
So
They out of state would receive
that 3000.
Mr. Chair, not if they are not a
resident, Mr. Chair and OK.
So I just need to make sure. So,
being I have a business on the
border.
Why would I hire anybody from
New Mexico.
Um, Mr. Chair and senator, um,
if you're
Um, trying to draw a connection
between our previous
conversation. I don't see the
connection because if you hire
someone from New Mexico, they
will be paying the premiums and
you'll be paying the premiums
for them.
If you hire someone from
Colorado, let's say, and by the
way, there is a program in
Colorado, um.
Then
There would be no difference.
You would be paying the premium
for that employee and that
employee, Mr. Chair and senator
would be paying in as well, and
they would be entitled to the
benefit that they've paid for,
Mr. Chair and senator. OK, so
Mr. Chair, just as an employer.
I would be
Letting them stay in another
state. So let's say
Um
Let's say they have someone
sick.
So if, if they're staying home
with that.
Right? If they're
My, my point is, what
What benefit is there to hiring
somebody in New Mexico when I
could get around some of this,
not all of it.
I could get around some of this
just by hiring somebody from say
Colorado Mr. Chair and Senator,
you wouldn't be getting around
to any of it if you hired
someone from Colorado.
Because, um, that you would
still be paying.
The premium and they would be
paying the premium.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, you
hired someone in New Mexico,
they'd be paying, you'd be
paying the premium and they'd be
paying the premium.
OK. So if they did get sick,
Right?
Then I'm
As an employer, I'm gonna have
to give them time off.
Correct?
Um,
Mr. Chair and senator if they
qualify, you know, they've
worked for you for more than 6
months that they establish,
so on and so forth, Mr. Chair,
Senator.
OK, so with now that we're
there, let's, let's talk about
that a little bit, uh, Mr.
Chair.
In
In one business,
Um, we hire a lot of family.
All right, so we might have.
5 people from one family working
in our business.
So if, if somebody gets ill,
Or
has a baby.
I, I can see how we could make
that work.
Right?
But in here you have domestic
violence included in there.
So if I have a family of 4 or 5.
Am I gonna be giving all 5 of
them off?
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh, no,
the, the goal here is the reason
for the domestic violence, uh,
excuses or um inclusion in here,
I should say, is because one of
the biggest limiting factors for
victims of domestic violence
from leaving is they don't have
the financial ability to leave.
And so by getting the ability to
leave and again, the fund, the
the the family wellness fund,
the time off protection is up to
6 weeks. That doesn't mean,
doesn't mean that every time you
put in a claim, you get 6 weeks
automatically. Um, this is
an opportunity for that person
to take some time to to away
and, and what I will point out,
Mr. Chair and senator, is that
we have a lot of really good
employers in New Mexico that
help their employees as much as
they can, but it can cost them
thousands and thousands and
thousands of dollars to help one
employee when they may face
domestic violence or another
issue with this, with the family
wellness leave time and fund of
allow is that while that person
takes that time, it is costing.
Cents on the dollar to be able
to allow them to take that time
off. Does, does that kind of
offer the full spectrum. So you
wouldn't have to offer it for
the for the entirety, but to
allow that person to take that
time to leave, Mr. Chair and
senator, but Mr. Chair.
That's not what this bill says.
This bill says
Domestic violence.
You have to give
Those members time out. So I'll
back up again.
If I have a family of 5 working
for me.
And they have a domestic
violence inside that house.
Let's say they all lived there.
As an employer.
What am I supposed to do?
Miss, Mr. Chair and center, in,
in the case that you have
5 individuals working and there
is, and even in related to
domestic violence situation with
a 6th individual.
And they all now need to take
time to leave. I'm sorry, I
don't want to talk over you, but
that's not what I'm saying. I'm
just trying to understand here,
so thank you. There's no 6.
Just fine. One member of that
family.
Creates domestic violence. All 5
members of that family is going
to be affected by this.
as an employer.
How am I supposed to handle that
when I'm given 5 people off at
one time.
Um
Mr. Chair and Senator, um, I'm
struggling to understand how
we've gotten to giving 5 people
off at one time, Mr. the um
definition of safely is what,
with Mr. Chair and senator is
what you're referring to, means
paid leave granted to the
applicant who is a victim.
And whose family member is the
domes of the victim of a
domestic violence issue and so
on, so if you're suggesting, Mr.
Chair and senator that
All 5 members will take off the
leave at the same time, I think,
um, we can all come up with
scenarios that
stretched the imagination,
Mister Chair and Senator, and I
think the one that you have
proposed, I respectfully suggest
to you, um, is one of those.
Well, Mr. Chair, I'm going to
I'm using this example.
But you're not answering the
question. The bill does not
limit.
What I can do as an employer.
So
I last shot at this one
question.
As an employer
What am I supposed to do when
I'm given 5 people off.
All at the same time. Mr. Chair
and Senator, on page 6 at the
top that explains the specific
uses for safely. And I just want
to be clear, seeking civil
protection order against the
perpetrators obtaining medical
or mental health counseling,
seeking new housing or
relocating, attending or
preparing for court-related
proceedings. Those are very, my
personal opinion and we may
disagree and that's, that's
fair. Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator,
these, these are their
particular things they have to
be doing. And so again, the
anticipation, and this is why
I, um, they can take it in bits
and pieces, right, for dialysis,
for example, which you might
need a day off here, a day
there, but that's long term and
that's a long term health
struggle, or for this, right?
Maybe there's a day that
somebody needs to relocate.
Maybe there's another day that
an individual needs to go to
court. But it is all in the very
specific purpose of they are a
victim of these specific
concerns. And in that effort, it
is to limit that. And again, I,
I go back to the application
process that a person cannot
just show up and say,
This is, this is my claim, and
here it is, and that's all I
have. They have to get approval
from workforce solutions and if
an employer feels that they're
abusing it, they have, they have
time to dispute that concern.
OK, and Mr. Chair.
So
Let's stay on the domestic
violence for just a little bit
longer.
So we have domestic violence in
the house.
They apply? How long does that
take?
research here and uh senator, so
we have laid out in there the
timeline. If there's an
emergency, of course, that kind
of quickens the pace and that
that is what I'm talking about.
Let's, let's talk about the
emergency. If there's a violent
thing happening in that house.
They've got to go and fill out
the paperwork.
Send it to Workforce Solutions.
Gets back to us as an employer,
I go and say, OK, you get,
you're granted this time off.
What's that time frame?
That time frame for that, that
initial piece. Again, again, it
is to respond in time. So the
objective and the reason for the
$35 million for the implementing
this process is to ensure that
we have the capability to make
that move faster. Um, we know
that many states who are already
implementing this law, Mr. Chair
and Senator, um, have had to
deal with car accidents or
again, emergency. So those are,
we have examples from many
states that we can take on how
we can implement those rules.
OK. And Mr. Chair, is there an
age restriction?
On who can start paying into
this fund.
Mr. Chair, if, if you're an
employee and you're paying, if
you're an employee, you're
paying into this fund in New
Mexico, Mr. Chair and Senator,
right, but what if I'm an
individual?
If you're an individual and
self-employed, Mr. Ches at
senator, is that what you're
asking? No, not self-employed.
Just
If
Just think of it as I work for
someone.
Right, so how
How does that, how does that
work in? Let's say I'm
17 years old.
You know, in our business.
There's a difference between a
17 year old worker.
And a 60 year old worker.
So
How am I supposed to as an
employer.
Regulate that.
A 60 year old worker may have
more health issues.
A 17 year old kid is like, I
don't feel like going to work
today. I need a mental day.
How, how do I as an employer
work through that. Um, Mr. Chair
and Senator, um, for the
circumstance where you described
saying the person saying, um,
I'm, I feel tired today. I'm not
coming in. That would not, that,
that is not covered by this act
because um it has to be a
serious medical issue condition
and that requires substantiation
from um uh medical provider or a
healthcare provider and various
other hoops.
that the person would have to go
through. So that this bill does
not address and does not support
a situation where someone just
doesn't feel like coming into
work on a particular day.
Mr. Chair
All right, and then just kind of
in closing, Mr. Chair.
Um
Let's say I have a health,
healthcare company.
And it's very expensive to train
and get these people certified
in 6 months. So let's say at the
end of the 6 month, I get them
certified.
That puts them eligible for
this.
So, let's say it's completely
legit. The um the mother is
deathly ill.
And they need to stay.
They need to take off of work to
take care of their mother.
So when they
When they do that,
As an employer,
I've got to start training
somebody else.
For 6 months.
So how
How in the world does this bill
sound like a good idea.
To keep businesses in New
Mexico.
I guarantee you if I'm starting
a business, I ain't coming into
Mexico.
Not with this bill. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator.
In that example that you
provided.
And it's and of course it's
completely legitimate. We're
gonna trust that that person is
going through that.
If this bill existed or if it
didn't exist,
to take care of their mother.
They would take that time and
the the concern for a lot of
workforce in Mexico that isn't.
Utilize right now is because
they don't have the flexibility
to do that. They are part of the
sandwich generation that takes
care of their parents and their
kids. And so I think there's two
pieces to this. So one is that
we're missing out on some
estimates 20,000 workers that
are that won't enter the
workforce because there's no
ability for them.
To
Work within those realms within
the.
that take care of folk on them.
And
To, I will offer the example my
little daycare I keep talking
about.
But there was a period of time
when they
multiple um
get pregnant at the same time.
You
policy
Mr. Chair and senator and so
rather than having 6 months
where we all had to pick up kids
at 2 p.m.
p.m. I think it was 2 p.m.
We want.
But instead of having 63 months
where I had
do that a little bit early. They
were out of employees for the
rest of the year, and at that
we had about, we had, my husband
and I.
to figure out and leave our jobs
early and figure out how to go
pick up our kid early so that we
could take care of that.
So that didn't just affect their
ability to operate and that was.
specialized field, people
training for years to go into
that. It's very difficult.
But rather than having a
situation where they could get
to working
Full time again. They never did
because there wasn't an ability
for them to afford to offer time
off for those folks.
speed you up just a little bit.
So Mr. Chair, with, with that
exactly.
I
A train that's person for 6
months.
I start in somebody else.
Come back to work
Chair and senator, again, it
depends on what you're.
doing? Should you, uh, if you
you can do
because you have to adjust to to
the.
If you don't think you
understood my question.
I think I do
You're saying is we hired a
temporary person to.
the person who
away
Mr. Chair and senators.
Your
Is that your point? Yes, but I'm
not gonna consider him
temporary.
I'm training. I'm spending the
money to train them.
So now
2
employees that are going to be
eligible for this
an employer and
it's supposed to do.
With the new
employee or the
I'm gonna
take them back
Mr. Chair and
Senator.
So you
Hired an individual
to replace
someone who took
Which is a situation that could.
And now.
Um, mister, because people who
are sick need to leave,
potentially.
So that's, it's not a different
situation than what you
currently have, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
and Mr. Chan.
As a business person, I would.
Um
that when you hired the
replacement.
And understanding
that understanding was
temporary or not, um.
Well within your discretion as
to how you describe that.
employment situation,
Mr. Chair and Senator.
Mr. Chair, and I, I agree with
you on that.
I
Except for
That
as you would call
that temporary has been with me
for 6 months.
What's gonna stop them.
taking their time.
still paying.
Mr. uh, Chair, and just to
clarify, uh,
I think you misspoke, Mr. Chair.
It was in 6 weeks, not 6 months.
It it is hold on one second.
Make sure both mics aren't on
because the webcast is getting
carpool.
So there's only
and just make sure.
So, um
Mr. Chair, what, what
Uh
filing for
unemployment.
how would this affect that? So
are
Because you're paying into this
fund, are you still gonna be
eligible for unemployment?
You decide to file for that.
Mr. Chair and senator, the
normal rules for unemployment
would apply.
Let me think this through, a
voluntary, um, separation, um,
is not the person is not
eligible for unemployment,
trying to draw on my memory
banks on how that that world
works, but I believe I got that
right. I see the chair who is a
business person as well, um, so
the only um condition for which
someone would be eligible for
unemployment, I believe if, if,
if they're terminated um for
anything other than um
misconduct, Mr. Chair.
Senator, so I don't think
there's a strong correlation
between these two statutes, Mr.
Chair and Senator.
OK, so, Mr. Chair,
So I had my full-time employee,
they took off. I had to hire the
replacement.
They worked for 6 months.
Now there, as you said, do we
have an agreement when we hired
him as a temporary, so now
they're gonna leave.
Are they gonna be able to draw
unemployment.
Mr. Chair and uh and senator.
They
I, you know, I don't know what
the rules are, Mr. Chair and
Senator, with regard to
temporary employees. So I, I
guess I'm I'm not in a position
to answer that level of detail
on the NO but maybe our our
budget person does. Sorry.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, I'm not
either, but I don't believe if
they had agreed to temporary
employment, and I believe they
would still have to go through
the room. I don't believe they
would qualify for it, but I can
do some more digging on that.
Well, there, Mr. Chair, there
are rules about um um filing for
unemployment and
And, and it could get cloudy,
but I, my point is this bill is,
is, um,
It's going to create all kinds
of problems.
That
that aren't addressed in here.
As an employer and an employee.
So, so my last question, Mr.
Chair, and I, and I thank all
three of you ladies for coming
in. Um,
How much
Did the house put in the budget
for this.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, the
House.
Has put in 35 million for
startup costs.
And if um the question is
extended to where is the, the
money for the welcome child that
will be through appropriation.
In, in upcoming years, Mr. Chair
and Senator, and I would point
out that that is not necessarily
unusual circumstance. It's been
done in the past and it's in
fact being done right now in
other situations, Mr. Chair. The
drawing of the money for the
welcome child will not occur
till January 1, 20.
28.
And so at this point, there is
not money in the budget for
something that does not start
until 2028. OK, thank you. And
Mr. Chair.
Um
No, I think I'll save that for
the floor.
So.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman, and
thank you, uh, presenters for.
Uh, the bill, um.
As I was discussed, I think we
passed the bill that, you know,
last year and now totally looks
different and, and so forth, but
I have a couple of questions,
um, and I'm not sure I didn't
look at the old bill, but under
definitions of
The last item, an individual
whose close association with the
applicant or the applicant's
spouse or domestic partner is an
equivalent of a family
relationship. Can, can you
further uh what does that mean?
And who is that individual?
Um, Mr. Chair, and, uh, Mr. Vice
Chair, that definition is taken
right out of the um healthy
workplaces Act, which is a bill
we enacted 3 or 4 years ago, um,
so it's currently being implied
and it relates to many of us
have very close personal
relationships that we treat as
family, and there is a, there
will be a mechanism to establish
that since we know it's being
used right now through the
healthy workplaces Act, which,
as you
you know, is the earned sick
leave Act, um.
And, and it's being applied by
the department, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would point out that to utilize
this program, you have to go
through the application process,
so you're not going to be
utilizing it for the guy that
lives next door to you or down
the street, you know.
So I understand there's been a
criticism, but I just want to
try to blunt that as we're
talking right now, Mr. Chair and
Senator. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you
Representative, you know, I was
just, you know, as the senator
Lanier was talking about.
The situation of family.
You know, and
That example is not.
Far-fetched.
Because there are many in our
tribal communities.
We don't
Have nuclear families as
You know,
Many families in this country
are defined.
And it's very conceivable that
The domestic violence can
impact.
The entire family.
And so I just want to put that
out there because I think, you
know, and as we've heard, you
know, domestic violence is
almost 5 times more in our
tribal communities.
Missing and murdered indigenous
women.
You know,
That's a high number we've heard
about that.
And so what we're talking about
family, I want people to
remember we're not just talking
about a mom and dad and kids.
We're talking about, you know,
families that are multiple
generations because of housing
issues and things that now you
have.
Multiple of families in 11
household.
And so that could, you know,
truly realize the senator uh
Lanier had mentioned.
You know, it's even worse, you
know.
You know, with all the the stuff
that's happened with the closure
of the mines in San Juan County
and all of that, you know,
thousands of Navajo families
have lost. I have families that
whose parents, I mean, I have
friends that are working either
in you or somewhere, leaving
their kids in farms with the
grandparents because they don't
want to take the kids out and
try to maintain a house.
And work somewhere else in the
state where they can, you know,
uh, do the work and, and so
these are, I think things are
not real, that are happening.
And, and so I could see, you
know, uh, Senator Leni's
question really impacting the
family and, and I don't want
folks to dismiss that because I
think that's, that's true. Um.
In on page 10, I know the tribes
are can opt in, but can you
clarify, uh, on page 10 on item
number 4 where it says tribes
that like to be covered, and
this is the part that's you or
to terminate coverage.
In the program for the
employees. What, what does that
mean?
I know the tribes can opt in if
they want to, but the.
Second part of that.
What, what does that mean?
Mm
Mr. Chair and senator, um, the,
the beginning, um, part of that
is welcome child and family
wellness Leave Act applies to
Indian tribes that elect to be
covered or to terminate the
coverage in the program. So Mr.
Chair and um Senator, what it
acknowledges is that the tribes
have full discretion to either
elect or
If they choose, if they do
elect, they have the ability to
terminate their cover, to step
out if they so choose in the
future, Mr. Chair and Senator.
OK, I appreciate that just
clarification I was trying to
remember any.
They like to be covered by now
that phrase, so they like to be
covered and then down the road
and say, hey, this is not
working, then they can opt out
again.
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes, and
it's obviously in respect for
their sovereignty and their
self-determination, Mr. Chan and
Senator. OK, and then I'm also,
so I'm also, OK.
If the tribe decides to opt out
and not get in.
Can the employees still get in
the program or it has to be
both?
Mr. Chair and senator, if the
employees are working for an
employer that are in the program
because, you know, obviously
many tribal members work for
employers across the state. They
could still be in the program,
but if, if the, the, the tribal
program is no longer in place,
um, Mr. Chair and Senator, then
they, the employees would not be
eligible.
OK, so, so I used to work for my
tribe, and you know, so if I
wanted to get in, but I couldn't
get in because my employer is
not.
Of the
Mr. Chair, I think that's the
correct interpretation, Mr.
Chair and Senator. I appreciate
that.
I think that's
And then, uh
On the welcome child fun.
Um, who is eligible?
This is eligible employees on
page 21, section 6, and the
first paragraph, the fund shall
be held for the benefit of
eligible employees. So, so who,
who is the employee?
But what's in the employee.
Mr. Chair and Senator, I'm
pulling up, I'm looking at the
uh definitions because eligible
employee I believe is, is, uh,
defined there. So just give me a
moment if you don't I don't
believe there's definitions for
folks in the Welcome Child fund
its definitions for the
paid family leave.
But now that they're combined is
I was looking for eligible
employee under your well, child
or welcome child fun definition,
but I didn't see one.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um, I,
I'm happy. Can I look a little
longer because I do know we have
it in there. It's, it's
something we discussed as well.
Um, but I will, but if you want
to go to the next question, I'm
happy to I think my last
question.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair and um senator, thank
you for the question. An
eligible employee is someone who
has worked for 6 months within
the previous 12 month period.
Um, sorry it took us a while to
draw that from our database.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Yes, I guess that sort of ties
back into uh Senator Trujillo's
earlier question.
If I'm a tribal member,
And my tribe is not involved.
And then, you know,
to have a baby anymore, grandpa
if I ever
become a father, you know, 60+
years old, uh, I would not be
eligible because
My tribe or I'm not an employee
of this other.
Um
Now that we've combined it, the
uh
Used to be pig family, what do
you call it now?
something
else
Whatever this bill is now.
The wellness
What,
yeah,
wellness. It's really a snappy
title, yeah, yeah, yeah you get
used to it. I appreciate that.
Yeah, so I'm just confused, so I
guess, so, so who is eligible to
take advantage of this.
3000 a month.
Or or is any pairing?
Eligible in the entire state.
For this fun or only those
parents or those individuals
that are part of this.
Snapping title of your program
now. I mean, can you explain
that? Um, absolutely, um, Mr.
Chair. The welcome child
component is for.
Parents who are working.
Who have a child through birth
or adoption, and they are
eligible to receive $3000 a
month, $9000 total, and they are
afforded uh up to 12 weeks of
leave and that we not, it's
unpaid leave, but they have job
protection so that they are
entitled much like FMLA provides
job protection. It's an unpaid
leave program and on top.
that, Mister Chair, we have, um,
Provided this stipend of $3000 a
month, Mr. Chair and senator.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, so, so
then we are now discriminating
with stay home parents.
Uh, or
Her mother that
It's not in like say I, I, I
know there's many.
You know, um
Mothers in our tribal
communities that don't work and
take care of the family, so they
will be all ineligible.
They will not qualify for this
one Mr.
Chair and Senator, um, so again,
the, the, the mechanism for
making this uh uh apply as it
can. And again in that spirit of
compromise that we did work with
many folks on, um, we focused on
working parents because that is
effect this would effectively
act again as a as a tax rebate
in a sense, right? So they have
been investing, they have been
working, they have been involved
in in Mexico economy. We
understand that they're gonna
need to take some time off to
bond with their child, whether
they're the mother or the
father. And so this allows.
them at least a, a, a, a, a, a
ground level of where they are
where should they sacrifice
their, their income for, you
know, 6 to 12 weeks, they would
be able to have some something
come in. So in that sense it
acts as a tax rebate for those.
Again, should we want to expand
this over the long run, um,
happy to meet with everyone here
to do that, continue those
conversations.
Yeah, I appreciate that. I think
sometimes, you know, some of our
families have other jobs that
don't typically
You know,
You see a lot of folks, you
know, uh, making burritos and
they're probably some of the
best at the at the corner, you
know, that new station, uh, I
mean, so there's ways that
people make a living out in the
rural areas.
You know, it's not the same way
sometimes in the metro area, so
I'm just saying that so from
that perspective, we're really
discriminate against those
people also trying to make a
living in a different way. So I
appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you, we'll just kind of
wrap it up.
You know, there's good actors
and bad actors in business,
right? We know that.
We know the workforce is the
most minute key workforce right
now that we've I've ever seen,
right?
They will leave you for $2 pay
raise, they will leave you
because you didn't offer this,
you didn't offer that.
Um, but I can't remember if this
was in Senate Finance and when
it came in or was an LLC.
And we saw where the workforce
is heading in the US, right?
Women are entering the workforce
at a higher rate. They're
heading for college at a higher
rate than men, and men are
declining in the workforce and
declining in college graduation.
They call it the browning, the
grain, uh, of America and there
are some interesting statistics
from New Mexico, right?
What our population, how much of
our population works, how much
of our population doesn't work.
And so, you're not gonna hear an
argument out of me about
mothers.
My wife was a school teacher,
didn't have the time off, didn't
get to bond with our children,
right?
Give them the time they need, 12
weeks.
Whatever it is.
That's the most important time,
I think in a child's life with
the mother.
And then, then we gotta go to
the other extremes, you know,
and these are real life
situations for me.
My mother was aging. She was
She kept her in her house,
right?
But every 5 minutes I had to run
up there.
So it's completely real
situation when you got to take
care of an elderly parent at
home.
But then
What Senator Lanier and Senator
Schle said are also true. I have
families that work in in our
business, right? A husband and
wife.
And, and
There's domestic violence where.
That it happens in neither one
of them will show up.
Right?
And
I don't really get into what
happened. I just hope it smooths
over itself and there's time
frames.
But when we come to this bill,
every time we go to the
extremes.
We can never take a baby step,
right?
If you had just mothers with 12
weeks and some and parent
families taking care of parents
or other in the medical
assistance. I'd vote for this
thing all day long.
Right?
I do not have a problem in that
format.
Um, but we got to start slow,
and we gotta start triggering
up. We always start at the
maximum benefit.
And then figure out how we're
gonna control that. We're never
going to control that.
Um, the cost.
It's not what it's gonna cost me
as an employer to do this.
And I don't think the employee.
We'll fight back on what they do
when they don't get the benefit
immediately, they will.
Because sometimes 10 or $15 a
month is the difference between
bread.
Listen, real world story, we
have to lend them money all the
time, gas money to go home the
more our workers drive 60 miles,
uh, one way to work 120 miles
round trip to just to come to
work.
Um, they, they
Have other family members, they
bring them on board.
And it's real world situations
that we deal with in the
business world. I don't know if
either of you have owned a
business where you have a lot of
employees and or workforce.
But
There's gotta be some cost
containment for employers,
right?
How do we say?
We have a very technical piece
of equipment over here.
And we sent these guys to
training.
And something happens.
And
we can get by for a little while
without you, but we can't hire
the next guy and spend $3500 to
train him and then bring the
other guy back trying to hold
his job.
Or it may be a woman because we
had traffic control women that
run our traffic control.
It, it, it's real world
situations that we're not
grasping.
And and that's a problem, but I,
I mean.
Um
People will leave. This is, is
this still limited to 5 and
under.
Mr. Chair, it, uh, the employer
doesn't have to pay into 5 if
you're fewer than 5.
And and that's another situation
because employees will leave you
for another benefit.
So
This is the way the world works,
if they see that benefit, your
husband or wife, cousin, whoever
it is.
If they see that benefit over
here.
And because you're a smaller
business.
Um
And they don't have that
benefit.
They'll leave you for that
benefit.
And then where are you at?
Because in small towns, the
world get around that that.
That
You know, George Munoz only has
5 employees, but
Benny Shindo, who has the same
business has 10, and he has that
benefit. Mr. Chair, I apologize
for interrupting your employees
are still eligible, that, that,
that employer's employees would
still be eligible. The employer
is not paying in, the employees
are paying in and they would be
eligible for the benefit. So if
the employer has fewer than 5,
the employees are still eligible
for the benefit. I apologize for
not being clear so no matter the
amount of employees they're
eligible.
Yes, Mr. Chair
And so that
It still creates the situation
with the uh an employee for a 5
or less.
I mean, that's pretty much all
hands on deck.
You got one person in your
phone, that person may be doing
quick books and doing payroll
system, um, you may have the
other person that's doing the
service work.
Uh, and, and you have the owner
that's probably working from sun
up to sundown.
And
It's just gonna create a mess.
I, I would love to see a small
baby steps in this for the last
couple of years, but that hasn't
happened.
Um
You know, this is.
Here's some CPI numbers and I
had them run for me.
And just based up on the $3000
right?
And we went back to 2015 in in
CPI and consumer price index for
all urban consumer price goods
in the Denver region. That's
what we based our CPI off in,
right?
So in 2021,
There was a 4% increase.
If we set that
Well, we went to 2015 just to do
a 10-year scenario as a base
year.
2015
Inflation was really didn't
exist 1.3 and 162 average of 2
until 2020 when it hit 1.2, you
got to throw a 20/20 out because
of COVID.
But after that, inflation ran
wild, 4.7, 8.8%, 4.1%.
And 2.9% for 2024.
When we look at those, if if you
look at that, that's a $900
increase on one payment on CPI.
I'll give you the sheet if you
want afterwards, but it's a $900
increase on CPI.
So if you keep the CPI inflator
in there, there's no cost
containment, and that number
comes from, uh, and I'm just
gonna use 2021 as a base year,
221 million and in 4 years, in 3
years.
It's at 256 million.
Everybody talks about the early
childhood trust fund and how we
could pull money from there.
Well, this legislature always
does this.
Whenever a big giant bucket of
money we create.
We go on right.
I may be part of the problem,
but their situations and times
where we had to, we had to raid
those situations, had to rate
it.
But every time we do that, and
we get a pile of money and we
say, let's build New Mexico's
future. This is the greatest
thing that we can do.
And what do we do as a
legislature? We go rob it.
And me change what's the
trajectory is and we send it on
a decline.
Uh, every single time in, in
that, and I don't know if
neither of you have ever been
representing Chandler, maybe you
were here in 18 or 19 when we
had to make cuts, and we're
actually hiding checks, bouncing
checks. We didn't have a penny
in the bank. We were dead broke.
And the hardest thing to do in
the legislature is to cut.
That's the hardest thing to do
and, and
You know,
have money for
And
Animal trust funds.
And I'm trying to figure out how
I, I pay foster parents more.
Right? We're in the middle of
the range for foster parents.
But how do we get more foster
parents and how do we pay for
them to have those kids. I mean,
this is a budget balancing act.
and
You know, the house, this is one
of those things that's not quite
figured out yet.
You bring me a bill that says,
We'll give women, I'll give them
18 weeks.
With their child, right? They
don't hold their job.
I believe that women deserve
that.
I believe that people, when
their family gets sick, they
need to go take care of them.
But when you get in very
technical defined areas, it's so
hard.
We're a small state.
are graduates are leaving the
rate, the state quicker than any
other state in the union.
And we can't control that.
And so how do we build that
workforce? We've thrown
Hundreds of millions of dollars
at the workforce and it hasn't.
Kept them here, and we haven't
created the jobs to retain them
here.
And and so for small businesses
is one of the hardest things for
them to adjust because we just
don't know human nature.
is the biggest in the world,
right?
And
Well, I want people to have good
benefits and want mothers to
have really good benefits and it
want when people got to take
care of their parents to be able
to do that.
Uh, a lot of employers do that
already.
And they do that with
On their own dime.
Uh, it's not the money to me.
I want a quality person, I want
quality people in New Mexico. I
want them to be able to raise
their families and take care of
them at the pay scale they need
to want them to have the quality
of life that
I and my family enjoyed and.
And
And so
It's just, it, it's always to
the extreme with this bill. It's
never
Let's start here.
And then let's increase it every
year.
And let's figure this out. It's,
let's go to the max and then
We're not gonna get there and
so.
I'll get off my
Talk, but I mean that I'm, I've
never voted for it because this
is the problem.
is we can't figure it out, so.
I will entertain emotion.
A motion for a due pass.
In a 2nd, 2 bien tree.
The cholera.
Senator Brent.
Senator Brandt votes no. Senator
Campos. Senator Campos votes no.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes no. Senator
Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes no Senator
Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes
Senator Tobiasin. No. Send her
Tobiasson votes no Senator
Truil?
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods boats no. Senator
Sendo,
Senator Sendo votes no, Senator
Padilla.
Senator Padilla Bos yes.
Senator Trujillo, Senator
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Munoz? Nonoz votes no, we have a
do not pass. We have 8 in the.
Negative and 56 in the
no excuse me in the negative.
Eat in the.
Thank you, Representative
Chandler. Thank you very much,
Mr. Thank you for the
conversation, Mr. Chairman
representatives, I do want to
thank you for carrying this
bill, and I truly, truly believe
that we need to find a solution.
And I'd love to be a part of
that.
OK, we, we got this flickering
light situation, so we're gonna
turn off the lights. We're gonna
come back in 5 minutes when they
change the lights.
So we can come back and kind of
wrap up house bill too.
8 in the negative.
and then they get 8 in the
negative 3 in the positive and
the negative.
3 in the positive.
So if we cleared the room real
quick, they're gonna turn off
the lights so we can kind of
flicker that out. We'll come
back in 5 or 10 minutes and let
everybody get a bathroom break.
We're gonna get started here.
Represented
Representative Garrett, I don't
think we're gonna get any house
bills cause we're gonna go to
the floor in a minute and we're
gonna get the draft instructions
for house built too, so we'll
probably come back this
afternoon and clean up all those
bills.
They're sitting there.
Depending what the house does.
The Game of Thrones has begun.
Charles, you're gonna start us
off. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
But
So we're passing out a
spreadsheet that looks like
this.
These are basically drafting
instructions for us to go and
draft your Senate Finance
Committee amendment to House
Bill 2.
Uh, there's gonna be a number of
items by section of the bill,
and I'll go briefly through
those and then be available to
answer any questions.
Once the chairman gets his copy.
Let's roll through it pretty
quick, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, not a lot of action actually
in section 4, line 11 is
necessary to really balance
everything and, and get this
department to use its own funds
rather than the general fund.
The big change I want to point
your attention to, uh, line 24
and line 25.
Uh, Senate Finance, uh, markup
is proposing to do the full
secondary reforms, um, that came
out of LESC. That's increasing
all of the weighting factors for
6th grade through 12th grade.
Um
So that's the 76 million you see
there and then 10 million in
savings to reallocate towards
it, uh, that came out of the
house.
If you flip the page, Mr.
Chairman, you can see online.
Uh, 26.
This contingent on enactment of
uh Senate Bill 376. This would
move the state towards resolving
the
Health benefits, uh,
deficiencies as well as uh
increase the premiums and change
the employer and employee share
of uh that health care cost.
And as you can see on line 28,
Mr. Chairman, between this
change and I'll go over later on
a change in.
Um, section 8 and just for
clarity, we will recommend on a
technical basis, Mr. Chairman,
that line 26 moved to section 8.
Uh, the, the funding amounts
won't change, but that needs to
be distributed by so we need
that as a motion.
Yes sir, Mr. Chairman, listen to
make that motion right now. Oh,
I, I've, I've got it. It says
section 8 right there on 26 and
you said we needed to move it.
I'm sorry, we, we made that
adjustment. OK.
Uh, so increased spending on a
recurring basis from the general
fund by a little over 23
million. This will put you at
about 6%, uh, a little north of
6%, um, spending growth. So
within your
The next uh couple of pages are
adjustments, and this is a, a
document that's adjusting from
where the bill sits right now.
So if you see a $1000 that's a
million dollars in addition to
what's in the, the bill or a
reduction um for what's in the
bill.
Uh, so like line 40.
As a good example of reduction
in this section of 72 million
that will move to the fund
transfer section.
That you'll see later, so
that's, that's not a.
Uh, any elimination of that.
Uh, there's also some um
language only items that were in
addition to the language that um
the language committee worked
on.
You, Mister Chairman.
I want to point out, um,
Line
81, this was a, a change to work
towards the exact.
And I think it was a priority
for many members in the Senate
as well, Mr. Chairman. This is
20 million for the rural
healthcare delivery.
Uh that was um a major ad.
Uh, lines 89 down to 93.
Those are adjustments to
language to conform to Senate
Bill 2.
Highlight line 107 to expand
suicide prevention and youth
behavioral health supports.
Same thing for schools online
123.
You have a bill to.
Uh, funds the 988 that is
already built into House Bill 2
to to be able to have HCA get
that.
Um, that funding so significant
investments throughout the the
budget, Mr. Chairman, on suicide
prevention and helping people in
crisis as part of your
behavioral health line 125.
Uh, this is no longer needed and
as a special for secondary
reforms because you're fully
funding it in the SCG. So that's
why that's being taken out.
There's also a hold harmless
later on.
Uh, that's no longer needed
because the full uh formula
changes, uh, would be funded.
That bill will need to be
amended, uh.
To line up to the budget when it
comes over.
Line 130. This is an item that
was in the grove.
Uh, so this just funds it for
one year and you'll see savings
in the grove for school
improvement activities.
You'll see line 143.
An elimination of this funding
because it was moved into
recurring. So recurring 3
million no longer needs the
non-recurring pilot money.
Uh, there's a number of items
throughout here where you'll see
reductions, same thing online,
149.
Where, uh, the chairman's mark.
focuses on what agencies can do
with money, uh, during the next
year and a half, uh, the end of
this fiscal year, next fiscal
year.
So that's explains line 154.
This is what uh New Mexico Tech
said they could actually do.
Uh, with this money as opposed
to um extending it for more
years or coming back and asking
for Rios. That's important when
you think of
Uh, the issues going on in
Congress with
Uh, the potential changes with
the budget reconciliation and
the reduction of federal funds.
We don't want to have a lot of
specials hanging out for uh.
too long.
Also working with the executive
in the last minute.
Uh, notification to Senate
Finance line 159 and 160.
That the health benefits fund
when it left GSD was still
underwater.
Uh, they need money to reimburse
uh local governments as part of
that court case where they had
collected.
Premiums during the middle of
the year to resolve.
Uh, the health benefits
shortfall, repaying them.
Uh, as well as having money to
uh pay out some outstanding
claims that are not being paid
out by the healthcare authority
today.
On line 17,170, Mr. Chairman,
you'll see all of those changes
resulting in net savings in this
section of 15 million.
Other state funds uh increases
primarily if you see that middle
column on the previous pages,
Mr. Chairman. This is where your
budgeting money that you're
parked in the community benefit
fund.
It's coming in as spending, the
specific spending items out of
that fund and then you'll, that
bill will have certain oversight
characteristics, uh, that's part
of it.
Mr. Chairman, the next section
is the grow.
Uh, some 2 years' worth of
funding for these items on 172
through 170182.
So this has to do with part of
your behavioral health package
as well as the uh the needed
funding for AOC for pretrial
services.
Um
As well as a call center and
then there's a series of funding
items that you worked with the
children, youth and Families
Department on including foster
care rates and those case aids.
Um, to give them a couple of
years funding shows to show the
committee, um.
That that's those items are
working before moving it into
there.
Their base budget.
Overall there was $43 million
worth of spending increases
added to.
Next on line 187.
You'll see the needed changes to
accommodate.
Uh, how our reserves are
sitting.
Because the grow sits in the
reserve, so you'll see on page
188, uh, to move money from the
ACF to the natural disaster
loan.
Fund will also be part of the uh
reserves that's just
transferring money from one
account to another.
Uh, the behavioral Health Trust
capitalizing that at 100
million.
Uh, that will be part of the,
the reserves and then the 73
million to increase the program
fund for spending.
There you see the match fund
come back in at 193, the 72
million.
And you see the changes, uh,
For those items that didn't need
to get multiyear funding in the
Perth.
And you'll see the community
benefit, uh, the need to reduce
that.
As well as a swap, um, of some
stranded money from prior fiscal
years line 202, that will go for
uh part of the Mr. Chairman and
section 10 for or section 11 for
DOT.
You'll see that it came over
from the house, uh, where the
road money except for locals was
uh zeroed out. You're adding
back in money for road
maintenance statewide.
Um, and allocating that across
each district.
The transportation project fund
for the locals gets an earmark
for motor vehicle excise tax, so
you're still keeping that at
about uh the 100 million, uh, it
would be a total of about 90
million when you add those two
things together.
Um, additions for rural Air
Service, that's proven uh
popular program and more
communities are wanting to add
that as well as cleanup and
beautification. Mr. Chairman,
there's just a couple of other
items, uh, down at the bottom
for uh budget adjustments that
weren't reflected in the
language committee and Mr.
Chairman, we would uh ask his
line 214 is important for us to
go in and make technical changes
to conform to House Bill 2.
Uh, style in terms of how we
write this, uh, as well as be
able to move money between FY 25
and 26 for non-recurring, uh, to
make sure everything balances
out to reach your risk
questions.
questions, Senator Woods,
Senator Truhill.
Just, just one question, Mr.
Chair, on, on line 133. I wonder
if we could just add a little
bit of language so that we can
have some report back as to.
How these, how these electric
school buses are are working out
for us if there's any more
maintenance or any anymore of
that.
You know, those are pretty new
and we got a different terrain
that a lot of places just kind
of.
If we could have reports back on
those
LFC, I'll, I'll double check
what I believe the um the bill
itself has reported.
In Tree Hill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Charles, I'm looking at line 177
and um I need, I need to follow
up on this too. I see that
there's $600,000 and that's
gonna go to CYFD for responses.
From the office of the child
advocate, is that, is that, is
that the CYFD side of responding
to.
Complaints Senator, that's
related to House Bill 5, and
that's why I'm we did that on
the floor, so let's see where
house both.
I get
What's the other state funds?
it's not this is a
appropriation.
Thank you.
OK.
No other questions.
There's
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, I move that we
adopt the recommendations that
have been submitted to us, so
for the adjustments and the
House Bill 2.
And the 22 by Senator Brand.
We call the role.
Senator Brandt
Yes, ma'am. Senator Brandt votes
yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Camposia, Senator
Gonzalez, Senator Gonzalez votes
yes, Senator Lanier. Senator
Lanier votes yes, Senator
Padilla.
Senator Padilla Boia, Senator
Steinborn.
Send her tobiasin. Senator
Tobias and votes, yes, Senator
Trujillo.
In Trujillo, Senator Woods.
woods vote yes, Senator Sendo.
Yes.
Yes. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'll be very, very brief just
for the viewing public and folks
in the room, I don't want you to
think we looked at a 214 line
document and, you know, 10
minutes and voted we have had a
lot of work and a lot of
discussion on this with staff
and with the chair and the chair
made sure we had plenty of time
to ask our questions. Just wanna
make sure that that's clear.
Thank you.
Yeah, just so the public knows
we spend a lot of time reviewing
this and it wasn't just, here it
goes there and here goes there.
I do need a uh catch up cleanup
committee. Senator Campos,
Senator Gonzalez, uh, Senator
Brant and Senator Lanier will be
on the ketchup.
You have drafting instructions,
it takes 3 days to draft this,
so maybe Wednesday, Tuesday or
Wednesday.
Yes sir, Mr. Chairman, we'll go
back over to the basement and
start working on it, depending
on actions in the house.
Uh, the, it will remain the same
and
We'll see what happens.
Everybody's smiling in the front
row, nobody's smiling in the
back row.
We are journey.
