Representative bills to get done
with.
Then we're gonna start hearing
some house bills that are moving
over to us.
So that's kind of our past any
questions Sir Campos.
lost more senior than I and.
Mr chairman in terms of
The H. B. two three seventy
seven and.
What we bill of your you have
all those things there in the
work.
That I have made all the
assignments in terms of what you
want us to do in terms of.
The and
reconcile take a look at the
numbers kind of things are is
there anything else that we
should be looking at today we
just we'll wait to see how it's
all going.
This start with the capitol
centre Rodriguez you're gonna
carry both capital bills the re
off bill are you pretty well set
on the re up bill in and then I
know the governor just said she
sent her capital to council
today.
Thank you very much for them yes
the we are waiting for the
governor's allocations through
coming in we need facts are
already to write that helpful so
we're just waiting to put
everything together they are and
everything's coming along as
expected with the routine now
alright that happens every year
so the ones that get into the
bill and and it'll move in the
house and eventually get into
the sense R. and the re
authorization bill the same
thing it's still and get the
introduced in the house that it
is kind of the committee once
everything gets reviewed and and
we've already it's just that the
fact is that thank you senator
problems for us that.
You're welcome not just a it's
always good for all of us to to
stay apprised of what's going on
and I really appreciate the work
you are doing I know it's it's a
lot of work and it's taking time
to put it together but again
thank you all very much amongst
all the other things that you're
working on so just of really
appreciate that thank you.
I'm just trying to get a hold of
senator Candelaria and Senator
Woods in center part two are at.
So Mister chairman Mr chair can
you hear me this time US Devin
trouble.
Yes you must've gotten on top or
something.
Well struggling earlier but you
can't see maybe you can hear me
this time thank you.
Senator did you have a comment
I just wanted to say that that's
a damn fine looking kitchen
behind.
It's never been used.
If they don't talk about
kitchens because we were
smelling like something good to
eat we're anxious to have a good
deal with dinner maybe even
water to drink we haven't had
much time.
Let's move on to to to we're
gonna have the the the Senate
amendments to you're gonna get
an update briefing in the next
day or two maybe we'll do a one
by one so everybody knows where
at
I do want discuss opportunity
scholarships just a hair for one
second there is some amendment
so if anybody has amendments for
for opportunity scholarships can
we get into us I know that
Senator Diamond we've looked at
years senator Candelaria if we
she's honor of where he is he
said it was going home to join
but if we get to get is and any
other men and so we can get that
wrapped up.
And then and guestlist Senator
Candelaria has done language
for.
Prior chairman for a couple
years so want to get in there
Senator Campos you want to help
him with language and Senator
Diamond but which we put you on
on the language issue to.
So they have to do is and what
are.
And then we're gonna look
together and and we occurring
dollars a nonrecurring dollars
and see where we're at.
Senator Steinborn the new you.
Thank you.
Which committee with happy Mr
chairman the language committee.
Yeah the review language.
Okay.
So maybe one that senator Byrd
to that language communicate
that okay we'll try to get a
balancer thank you just kind of
limit put the red heads together
Mr chairman is that what's going
on there.
Well I think senator Byrd is
bald.
Well.
Well okay we'll leave it at
that.
Thank you to read it with that.
Senator Campos thank you very
much so if you're foreign
language committee.
The five of us sounds like
What would you like us to a
sister to me.
Or how do you expect to handle
and I'm sorry.
We're gonna have a spreadsheets
It in wings on in in the next
day or two and and everybody
look at the spread sheets
have you guys do that either
after committee and it is so you
guys can review the language
make sure everything's correct
there's any late HSD ads we'll
do that.
And
if we need to add anything
subtract anything all language
is correct and and then try to
do that maybe.
On Friday get the language
corrected so they can begin
drafting house bill two.
Once we have that the sheets you
know takes it takes a couple of
days to get everything drafted
for house bill two and and make
sure it's correct and everything
so we'll look at that.
Do you still have some stuff in
motion if there's tax bills are
going to be proposed we're gonna
see what happens with those and
we got a few bills that
well we're gonna need to look at
pretty hard.
So Mister chairman in terms of
the the tax bills are we should
be getting if you will there are
packages coming forward that we
should be getting those in the
next few days as well.
It's my understanding that that
those there were still talking
today I wasn't involved in those
conversations that asked to be
involved in those conversations
so that we know what's happening
when they're in tax and how
they're going together and and
what those look like and then
Involved in those conversations
that'll be able to have those
spreadsheets.
Force and then we'll.
Thank you Mr chairman just to
follow up because if not for us
over the years has been
from tax ways it means or
whatever the the name of the
committee has been once the
those tax bills are ready we
take a look at him and we
decide.
Committee as well
fits what doesn't cause will
make sure that we do have a not
only balanced budget but if they
are to be in the the tax
proposals that were directly
involved with those as well
thank you Mr chairman.
That that is correct
I keep seeing.
The other three senators and
join this and I don't see an.
Senator Gonzales I will take the
blame for this is this is my
responsibility as chairman and
and it just got worse and worse
and worse and so I I again I do
apologize for that but we will
get it fixed.
Sure me that because assure you
that because it was.
is chairman I'll take
responsibility so.
So that said anything else you
think we're gonna be missing
center Rodriguez capital your
you think we're good we're we're
going just as opposed to be this
is the usual process is working
on just right up to the chairman
from the house today and we're
on the same page everything's
working out great thank you.
Okay.
A few more minutes if not I did
try calling all three or four of
them they're not answering so.
It just keeps going back and
forth looking.
Anything else you think we need
to cover.
Senator Campos Pete.
Anything else you think we need
to cover that were missing.
Mr chair just as we get ready
for the the house bills are we
going to be.
The minute the duplicate bills
are are are is there is some
arrangement where some of the
also going to be going through
that for Committee cross from
the house those will be the ones
that will are we'll try to get
if they are heard on the Senate
chamber
so we're really down to the
balancing part so I just I don't
know what your process will be
there at the end but I know
we're going to be coming up on
that this next week so.
Yeah we are down to the
balancing part and we're looking
to make sure that some of our
Senate member bills are getting
hurt in the house.
And that we're here in the the
fair number House bills that
need to be heard and and so we
are in that balancing situation
where we start we have one or
two house bills that we may have
schedule for one for tomorrow
let's try to keep the schedules
light as we can and if we got to
come in on Saturday in and do a
bunch cleanup we should be fine.
Mr chair and I really appreciate
that the other issue I know that
the priority goals for members
of the Senate others two or
three thank no making their way
through the process and we know
that.
I would be priority bills for
towards the end we so again
thank you very much for the
consideration of the balance
gonna handle these the
legislation at the end of how
we're working with both members
of the house and Senate and the
governor of course thank you
very much Mr chair.
Chairman Campos when we decided
we were going to meet about
language.
that's a very good point eminent
I'm going to defer to the chair
and then once he gives us the
direction that we can come to
get I really believe at least
the next couple of days when we
need to start looking at
language because it's a the it's
a lengthy process to make sure
that the bills are are complete
so Mr chairman for you.
So we're gonna spread sheets and
the next day or two with that
language.
In a so we'll look at those
those spreadsheets and then you
begin to look at language.
Thank you.
Just so people know I mean the
Senate rules don't allow us to
meet in person that I've tried
and I've tried and I tried.
And and they don't want to speak
in person so.
You know given the COVID world
in and where we're at we can
meet on the floor but we can't
meeting committee it's just a
little bit tough even if we met
on the floor so.
Mr Chairman we've been through
it to this point how many days
left now before the end of the
session so I'm sure we'll be
able to pull through somehow has
many the obviously the stress
and the additional workload for
all of us in pretty pretty high
but I'm I'm happy to get through
it together.
You so yeah.
Well.
I've reached out to two times
and and haven't got a response
so the Senator Gonzales we will
get that done I assure you that
Even if I find a different path
for that we will get it done so
I just want to show you that and
I'll just you and then I guess
we'll adjourn come gonna be on
the floor.
Fifteen minutes and I hope we
aren't there right along two
lines.
Thank you guys thank you for W.
nine.
Thank you.
