Get some crayons in my office.
Ah, I got crayons.
It's pretty hard to act water.
We're ready. We're just
We're gonna We're in a hearing,
so I'm just being a
subcommittee. I guess we're not
making decisions. Okay. Um so,
Mr Chair and members of the
Committee of the Subcommittee
Thank you for having us here.
I'm joined with the EFTA. Ashley
Leach. Um, and there's a number
of the cabinet heads here as
well. Economic development
office of the state engineer.
General Services Department.
And I think that's uh, that
represents the majority of the
folks that are here to, um
again help answer questions or
talk about the strategic water
supply.
So let me just give you a brief
overview with the strategic
water supply is and is not, um
so the strategic water supply is
a concept that is really
identified to create less
reliance on our freshwater and
preserve freshwater resources.
So the idea came to a number of
us working with each other
across the cabinet trying to
think about how do we continue
to grow jobs and economy in a
state that is water starved? How
do we continue to preserve
freshwater resources for our
communities? And how do we think
about what the federal
government has done?
Which is bring the inflation
reduction Act. The bipartisan
infrastructure law, the chips
Act, um and and really
catalyzed the investment
expansion and on shoring of
these companies more
domestically than we've seen in
the past and why I bring that up
related to the strategic water
supply is that key aspect of all
those federal acts that I'm
talking about?
Um, brings water intensive
industries back to the U. S, um,
that are also reducing carbon
footprint that are also sort of
the types of companies that will
help with our energy transition
and advanced manufacturing that
supports that transition.
So we're at a crossroads in
what? How do we again preserved
fresh water for our communities
and keep that is the highest and
greatest use.
And and where are we going to
get this water from? So we're
not left behind for those
industrial onshore rings that
are happening. That again will
help with battery manufacturing
and critical minerals and other
things that are so important for
this transition.
So again, the strategic water
supply is taking, um
Brackish water and produced
water and focusing on those two
types of water that are not
currently used and that have a
higher or not currently used for
advanced manufacturing or
energy. Um
Or otherwise wasted and causing,
you know, in some instances,
problems environmentally that we
have to then go and clean up and
think about
So by treating brackish and
produced water. Um
Let me let me
So I think I said the problem
statement out there. Um, the
next pieces, you know? How do we
do this? How do we go from
concept to implementation, So in
terms of the implementation
side, many of you know that the
New Mexico Environment
Department is focused on water
reuse roles that are kind of the
stick the making sure that
Water reuse can happen in the
state of New Mexico and is safe
and sound way so those water
reuse roles are currently in
front of the water Quality
control Commission. And I think
that hearing is set for May. So
that's the sort of regulatory
stick side of the house and then
on the incentive side, what we
wanted to do, and there's a
growing thought here, you know
nationally.
Um, that public agencies or
government should not
necessarily continue to fund all
the infrastructure but should be
sort of closing the financing
gap and help catalyze the first
movers to come to the table and
implement some of these
solutions, and that's what we're
doing here is that we would use
funding as appropriated through
the Legislature.
To purchase the treated water
while the private sector
develops all the infrastructure,
so there's no cost to the state
on the infrastructure side. The
appropriation would be used for
the procurement of the water. Um
And we kicked off that process
through a request for
information last week.
That request for information
closes March 31st, and then
we'll move to an RFP through a
GSD procurement process as we
ask for more industry specific
concept papers to be submitted
to the state and then by the end
of the year at the earliest, we
think we'd be in the position to
make some selections provided
the appropriation came through.
That we would be at the end of
the year, able to make some
selections.
And that would give us the
ability to probably be within 18
months. There there about of
actually purchasing this water.
And the water itself would have
to meet quantity and quality
specs and there and the water
would only be used then for, um
uh, fit for purpose uses and
what I mean by fit for purpose
uses is the industries that
would
Uh, are heavy consumers of the
water so things like green
hydrogen? Uh, things like solar
manufacturing As again I
mentioned chip manufacturing it
earlier, but they would use that
water for those particular
purposes, So maybe a really
simple thing that I need to say
that it's sort of throws. People
off here is that
While the state is purchasing
the water, the treated water and
not funding any of the
infrastructure were purchasing
the water.
That water then would be made
available to those industries.
The state is in the kind of a
role of managing water on paper
the industries would be in the
role of managing the water
itself, like the literal
movement of the water between
The treatment and the finishing
to the companies that would then
consume that water. It's a zero
discharge proposition. It's
illegal, um today to discharge,
treated or untreated produced
water, and it would continue to
be illegal to do that. Even on
the flip side of this advance
market commitment or the
strategic water supply.
Um, So I think Mr Chair members
of the committee that is a high
level overview of what we're
talking about. Um, but I'll turn
to my colleague from D F A to
talk a little bit more about the
financing side and the
appropriation request.
Thank you. Secretary Chairman
members, Ashley Leach, director
of the State Board of Finance.
So, um
What we're proposing with. This
is the funding of the purchase
of water via appropriation with
senior severance tax notes, also
known as sponge bonds, the
senior servants tax notes have
been a component of the
severance tax bonding program
for since the 19 nineties when
it was established.
These notes, which are short
term in conjunction with long
term severance tax bonds are
used typically to fund capital
projects appropriated by the
Legislature. That's how the
bonding program works notes are
not a long term issuance. There
are short term no issue to the
state treasurer's office
overnight to sponge up cash in
the severance tax bonding fund
that is not otherwise used.
For long term debt service. That
funding is sponged up prior to
statutorily required, Uh
Uh, sweeps of the bonding fund
to the Severance Tax Permanent
fund, which is then invested by
the S I C
Um, And then there are
distributions out of that to the
General fund.
So we are proposing the use of
taxable senior servants tax
newts for this into
appropriations of 250 million
each one this year and won the
following year as of now.
Um and I would just state we
typically issue senior severance
tax notes 1 to 2 times a year
again to fund appropriated
projects. We have had our tax
counsel and Bond Council review
this and they have reviewed it
with taxable bonds and notes. We
do not have to conform to all of
the IRS requirements that we
would for municipal long term
bond issuance.
So that was taken into
consideration that said Bond and
tax counsel did review this.
They did determined that the
purchase of water is capital in
nature, Uh, considering that it
is an obligation that the seller
sell the water to the state once
it is treated, so they have
reviewed this, um and opined on
that and again. It's a standard.
It's It's not a standard. It's
just one of our bonding programs
that we utilize for capital
appropriations. So
It's pretty straightforward from
the funding mechanism piece.
Thank you.
Mr Chair. One last thing that
I'd like to say and and again,
my inner I know you'll find this
hard to believe of my inner
engineered
Water nerd self will show here.
Um, is that
You know, as Ashley is talking
about this, the fact that the
state could consider water a
commodity.
Uh is is a big is a big deal
that I think is exciting with
the strategic water supply, so I
think that's a great step
forward for people who are
looking to preserve, protect and
ensure that water is used for
its highest value pill. Your
first. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Kenny, um,
for the presentation. I just I
noticed that
The executive request for
employee compensation was there
was a discrepancy there, and I
was just wondering if you
received the request for the
executive request for the
employee compensation. How would
this impact? Um, your ability to
Provide the services to New
Mexico. And would it affect your
request here at all?
Send your Hemphill. We're going
to hear the agency right after
this water presentation, Okay?
Senator Brantley. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Secretary.
It's good to see you.
There's a little bit of
confusion, I think and that the
state initially I think there
was some confusion that the
state was going to spend $500
million to clean up water to
create produced water. But if I
understand this this plan, the
state is already purchasing
produced water that the state's
going to purchase produced
water. I guess what I don't
understand is if we don't
Own wells. Why are we Why are we
Why do we need to purchase to
themselves?
To to end users. I guess I'm
saying, why are we making
ourselves a middleman? Not that
I'm not supportive of obviously
the use of produced water. But
why? Why are we getting in that?
So, um
Mr Chair and Senator. Good to
see you. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, thank you for the question.
So I'm gonna be specific about
my terminal. Try to be as
specific as I can about my
terminology, so we the state
will not purchase any produced
water because produced water by
my vernacular would not be
treated. It's it's right
associated with the production
of oil or gas.
Um, instead what we would do is
ah solicit concept papers from
industry.
That would be and they may or
may not be oil and gas because
oil and gas does treat their own
waste water. And then there are
other times that other companies
come in and treat that water.
So we would purchase treated
Produced water not produced
water, right? Um, that treated
produced water would give us the
ability than to use it as a
economic
Um, lever to attract some of
those other companies that are
in the water.
Uh, demands that you know they
need water. So, um, could this
happen absent the state being
involved?
In theory it could, but it
hasn't largely because the
companies who will treat
The produced water or brackish
water.
Need the certainty.
Of the state being the
Long term purchaser of that
water.
And then once the state is the
long term purchaser of that
water than they can the steak
and then work to bring other
companies in that would consume
that water. So we're helping
bring certainty.
To the industry that will put up
the capital to
Build these treatment facilities
we buy what comes out of it
Provided it meets spec. And then
we're the middleman. If you
will, or middle woman that would
bring that water to a another
industrial use. Maybe that is
green hydrogen. Maybe that is
advanced manufacturing.
Um, and they would use that
water again. Could the business
sector do this on their own?
Likely, but
We're getting in this to spur
that.
That incentive to move that
forward through that it through
that purchasing of the treated
water. Okay, So, Mr President, I
think I think you did a good
job, explaining that it's almost
a concept that if you buy it,
they will come, I guess is the
end. Consumer doesn't have the
time or the capital then to to
create this commodity that
you're talking about. So you're
saying it would be readily
available for them to come in
and the state is holding that?
Mr Chair and Senator. Yes, And I
mean, I said this to a number of
different companies. You know, I
find myself in more and more
conversations with companies who
are looking to come to New
Mexico and say, I need potable
water for my manufacturing. And
I say, Do you really need
potable water for your
manufacturing? Or could you use
water that does not meet
drinking water standards And
they say, Oh, you're right. We
could use water that is a little
bit different than drinking
water standard.
Nerds.
So we play match dot com with
between the companies are
looking to set up in New Mexico
that have water needs and my you
know my view. Part of my job is
to make sure that we preserve
our freshwater for communities
because we're certainly
declaring emergencies and trying
to get water to communities.
Um, but my my job is to look at
those companies coming in and
saying you're a good fit. You're
gonna help with our energy
transition. You're going to help
with whatever it is that sort of
aligns with where we're going.
Like, how do we get you off this
notion that you need potable
water that the community is
going to use and and so we look
back now at this brackish water
and and produced water and say
if that's treated, we could land
these other companies and and so
we do spend a lot of time in
that middle. I know it's sort of
like, Well, why don't they just
do it on their own? That doesn't
necessarily they don't do it on
their own.
And we have to be in that space
to kind of help. Close that
deal. So, Mr Chairman, my next
question would be in doing so,
Are we competing with private
business? Are there no entities?
No private businesses that are
already supplying this
I think, Mr Well, Mr Chair and
Senator, um there may be private
businesses that are interested
in doing this. But since 2019
It's been in the conversations
that I've had. It's been talk
and not
Action.
The the Federal IRA B I. L chips
act things like that are really
making it more of a powder keg
moment where companies are
looking at New Mexico, North
Carolina, South Carolina, You
know they're looking all around,
and they're saying which states
have the you know the workforce
all these other things and then
the water.
Um so I don't think we're
I think we're spurring those
first movers to initiate
Building the infrastructure for
sure we are.
But we're not sort of
disrupting.
The are are sort of undercutting
businesses in this space, I
think until we provide the
certainty they may not be first
movers.
And Mr President. Is it because
I mean, if there's money to be
made, a businessman is going to
come in and do it. Our private
business is there. Is there a
risk that we're not considering
here? I mean, we we purchased
this, and then there's no into
consumer and as the state left
With with a bunch of produced
water that we invested in and
couldn't sell.
Ms Yeah.
Mr Chair, and, um
Senator, I think the whole
deliberate approach that we're
taking to establish a request
for information for the next you
know, 2 to 3 months and then an
RFP with concept papers is to
suss out to make sure that that
everything that we're hearing
from industry about if you do
this, we will move is actually
correct.
Right? That's that would be my
concern as well. Thank you for
better clarifying that. I
appreciate that, Mr Chair and
Secretary
This kind of blow, so, Mr Chair
and Mr Secretary.
This kind of blows our thoughts
on
Form water and the state owned
in water and
And and giving someone the right
to use that water and
And so we're treating this as
something other than water?
Here's where I'm understanding
you.
Uh,
Mr Chair. It seems to me that
That the way you're describing
this
It could be.
Any other commodity.
But it's not
What we consider as water in the
state.
Am I missing something here?
Mr. Chair it. Do you understand
what I'm asking?
When when we talk about water
and stayed into Mexico. From
what little understand
We're talking about, you know,
diverting water.
For particular.
Use.
We'll talk about, uh
Maybe never owning the water,
but owning
The right to use the water.
And I don't hear that. Those
statements made in your
presentation.
I hear
I hear we're going to buy
Produced water, which
You know why not despite fresh
water.
When you start talking about
we're going to use water.
As uh,
Commodity. So are you gonna put
around? It's got to be so
polluted.
Before we consider this
Or you? I don't know if you're
getting my point across me chair
when I'm trying to say is
This is gonna this is gonna be
treated completely different
than
Then what? We have the thought
of water administered in the
state of New Mexico. So in what
part of this am I missing
Mission chair and Mr
So Mr Caron and Senator Woods. I
am may need to call up my
colleague Um, Secretary Hammond
from from OSC, But let me
Let me just say this.
Um and I hope it's at the risk
of clarifying that at the risk
of complicating
Uh, that
Effectively. Brackish water is
at a certain salinity and depth.
And I don't believe that that
water is appropriated by OSC.
Um
Produced water is also outside
of OS es.
Appropriation will house
Um, so the two types of water
that I just mentioned
Salt water that's brackish or
saltwater that's produced water.
All right. Outside of what we
typically think of in water,
quantity and water allocation.
So there it's it's I think it's
very different concept.
Then what OSC would normally
work on.
And once that water that I am
talking about brackish water and
produced water are treated
To a certain specification.
Then that water could be used in
certain industrial applications.
That I previously described
It is completely outside of the
scope of what we're talking
about. Through typical typical
OSC jurisdiction. Um and I hope
I helped clarify, but Secretary
Hammond
Thank you, Secretary Kenny. Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods.
This is a new source of supply
that does not require state
engineer permitting, and, uh,
the produced water.
Ah!
There's there's permitting with
fresh water. That's
Brought into the oil and gas
operations that we we do permit,
but once it's gone through the
the
Produced process of pulling up
the oil and gas. It no longer
requires a permit to take that
block of water treated and put
it to some type of alternate
use.
The same thing in place to
brackish aquifers. We we have.
we have characterized all of the
freshwater aquifers.
In New Mexico and anybody
Acquiring water from freshwater
aquifers does require a state
engineer permit.
But a brackish aquifer does not
What we would permit are the
actual wells themselves to make
sure that we protect the
freshwater aquifers as a
producer, you know, an
exploration well or producer
would would drill to tap their
the brackish, You know deeper
aquifers.
Uh, but we would not require a
permit to put it to beneficial
use.
Well, I'm Mr Chair of had some
dairymen Tell me that they've
applied for permits.
To go down there and what
As hillbillies called Santa Rosa
Layer and and
Use some of that water to water
the cows on derricks.
And and I thought, they said
they had to get a permit from
you to do that.
So, Mr Gerin and
And, uh, mistake. Engineering.
Um, did I miss that somewhere?
Mhm. Um Mr Chair Senator would
if the
The salt. The salinity level is
at 1000 mg or less.
Then that's considered possible
for
The purposes of animal use, You
know, stock, water use or
whatever that that does require
a state engineer permit. But if
it's higher salinity than that,
it's considered brackish.
And we don't have jurisdiction
over permitting that particular
type of water supply.
So so with that thought.
The the
L. Paso.
Plant over there.
That produces water for El Paso.
They treat that
What we call what I've heard
called brackish water, so it
must not be practice water.
Because
And that's Texas. Source. Texas
law, It's altogether different.
Let's try Alamogordo.
Tell me about the plant and
Alamogordo.
That that cleans up water.
They're Dalma garden. That is
that is not permitted water
whatsoever. Or Miss Jereme.
Sorry. I'm leaving you out.
But the state engineer
Um, if that's been defined as a
brackish water source, there is
no
Permit requirement for that.
For that that water that Alma
Gordo's trying to tap and treat
So
So we're going to change the
rules a little bit now and
Because the way I see this, we
talked about produced water, but
the way I really see it is why
would you clean up?
Produced water, Mr Chair.
If there is some brackish water
that needs very little cleanup.
And you can meet the
specifications for producer and
it wouldn't have to be next to
the oil patch. It could be.
Somewhere else in the state
where there's brackish water so
I don't think
I want to choose my words
because
When you when you make the
emphasis on produced water
I'm assuming.
We're talking about brackish
water anywhere in the state, and
if it is closer to a
manufacturing zone
So we don't have to pipe it or
don't you know, I would assume
the manufacturer has to
Has to set up his plant pretty
close.
To the distillery for better
word.
Uh,
To use the water so we don't
have to pipe the water.
And and so
Would you?
And we might want to wait for a
bill because everybody is kind
of confused. Okay? I'm
I have confused myself. Thank
you very much, Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair. Can I just respond to
one thing? Sure, Senator, Wood
said, and I and I appreciate
Your comments. Senator was, uh,
you are correct that the
The brackish water is found
throughout the state produced
water is found more or less in
the corners of the state. Um
Therefore, treating brackish
water could sort of happen
anywhere if you will.
Treating produced water would
happen in those, you know San
Juan as well as the Permian
Basin.
Um
I think the reason you would see
interest in both brackish and
produced water.
Uh, is that there is associated
infrastructure in parts of the
in all around the whole state
that make brackish water
exploration and treatment and
usage.
Advantageous in those areas and
similarly same argument in San
Juan and Permian Basin
infrastructure scale workforce,
etcetera.
Um
The the
Oil and gas industry and the
Produced water that is
generated, you know, is
currently put down hall at a
cost.
So
There may be other options in
terms of treating it that bring
revenue.
Such as You know, there's one
diminished cost for disposal,
but two critical minerals that
could come out of that water
that you may not find in the
same concentrations in brackish
water, and I'm speculating that
I don't have a factual knowledge
of that. Um, but what we're
hearing is that some of the
associated critical minerals
that again would go for things
like
Ah, you know, electric car
batteries and other types of
critical infrastructure. That
sort of again is towards this
transition.
Would be a revenue stream that
would be of great interest.
So I actually think that
depending on the company,
depending on their expertise,
depending on where they're
looking in the state, there are
reasons why this would be viable
in, you know, the through
throughout the state. There may
be reasons why it wouldn't be
As well. But that's again to to
the to the point of requesting
information that we sent out.
To the industry, or, you know
for anybody to respond to.
That's why we put out a request
for information so that we're
cautious but bold in the way
we're moving forward.
Um
You know?
Senator Bert Let me ask some
questions real quick.
Why are you going to make water
commodity? I mean,
Nowhere in the entire world. I
don't think waters are
commodity.
Yeah, And I'm afraid the minute
we do this.
Every stream.
That feeds Arizona, California
All of them right?
All that water will now be a
commodity, and we'll have a
market rate on it. That's
Probably ungodly.
Um
All right, Senator Bert, but I
mean, that's something to really
think about.
When poor people right
Can't afford other things.
And we know a bottle of water
costs. 25 cents wholesale,
right and if we put a commodity
On water.
And I don't think anybody else
in the world has put a commodity
rate on water.
It's pretty scary to me because
that means
Now we've we've opened the
market up.
And maybe it's only a commercial
market, right?
For certain sectors if you label
waters of commodity first people
in the world, I mean
That is absolutely scary.
To me because then
People consume more water than
they do anything else in the
world. And what what's going to
happen to that race? Herbert
Thank you, Mr Chair. Now I'll be
a little more direct.
Because they're more share with
you What I hear in my area of
the state subsidies, prostate,
um
Has either two agencies bought
land with water rights on them.
Um And that would be part of
what I know. We're talking
produced water, but I'm asking
about Have you purchased land
with water rights on them and
bought the water rights as well.
Mr Chair and Senator, um, for
for the purpose of the strategic
water supply, there would be no
purchasing of land or water
rights because
Again, as the state engineer
explained.
Treated brackish water or
treated produced water.
Do not.
Have a water right associated
with them.
Hmm. Hmm. Mr. Chaired Senator
Burke.
I think it would be if you were
to use an analogy of a bottled
water plant.
As as maybe a talking point
here, um to also address Maybe
your discussion on the commodity
issue We're really asking people
to do to it is to invest in the
technology to
You know, analyze the water. You
know, we gotta characterized the
aquifer. We gotta understand the
mineral content within it. Is
there something of value there
that that a company could
You know, utilize and
commoditize. Um And then once
you make that investment and
treatment of that water, that's
the cost of that you would
recover, and then there would be
potentially a profit margin
above that, Which would be
something that can't do with a
bottled water plant does takes
takes something from a
municipality who
Actually has water that they
charge their people fee to use
whether it's commercial or
residential. Um, and that covers
the cost of production. Right
and then a company can take that
water and treated again and then
sell it.
Um uh, that there's a and and
you know the private company
could buy land to put their
plant on to produce it.
You know, those are the kinds of
things that we're looking at.
When we're putting out requests
for information from these
various entities.
The actual commodity of water is
is not the issue. It's the
recovery cost of production of
it. And then whatever it takes
to, uh, you know, apply it to
the end user.
Yeah, Mr Chairman. And and thank
you for that. Answer, Um
The concern is that I hear from
folks is that
State government.
Wants to buy a plant and water
rights.
Uh huh. And take that out of the
mix, and I agree that there are
companies who want to come into
the state and and produced water
or even natural water, And they
certainly have the right to do
that.
There are concerns the state
agencies.
Owning land and water rights and
not allowing the public to use
those or resell them.
And so I'm just being real,
candid and honest with you, Um,
for me. I don't want to go there
if they want land and want to
write something there. In fact,
we had a, uh I think we had a
minor, uh, who was producing
even, um what they call it rare
earth minerals as well as some
natural minerals.
Who's gonna put it put it in
production plant in Alamogordo,
which would have been a
wonderful thing.
Ah, and he was gonna buy some
land that had water rights on
it, And I don't have a problem
with that. That's private
industry. I think we just and
Covid came along and all that
went. So so I think the concern
is that state government owning
a lot of land with water rights
on it, and water being so scarce
in New Mexico.
Not allowing, um some private
industries come into a certain
area.
And see piece of land that they
want has water rights on it, But
the state owns it and may or may
not sell it.
Back to that person. That's
their concern, and I'm bringing
that to you. I'm sure you
You. This is not the first time
you've heard that by I'm
throwing up the flag of caution
right now to make sure that
we're not doing that as a state.
I think, uh, real naturally
produced water out of the
ground. Um, and the land that
surrounds that, and whoever owns
that should be left up to
private industry.
Listen, State land already then
I understand, but I mean, taking
private land and purchasing that
by the state, I think is a real
concern of a lot of people.
So I just want to bring that to
your attention, and I hope
that's not the case that we're
talking about here. We're
talking about taking produced
water and and reusing it. I'm
all for that Mr Chair and and
Senator just to be really brief
about it. There is no scenario
in what we're talking about, in
which the appropriation would be
used for the
Acquisition of land or water
rights. It is strictly for the
purchase of
A gallon or barrel of treated
produced water or treated
brackish water.
In which the state will
Ideally have a match or for
every barrel produced. There are
there would be a consumptive use
of that water, so it never fit
into the scenario that would be
discharged into the environment.
It would be completely
The purchase of a volume of
water over time, and that's the
way the contracts would be set
up.
Thank you for that. I appreciate
that clarification. Mr Chairman,
I assume that there are some
work with economic development
that that
And you know we're knowledge,
privy to what's in the works,
And that's okay too, because
companies want to, uh me and
almost until they can actually
come into the state and work on
that. And I think that's fine,
too. Um, I just don't also as
just as a taxpayer and and
private sector guy. I don't want
us to invest a whole lot and
have all this.
You know, water purchased and
sitting somewhere or have the
rights to do all this stuff, and
we spent a whole lot of taxpayer
dollars and we don't have a use
for it. I don't think that's
efficient Use, so I'm hoping
that we're tracking what may be
available and purchasing or
preparing to produce just that
amount of water, not just
wildcatting out there so to
speak, and
And getting a whole bunch of
water, stored or prepared for
somewhere else that may or may
not ever be used. So just again
Flag of caution on that, Mr
Chairman, That's all we got.
Thank you for the time. Thank
you Kind of want to just run
through some questions. You
don't have a presentation, and I
guess I'll have to get match dot
com to figure out how you're
going to do this.
Um
You know, the sponge Bonds
worries me a little bit right
Because that's excess cash. The
government that we appropriate
End of the exact now wants to
snag up.
In sponge bonds and use that
money to fund that.
Um, that's a little worrisome
for me.
You know?
Fresh water is now commodity to
the oil and gas guys.
Comes back as produced water,
right?
And cleaning up. It should
happen, right? But I don't It's
so dangerous to make a commodity
out of that thing. I mean,
millionaires and billionaires
have been made on freshwater in
re injecting produced water and
all that, right.
And now if you're gonna create
that, as a commodity or as a
class in water
It's very scary to me.
To do that. I mean,
Depends if if it's
commercialized or not
commercialized like
We buy water from the city and
we have to submit her. But we
can't change. We have to charge
the same rates as municipals did
right because you can't make a
profit off water.
You can make a profit off for
reading the meters.
But you have to charge the same
rates that cities do.
So you can't capitalize on
water.
And so when you change that
commercialization, right and
maybe five years from now or
someday technology, maybe there
that you can
On produced water that you can
actually use it for drinkable or
potable water, right?
In the systems where they're
going to need it.
That that's really
I guess we'll have to see how
that works out. I have no
problem with the produced water.
Let's clean it. Let's do
something with it right.
But do we give it to the
universities? Maybe and not
Let them make an income and not
called a commodity and put a cap
on it.
And let them use it for revenue
sorcerer something other than
just creating the commodity in
the private market sector.
It is is really a question work
for me.
Um
The private infrastructure,
right? I don't
I mean, when we talk, I'm just
talking solely about producing
water right now.
I don't know how that will
happen, right? Because where are
you going to store it stored
above ground underground, Right?
How are you gonna you gonna
control that produced water as
you clean it up and
And the by product is produced
has to go somewhere.
And and so we'll have to see
that in the bill.
What do you think the real
timeline is on this
If we started yesterday.
When do you say Okay, we can
actually have produced water
into the market. What's the
timeline?
Produced only produced only, um
Mr Chair. I I think I want to
give you an answer. I'm going to
say again 18 to 2024 months and
we'll know more on March 31st
when all they are fit data comes
in.
Um, I think it depends on
You know, produced water has a
high salinity and other things
in it that need to be removed
that cost money and building
plants to treat to. You know
whether it's 10,000 or 1000 or
300 TDs is a is a range of
bricks and mortar, steel and
etcetera.
So I think right now, I could
say 18 to 24 months.
And how many months does this
executive have on this
administration?
Mr. Mr Chair. I believe we have
three years left so 36 months
thereabouts.
Yeah.
And shrinking.
I mean, this is I mean, this is
why we're being really cautious
this year, right? We're coming
to into determine and executives
come in, and they next executive
wants to do something completely
different, right?
Very rarely. Do we see it?
Continuance of prior executives.
Big ideas continued.
Hmm. And that becomes trouble.
So I mean,
I guess we'll have to wait until
we really see the bill.
Hmm. And really disseminate on
on what's going to happen, but
I'm just
I mean, if we create that
commodity in New Mexico
It just set everything up,
right? I mean, they're water,
clean water and in just say,
produced water and farming. 10
approved water and Carlsbad.
Their their water. Their
produced water has a value
right, and that's gonna set the
market for clean fresh water.
Okay. This is a different class
of water. I don't know how we
control this and end because
You know?
World domination is dependent
upon water.
Anywhere you go, Mr Chair, you
know, maybe over. Maybe I'm
over, stressing the use of the
word commodity and maybe they're
different definitions.
Floating around in people's mind
as to what commodity means into
a Senate finance share. It might
be different than to an engineer
Cabinet secretary. Um one thing
I can tell you in 20.
Seven years now of being an
environmental regulator. Um
Is that when wastes move from
expense of the ledger, too?
Ah, something that is profitable
on the ledger or something that
it you know, even as less
expense driven, it's better
managed.
And in my job I spend
More dollars and time cleaning
up wastes from our environment.
And I think anything that we can
do to move.
In a thoughtful, protective way.
Those wastes from the red to the
black.
We'll ensure that we have a
more, uh, protected environment.
So if if that's that is maybe my
working definition of a
commodity.
Um And I just wanted to share
that with you and the committee.
Well, that was yours, probably
defined by Webster.
And and we'll see what that says
That was your guys' word.
Let me ask you. We're all on
board for diesel. I am right.
If I just My mother passed away
this last year, and I was
looking through some stuff in
1967 or 68. My dad testified
before Congress on the Gallup
Water pipeline, right. We still
haven't got a drop of water on
that thing, and it went from a
billion dollar project 600
million to a billion. It's
probably going to hit 2 billion,
right?
And we're still not sure we're
going to get the water in there.
But Gallup is drilling all these
wells to fill up the pipeline,
right?
Into service and Navajos and
everybody out, which is a good
thing, right? But if we had to
put a detail plant even today
inside a gallop right or in the
surrounding area.
We can do the exact same thing
and and we toured.
El Paso, which was $80 million
don't have many years ago or 60
million and went to 80 million
now or something. I mean, those
are things that I think are
really good across New Mexico,
right?
If we if we can trigger those D
cells and service scallop and
you there's one in outside of
Rio, Rancho. If all of a sudden
they could tap that and and have
an influx of water into
Albuquerque, and in that whole
lower Rio Grande mean
Because river water is getting
less and less look at the snow
pack this year, right? It's not
what we needed to be.
Philip any of the lakes in
Actually, Santa Fe is
Reliant on the version of it.
Of a trauma.
And so that that's snowpacks.
Not that high, either. So
I think we're all on board for
DSL, The structure of the
bonding. It's a swipe cash
before it goes into into bonds.
We did that in times of
emergency. We took money that
was left over and sponge bonds
and and funded stuff overnight,
so we can pay bills. Um
something I don't think I want
to take away from the
Legislature.
Case that ever happens right
case we ever have to go that
scenario, but we always want to
have that scenario and not have
it tied up.
At any point.
Uh um.
I mean,
I'm all it.
I'm good with taking risks,
right?
Hey, Chris, Everyday you
mentioned something like you
have a commodity and we we get a
product in in a crate, and then
we have all the crates, right?
You need to sell the crate
somewhere, right? You need to
dispose of the crate somewhere,
right? And you need to take it
from the cost side to the
profitable side. On your margin.
I get that business park it And
I guess maybe we need to see the
bill. But, you know,
When I mean, just like I said,
every place in the world was
built around water.
Right before technology came. It
was all around rivers and
streams. And and that's where
people lived because there was
water there.
World dominance is about water
right in clean water.
Continues to be that way. But if
if we even mentioned the word
commodity again
I mean,
I just just look at the world
market, right?
Mexico has a commodity market
for produced water.
That's going to set up a market
for every other water source
that comes along. I think in the
market will do that, naturally.
And and that's what's really
bothersome because
You don't want well. The Gallup
pipeline. We did the math one
time and it's going to be
cheaper to bathe in bottled
water than it is to run your
water. That's how high it cost
it costs for that line, right?
And so
I guess we'll see how it goes
forward, but I'm not on board
with the sponge bond issue that
is
You're gonna have to find
another way. Another source
because if anything happens, and
we got to use that overnight
money or pull that overnight
money back to cover overnight
costs.
Uh um.
I guess I've been here too long.
It really will hamper the
Legislature because
There was a point in time in
senator compose, and maybe he
remembers better than I
But in in 10 or 11
We had to use sponge overnight
sponge bonds to make
That service payments.
And I, There's no way I can
support that.
Doing that to Legislature when
that's that's a
Do you want to add some? Yes,
Chairman and members. Um, we
have run some numbers. It would
be something that would be
included in the sponge note sale
and the money would be held
until the expense until the
purchase of water occurs. And so
I don't know if this provides
any ease, and I'm happy to
discuss it further and provide
additional information but that
money until it's expended could
be pulled back if there was some
emergency, although
You know, that would be at the
will of the Legislature. So it
wouldn't be what I would
consider it more an amount that
instead of being appropriated
for other capital purposes, like
Gallup Water pipeline, you know,
I think it would be for this
purpose so otherwise it could be
appropriated for other purposes
and just like with other
capital. The funds would be
released as expanded, just like
we look on the balance sheets
and say, Okay, how much have we
issued and how much has been
expended for all capital?
Regardless of the funding
source, it would operate the
exact same way except the
Legislature wouldn't have the
appropriate authority over the
money because we would have
given that up.
Appropriator for these projects.
Um, Chairman. I believe we have
done sweeps and swaps before, so
that is something that can
occur. But you know the funding.
You know, it is the you know,
the authority of the Legislature
to provide it for the use. Um,
so I mean, that's just
The history lesson that you
learned right and
In that ability. I mean, should
we use bonding money? Yeah.
We probably should really look
at bonding right and and
investing in our future.
But how do we do that? Right?
I mean, we set a captain Bonds.
I mean,
Three for me to sit up here and
tell you, you know, I agree with
it and then help you figure out
the problem, I think would be
wrong, but I think we need to
figure this out.
It has to happen. I mean,
I mean, you just matter what
story you tell. I mean, every
time there's a water
Non portable water, it becomes
an issue across the state of New
Mexico. And how do we get those
resources?
And
I don't have a problem if it's
produced and cleaned up.
Dumping it on the border and
sending in Texas and calling it
good.
You may have Mr Secretary Seems
like you're a little red about
that. But that's called water
credits. I don't know where we
measured that now these days,
but
Clean water is clean water. They
do it to us.
Thank you guys for your
presentation with Secretary. I
guess we're gonna start on your
budget hearing.
Sitting here. Hemphill had a
question for you.
Remember Senator Woods that we
did this once before, and
That was almost Governor
Richardson did that somewhere
between Glorietta and Las Vegas.
We bought farms and water
rights, right?
And then the state figured out.
They couldn't manage the farm.
And then we sold the farm and
the water rights back to the
same farmer.
It's probably profitable for
him, not for them.
You know, Mr Chairman, Mr
Chairman.
Alamogordo does a few things
right?
We take all of our fluent water
and we water every part every
ball field every the golf course
and everything with the fluent
water. So if we're looking for a
fluid water next to the
fluent water. So if we're
looking for a fluid water next
to a community, we we use a ton
of a fluent water every day, but
we don't use all that we produce
so every community probably has
Over ridge on the fluent waters
that could be used depending on
the on the use of the process.
So think about we do the same
thing. But in Gallup, we don't
put our golf tees in their
mouth.
Yeah.
Yeah.
God, you're gonna start us.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Scott Sanchez on the LFC,
analyst for Natural Resources.
We're not gonna be looking at
the budget recommendation. Um,
the lfc for the Environment
Department agency code 667. You
can find this information behind
Tab six in your packets.
You can also find more
information on the LFC
recommendation. LFC Volume one
starting on page 148.
And then on in volume two on
page 357.
Here with me today, Uh James
Kenney, Cabinet secretary for
the Environment Department.
Deputy Cabinet Secretary Daniel
Gilliam and my counterpart from
D F A Sicilian Ever. Mattis the
biggest differences between the
recommendations are that the LFC
recommendation included a
general fund increase of
approximately 1.3 million, or
5%, or the executive included an
increase of 6.9 million, or
27.1%.
The LFC recommendation General
fund increases primarily in the
resource management division, or
ASD.
Um, to fund agency least
expenses or the executives.
General fund increases spread
throughout the divisions for
appropriate placement.
Ultimately, the remaining
differences in the overall
budget or in federal and other
revenue, which the executive
increases by about 11 million
above the LFC recommendation.
And with that I can hand it to
Cecilia.
Thanks, Scott. Um, good
afternoon, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. I'm briefly going
to go over the executive
recommendation because there are
a few major changes here.
Um, the major differences
between both recommendations as
they relate to General fund,
Federal funds, Revenues and F T
are split across various
programs within the agency
Executive recommendation fully
funds, the agency's request for
personal services and employee
benefits for water protection,
Resource protection
Environmental Protection
Division and the new
environmental health Division.
For the agency's resource
Management division. Executive
recommendation aligns with the
agency's requested General Fund
for personal services and
employee benefits, effectively
addressing the agency's concerns
as it relates to compensation,
appropriate placement and union
grievances.
In addition to addressing the
compensation disparity presented
by the agency, the executive
recommendation also provides an
additional $825,000 in general
fund to address shortfalls in
project or special revenue lease
payments, which equates to
roughly 30% of enemy DS 30.
current leases across the state.
Second, the executive
recommendation for water
protection restores the agency's
permanent positions to that of
fiscal year 24 and increase to
the agency's original request to
eliminate those two positions.
Executive recommendation has
also maintained federal revenues
flat to fiscal year 20 for
allowing the agency essential
budget flexibility to use funds
independently, according to
their budget needs.
And lastly, the expansion FTE is
originally requested by the
agency have been built into the
operating budget based in the
executive recommendation, along
with the adjustments from term
to perm positions across various
programs.
The executive recommendation.
Alliance permanent FTS with the
increase in general funds, which
is considered appropriate
practice across the state for
these types of positions. It's
important to note that the term
positions are typically regarded
as project funded, further
amplifying this adjustment.
The expansion of T E and their
total transfer revenue of
4,180,000 has been added to
their respective program basis.
However, these new transfer
funds originate from special
revenues in their special
revenue Fund P 802, Therefore,
the executive recommendation
adequately accounts for those
transfers and the origin of
those funds to appropriately
balanced both revenue and
expenditure.
The largest dry and I'm just
going to add one final note. Mr
share, the largest driving
factor for the Perm two term
switch, because I think that
will be the largest difference
You see between both
recommendations. Um, is simply
that project money is not
permanent money, and it's argued
what is permanent money, and
that's another conversation
entirely. But in a state where
scientific projects are readily
available at significantly
higher salaries
This approach to maintain
permanent positions at the
agency is to attract
professionals, um, in a in a
long term fashion tailored to
long term commitments to the
state, but
With that, Mr Chair, I will pass
it over to Secretary Kenny for
his presentation. Thank you.
Thank you.
And Mr Chair. Thank you to our
two analysts that are here. Um,
who who helped greatly with
Ah, translation between all of
us.
Um, Mr Chair. I'm not sure if I
need to do something to bring up
our
Okay?
We just covered mixed like
Okay, Um
Alright. So, Mr Chair and
members of the committee
Ah, for those who might be
following along on the Webcast.
our budget fact sheet.
Is available on the enemy D Web
page.
Um, and it's four pages and I'll
go through it rather rather
quickly. But there are some
notes on here, Mr Chair, members
of the committee that I'd like
to share with you. Um, before I
do that I just wanted there's
such interest in our budget by
our staff. Um, just like there
is interest in our budget from
this committee and the
Legislature. I just wanted to
acknowledge that we have a
number of enemy d staff. People
from our Santa Fe.
Campus of of, UM, buildings and
if they could just stand for
just a moment.
Some Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. I just wanted you to
know that the see the faces of
the people that we're talking
about, because when it comes to
our budget request on
appropriate placement this this
is who were you know, investing
in these are the people that are
here. It does not account for
the people in your district is
if you're not a Santa Fe based
legislator.
Who are watching online as well
and I'll talk a little bit about
our field offices as we move
through the presentation, So
thank you to the enemy D people
and, yes, you can still call our
office and get someone to pick
up the phone right now.
Um So on page one of our fact
sheet and I know for the folks
in the room, they don't see it,
But soon it will be on the
screen for those who have it in
front of them. Uh, I always like
to just highlight our mission
and values. There's not a
decision that goes by on a day
that goes by that we're not
talking about, uh, focused on
science, innovation,
collaboration and compliance.
Um, we strive to sort of put
those words into action, not
just call them. Uh, they're
they're verbs to me.
There the way we do our
business. They're not things
that we aspired to, um their
actual the way we get things
done right under that box in our
table are on page one, I should
say is a table that highlights
our vacancy rate. Um, Mr Chair
and members of the Committee,
you know, being a little
competitive with my fellow
cabinet secretaries. I don't
know if you've seen lower
vacancy rates, but we've gotten
our vacancy rate down to 16.5%.
It's It's the lowest vacancy
rate that I've seen since I've
been in this position since.
2019
Um and that's uh large in part
due to a highly functioning
administrative services
division, both our financial
team and our HR team as well as
some really dedicated
supervisors, making every effort
to not only do their job but to
bring non new people, um and
that that's bringing on new
people. But it's also about
retaining the people we have
that keeps that vacancy rate
going lower.
Um, on the right hand side is a
letter that I try to craft you
know, to the legislators just to
kind of highlight. What are
there are big focuses for the
coming fiscal year. There's
three bullets there that are
highlighted, but really what?
I'm asking you for is quite
simple. It's $6.1 million to
appropriately placed the
existing workforce that we have.
And when people are paid for the
value in which they are doing
their job based on the
education, their years of
service to state government or
even in their career, then they
are fully valued and able to
implement the their their, um,
totality of their duties In
doing so you can see that we
would continue to focus on
economic development as that you
heard me talk about in the last
session.
Ah, protecting communities, um,
from emerging public health
concerns, mitigating
contaminants that are found
throughout the state. And then
finally, um, looking at both
permitting compliance activities
to ensure that we're
incentivizing and helping those
businesses that are really
working towards getting their
permits and complying and then
holding accountable those ones.
Ah, who who don't fall in line
with their competition and maybe
in current economic advantage in
doing so.
Um, but Mr Chair members of the
committee are you sure? I
apologize. Well, then I'm still
correct, Mr. Chair, Um, members
of the committee on Page two.
What you'll see here is
something I just want to pause
on and spend a little bit of
time talking to you about
because we provided about, you
know, 40 megs of of data to lfc,
um, in in sort of post bfm post
submission of our budget on
September 1, So we're really
trying to make sure that
everybody's educated on why
we're asking for 6.1 Million and
why the Environment department
is a typical maybe of other
departments. You see, before you
And what I wanted to do is take
a step back. While I have
inundated Scott and and, uh, lfc
with data. What I wanted to do
is take a quick step back and
show you that what you're seeing
at the Environment department in
New Mexico is typical of what
environment departments are
going through around the
country and
I provided there that 60, you
know, so let's break down the
budget nationally for
environmental agencies, 61% are
getting federal funds. 27 sorry
61% of agency budgets are
federal funds. 27% are permit
fees and 12% Our general fund.
That's the norm. That's the
average across the country.
And in New Mexico were 40%
federal funds. You might say why
Enemy D. Are you not bringing in
more federal dollars? Largely,
These are formula, uh, funds and
we don't have the population to
sort of bring in more dollars.
So that's a big big focus. There
are big reason there.
43% of our annual budget is
based on permit fees, so we are
collecting more in fees Now. I
don't want you to think in
dollar amount. I want you to
think that I want you to know
that the Environment Department,
unlike other environmental
agencies, has OSHA has food
programs has radiation control
has liquid waste septic systems?
Every real estate transaction
that many of you know about in
the state that involves a septic
system is through our
department. So we are an
expanded environment department
in New Mexico, so we have more
permit fees, and that's why 43%
represents our budget compared
to 27% nationally.
And 17% is General fund. So
thank you. We do get more in
General Fund from the New Mexico
from the New Mexico Legislature,
then on average environmental
agencies are getting. Um, but
that is again to make us whole
when you see the loss of federal
funds, and, um
The breath of the programs that
we administer. We do take a
little bit more in general fund.
Um
Then then other sister or you
know other agencies around the
country. But let me also note
that
We've tried to raise permit
fees, and we've tried to go
after more federal funds. I was
in D. C. I guess it was a week
or two weeks ago. Now, um,
working the hill to try to get
more federal funds for state
environmental agencies,
including those with lower
populations like New Mexico. But
yet yet environmental agencies
have not seen more in federal
funds in 20 years.
And then, um, permit fees while
permit fees can be used for
staffing.
We have not brought we have
legislative. We have state law
restrictions on how much we can
raise fees and when we can raise
vis, so we have restrictions,
and we've tried to bring some
program, uh, feet increases
through the Legislature, not so
successful. Some years, um
But we that is, those are two
factors that kind of limit our
ability to sort of be more, uh,
fiscally sound. And then when I
look at North Carolina and t C Q
two states that have taken who
are both in the same situation
that I am static federal funds
inability to raise permit fees
for whatever reasons
Uh, North Carolina went through
their legislative process and
they updated all of their their
permit fees, all of them 11
shot. They went through
everything updated all the
permit fees. And why did they do
that? They're stated reason was
to continue to deliver services
and make employees whole because
they were having the same
problem we were having at the
Environment department.
When I look at T ce que
commissioner there, Jon Niermann
and I had dinner the other night
in D. C. When I was the hill, we
talked all about appropriate
placement, and he pointed out to
me that 79% of staff were below
midpoint. They had to they
budget on, um, to to, uh, every
two years.
Um
And the Legislature appropriated
$36 million over. Uh
Each year to bring 2700
employees up to proper
compensation. So North Carolina
and Texas are examples of what
I'm asking for, which is ways in
which we can work together to
make our employees hole.
Um
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee when you look at the
next part of the presentation, I
thank you. You can see the
executive and lfc rec. Uh And I
know you have this in front of
you, but really all I'm focused
on right now is personnel
compensation. There's a big
difference between the executive
and LFC has stated, um $6.1
million for our existing staff
and lfc is a has zero in there
as of right now.
Moving to Page three or the next
page. Um, and here's where I
want to spend another minute
talking to you. Is that
You know, I'm not asking.
alright. I should say I'll put
it in the positive. I'm asking
for that 6.1 million for our
existing staff because
We put $138 million in the
communities through grants and
capital outlay last year.
Um And I know that many of you
call and many of you ask, and
many of you say, can you move
faster on Capitol outlay or
what? What's the holdup? The
hold up is you know, while we're
making gains on reducing our
vacancy rate
Our employees are still
Overworked and underpaid, but
yet what's at stake 100 and $38
Million going to communities. 50
million going into water
projects throughout the state.
Um, we've cleaned up 645 acres
of of contamination and that is
often in areas in which can be
redeveloped again driving
economic development.
If you look on the right side
Ah, employee paying retention
64% of our employees remain
compensated below midpoint yet
88% of our employees have 10
years of career experience or
more so we have we don't have
junior level entry level
position. I mean, we do We do
have junior and entry level
individuals. But 88% of our
employees are what I would call
somewhat more mid career.
And yet 64% remain compensated
below midpoint.
And then 20% of the employees
who left in the media in the
last year and a half.
Um, had been with the agency for
15 or more years, so the loss of
that institutional knowledge is
significant, um, and create some
some real issues for us. Uh,
anecdotally. I had one employee
Tell me the other day that when
she was hired, she was hired at
a higher rate than the person
training her
And the person training her. I
mean, imagine how that feels to
have the person training you
being paid lower than than the
new employee, so it creates some
some problems internally as
well. Just with morale and and
workflow, Mr Chair and members,
you know.
Civil penalties or things that
we
Are that we revert to the
General fund you today We're
about $3.6 million, so getting
close to that appropriate
placement amount, and I
anticipate that we're going to
return more in civil penalties
as well to the General fund.
Ah, And then finally, I know Mr.
Chair. Senator Woods will
probably ask me about this.
Maybe I don't know diversions.
Um and and I know he'll ask me
about contracts, but, um, Mr
Chair. We feel really proud that
we in fy 23. We reverted $93,000
in general fund, which is 0.5%
of our recurring general fund.
Um
A little bit more because of
special appropriations weren't
utilized. I don't know if that's
not such a bad thing if we could
get the work done cheaper and
then capital outlay, we we sent
back $503,000 again. That's
largely because communities
can't
Uh, we're not able to utilize
that money in the time of the
fiscal year.
So one other thing that I just
wanted to mention, and I asked
my team to put this data
together so we could talk a
little bit. So you had this sort
of in the back of your mind
because I think often when you
see the number of Santa Fe
people standing up, I'm not
representing the field offices
very well.
And when I look at the rural
parts of the state, you know
almost 80 to 100% of our
employees who are in the rural
parts outside of Albuquerque and
Santa Fe are actually
compensated. Less, um, are
compensated below midpoint.
So when we look at Alamogordo,
Mr Chair and Senator Bert, uh,
you know,
What we see is that 100% of the
employees and our Alamogordo
officer paid below midpoint and
Mr Chair when we look at your
district, and we think about
Gallup and and and grants, you
know we have roughly 100% of the
folks that work out of the
Gallup office that are
compensated below midpoint.
Um and I can go on and on
Senator Hemphill is not here.
But Mr Chairs, Senator in
Senator Ham pills, Silver City
office. 70% of our employees are
below midpoint. So again, this
is something that we're seeing.
Even though you're visually
seeing the folks standing up in
front of you here in Santa Fe,
Um I really want to drive home
that these are the people that
you and I rely on for
environmental protection
permitting.
Public health issues in your
respective districts.
So the their potential risk to
the state which are
Uh, now just below. Yes. Thank
you. The potential risk of the
state. I'm not going to
highlight these in great detail
because these are risks to the
state and to the department and
we're focused on these.
Um, but I'm going to ask my
deputy Daniel Gilliam just to
give you a quick update on where
we are with the union grievance
because things have changed even
since I published are provided
you with this fact sheet.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee on the current status
of our grievances that we've
gone through steps 12 and three
We were unable to resolve the
unions concerns and they have
invoked arbitration. We're in
the process of
Going through that particular
process under the collective
bargaining bargaining agreement,
Um
Without speaking in any great
level of detail separate from
that.
Um, we do have
Um, opportunity for employees to
pursue other legal avenues.
So, Mr Chair. Thank you, Daniel.
Mr. Chair again. Members of the
committee. You know, we have a
significant union grievance,
alleging that 90% of the
bargaining unit employees are
not appropriately placed and
we're sort of stuck on that, Uh,
successful resolution.
Um, but we'll go through the
arbitration process.
I'm sharing with you all that
you're probably familiar as the
Legislature and the executive or
named in a lawsuit for, um, a
constitutional right issue. I
won't get into it, but I just
wanted to highlight that there
are risks outside of the union
risk that we're trying to
mitigate through the appropriate
placement appropriation.
And then finally, on the last
page, Mr Chair, I present this
all the time to give you a sense
of the workload Snapshot. What's
happening in the department?
Sort of. How long does it take
to how long would it take for
our air team to go out and ah!
Permit or inspect facilities.
How? How many, um, you know,
permit ease Our
Under each individual person in
our drinking water Bureau.
Etcetera, So I'm not going to
highlight. I'm not going to read
this to you, but I wanted to
give you the sense of how
immense the workload is for the
staff that we have, and I think
they do a pretty darn good job,
despite sort of how much is in
front of them, and then how many
things we get added to our
plate.
Which we're happy about, because
they're always in the in the
mission of protecting public
health and the environment and
one of those items that under an
executive order in a public
health, um declaration
Um at the very bottom, you'll
see the wastewater drug
monitoring dashboard logo that
we put together and I think
there's some real value that the
Environment department is
bringing to our decision making
whether it is related to the
FAS, or whether it is related to
protecting waters of the U. S.
Or what are now eroded waters of
the U. S.
Um or even looking for cocaine
and fentanyl in public high
school wastewater, and I'm
really proud of the work that
we've we've been doing on that
front and then handing over to
others to figure out ways to do
intervention methods.
So, Mr Chair members of the
committee. I think you've heard
a lot from me and I appreciate
the time and, uh,
Stand for questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Chair and thank you,
Secretary. And and all the
presenters lots of very good and
interesting information. I just
want to draw your attention to
environmental agency funding
that slide.
That is comparing to other
states. So when you talk about
61% versus New Mexico, 40% what
is causing that? Is there a
matching dollar that were maybe
as a legislature? Should we be
doing things to draw down
additional federal dollars? Or
how would you right size that or
move that now? You know, on the
other side of the coin.
Not necessarily wanting to
reduce the 43% as a in its
value.
So what are your recommendations
on how we can bolster our
federal funding? I guess.
Yes, Mr Chair and Senator. Thank
you. It's a good question. Um
You know the formula grants that
we receive that constitutes that
40% of federal funds with the
vast majority of it are hard
formula for us to try to change
that. There's not much we can do
as a legislature or under the
executive to change that.
Except, you know, trying to
Change the formula, which is why
I was in D. C, um
But it's a big portion of that
is simply based on population a
big our population numbers so
That's a big function of it.
There have been times, Mr Chair
and, um Senator Padilla, in
which I did not have federal
state match. I can't match
federal funds with federal funds
there have been times and
specifically in the ocean
program that I did not have.
Enough state funds to draw down
more federal dollars. So that
has been an issue for me in the
past where I was going to
interrupt, and secretary Is
there something that we're not
doing? That would bring more of
those because you know a 21%
variance versus the country that
the rest of the country that's
huge. That's 51 50/50 percent of
Where we're at. So that's only
one state North Carolina.
I thought it was the
Legislature's fund environmental
agencies nationally versus New
Mexico is the number that I'm
looking at here to the right.
The North Carolina model.
Yeah.
So so, Mr Chair and senator that
the top row
61 27 12 is an average of
environmental agencies
nationally, the next row 40 43
17 is the new Mexico environment
departments.
Um
So
You know again, The simple
answer is
Ah, and there's a bill running
this session to bring more match
to state and city County City
agencies.
Um, but sometimes I need the
General fund in order to match
federal funds to bring those
dollars home.
And that's Mr Chair exactly
where I was going so
And But then I'm also concerned
what what's wrong? What's going
on with the formula that
disadvantages New Mexico
specifically
Yeah. Mr Chair and senator. The
formula is simply one that is
favoring.
Larger population states, So it
is a population thing. Then if
you go over to the next column,
um, Mr Chair, I guess you talked
a little bit about
So do we Do we sort of piecemeal
How we look at permits, Or do we
ever have like a
Regular review of all permits.
Is that sort of something that
we should we should consider
doing setting you up that way to
have a
You know what two year cycle of
reviewing of permits, and then
you bring a set of
recommendations of what those
need to be.
So, Mr Chair and Senator, uh, on
the permit fee front. Um, we
manage roughly 26 or 27 special
revenue funds funds created in
law.
Those funds have varying
requirements as to how they can
be used and whether they give US
authority to raise fees, sort
of.
As need develops or
Are they capped at a certain
percentage. You're over year
They're not, um, based on
Consumer price index like
there's no adjustment for
inflation at all. So you know,
there's been times where I've I
advised members of this
committee who are bringing bills
forward. It will cost me more to
collect the penalty or collect a
fee. It'll cost me more in
staffing time like it's not
worth the fee because the fees
are so low that I'm spending,
you know hundreds of dollars in
staff time to collect, you know,
$10 or something like that.
I think, Mr Chair and and
Senator Padilla, The pro TEM has
been gracious in in working with
me on bringing a solvency bill
that we have ready to go. Um, I
would love to work with members
of this committee if anyone is
interested on bringing that bill
forward, um but I think we could
work on a fixing those 26.
Fees. Sorry there's 26 funds.
In a single bill. This session
would greatly help
Our ability to then in future
years raised fees.
To make our programs a bit more
enterprise and so chair and
secretary of the You know, the
other side of the coin is not
everything's you know once you
do that, you know, you know,
balloons and Christmas and you
know, birthday cake. We We also
don't want to turn off
investment into New Mexico. We
all still want to turn off
things that are gonna raise fees
so much so that you know
Is that a calculation and what
you're looking at here? Because,
you know, we also don't want to
shoot ourselves in the turning
after shooting ourselves in the
right foot for so long turn and
shoot the left foot. Mr Chair
and Senator, you are correct,
and we we benchmark against
other states, Um, you know, let
me just give you this example
are solid Waste program has one
fund that says we can collect
these every 10 years.
There are nine years worth of
work. And that's always bureau
that that also, um have to get
done and
You know, we we tend to give
which is great employees or have
tended to give employees raises
every year in terms of a
compensation package, But as as
the money comes in there, and
it's not coming, you know we
can't get more out of the
regulated community. I then have
to unfunded positions in the
solid waste Bureau, which is why
we're left with
As a as an example the Camino
Real Landfill has to develop
their own permit.
Conditions and submit them to
us, So we're basically starting
to farm out our own permitting
work because we don't have the
staff capacity or the money to
bring people on and pay them
appropriately to do that work.
So
Swimming back upstream, not
everything is about raising
fees. Sometimes it's about just
the frequency in which if he is
paid, and so thank you chair and
I'm almost done, But so you hit
the nail right on the head where
I was going to go next. Give us
an you know, an example of you
know how this is really gonna
write and want to make sure I'm
not putting words in your mouth,
but I want to make sure I heard
you correctly.
You're collecting a fee once
every 10 years for work that's
being done over 10 years and
He said. Did I hear you
correctly to say that? So it
just seems to me like a lot
happens in a decade. We just saw
extreme inflation We're seeing
in the middle of extreme
inflation, a number of other
things, but that fee is still 10
years.
Past due for a review and a
modernization used term
modernization. Mr Chair and
senator pretty. You are correct.
We tried to bring that Bill. Uh,
I think two years ago to fix
that. I believe it made it
through the house stalled in the
Senate at the end of the
session. Um, but you know, it's
It's almost like saying if
you're paying your fee
Um
And we provide you with the
permit and we don't do this, and
I'm not asking any of my staff
to do this. But over those nine
years, please don't call us
until you're submitting your new
application and your permit fee.
I mean, we don't do that. We we
spend countless hours on the
phone.
Working.
With the permit E for those nine
years, Um
Helping them understand what's
going on. So
Yeah, and and them explaining to
us what's going on to its two
way street.
But you're you're absolutely
correct in in sort of how you're
starting to put the big picture
together that our fee structure
as well as the fee amounts are
not serving the services.
Um And it's on the backs of our
staff that that
Then gets cut and sew chair. I
guess the last line of
questioning or the last question
I have is, I want to compliment
you for reaching 16.5% vacancy
rate That's still incredibly too
high. I mean, you know so great
job chopping and chopping that
tree down a little bit, pruning
it a little bit. But you really
need to get your hands around
this. I mean, what do we need to
be doing with salaries so that
you can get this grievance
behind you?
And also what do we need to be
doing with salaries to make sure
you can close that gap on 16% to
get that somewhere under 2%?
Mr Chair and specific numbers
you want to share with us?
And Senator Padilla one
appropriate placement to get all
of our employees above midpoint
and properly compensated for
their education and years of
service, their career service
to, um, continuing to work on
salary studies to look at the
classifications to make sure
that we're we are
Capable to make sure that we
know what fair market value is
for an engineer.
A scientist, a lawyer, a
secretary, Um, you know,
apparently eagle, etcetera and
then making sure that we have
the funding to be able to pay
them.
Competitively in a ever
increasing market with B i L and
IRA bringing jobs and you know
I'm not looking, but I do look
to see what other people are
paying. And I see you know all
the companies that economic
development or bringing in are
looking for exactly my staff. Um
To run, you know, to run these
operations, so we need to stay
ahead is we continue to grow our
economy, which is great. We need
to continue to pay state
employees. Um
Aggressively.
So so chair. This will be my
last question. So does six word
is $6 million place. You and I
see the schedule here on the FY
25 executive lfc
recommendations. What is 6.936
Million gets you in terms of
Were these salaries will be in
the marketplace.
Mr Chair, and, um, Senator, what
it would do would get us
The majority of our employees
would be
Appropriately placed. I'm not
saying every employee will go
above midpoint. But if their
education and years of
experience would take them above
midpoint
They would be compensated at
that. And some of this money for
some of our lower paid and
compensate in place is game
changing money. I mean, this is
the decision of whether I leave
your department or whether I
stay in your department, whether
I leave state government or stay
or whether I can afford to buy a
car or, you know, buy a house
this year, so
It's that that's that's what the
$6.1 million gets us.
Are any of the chair of this
will be the absolute or anything
of the 16.5% sort of preventing
the state from collecting
additional revenues for your
department is really going on
that that that you know when
you're
Collector build call centers for
a living. That's one of the
toughest roles we have to claim.
Recruit four sometimes is there
are their roles in that 6
million or the 16.5% that is
preventing you from filling the
bucket up of revenue that you
need to do your work, Mr Chair,
and, um, senator, Media best
explained by a quick example and
I know one of the the bureau
chief is in the room. I believe,
and by no means of my trying to
embarrass anybody. But you know
a cardiac care center that
wanted to do, Uh um uh M r E S
and P E T scans of
For for new Mexicans, which we
license was trying to come to
New Mexico and they said, Hey,
it takes 4 to 6 months to get a
license in every other state.
Why is it taking you guys so
long? Well at my direction, I've
asked our bureau chief, and that
staff to work on raising fees
because we can't get out of our
so We either have to choose
right now to your point where
choosing do we throttle back on
permitting issues, right?
Or and getting permits out the
door is simply to make ourselves
a little bit more sustainable as
we
Administratively put rolls
together. So raising these is
not something I can do
overnight. We have to publicly
noted, We have to put it
together. Publicly. Notice it go
before a Border commission staff
that Border Commission wait for
their decision so it, you know,
68 months year process.
Um, So we're China. So if we
bring that vacancy rate down, we
can then be focused on both the
permitting the compliance and
the administrative operations of
our department to raise fees to
make ourselves a little bit more
sustainable. Thank you. Chair.
That's all I have. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr
Secretary. Last year, your
office announced the closure of
the dimming field office and
cited lack of funding and his
response. Senator Hemphill and
I, um, since you a letter, a
joint letter requesting that
that be reconsidered because of
the current backlog of that
office already and just the vast
area that which is serviced.
And in your October report, you
had a very basic funding, saying
you'd be requesting $2.9 million
to pay for 27 leased spaces,
including the reopen of that
dimming location.
But but coming in this session,
I don't see that in the budget.
Could you assure me that that
reopen of that dimming filled
offices included in your budget
request?
So, Mr Chair and Senator, Um,
thank you for the question. I
knew you were going to ask me
that question. I suspected you
would ask me that question. Um,
I think where we stand right
now. My commitment to you still
remains the same. I am working
really hard to get that Deming
office reopened or get a Deming
office opened, um and properly
staffed.
Um And I think what's going on
in the news means, you know, we
should really make sure that we
have some state agency presence
down there. But that
I'm I'm not going to lie to you
or misrepresent I should say, Mr
Sharon, Senator, I'm struggling.
Uh, we used our special
appropriations and I'll
allowable way to pay for leases.
Um, we we probably need to
continue to look at Mr Chair and
Senator.
Where
New Mexico Environment
Department.
Needs to have offices from a
traffic regulated community
standpoint. Um and I and knowing
that we're not It doesn't appear
that we're getting all the money
we need for that just yet. Um, I
think
My commitment to you is
subjected to get something open,
but I'm I'm also struggling with
how I'm going to pay for
everything. Mr. Chaired senator,
One of the things that we're
doing, though, is we are working
with GST to figure out how to
get more Santa Fe based state
space, So we're not paying
leases in Santa Fe as much
And then we're going to shift
money around into our field
offices where we do rent more
space. But in a campus area like
Santa Fe, where there's state
buildings where we pay less for
those we're going to try to move
our folks out of those for rent
locations or private least
locations and into state space
so we can shuffle money into our
field offices.
Um, I'm trying, Mr Chair and
senator, and, um my commitment
to you is that we will get
something opened in Deming. Um
And I'm I'm just not exactly
sure how I'm gonna pay for that
just yet, but we're working on
the numbers. Mr Chairman,
Senator Hempel and I are going
to be watching that closely.
Maybe it's if we cut regulations
at the same rate. We were
cutting field offices. That
would be okay. But the problem
is, we have an existing backlog
all the way over to like how dog
Oh, so if you're going to just
office someone out of Las Cruces
it's already taking
Way too long for the dimming
office to respond to that. And
so that entire, you know,
quadrant of New Mexico will go
under service. So I'd like to
really just encourage you to
really consider that particular
field office, which was already
delayed.
And then second of all, I want
to extend a personal invitation
for you.
To come to truth or
consequences. Mr. Chairman, we
are still experiencing what is
not just an environmental
crisis, but I would say a public
safety crisis 200 million
gallons of potable water flows
out on the streets every single
day and has a year annually
every day.
At um and astounding rate 43% of
the city's water is lost to
waste. And so we were requesting
just to start with for emergency
$20 million. It's a It's a small
drop in the bucket on the big
scale, but the water lines in
truth or consequences are so old
that they are actually wouldn't
they remained from the 18
hundreds?
And so it is such an
environmental Just waste as you
see, See this and then.
When we talk about the public
safety, we have had to turn many
on many, many occasions.
Ambulances from hospitals to
continue on for another 75 miles
down the road. Our veterans have
gone sometimes over two nights
without any water. It's we've
shut down schools, we we school
bus our kids in the middle of
the day home because of water
shortages and so
It's It's not just a public
safety, but if you would come
and just see the environmental
waste and how we can, how we can
address this really, because
it's a new Mexico problem. I'd
really appreciate it. If you
would come see it's making
national headlines that
continues to do, But we can't
seem to get the attention of
Santa Fe. So I invite you to
come see it with me. Mr Sharon
Senator happy to do that as soon
as session is over, Um, happy to
join you in that.
Um And I know my team, uh and
and myself have been on calls
and with truth or consequences,
and I was just down there over
the holidays. I should have
called you, Um
But happy to do that, but more
importantly than me, sing is
happy to really roll my sleeves
up and try to figure out how to
solve it.
Right. Thank you. I appreciate
that, Mr. Secretary. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Um, Have you had
your
Hearing. Uh
The secretary of you had your
hearing and house appropriations
yet.
Mr Chair and Senator, I have
And what was their
recommendation?
Um, Mr Chair and Senator Woods.
They adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Yeah.
Ah!
You know, I've looked at. I have
looked at the book here enough.
I formulated some questions, but
We've talked this served you
before.
Hmm. I
Your your band problem is a in
my property in my theory is HR
problem.
Uh huh.
I think that's a deal that you
have to solve by yourself.
Uh,
I don't think
The Legislature needs to get
into that state personnel office
and HR needs to take care of
that. So
I know that we are funding a
study.
For that particular
To see where our employees are,
according to other states, So
I don't know when that
We disappointed it, so I don't
know how long it will take to do
that.
But for all the employees out
there behind you
Um, that's
That's where I see it.
It's it's got to be, you know, I
mean, I need to know where you
guys are setting.
Was with comparable situations
and other states.
And hopefully that will help us
employ people in our state. When
we can. We can at least match
other states.
Uh,
Wages, so to speak.
And I know you have a lot of
specialty people understand
that.
Uh,
I, You know, I've been reading
this and and
Lfc is is
Kind of question you to use some
other funds that you have.
For some other things.
And so
I'm not gonna ask any more
questions than that. Mr Chair. I
just, uh
I
You know, it's in House house
right now.
Recommended the
Lfc deal and I know they can
catch up and clean up and so
until they come over with
something wrong
Um, you you've explained your
problem. I understand your
problem.
But again, that's where I see
it. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you for your time today,
Senator. It's nine more. Thank
you, Mr Chair. So good to be
with everybody. I think I made a
new land speed record today
coming in from Las Cruces from
the funeral of former Senator
Maryjane Garcia.
But I so wanted to be here
today.
As you know, Mr Secretary, So I
was flying and listening to you
all a lot of good questions. I
was just hoping for a few more
questions. Um, because I'm
really interested. Number one in
the water strategic water issue,
and I just have one question. Is
that going to be in a piece of
legislation, Mr Secretary?
Um
Mr Chairman, Senator Stein, born
Um, the Senate finance chair has
indicated that he once sent a
little piece of legislation and
I was going to clarify
afterwards. It's certainly in
the capital Bill.
Um, but I was unclear about
additional legislation at the
moment. Well, Mr Chairman,
secretary, I have a lot of
questions slash concerns as
well. And I know a lot of
members of the
Community, too, and I'm hearing
questions on all sides. Good
questions. Um
I'll just say I have a lot of
questions about it, and I won't
ask him now because we're not on
that right now. But I think you
probably appropriate to be in a
piece of legislation.
But otherwise it definitely
warrants a lot of healthy debate
just about options. I could
Definitely appreciate the goal,
as they say, which generally
sounds like a patronizing
statement when it's made in the
Legislature, because usually it
is in this case, I can
appreciate the goal. Um it's
just a matter of
Um
Is that the right policy is now
the right time. Lot of other
questions, but so hopefully we
can have conversations about
that, and we can all have a lot
more as a Legislature, but as
far as your budget goes, I just
want to ask a couple of
clarifying questions to really
get the committee into focus.
Number one. My understanding is
that we Mr. Secretary, Mr. Chair
Do not give you General fund for
all your staff. We only
generally give you General fund
for the things that are not
funded.
By federal funds and other other
funds. Other funding sources is
that correct?
Um, Mr Chair and Senator
Steinberg. And it's generally
correct. Okay, so and and when
we give out pay raises, which
we've done the last few years,
which we recognize an important
policy issue. We've also only
given you pay raises for the for
those employees, which we
recognize or not funded from
generally.
Federal funds or other funding
sources. Is that correct?
Yeah. Mr Chair and Senator Stein
born, you know, 18% of our
budget is roughly General fund
thereabouts.
Um and generally and when all
employees are mandated to
When the state mandates are
raised for all employees. We
generally get about 18 cents on
the dollar. So, Mr Chair
When you when we say you have to
give all your employees have 4%
raise with that the situation
that then forces you into
Is basically we're saying do
that across the workforce, but
we're not giving you the money
across your workforce. We're
only giving you the money for
that 18%, and you're then having
to literally rob from special
funds and special programs that
are funded for other purposes.
To give those pay raises or
Not pay people the same level
that they might be enjoying for
the same job and another part of
state government. Is that true?
Yeah, Mr Chair and Senator
Steinberg. And that's that is
true. And that's why I showed
that federal funds had been
Flat for 20 years and permit
fees have not been sufficient.
We've effectively rated as much
as we can our permit fees for
that purpose. Um
Yeah. Thank you. Well, Mr Chair,
I think we We clearly need NME
nme defects to fix this whole
one way or another, and I and
it's a great I'm glad I'm
speaking after my colleagues
because I think everybody
Once a well run robust
environment department.
And we have to pay for it.
It's just that simple. You get
what you pay for.
And
Personally, I want a robust
environment department and if we
don't pay for it on the front
end, then we get to pay $100
million to fix the sinkhole.
In Carlsbad, or you get
pollution screaming down the
Animas River, and then everybody
of all political persuasions
say, Well, why didn't you do
anything about that? Well,
So it's it's frankly smart
financially to invest in that,
but it's also invest in our kids
and our communities and our
water systems and, um
And I, really through the years
I've been in the Legislature.
It's really frustrating to me
when I hear people.
Treat this issue the same as
other issues because it's not.
It's
It's frankly, more important.
Our health
Our air quality or water
quality. And so, uh,
You know, and I think we have
forced you.
To, um
Kind of cobble things together
with duct tape, but we keep
giving you a bigger, bigger
mission. So I hope once and for
all we really make that
investment while we have it, and
then we work with you on
solvency. You know the questions
my colleague was asking, and we
really step up to
Excellent line in questions and
I definitely tag him in
But, uh
So, Yeah, I look forward to
hearing how we can do that. And
also recognizing in New Mexico.
Some of our fees are less than
other states were not
We're not talking about pricing
ourselves out of the market or
making this industry unfriendly.
It's really just kind of
modernizing some of these fees.
So
Um, thanks for the work. You and
your agency do and all your
staff that are here and
listening. We really value it
and, uh,
I hope we can. We can come up
with a fix once and for all, Mr
Chairman and stop
You know, Stop
marginalizing the agency.
Thank you, Legislature. Thank
you. We're going to talk about
this because this has been a
long drawn out thing and Sydney
and was kind of I was going to
ask her if she had a question,
because just looking like she
was kind of getting tortured by
your questions. And now
Kind of changed. You know this
agency last year, took FTE money
and moved it.
And pulled it in and used it for
operation and then did it for
contracts out of their F T. E s.
Hmm. And since 21 to 24, we've
increased this agency 75%.
Thank the largest increase in
the Legislature.
And then this summer, we kind of
found out and I see the young
lady in the office Onions back
there. We found out about the
pay issue, right?
And so
From that point on we've been
working on. You have enough
money in the buckets and what
employees are paid out of these
buckets and how that works, and
Scott has been working
diligently.
To try to figure that out for
us, and we've come up with a
number of roughly 6.16 0.2
correct.
Is what it's going to take.
Well, we did the pay study and
we sent some of our
Forget who's doing that for us,
but they were in here last week.
They did some of the
environmental employees first,
right?
And they kind of stuck out that
they were below way below. Don't
have the numbers before me the
payments or the pay grades they
should be at
And I will tell you I made the
commitment in another meeting
that we're going to fix this,
and we are you probably see some
kind of movement in the house,
And maybe the Senate will
backfill the rest. But we're
going to get there right because
it made those commitments to his
employees.
But
Probably gonna take away some
transfer authority when we do
that.
Because
Now that we got you in the right
pane, and it's not. It's only
for one year. It's not fixing
it.
Moving forward. That's becomes
the problem. Correct, Scott they
there's 6.2 is only the one year
increase. That's not the 25
increase that will need to build
in for the next year, so and
then, if the pace study comes in
and says
You know, we need to bump up
another three or 4% or
something. Then we got to start
looking at the numbers. So is
the 6.16 point that 6.1 or 6.2,
Mr. Chair of the committee? Yes,
it's $6.1 million will
appropriately placed the
workforce at enemy D as it
stands right now that doesn't
take into account any future
hiring, which we hope would be
the result of appropriately
placing more of their employees,
right? We want to see that
vacancy rate continue to go
down.
Um, so we know there's more work
to do. But over the last few
months and since the formation
of the L C recommendation we
have spent honestly you know, 15
plus hours working just on the
personnel part of this budget
alone and meetings and otherwise
and then immediately and very
responsive in providing that
information we feel like we're
fairly confident in $6.1 million
being able to solve this
problem for FY 25 based on
salaries right now, today.
Okay. And then, Mr. Secretary,
Do you have those numbers for
those correct placements in
those
Agencies.
Mr Chair. We have so of the $6.1
million in the various P codes,
And then the bureau's We We have
that we have that broken down as
to where it needs to go. Is that
that's what your question is,
Yes.
Okay. And then we're gonna get
that handled immediately, right?
Because we can't you know we're
not allowed by the Legislature
cannot pay back pay right? You
can only pay forward.
Right?
And so I'm still looking at if
We need the July 1 budget, right
If that's considered, maybe you
can answer this, Scott, right?
If we can we legally take from
July 1 or is it when house built
to assigned
I mean, the back pain If we took
the new calendar your started in
in in July.
Can we take Can? Is there a
legal precedent being set? Kelly
is going to come up here. How
can we can only
We can. Also if she signed the
bill, April 1st
From that day forward from
signing and we could supplement
that from April 1 to July 1.
I'm waiting to see if Sydney has
a comment.
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee $6.1 million with the
appropriate placement to each
program. What it's doing is so
as you know, when we do Section
eight compensation
appropriations, um, how those
get distributed to agencies are
you have X amount of general
fund and X amount of other state
funds and
That percentage of the overall
share of those funds to those
agencies is what the agency is
then given, um either given in
general fund or allowed to use
to make sure that all of those
employees are then getting the
4% compensation. So what's
happened over the last few years
is every year and the media's
had a compensation breakout with
X amount of federal dollars
being used, and they have to
provide these
Salary increases to these
employees. Now what That means
is it's either dipping into that
federal funds or it's dipping
into that permit fund to pay for
compensation doing a $6.1
million appropriation right now
in Section four, will take away
the money that is currently
being dipped into fill it with
the General Fund. And then that
money that currently is being
used to fill those last five
years of compensation will now
then be allowed to go to the
appropriate programs and
Projects that they were
originally intended to.
So it's not the supplemental
would be one year special money
and it would not effectively fix
the operating budget moving
forward because then it's not
built into the base. So it's a
complex problem. Scott and I
have talked about this for
months at this point, and you're
right it is. It is also not
unique to enemy D. There are
other agencies like E. C, C, D
and D ws who get federal funds
so
We're it's It's
Heard and we're in discussion,
and I just wanted to clarify the
use of that 6.1 caution is we're
gonna look at those funds every
year, right? And if those funds
are building up and we're going
to take the preparation, how
those funds and supplement that
appropriation because
Taking federal funds.
And supplementing state money
for federal employees. If we go
down that path that is
Very dangerous path.
To go down and my problem is I
made the commitment to the to
the people to fix this promising
And we're gonna fix it. But it's
going to come with some
tightening of the strings. Um I
mean, just for instance, that
FTE transfer last year out of
FTE s instead of starting to fix
your proper placement and
increasing that was then moved
for contractual services. I
don't know what it was for just
as contractual services.
But you could have begin to fix
those.
Proper placement numbers.
But we moved it to another one.
So
Mr Chair that That example is
that was a cascading bar with
PICO Transfer authority.
Such that we were no longer
Um
Using
Funds that had limited
legislative intent for employees
that they probably shouldn't
have been used for. So we were.
We were
While it may appear that we were
moving money, guilt in this
committee, I understand, Mr
Chair. Uh,
I don't know how else to explain
it to you other than we did a
cascading series of bars to move
money to make r O I T Office of
information technology on a
proper funding source so that
they could administer services
more broadly, and we just kept
moving money to cascade that, um
With the and again that that was
not an audit, finding to my
knowledge that was all done
appropriately. Um, but your
point is is well No, I take your
point.
That with sort of greater
flexibility if you will, and
getting this money comes greater
accountability in our fund
balances need to be spent more
aggressively and our federal
funds need to be, you know, uh,
Appropriate not appropriate but
used more aggressively as well.
So I I understand what you're
saying.
Okay. And in in, this is gonna
go the employees. I mean, we're
gonna get you guys fixed.
I want out of that lawsuit.
Listen, I can't fix the past.
He can't fix the past. The judge
can't make us fix the past. We
can only fix what it's going
forward.
And so as we move forward that
hearing or am I don't work in
government. So that thing I want
it cleared up. Let's let's
Let's be on both sides of the
fence. Listen, we're gonna help
you fix it. And if we had known
sooner, maybe would have fixed
it sooner, But we weren't in
session and we're going to fix
it. But we want that cleared up
as we move forward, because
that's
It was unfair to you guys and it
wasn't happened, But you brought
a tart tension. We're fixing it,
but I want that complaint
cleared up at the same time we
get this I mean,
I can't fix ancient history, but
I can fix everything in the
future.
And I can hold people's feet to
the fire in the future for
what's happening. Scott, do you
want to add something, Mr Chair?
Thank you. So just to be clear
last year, the Environment
Department's budget request was
for like $4.7 million to cover
agency leases, and that was
their attempt at the time, I
believe to try and solve some of
these administrative problem
where you had Lisa's being paid
out of programs that required
them to basically leave empty
desks because office space
wasn't being used by the
resource protection Division,
which you have water protection
division staff that need to be
there.
That's not an allowable use of
those funds.
So what the Legislature did last
year was recognizing that there
was probably no way to
appropriately placed all of the
employees. That wasn't a
conversation We were having. We
started. The Legislature sucked
a lot of money away in their
contractual services to allow
them to hire people at market
rates to perform some of these
same functions that anybody
staff were they weren't able to
fill those positions. What,
appropriately? Placing an M A D
employees will do, though, is
give them the ammo that they
need to hopefully fill some of
those vacancies and allow those
same work to be done by people
that work for the Environment
Department.
And over time that will
hopefully lead to an increase in
fee revenue. Greater reversion
to the General fund and the
ability for their workforce to
continue to grow and maintain
and keep some of that
institutional knowledge they saw
walk out the door in the last
year or so.
Did you hear what Scott said.
You have to do, Mr Secretary.
He just said he just gave you
the greatest explanation to fix
the funding problem.
Yeah, Mr Chair fully fully agree
with what Scott said. And I
think his knowledge of our
operations as well as the FAA
is, I think has been a big
investment.
On both their parts, So I really
do appreciate what you're
saying. And what d f A and lfc
or are saying we're
We to be candid, we could not
have done the appropriate
placement calculation until the
current team is there. So last
year we were trying to fix
leases this year. We're trying
to fix appropriate placement and
leases. My I would love to come
before you and say I don't need
anything.
Yeah, well, we're going to ban
you from Twitter and House Bill
two and hope the governor
doesn't line item that, uh
But, uh, you know, we're gonna
fix this, but I'm looking at
those employees to you know, we
want out of that deal. We're
gonna fix it Can't fix this
ancient history, But we're gonna
fix it for you guys, and we're
gonna monitor for me going
forward, So we want out of that.
Complaint file or whatever. It's
fair for us. It's fair for you.
It's good for the employees.
You're probably gonna see
another increase on top of that.
So
Got you where you think you need
to do the Secretary Scott gave
you a lecture? What You need to
do an agency. I have one looming
question.
Uh and I've seen it on the news
where yours.
Taking the samples out of the
high schools and the amount of
drugs and everything else like
that, right?
I mean, at the end of the day,
what are we gonna do with that
information, Mr Chair? I think
you know, being a science based
organization gathering that
data.
Will now allow public health
professionals to look at. You
know what intervention methods
are working in one school, one
part of the state not working in
others and recalibrate. I don't
think I mean, call me naive. I
had no idea that cocaine was
going to be a bigger problem
than other illicit drugs in in
public high schools.
I think to the extent that you
know, parents are not talking to
their kids about cocaine. I
think that's already a
intervention method that can
happen.
More immediately. So that is the
that is the next step we're
working with. Um Secretary Alan
and others in the Cabinet to
kind of get that those
intervention methods stood up. I
mean, and how much does it cost
to do? A sampling of the high
school?
Example at one sampling event.
Jonas. You know that by heart?
Yeah. Um, Mr Chair. Jonas is
running this for us. Um, but a
little under $2000.
Okay. I mean, if there's an
outcome, I understand it. I
mean, we all know there's drugs
in the system, right? I mean,
Every There are drugs in school
when I was there, right and
there was drug prevention and
everything else. It didn't
really change anything.
May change a little bit, but I
don't know. I just
We'll move on. We're off the
poop. Thank you were hitting the
path Just remember, we're going
to fix that problem may not look
like it today. But the end of
the day we'll have it fixed.
I can't say it enough. We fix
it. I want out of that petition.
That's only fair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And thanks
to the members of the committee
Appreciate your time.
Thank you. We're gonna do next.
See why F D and then
We make. We're probably gonna
skip over early childhood.
It's already getting late.
I don't see the secretary in the
room.
Okay?
Thank you, Kelly.
Can I get your approval on this?
Jerry wanted to change is there
Yeah, Yeah, yeah.
Sydney and I thought I had you
there for a minute because you
were right.
Um, Secretary, we're just going
to go over the budget kind of
timeline.
So we can skip to page five of
your presentation.
I'm looking at that one. Yeah.
One through four just pictures,
so Senator Bert will probably
dry mustaches on people.
University. Yeah.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Good afternoon. My
name is Dr Rachel Garcia and the
LFC analysts for the Children,
Youth and Families Department.
I'm going to walk you through
the very high level differences
between the LFC recommendation
and the executive recommendation
and then I will turn it over to
my idea of a counterpart and the
secretary, traditional comment.
With me at the table and is a
secretary Theresa Casada is from
the Children and Families
Department as well as Mary Beth
Dunsmore from D F A point you to
a couple of resources in your
packets before we get started,
As I give you the very high
level differences, I'll be
talking through the high level,
and I also suggest that you have
the special appropriation. Um
she out because that's where we
see some of the big differences.
Um And then, if you would like
to look at any of the volumes,
I'll give you a couple of page
numbers for reference Volume.
One page 25 has the child well
being Section volume two page
375 provides more detail about
the lfc recommendation. Um,
overall, the executive
recommendation for the C I F D
operating budget is 26 million
higher.
Then the LFC recommendation and
includes a general fund
appropriation. That's 22 million
more than the LFC
recommendation. The LFC
recommendation would appropriate
257.4 million from the General
Fund, which is a 1% operating
budget increase over FY 24 while
the executive recommendation
would appropriate 279 million in
general fund roughly 10% more
than the FY 24 operating budget.
There are two big differences
that I'll call your attention to
that kind of explain the
differences and those numbers.
Um, the first. Is that what it
is one of the agencies for which
the LFC recommendation provided
funding and the proposed
Government Accountability
Expendable Trust fund, And so
for that reason, I recommend
you. You look at that special
sheet as we walked through the
budget of the LFC recommendation
provides 19.9 million in that
fund to pilot and evaluate
evidence based prevention and
intervention programs as well as
workforce initiatives over four
years.
And while the executive
recommendation general funds
prevention intervention within
the operating budget
In addition, the second big
difference between the two
budget recommendations is the
executive recommendation
proposes a reorganization of
programs within the department
specifically creating the family
services division and moving
21.3 million in general fund
revenue, along with a T F T E
from protective services,
behavioral health and juvenile
justice into that proposed
program.
In addition, the executive
recommendation reallocates 37
FTE at about 19 Million in
General Fund from behavioral
health and juvenile justice to
program support. So that's where
if you look on your high level,
you'll see some of those big
differences.
And as a result, the executive
recommendation in the behavioral
health program reflects a 1.1
Million general fund decreased
about 2.3% and a 7.2 million
decrease about 10% in general
fund revenue in the juvenile
justice programs. Um, executive
recommendation also includes
23.6 million expansion for
protective services.
Um, In contrast, the LFC
recommendation does not include
the reorganization of the
department and generally
recommends a flat general fund
appropriation in program support
Protective services, behavioral
health and juvenile justice,
primarily because of funded
vacancies and historic spending
levels and trends within those
programs, and there are a few
key increases within the
operating budget that LFC
proposes that I'll call your
attention to
Um, specifically 576,000 from
the General Fund for tribal
liaisons to support and address
Kevin s lawsuit. Settlement
agreements. 1.6 million from the
General Fund to replace Social
Security benefit revenue
previously used by the
department to pay for care and
support.
300,000 from the General fund to
replace fees and fines revenue
for domestic violence programs
and then an increase of 1
million from the tan if program
um for supportive housing for
young adults in the fostering
connections program. I'm aging
out of foster care.
Ah!
One other big difference between
the LFC and the executive
recommendation is proposed
language. The executive budget
recommendation includes bar
authority that would allow C y f
D to transfer 5 million between
the agency programs, which is
more expensive than any other
authority and state government
currently, and the LFC does not
include that recommendation.
Um In addition, the executive
recommendation would allow
protective services, um, budget
general fund dollars not to
revert and the LFC and does not
include that recommendation. And
those are the big differences
between the two programs and I
will turn it over to my D F a
counterpart Mary Beth, as well
as his secretary, and to walk
through and the executive
budget.
Okay. Thank you, Rachel. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair. It's always
difficult to know how these are
gonna come across. Um, she
summarized everything up Really?
Well, there's just a couple of
things I'd like to bring to your
attention. Um, The first thing I
just really want to underscore
is that the three organization
that the agency has requested
his budget neutral? It moves
some, you know items from
programs.
To program support to the new
Family Services division. But
while there were some expansions
baked in, um
The reorganization itself is
budget neutral. And so the
executive does support that. But
that was not in the lfc. Um, as
Rachel said, the other thing I
just wanted to bring to your
attention is, um there is 2.6
million in protective services
in the executive recommendation
that would help fill vacancies.
Um
So the social reality can hire
across the states. Not more FTE.
It's just more funding so they
can decrease their vacancy rates
so that would actually, um the
executive would take them from a
funded vacancy rate this year of
about 79.2%, meaning that's the
they could, they could fill
Theoretically up to 79.2% of
their positions. The executive
recommendation for 25 would take
that up to 85.3% flipped to
14.7. I believe, um, so that's
just another difference. I
wanted to call your attention
executive is really trying to
support the protective services
program and also highlight the
new Family services division
Should the reorganization go
through? Um, and that would help
with transparency,
accountability and
And it would
Ah, merge all of these
prevention programs in one
place.
So it's easier for everybody to
see what's happening and track
it as well.
Just wanted to point those
couple things out to you in the
executive recommendation, but
I'm not going to take any more
time and turn it over to the
secretary for her comments.
Great. Thank you very much.
Rachel and Mary Beth, I
appreciate that. Um, Mr
Chairman, I recognize that we
are short of time and so want to
be respectful of your time this
afternoon. So, um, as you saw
from our presentation, we do
have some photos of all of our
leadership team. I won't go
through that today to introduce
them to you. I think they've had
an opportunity to meet
Um, a lot of you. Um, but I do
want to start out by just really
thanking the C Y F D staff
because none of this would be
possible without their
dedication and hard work, and we
do have an incredible staff that
works hard every day to try to
meet the needs of the
individuals and their
communities, and so just want to
recognize them before we get
started. Um, we are working hard
to, you know, support that
workforce at the department and
you heard presentations right
now from both Rachel and Mary
Beth about a budget request.
We are requesting the addiction
$26 million to really fix an
agency that has been plagued
with problems. And as Mary Beth
said, the budget that we're
asking for within our new Family
Services Department is budget
neutral. It takes programs that
we are currently doing, um, that
are buried down in other
divisions, and it really gives
us an opportunity to be more
proactive and do prevention and
intervention in the systems that
we're we're
Working through
So I've participated in
countless conversations over the
last seven months.
Numerous times. They've said we
cannot continue to do things the
same way that we're doing them
and expect a different result.
However, the budget requests
that you have before you buy the
LFC does exactly that. It leaves
us status quo. It leaves us with
the same amount of money that
we're currently operating with
and doesn't allow us to
reorganize. The way we see that
the agency needs to be to meet
the needs of those individuals.
So I asked that you be open
minded about this
reorganization and allow us to
really look at the department
and figure out how exactly can
we carry out these changes
Streamline our process, support
our employees by listening to
their needs and meeting them
with action and not just empty
promises and, most importantly,
working to ensure families can
thrive in New Mexico.
And I don't think that's too
much to ask for from an agency
that is struggling to provide
services, so
I'll go into a little bit of
those differences, but what I
want to say about the
reorganization is that one c y f
D was created. It was created to
support Children, youth and
families in need in such a
manner as to promote self
sufficiency and to coordinate an
integrated system of care and
services. Nowhere in our
enabling statute, did it say our
primary focus was on individuals
and protective services or in
juvenile justice. It's to serve
families and we've forgotten to
do that somewhere along the
line.
Because we were overwhelmed with
other needs.
So that's still what we strive
to do, and that's what we're
trying to do through this
reorganization. It allows us to
streamline programs it allows
for more accountability and the
work that we're doing, You know,
I think at a lot, the last
hearing that we had Senator
Woods asked for a list of all
the contracts, and that's
extensive. This is giving us the
opportunity to move that from
all over the agency where we're
doing duplicative contracts and
protective services and in J. J.
With the same vendor for
different services. This allows
us to streamline that into our
administrative services
department.
In really take a look at those
contracts and see how are we
serving people because we can
streamline that and do one
contract across the agency that
meets the needs of all the
different individuals that we
serve. Um, so simplifying that
in streamlining in is a good
thing for state government and
allows for less bureaucracy and
more accountability, and I think
that's exactly what the LFC has
been asking us to do as long as
I've been in this role is to
really be accountable and
Focus on what we're doing how
those programs are working.
And making sure that we are
operating in a way that gives us
the best services possible and
utilizes the state's money and
the best, most financially
fiscal manner.
The enabling statute also
doesn't say that the LFC, um
decides how we set that up.
If you look at that statute,
there's nothing new in the
structure were simply re
establishing a division that was
in our original statute, the
prevention and intervention
division. It's in statute that
that is a division at C Y F D.
We are simply renaming it.
family services and really
taking the opportunity to focus
on intervention and prevention.
Aside from that a program
evaluation that LFC did in
August of 2022 tells us that
we've strayed from the original
and of intent of its founding by
removing preventive services as
a division and service area.
So I feel like we're being asked
to do certain things within the
department and when we're
stepping up and doing that we're
being told that that's not the
way we need to do it. So I
really support your request in
this budget.
I really suppressed support. I
mean, request your support and
allowing us to restructure the
way we need to to meet those
needs and I won't go into each
of the different divisions. I
think you have that there,
which, um, those asks are and as
Mary Beth pointed out its budget
neutral. We're moving money
around. With the exception of
You know money for our tribal
positions that meet Kevin S, Um
there's additional money for
placement and adoption. There's
money for supportive housing in
care and support. Um And then
there's money to fill the FTE s.
And as she pointed out, we're
not asking for additional FTE s
just looking to be able to fill
those that we already have in
reduced are funded vacancies.
Um, So with that all stand for
questions. Center Diamond. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you, madam
Secretary. One of your ass's $20
million for a
Legal settlements. Why? Why is C
y f d requesting that instead of
state risk fund
Um Mr Chair, Senator Bradley.
Um, over the last year. We've
looked at some of the cases that
have been filed against the way
of D, um and I think you know
there was one in particular case
that was brought to our
attention. Um, that really had
us evaluating where we were. We
reached out. We started looking
at some of those cases. We
negotiated some settlements, and
I believe that it was about
$16.5 million in outstanding
commitment for cases that we're
looking to settle that I believe
risk management is looking for
some assistance. As you know,
the fund.
His
Nearly been or has been depleted
at risk management, and I
believe this was an opportunity
to get money into our specific
budget since they were C Y F D
cases.
Okay. Thank you, mr Chair. So I
guess the answer is because risk
management is broke. You're
having to ask for General fund
revenues.
For that, Mr Chairman, Senator
Brantley. Yes. Okay. How? How
frequently? Mr. Chair have you
guys represented yourself
instead of going through risk
management? Is this a new this
relatively new where you began
to ask Request general funds for
lawsuits. Mr Chairman, Senator
Brantley. I believe this is the
first time agency specifically
have asked for
Um, funding for cases that are
paid out of risk management. Um,
but I don't know, Um prior to my
being at the department, whether
or not that was included in
their previous budgets. Okay.
Thank you. Mr Chair. Can can you
tell us Madam Secretary
What do you have pending and
legal settlements right now,
collectively between settled
And and potential.
We have Mr Chairman,
Representative, Senator Bradley.
I'm sorry we have about 16
Almost $17 million right now in
outstanding, um, settlements
that we have negotiated with.
I believe it's eight cases and
that information has been
compiled and given to risk
management for submittal,
because I believe there is a
request from them to have
specific information, so I can
make sure that you get a copy of
that. Could you could you Madam
Secretary sent that over to us
the total outstanding and number
of pending cases and I guess
what I would ask also, if you'd
included, Do you know what the
nature of those cases are? What?
What those payouts There were
four of its wrongful death civil
rights. What kind of injury?
Um, Mr Chairman, Senator
Brantley. I believe there are a
couple of those that are for
wrongful death. Um, I can have
the list in front of me so I can
specific. Um, let's see. I
believe there are
123 cases that are wrongful
death. There are some that are
physical and sexual abuse.
Um and one that is a child abuse
case that are pending.
All. Thank you, Mr Chair, all at
fault of C Y f d sexual abuse by
C Y F. D.
Employer, Mr Me, Mr Chairman,
Senator Bradley. None of these
are employee related cases.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. I think I'm gonna be
very short here, but I think
that really in the introduction
when you talk about kind of the
disconnect of where we're headed
here, you made a point to say
that it is the mission of this
agency to serve families. And I
think maybe that's where
The greatest disconnect is
because I would see because of
the failure to Children is the
mission of the agency is to put
the priority of Children first.
I almost I almost wish we could
take families completely out of
this and just have a Children
and youth division here so that
we could narrow the focus of
what our greatest
vulnerabilities are in
priorities would be when I think
of families services, I think of
H H s D or Department of Health
or something that come in and
provide services for families.
But until we begin to
prioritize, just Children first,
I think we're going to continue
to see just function through the
agency. Thank you for being here
again, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary and the presenters
keep keep on keeping on. Okay?
had a couple of questions on the
contracts. Uh, thank you for
this level of detail. I don't
think we've ever seen a cabinet
secretary bringing this much
detail. So outstanding. Good job
There. I see a contract with
Bernalillo County. Madam
Speaker. Mr. Chair. Madam
Secretary. Is there not work
that from that's done by the
city of Albuquerque for you, or
maybe I just missed it. Maybe I
just didn't see it.
Um, Mr Chairman.
Senator Padilla. I don't know
that we contract directly with
the city of Albuquerque. Um,
through there. We also contract
um through falling colors and
many of our contracts to
following colors could be with
the city of Albuquerque, Okay.
Okay. Thank you. Um, thank you.
So on on the you know, it seems
to me like you are doing a
phenomenal job of recreating,
redesigning innovating the
department. You're moving this
division creating that division
all within. You know what I
believe you're able to do? Um
The executive recommendation of
the 4 12.8 and then the
legislative of the 3833 86.8.
What does that do to salaries
for recruitment purposes and
also ratios of case manager to
to to to client? Um, Mr
Chairman, Senator Padilla, what
we've done when we re
established our pillars for case
bones, um, was used data that we
currently have available to us
to determine how many based on
the national average How many
Any FTS we needed in each area
based on our current caseload.
Um, with some numbers built in
for, you know, added caseload
and closing out caseload. And so
that allows us to hire in each
of those specific areas based on
need. Um, we did do salary
studies about a year, maybe a
year and a half ago. Those have
been implemented to make sure
that we are able to provide
adequate salaries as we recruit
for individuals and to make sure
that we can do proper retention
for employees who have been with
the department for some time.
So thank you. Chair and Madam
Secretary designate, um so
really specifically on salaries
for the social workers that
you're hiring, Um
Do we pay your social worker
salary different than we do, say
over at Department of Health.
You know her? I don't expect you
to know that. But do we, um,
Anyone have that information,
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla.
The social workers that C Y f D
R in their own, um,
classification, but there are
other agencies that do use that
classification. Um and I can
certainly find out for you if
it's a social worker at dohr
something but anybody who's in
that classification as a social
worker.
Should be. You know, In theory,
there should be some parody, um,
across agencies. Thank you,
Madam Secretary, Mr Chairman,
Senator Padilla. Um, last
legislative session, there was
money allocated for a salary
study across all state agencies.
So I'm hopeful that once that is
completed, it will give us more
insight on you know whether
we're competitive or need to
increase our salaries at C Y f
D. Thank you, Mr Chair. And
Madam Secretary. You are right
on the money there. I think
we're gonna be
Really surprised when we get
that report back, and when that
thing comes in, Yeah, but the
last thing I want to see
happening is is people coming
into your department and then
you constantly be a training
ground for other departments. So
that's why I'm just curious
where the leveling of the salary
is for the same job Now,
obviously, your your job is you
know what it is, and then as a
social worker, and d O H might
be another type of role.
Maybe they're more case
managers. I don't know. So we
really need to kind of take a
look at that and just kind of
understand it a little bit. But
I appreciate that. You're paying
a lot of attention to that
Because you guys your department
really does need to help on that
another item chair and Madam
Secretary designate again, just
a follow up to the legislation
that I passed two years ago on
fostering connections. That
program I believe is going to
reap.
Huge benefits for New Mexico. As
I've said before the states that
have implemented ours is the
most comprehensive as far as I
can tell, not just because it's
ours and because it was my
legislate, but it really is very
common, much more comprehensive
than the others.
The rate of Children like
becoming their Children, their
kids becoming going into foster
care later on in life is
actually 70 to 77% when we don't
do this.
The states that have have have
implemented a fostering
connections Light program they
see that number fall to 30%. And
so I'm hoping that that's the
trend that we see with that. So
you know, I do have the bill
this year to do the cleanup
because we left some kiddos out
of this thing or aged out foster
youth out of this thing with
unknowingly. So do we with that
type of four E funding. Do we
add to your budget or do we just
simply draw more money down from
the Feds?
Tip to add the additional
Children or
Eligible young adults to this,
Um, Mr Chairman, Senator
Padilla. I just wanted to give a
shout out to the people that set
up our fostering connections
because they did an incredible
job, And it is an amazing
program in the state of New
Mexico and for those kids that
were left out of the funding. We
are still making sure that they
do receive benefits so even
outside of the legislative fix,
we are making sure that they're
not left out.
Um, and that there is still able
to benefit from that program. So
which is wanted to make sure
that you were aware of that, Um
we will be able to draw down
additional $40 for those
individuals. But there are some
instances where maybe if the $40
aren't, um, completely
available or there's a match. It
would give us funding to be able
to meet those matches. That's
great. Thank you. Chair and
always love. Madam Secretary
When your CFO starts nodding
Yes, about money coming from the
Yeah. So, so I I'm just great. I
really hope that we will get
That done. It's about 12 to 15
kids a year that have been left
out of this thing. It's just got
to get that thing done, so I
really hope that you all will
show up for those
Was hearings and all that kind
of stuff. Thank you. Chair.
Thank you Don't see another
question.
I'm just looking at the the
executive compared to the
legislative, right. And can you
tell me like, why wasn't this
20.6 Million in what year was
that expended?
And are appropriated in. Why
wasn't it expended?
You're asking for
reauthorization on Page seven.
Of the behavioral health. Okay.
Um, Mr Chairman. The 20 Million.
I believe you're referring to
the $20 million for the
behavioral health money that was
given to us through our part
funding. You know, 00 c West
west. Okay, so the sea was
program is the new system that
we're building that will replace
our facts system.
Um, And so this has been ongoing
for several years. They went
through reiteration that did an
RFP. And so we finally were able
to select a vendor. I believe it
was me or June of this year. Um,
then we took a moment of pause
because it didn't include all of
the agency. So we had them go
back and revise that to include
juvenile justice and any other
programs that we have so we can
have one set of data to be able
to run.
Numbers with and so once those
were revised. We made an award
and we're moving forward on
that. But the timeline has been
put behind, um a bit because
it's taken some time to get
approval from the federal
government. They're working to
make sure that that works with
the HHS 2020 that it's
compatible and so
There's been several changes up
front that have put the program
the process behind. Rachel. When
is that appropriated? You know?
Mr Chair. I would need to go
back and look specifically in
the data that appropriation it
was severally.
Mr Chair. I don't know if the
top of my head but I do think it
is in. It's already been
reauthorized. I think they're in
the process and it's probably
Yeah, 1920 19 Possibly. But we
can confirm that for you, Mr
Chair. It's been five years.
Possibly
And then what about the $3
million
The workforce. That $3 million.
Support the workforce plan. Um
and so we're asking for
reauthorization of that We do
have a plan right now to spend
that, um, it does stipends and,
um
Some payment reimbursement for
social workers. And so as we're
working that through, we want to
make sure that we don't have to
just give them all that money up
front when we bring them on and
that it can be a period over
time, so that we retain them, Um
in the department.
And Rachel, did we appropriate
money on top of that for the
recurring costs if there is any
other than just the reality, Mr
Chairman, Senator, so that
appropriation and
Began last year. The intention
was really to do recruitment of
social workers, so to do things
like go to institutions of
higher Ed and other states and
recruits, social workers. Um,
that hasn't been how we have
seen. The department used the
funds in the last year. There
was a lot remaining, and so, um
what the lfc recommendation does
is reauthorizes it, but it
tightens the purpose.
Noting that it should
specifically focus be focused on
the recruitment and retention of
social workers. Um, while the
LFC recommendation didn't
include anything in the base
budget, specifically, um the LFC
recommendation does, including
the expendable trust additional
dollars to pilot a program to
provide master level social work
licensure as an incentive for
attention, so there is another
kind of related special
appropriation, though nothing in
the base specifically
And now what was the original
Appropriation Mountain if they
spent some of the 3 million in
didn't target it. Ah. So, Mr
Chairman, Senator, the original
appropriation was 3 million when
the agency was in front of lfc
back in December, Total spending
was about $60,060,000. So they
had spent very little as of
December.
Okay?
And then
The other. I mean, I mean, we
appropriate 19 million through
are expendable. Trust in
alcohol. The grown New Mexico,
right?
But it doesn't look to me. The
executive didn't recommend any
of that programming based
intervention.
You know why the executive
didn't
Um
Mr Chair. The money that the
executive recommended is in our
base budget for expansion and of
those programs, Um, and that
allows us the opportunity to
build out those programs and
hire the staff now, um, and have
recurring money as we move
forward with successful
programs. So as we build those
out and evaluation will be done
of the success of the programs
and how those are affecting the
lives of Children and those that
we serve.
Um, successful programs will,
you know, obviously need to be
maintained and will need
continued funding for those the
money that there was set aside
to, um this fund allows us to
take 1/4 of that in the first
year. Um, it makes it incredibly
difficult to hire in an agency
where it's already incredibly
difficult to hire. But you would
be doing term positions that
would be
For a one year period of time,
Um, which always is harder to
fill, and so setting up programs
based on temporary money and
term funding doesn't really set
it up for the most success
program funds it for four years,
not for one year, and it gives
you over a four year period and
then we see how you
Do with your hiring.
What else do you put prevention?
Interesting programs and just
allows us to track it? Because
if not, we don't know any way to
track this in this. Rachel gets
up at 6 A.m. and gets a pick and
shovel and start digging through
your agency to to ask the
questions and then sometimes
agency don't answer the
questions. Sometimes there's
pushed back because agency
doesn't want us to know what's
What's going on. How's employee
morale over there?
Um, Mr Chairman. I don't believe
we have the greatest employee
morale s F D at this point in
time.
How do we help you change that?
I mean, if we're going to
change an agency if you don't
change your employee morale,
right?
Then we're gonna struggle
because
Whoever gets hired
That employee that has a bad
taste. It's gonna
Give the bad taste to the new
employee.
Yeah, I mean,
How do how do we change that
employee morale over there?
Um Mr
really supporting those
employees? It's an incredibly
difficult job. I mean, you know,
it was even easy for me when I
was, you know, in a different
role to be like, Oh, we should
be doing this or we should do
that. And they should do this
differently. Um, you know, I
feel like we've tried to make
huge steps towards increasing
that morale in supporting
employees. But even just in our
visit around the state
Um to nine of our offices at the
beginning of the year, there's a
high level of frustration for
employees that don't feel
supported, you know, not just
from within the agency, but as I
mentioned in previous hearings,
you know from the community
from you know this body from
everybody that they encounter
who fills, you know they're not
doing a good job, And yet they
still get up every day and come
to work and continue that hard
work and we all need to do a
better job of supporting them in
the work that they do.
Well, you know, the Legislature
just a funding norm, right?
And you haven't been there. How
long nine months, maybe
summoned.
I mean,
I'm on board. How do we change
if you change morale inside an
agency?
Then you change the agency
because you can get by and from
the employees and the staff, But
I don't know how to help you
accomplish that.
Because if we struggle through a
lot of changes, and we just keep
changing employee just saying,
Well, they told us to do this,
but the room in the closet over
here yesterday and now the club
broom closets over there today,
and I don't There's no reason
for changing that, but I mean,
if you're really gonna change
An agency. I mean, I don't know
you should have. Maybe you
should do an employee stand and
see what changes the morality,
You know, Um, Mr Chair. One of
the things that we are doing is
stay interviews with employees,
and we're developing that so we
can find out for those that do
stay, and I won't say that the
morale was horrible. In every
office. We had some more things
were really good, and we need to
take a moment to kind of learn
from those employees. What is
working for you?
What makes it the right place
and the right decision and
continues to make you want to
get up and come and do this work
And if we can learn from those
employees with that is and
replicated and those office
where we don't have it and give
them the support that they need
to be able to do the work that
they need to do and know that
they have our support. Um, I
think that will be a huge start
for us in trying to turn that
morale.
And I think, um, go ahead. Okay?
Um, yeah, Mr. Chair. Um
Thank you. I just wanted to add
to that. So one of the things
um, that
Might help, I believe is
supporting the reorganization at
its budget neutral level.
So, for example, one of the
things that's supposed to do is
take administrative work off of
caseworkers and put it into the
administrative services division
with people who are doing that
work, and so it would not would
no longer fall on a case workers
to ensure that families get
their payments or things like
that it would free them up to
simply do the work that they are
trying to do to do the social
work to help these families to
help these kids So
If I may just wanted to throw
out there that that
reorganization really is a
pathway to improvement at C Y F
D. I urge you to consider it.
Thank you shifting the load, But
she said you you're kind of
response was kind of like, open
up Big cannon Chicken noodle
soup.
Everybody's getting the same. I
mean, some pun intended, but I
mean, you know
You got to change the morale in
order to change the agency and
and I don't know what that is.
We need to put a special skyping
in. Do you reward employees that
have high stress deals with
One extra day of vacation, too.
I don't know if I would, Mr.
Chairman. I'm sure they would
love that. But if I told you how
many employees lost time at the
end of the year because they
can't take that time off, or
can't take their comp time, Um
I mean, maybe we can look at
that. Like if they have all of
that leave or comp time that
they've accumulated because
they're working nonstop and
they're short staffed that they
don't lose it at the end of the
year because that truly does not
help morale, either.
Yeah, I mean, for me, it's just
If you can change all the
structure and you can rearrange
all the chairs on the deck you
want
Right if you don't change who's
on the boat?
You're not gonna have it in a
different direction in in so,
but Mr Chairman, part of that
structure changes, really
finding the supports for those
employees. It's not just
realigning where they are. It's
making sure that they're
supported and they have the
training and the support that
they need to feel successful.
Um, I mean, that makes a huge
difference for people, but I
don't see that in your request.
Yeah, it's in there. Maybe you
can highlight it, But I mean, I
Rachel, you do good work, right?
And and and when lfc you know,
we want we want the truth,
Right? And then when agencies
come in, sometimes it's like
You know, it may be a little
off.
But we're pretty close,
sometimes in some cases, but
I don't think Rachel's one of
those that targets and agency
and I just want to
I'm gonna terrorize him and
everything I think for law,
Rachel, I don't think she could.
Terrorize much, but I mean, I
think we just need to figure out
how to change morale. I mean, if
if I'm in that
My workers on this morning at
four o'clock in the morning,
right? I was leaving town and we
have a work safety meeting every
Monday morning at five.
They don't want me at that
meeting because I'm bad for
morale because
But I mean
In December when they got their
bonus checks right in their pay
increases. Oh, there was a lot
of different morale and you just
gotta remind him continue that,
so don't maybe it is extending
that timeframe. Maybe we can do
that. Such totally Rachel, You
have any ideas? Mr. Chair,
Senator Munoz may offer some
additional context to the LFC
recommendation.
Um, to maintain the current
budgetary structure. Um and that
really is, you know, the agency
has the authority and the entire
me to change reporting
structures currently, as we were
working through the budget
process this fall, we both
understood that the agency
wanted to make significant
reorganization of budgetary
dollars, but also maintain
Significant bar authority. And
so for that reason, didn't make
the recommendation thinking this
may not be ready for prime time
in terms of moving financial
resources around the
organization. The second
concern Mr Chair is it appeared
in the initial plans that we
start kind of an increase to
administrative costs, moving
money into programs support one
and potentially moving the
resources that may have been
dedicated and focused on really
Pacific federal reporting
requirements and so saw
potential risk there. And I
think the summary is and that
the LFC recommendation is not
about
Um, reorganizing reporting
structures per se to improve
efficiency, but didn't feel
ready to move forward with a
significant move of financial
resources around the
organization Without more
information.
Okay?
I think we're good. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thank you.
Yeah.
