We're gonna start with the
language. Charles or S. J P.
A new Adrian. Uh, Adrian is on
Zoom. Right, Adrian?
Yes, stuck in a snowstorm.
Alright, SJ. Alright, Thank you,
Mr Chair, So we're just gonna
talk about some proposed
technical corrections to
hospital to starting in Section
four with the Environment
Department. We moved 470,000
from the resource management
divisions, personal services and
employee benefits to the
environmental health divisions,
personal services and employee
benefits.
Also in Section four. We remove
some contingency language, um,
and replaced it with contingency
of LCS, adopting its own plan to
Sorry, Senator.
Um
On Section five. We added
$2,560,997.92
was transferred to the
appropriation contingency fund
to replace lost revenue during
Covid in 2019.
Also in Section five. There's a
technical change where lines
four and five were listed as
being in Section four, but they
should have been in Section
five. And then um, there was a
quick amount change for item
number 38, which should be
changed from 135 million to 125
million.
On the D F A Z $25 million law
enforcement item. We added
language for statewide and local
law enforcement, correctional
and detention agencies for
recruitment grants for law
enforcement, probation,
correctional and detention
officers.
Um in the $20 million
firefighter item for DFA. There
was also a language change for
statewide and local fire
departments, including volunteer
departments for recruitment
grants for state and local fire
departments for recruitment of
firefighters and emergency
medical technicians, and we also
removed the contingency language
on that.
E d D we removed HFC item number
58 and moved the $1 million from
that to Lida to bring the leader
Total and item number 60 up to
10 million
Um, we removed contingency
language on the Water Quality
Management Fund for 7 million
changed language in the
healthcare authorities. Food
banks item. Um
Which includes a $2 million
560,997 dollars and 92 cents
transferred to the Appropriation
contingency fund.
Um and MSU. We removed
contingency language on item
number 185 the livestock Mexican
Wolf compensation program.
For P e D. We changed references
from the General Fund to the
public Education Reform Fund and
increased earmarks for
internships to 5 million.
Um, for PRC. We changed item
number 65 to state costs from
plaintiff costs to cover court
awards related to the Dick where
over his PRC.
Um, moving on to Section six.
supplementals. We added language
to workforce solutions, paid
family and medical leave that
it's for expenditure and fy 24
in FY 25.
In Section seven. We struck
language appropriating from
other state funds for Workforce
solutions.
In Section eight. We added a
subsection stating that the FAA
is child distribute a sufficient
amount to each agency to provide
the appropriate increase for
those employees whose salaries
are received as a result of the
general fund appropriation, so
salary increases in Section
nine, which is grow, we removed
contingency language on the $2
million item for housing
assistance.
Um, we changed all mentions of
the government accountability.
expendable trust to government
results and opportunity.
Expendable Trust to reflect
changes in the name.
And in section 11. We added $70
million for road project items.
And then in bar language. We
added language to the healthcare
Authority departments item
stating that medical assistance
program of the Healthcare
Authority Department may request
budget increases from other
state funds from the health care
delivery and access fund from
healthcare delivery and access
Hospital assessments. Contingent
on SB 17. So we added some
Contingency language there.
And those are all of the
proposed changes. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Any
We don't have anybody in the
audience and support anybody
support anybody against
Nobody on zoom.
Questions from committee
members.
Understand born. Thank you.
Thank you, mr Chair, So I know
that our funding for the
Environment department has been
a moving target. I know that
certain commitments were made to
them to keep them whole and deal
with some of their
You know, litigation issues, um,
and funding shortfalls.
Like to see if they're here. Um,
because I'd like to see if this
language works for them or where
they're at.
And we have a deputy back there.
Mr. I'd like to call on Mr
Chairman, Senator.
The money that you put in for
the Environment Department. This
is how they asked for some of
the dead made.
Yeah, And thank you, Charles. I
know that this piece of it
works, but I still don't know
It's the whole story. So if I
can, Mr chair I'd like to just
hear from
The environment department real
quick, we'll take it out of your
capital. Come on up.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee as it stands right
now, Enemy DS budget has been
cut $1.4 million in its resource
management division.
And I understand that there have
been increases, but there were
also decreases made in the
budget in critical areas.
Which if I look at my notes, we
would need that in order to
preserve the support operations
of
The department. Without those
funds, we face a potential
layoff of 12% of our program
Support staff were talking about
attorneys. These are individuals
who are critical to our
compliance and enforcement
activities.
Um, that includes our budget
folks in HR staff.
In addition, we have requested
some program language, which has
been uniformly struck. This is
language we've traditionally
had.
Um, and what that language
permits us to do is to respond
to emerging threats and
emergencies, things like the
hazardous Waste Emergency fund
that we can draw on as we have
In the most recent instance, for
example, with the Calf Canyon
fire, So, um with that I'm open
for any other questions you may
have.
Thank you.
So, Miss Mr Chair. I'm not sure
what happened because
At the beginning of the session
we talked about
Making them whole and it I'm not
sure why things got moved around
such that they're still in a
still in a whole, basically,
sounds like they have the full
pay.
That was paid for by federal
programming.
But now the state is picking up
to the tune of roughly $6
million.
The secretary got himself in a
pickle.
When he didn't correct pay
overtime.
Had the had the availability to
do that.
The CW. A filed a
Complaint against him.
We met with them several times.
Figure out what the exact dollar
amount
Met with the exact the exact We
took the exact dollar amount.
The F A reviewed all the
language and D F a agreed to the
language.
Of if the environment apartment
doesn't like 126% increase over
the last four years.
How many house will take their
money?
No.
Um, anyway, Mr Chair, I think
just looking at pure increases.
You can't look at it just that
way because they've had more
responsibilities. We've had a
mandate increases from the
states so
Once you get in the minutia, so
I'm I'm just disappointed to
hear that there's still
deficiencies here that I would
love to work out because
personally, I want a robust
Environment Department that
protects our air water land, and
I don't think there's any
malicious intent here. I think
they're just trying to get fully
funded to do their job.
So I
You know?
I'll just leave it at that, Um
I'll leave it at that. For now,
Mr Chair at the end of every
session, there's malicious. We
worked with them harder than we
ever worked with them before.
Picked up federal employee costs
that are not the responsibility
of the state.
Gave him $6 million gave another
seven made adjustments He has
unexpended balances that he's
asking for Riaz.
I asked him if he wanted his
funds field. He did not say he
wanted him filled back up.
We would have
And so we've made every
opportunity. So any other
questions?
Company.
Thank you Chair. So, um
Online. I'm sorry Section 11
line 21 of this document.
So in the transportation
section. We had another I had a
line that I put in here and I
don't see it now. So
What was the process for
removing
Things that were already here
When we met the other day,
Senator body I believe this is
additional language, Other
languages still there, and
nothing has been changed from
what was we saw the other day.
This is additional language that
was right over from the house.
Okay? I just want to make sure
thank you.
Any other questions.
Senator share
Um, thank you, mr Chair. I also
believe the environment
department got another $750,000
from outside the state. But I'm
not sure about that. But I do
have a question on line 17.
Word, says HFC sub item 25
strike other state funds
language.
I thought we were trying to
That we're going the other
direction.
Mr Chairman, Senator. There was
no language in the LFC
recommendation for workforce
solution out of other state
funds because there's no
appropriation from other state
funds.
And when
We put together the budget for
the house. Uh,
Somehow that language popped in
there and it's a technical fix.
It needs to come out because
there's no money that's
appropriated from other state
frames.
And then, uh, online 21 with all
of the roads.
I know the roads have been an
issue. Do you think we got all
the roads right now? I'm sure
you do. But do we have anybody
to check to make sure we get all
the roads, right?
That's Mr Chairman. We have been
working with Senate Finance
Committee staff to make sure we
got all of the bill. And then
finally, Mr Chair on line six.
the $2,560,000 a night.
$997.92. That's probably the
only real number in a budget
I've ever seen. So thank you, Mr
Chairman, that is D FAA alerted
us that there was that amount of
money from the AARP, a state
relief.
That had not been transferred to
the appropriation Contingency
fund for the Supreme Court
ruling, but they hadn't spent
it.
So this is to get it into the
Treasury appropriately, and then
it's being applied for the food
banks.
Senator Burke.
Thank you, Mr Chairman in the
trails. I think you may have
just said this is I know the
food banks are rude.
Short, um in line 12. Does that
make them whole or get them
closer, Mr. Chairman, you all
adapted
An amendment to provide 5
million for the food banks, and
this is helping fund that, okay?
All right. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Okay. Any other questions?
Center.
Bradley. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Charles. Can you just clarify
lines? 16 Workforce Solutions.
Add language to the paid family
and medical leave fund to the
state is the only language
you're adding what follows for
expenditures expenditures in FY,
24 and 25.
Yes, that's just clarifying that
the appropriation is available
for the fiscal years. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you. Can I have
a motion to adopt the language?
Second motion by
Center share second base in the
would you call her all?
Senator Bert
Senator Bert votes? Yes,
Senator. Compost? Yes votes.
Yes, Senator Bradley, Senator
Bradley votes? Yes, Senator
Gonzales. Gonzales votes? Yes,
Senator Hemphill, Senator
Hemphill votes? Yes, Senator
Padilla? Yes votes? Yes, Senator
Scherer, Senator share votes.
Yes, Senator Stein born Senator
Stein born votes. Yes, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods votes Yes, Vice
Chair. Rodriguez. Yes. Rodriguez
votes. Yes, Chairman News Yes.
Their language has been adopted
11 to 0.
11 to 0. We'll get this in House
Bill 2 may come back tomorrow
and your house built to
Depending on how quickly you can
get this into the section of the
bill, and the pages built two
out of here.
We're gonna charge for seating
next time when House Bill two
comes in senator shares getting
charged 92 cents per seat.
Please bring the correct change.
Senator Rodriguez 92 cents and
92 cents.
Yeah.
No, that's what he just said.
Good morning, Mr Chairman. Let
me just tell people we're not
going to hear to 46 to 75 and
308.
They're still in the corners.
Okay, so
Go ahead, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have
Marquita here from the N m f A,
um, sitting with me and
continuing to work hard as
always. And Mr Chairman, you're
probably familiar with the
public project Revolving fund's
annual bill that we bring every
year just to allow entities to
apply this and it will be coming
in. In fact, I think it's here
in the Senate already which I
will bring to this committee
soon.
The reason I mentioned that Mr
Chairman is in members of the
committee has because this bill
ties in with that what it does.
Mr Chairman is it only, um,
The reason I mentioned that Mr
Chairman is in members of the
committee has because this bill
ties in with that what it does
Mr Chairman is it only allows
the ineligible entity of
housing, for example, to be able
to apply for low income loans,
and it allows non profit housing
developers as qualified
entities. It's just not clear in
the law right now. Nonprofits
already qualify, but there was
nothing in the law.
That clarified that it was
housing developers so that they
can be able to apply for this
low interest loans.
That's what it does, Mr
Chairman. But in addition to
that particular topic it it
allows with the with respect to
the local government planning
fund. It also has to change that
to allow for affordable housing
plans because that's not in the
law. Clearly what it is. Mr
Chairman Committee Committee
members is that, um, in order to
access public funds, these
entities have to have
Um, have have to have funding
for their planning, like
municipalities and counties, and
otherwise they're leaving money
on the table. Federal funds
particularly and, um,
Additionally, we had to broaden
the language of this local
government Planning fund to be
able to include and again this
is just to apply doesn't approve
anything yet announced the flood
for flooding and Dacian maps and
to obtain archaeological
clearances, which the soil and
water conservation districts
need in order to access. Also
public funds and to maintain
compliance.
With the office of the state
engineer when he comes to dams
and so on, So we're streamlining
it to kind of close any gaps in
Indian halbish ins there? That's
all it does, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Anybody in the
audience and support
Got one.
Any bands and Nope.
You want to speak, Debbie?
I can almost get what? What
you're gonna say we
Has to be done by engineering
firm which is also something we
did not have any funding for so
by adding this gives us the
opportunity.
To work with the finance
authority. And just one more
thing I want to say my
understanding is there's just $2
million in this fund, and at one
point there was more like 7
million, and so as we're
broadening it, possibly adding
some additional data need for
local governments. That's it,
Senator Woods.
Real quickly, Mr Chair and and
Madam vice chair.
The tax credit were issuing
here. It's uh, offset to
State income tax.
Jared.
Madam. Last year, Mr Chairman,
I'll defer to Marquita though
they're they're actually just
applications for loans, and it
allows them to apply. It doesn't
mean they're going to get the
loan. It doesn't mean that we
have applications on hand that
we're denying. It just merely
says you're part of the list of
those entities that can apply.
Now That's what it is, but I'll
defer to market a For more
information if you need it.
Thank you. Mr Chairman, Senator
Rodriguez got it right. There's
this is a loan program. Um so
Phone at the No. No tax credit
tax credits. It's a loan
program, and then there's a
grant program that, um
Misuse was just talking about no
tax credits. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair any other
questions from committee
members? Senator Brantley. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Just a quick
question. What's a nonprofit
housing developer, which has
been added to this? Sure. Thank
you. Mr Chairman and Senator.
Um, it would be someone like
home wise, the community housing
trust. Um there's nonprofits
that do a lot of housing.
Um, but but do not, but are not
currently in the list of those
clearly in the list for those
that can apply, so we're trying
to make sure that they're not
excluded from being able to
apply. Um, that's all in other
words, it doesn't make any sense
that we would be leaving them
out when In fact, there's a long
list of entities that would
already qualified. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you.
Alright, uh, can have emotion.
Motion by Senator Gonzalez that
can buy center Woods.
He called her well.
Senator Bert
Yes, Senator. Bert votes. Yes,
Senator Campos.
Senator Bradley Senator Bradley
Boats. Yes, Senator Gonzales,
Senator Gonzalez votes Yes,
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill votes. Yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes. Yes, Senator Scherer.
Mostly, yes.
Yes. Share votes. Yes, Senator
Stein born Senator Stein born
votes. Yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods boats? Yes.
Nice chair. Rodriguez. Yes, Vice
chair. Rodriguez votes. Yes.
Ceremony knows, Yes. Sports.
Yes. You have a do past 10 to 0.
Thank you.
Send the bill to 6 to 17. Thank
you, Mr Chairman Kelly here is
with me. Kelli Carcel from lfc
and this very important bill.
I'm happy we're hearing it
because it really needs to get
through the house and then to
the floor and let me explain
why before we move on, Let me
just say I have an amendment
that had to clarify a technical
correction. Uh, that
Um, I moved the amendment for
discussion. Can we have a
second? I'll explain, Senator
Once you explain the bill for me
to explain to be okay, usually
fine. No worries that that's
good to what we do we're doing.
Mr Chairman is merely because
we're funding set the all the
projects that we normally found
through severance tax dollars.
We are now funding them with
General Fund because of the
influx of money that we had
coming in this year. And so by
doing that this is really
paying.
In off because we're able to put
away a large amount of money.
$82 million per year into the
severance tax permanent fund.
That is money that we saved by
merely not borrowing money
through depth service.
And, um, if we do that every
year than by the end, of course
of the 10 year period we're
looking at it would be close to
a billion dollars and even more
because it's going to be
invested and then spitting out
funding back into the General
fund. Recurring dollars. So, um,
it is truly a good thing to do,
especially because we are we are
not having to pay out. But
instead we're bringing money in
And so that's really what it
does. We do have an amendment
motion to adopt the amendment
for discussion purposes. Thank
you, Senator Steinberg, second
by Senator Brandt Brantley.
Okay. And we are discussion. You
wanna explain this Amendment
Senator Rodriguez? Thank you, Mr
Chairman, and it's It's really a
brief short amendment. There was
a technical error when the bill
was drafted that referred to
being for 11 years because of
the dates that were put in. It
was, for example, it said 20.
To 2034, and it should have been
2033 for the 10 years. So that
is a technical correction that
lfc from the Board of Finance
also brought us to be able to
make and then the other
correction is merely, um, fit
correct into around enough air
not run off its air, but more to
Just streamline it to $82
million from 82.5 because the
state Board of Finance
apparently was having problems
in reconciling the full 82.5 of
savings that we're going to have
by not bonding. So that's all it
does. Mr. Chairman 500,000 go.
Mr Chairman. Let me defer to
Kelly on that because this was
recommended by the state Board
of Finance, and apparently they
couldn't fit it into the system
to balance out so it turned out
to be around him situation, But
I'll defer to Kelly, Um, Mr
Chair, so the Board of Finance
gave us the original number from
their kind of capacity model.
And, um, they later just had
trouble replicating it and we're
coming up with a slightly
different numbers, so we just
opted to round it down.
For safety. Where did the
difference? Go?
He rounded down and you had a
higher number. Where did the
difference? Cool?
Um, I don't think it went
anywhere. I mean, in this in the
future. If there were a little
bit extra left, it would just
remain as part of the capacity
must be in his piggy bank.
Border finances. Piggy bank
questions on Senator Rodriguez
questions on the amendment.
None can have a motion to adopt
the amendment.
Motion by center. Gonzalez
second by Senator share We can
call the roll.
We don't need to call the roll
any objection to adopting seen
None. Center accomplishes Not
here.
Amending bill, Let's go the
audience anybody in we didn't we
do that already? Anybody in
support
Anybody on zoom anybody in
opposition? Good.
Back on the bill questions on
the bill.
None can have emotion.
Second pass by Senator
Hemphill's second base Senator
as amended as amended, Uh 2nd
may center stain born, we call
her off.
Senator Bert Yes, Senator. Bert
votes? Yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Brantley. Senator
Bradley votes. Yes, Senator
Gonzales.
Senator Gonzalez votes. Yes,
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill votes Yes.
Center by the yes votes. Yes,
Senator Scherer, Senator share
votes? Yes, Senator Stein born
Senator Stein born votes. Yes,
Senator Woods.
So I guess Senator Woods votes
Yes, Vice chair Rodriguez.
Cheer. Rodriguez votes. Yes.
Ceremonious.
Yes. Votes. Yes. You have a do
pass.
Do not pass.
Do pass on the amendment 10 to
0. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you. I think we'll
adjourned. We'll see. Tomorrow
brings and
Hopefully, we'll get hospital to
completely done and gone.
