Justice.
He's sitting right back there.
He's ignoring us. He's sitting
right back there.
He's the mayor of the Justice
League.
I don't know. I have to ask him.
We're gonna go over some stuff.
Ricky Mortgage. A copy of this.
We started looking pretty hard
here lately, and we're trying to
figure out what bonding scenario
works.
Uh, on your page.
Slide. Seven. I think that's
seven.
That's seven or two of your
presentation.
You're saying that that your
average cost escalation is 20% a
year we can kind of pull up the
national construction cost
average, right?
Pre pandemic 4.4 20 Year 5.8.
And current rate 5.2.
So we're gonna want to break
down of those to see if it's
actually 20%.
Because if I look at your
presentation, and I take it
Uh, four year caustic relation.
That's 120% in cost regulation,
right?
So if we had a billion dollars
worth of project I mean and now
be $2.2 billion worth of
projects, and it'll be cheaper
for us to bond than to wait on
the 20% cost escalation so sure
wanted on a breakdown,
especially for bonding.
For sure. Mr Chair and just to
clarify We're using the 20% not
compounding. But in that year
this is what the cost of
escalation was to construction.
So it's not a 20% year over
year. That's why we only did it
for that one year. 20%
escalation on construction costs
in 2024 was about 300,000 and
provide you with the breakdown
by project of the bid estimate.
Of the bid and the and the
engineer estimates, But you're
seeing it on the annual this
operating budget.
Section nine funding the
232,000. And then you had a 300.
And
306 157,000 cost secular nation,
So the 232 is actually a
negative number. We didn't fund
you enough to complete those
projects.
Uh, no. Mr Chair what we're
seeing here. 2024 Correct. So
what? We're budget 1.2 billion
Section nine. Funding 232 costs
actual ation 303 100,000.
So in Section nine.
We didn't even fund the cost
Escalations.
Uh, Mr Chair? Um, that that is
accurate. I mean, when you look
at the money last year data and
the stuff to back up, I'll get
you that keeping up with
inflation and we're spending
232 million last year, and we're
not even covering the cost
escalation.
And we're actually running in
the negative.
For not keeping up with
inflation running the negative.
And so the only way to get above
Inflation or Cossack relations.
Right?
Institute a bond package and get
ahead of it and then do design
build projects with contractor
price locks in
Right, Mr Chair. I mean, that is
when we look at it, like the
next design build project would
be Gibson Interchange and we
would be very remiss to start
that design to accelerate that
project, while Montgomery and
Comanches under construction. I
don't think, um we could really
handle those kinds of delays on
25 in the in the Metro area.
Thank you Have a vacancy of what
was your vacancy this last year?
Mr Chair Vacancy for employees
about 17% many employees is that
Um 17% about 500 vacancies.
You get to work.
I mean, if
Common sense tells me if you
want to.
Spend
20% more every year, right on
projects.
We've got to get the work done
and get it contracted mean I
don't know if you've seen the
news story, but they did a news
story and best almost every made
a Mexican from every county,
right and what they say their
number one goal is they wanted
better roads, right?
Mr Chair. It's 425 vacancies and
then one last point on the
escalation is
On the slide that you're
referencing we're making. We're
making a real comparison between
pre pandemic and post pandemic
and so in comparing escalation
costs going back to FY 22 today
is showing what the pandemic has
done to the cost of doing
business. We're seeing a level
setting and so we don't expect
20% increases next year. I
think, even in our bid and our
bids and engineer estimates were
leveling off.
And so we think that there will
be year over year national
escalation rates, which we we
anticipate What in the 3 to 5%
David, year over year, So these
numbers were kind of a little
bit of a scare tactic to us? No,
Mr Chair. What we're showing you
is when you see our budget
increase from FY 20 to 24.
There's a sense that while
you've been getting more money,
you should have been able to do
more work. What we're showing
you is
The increases we've received
from 20 to 24 or simply like you
said, barely covering what it's
costing to do business. So if in
2020 we could do 800 miles of
maintenance. This year, we can
do 20% less. And so if we get
20% funding more than we're
going to be doing the same, so
it's not a scare tactic will
send you the data to show where
the increases have come and how
they're still going up for some
construction projects like
Bridge.
I mean, the national average,
which I have right here, right?
Yeah. Is that 5.2%? But you said
your average cost escalation is
20% for 2024.
That's your comments. This is
the national average. Now. You
just said it's coming down, but
in your presentation you said
you're at 20%. Mr. Chair, the
the your ear cost that's coming
down. I think everyone in the
entire world is level setting.
when you look at the difference
in goods and services between
pre pandemic and now you're
gonna see a 20% increase in a
lot of things.
That's not to say that next
year it's going to be 20% more
than 20% more. The world
couldn't keep up with what we're
seeing is that when we compare
pre pandemic construction costs
to construction costs now
We're seeing from the bids to
the engineer estimates on a
conservative estimate of 20%
when you make that pre pandemic
post pandemic comparison, is it
going to jump 20% again next
year? We don't anticipate that.
But what we're saying is that
it's funding has increased over
the last four years. There's a
sense you should be able to do
more. Now you have more funding
and what this light is Showing
is
That increase in funding over
the last four years has been
going to pay for the increased
cost of doing business. That's
what I'm saying, but it's a 20%
increase matter how you how you
But cut it up. Put it in the
oven or mix it in the blender,
right?
If you had this dollar amount,
and the Legislature thought they
did a good job putting 232
million in
It didn't even cover the cost
escalation, right?
Don't think legislators
understand that right?
Hmm.
So I mean, the only way to get
ahead of this right is a mass
influx of money.
Right? And and if your cost
escalation is gonna level off,
you're still 20% below.
Right. So, Mr Chair if I may, I
think the reality that we're
looking at those is the projects
that we have in the pipeline now
or planned out over the next
several years, and so we get an
influx of a billion dollars on
top of the program that we have
now we wouldn't be able to.
We're not gonna be able to
accelerate any projects, um, and
bringing new projects online
into the stiff is going to
require that initial
Oh, worse groundwork that we
need to get a project developed,
So it's not gonna We're not
gonna have the capacity to get
it out the ones around around
the capital senior budget was
short.
I mean, that's that's what that
was. The word is what you guys
were saying. Is there shortness
in the Legislature there
shortness in the Legislature?
Now we're saying Oh, we got a
plan to give you money. Now
we're seeing
Well, we have 540 vacancies. We
can't complete it.
Be careful what you ask for.
Mister, Don't you get us those
numbers and come back onto the
next one? Okay if we met with
our bond advisor, if you want
the capacity numbers we can get
into. Yep.
Uh, financial beyond at DFL.
Beyond it. We're looking at the
numbers and they were in the
meeting with us. Our analysts on
both sides Lfc and D F a
To realize 1 billion
construction funding, and BOT
would need legislative authority
to bond issue bonds up to nine.
No, that
Uh, there's a bond bill being
drafted right now. Alright, you
I think you got it.
Secretary of state
Peanut heels bypass. I just had
to flow out of my mouth. No good
reason.
We have made a call Senator
Sheer. I don't think he really
believe me. But we didn't call
make a call for Ken Griffin.
And, uh,
And Edgar to do a zoom with us.
It will be interesting.
You too.
Madam secretary as quick as you
can.
Mr Chair, Mr. Chair. I'm Emily
With the lfc with me is Maggie
to lose all over secretary of
State as well as Simon Miller
from D F A, uh, the main
difference Just going to keep it
quick and high level. The lfc
recommendation is 472.8000 less
than the executive. The LFC
recommendation includes an
additional four FTE positions,
two of which are expansions for
Um, different positions. The
executive recommendation
supports two additional FTE and
does not support any expansions.
The executive recommendation
increases personal services and
employee benefits by 9% and the
LFC increases this category by
3%. Other than that, I will turn
over to Simon for any additional
second. Simon did. What in the
House do.
The house went with the LFC
recommendation, Okay?
So you still want to talk to us?
Simon,
You're good with the house.
Rec. I would leave quickly if
you're not good with the house.
wreck, and we'll be back here
with the bill that you and vice
chair Rodriguez or co sponsoring
for our election fund, and
that's all I have to say. We're
good. Nice weekend. Thank you,
Mr Chair, State auditor.
We got it.
I thought I did that earlier. We
don't have money. We don't have
money there. Shortness can't
handle it. If Mr Chair one quick
thing I have a public policy
classroom. Um, I asked to watch
this. They're not gonna get much
of the public policy class on.
this is no. No, but but I told
them I tell them a word And the
word is thank you so they can
get credit for for tuning in.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I will sign
the letter for they can get
credit.
From the chair of finance. This
tells you how much efficiency is
the secretary of state has done
in the house and manage your
budget over there. So, uh,
To those students online have a
good weekend. Public policy part
is if you get what you want to
shut up, Yeah.
Should I even sit down? Mr
Chair? If you're if you're happy
with your budget, you should not
sit down.
What's that consumers?
And you're not happy with your
budget and stay seated, but
outcome to be determined those
public policy students Canal.
Uh, listen to this presentation.
Oh, good afternoon, Chairman And
I would like to let you guys
know that I'm actually in the
graduate program. Adam, um, for
public policies. I feel like I'm
getting a pretty good on working
experience and school
experience. Yes. So
So hopefully these students
could be able to kind of learn
from this presentation.
Hopefully, thank you, Chairman.
I'm gonna kind of go over a
little louder.
Yes, sir. Um, so today I'm going
to go over the high levels for
the state auditor's office,
which is agency code. 308 Tap
three
to kind of start off the policy
recommendation was adopted in
HFC. Um, The LSC recommendation
for General fund revenue is a 3%
increase.
$121,000 and the L. C
recommendation for General fund
revenue was 488.
$1000 below the executive
recommendation for personnel.
The LSE recommendation was
$502,000 below the executive
recommendation and my DFA
counterpart will be able to let
you know why that's the case.
Um, the LSE recommendation for
contractual services is actually
$45,000 more than the executive
recommendation, and this is
because of the local public
bodies initiative, um, to hire
independent, independent public
accountants and also hire
contract accountants during
audit peak season.
And then, lastly, for the other
costs. The L C recommendation
was $31,000 less, and this was
just a find, like educational
materials for CPA and CFP
candidates and also for new
audit staff laptops. Another
thing I would like to add on the
high level she is that the sense
the executive order 2013 06.
Um I always say is freed up $2.3
million of capital funding for
local public bodies, and this
was actually appropriation was
given last year for $500,000 and
the LSC is recommended a million
dollars for this year or the
same exact initiative and
without turn it over, Mr
Chairman to the state auditor
and idea to counterparts Samuel
er.
Thanks, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Uh,
Nope. Lfc covered. The
difference is perfectly so I
will pass it over to our state
auditor. Thank you.
Mhm. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. Should
I proceed with a brief
presentation or you have the
presentation.
Well, let me just say that you
all know what we do and our
request, particularly in the two
hundred's was not addressed. I
think I've mentioned in the past
that
Um
We're under resourced in terms
of our capacity to review audit
reports because of a legislative
mandate back in 2021.
Which is we're mandated to
review conservatorship annual
audit reports.
And so we really want to come
back and make it clear that we
need to make whole our financial
audit division. That is our
number one priority. I know you
all want timely reviews and the
public release of these audit
reports.
And, um
Right now. Our current condition
is not sustainable and so
Ah, that's why we definitely
need more operational budget,
particularly in the hundreds.
So Isaiah on page five funded
and the funded vacancy in
dollars for 179, right?
Is that the difference in the
vacancies at the orders
requesting
Yes, I am. And my pages are
actually I'm not numbered in the
same. Can you please refer me to
Thank you See, Rick,
I mean, Mr Chair members of the
committee. Uh, yes, the
auditor's office. This year's
Funded. They were about 35 ft.
Funded right now, 30 of those
are filled.
The executive recommendation
Funds 39 FTE, So nine above
what's filled right now.
Yeah. Many did you say you
needed
Well, we have 41 FTE s right now
We have six.
Six vacancies.
The issue is really, um Wait,
Wait, wait, wait.
You just What'd you just say?
Simon? As of January 1st there
were 30 positions of the 40 to
build. So perhaps some have been
filled in the last 20 days.
I don't know There's math and
you started talking and
something didn't add up real
quick. So, yeah, just a snapshot
of our offices. We have 11
vacancies and 41 FTE s that
doesn't include two internships
and we're trying to expand the
internship program to four
positions.
And that's also included in our
two hundred's requests.
Mr Chair. Can I at least
recognize my team That's here.
No, we're trying to get some
numbers. I mean, it's Friday.
Alright. You know, we don't know
what the house has completed
yet. We think we know but we
haven't
We haven't seen it right?
And and if your request is F t E
s
You have
30 positions that are filled
currently, right?
42 available.
You're asking for an expansion
of six.
We're not requesting an
expansion at this time. We do
want to come back. I think what
we're doing right now is a
stopgap measure to help through
staff augmentation is to hire
contract auditor to help my
financial audit division during
the peak.
Ah, workload, which is right now
we we get hundreds and hundreds
of audit reports that need to be
reviewed beginning in September,
and we received them all the way
through December. So
That is the workhorse of our
office. However, again the
legislative mandate to work with
the courts to review
conservatorship reports has
gradually bled resources from
our financial audit division.
K. Introduce your staff real
quick. All right, real quick,
Uh, Deputy Ricky Bejarano. I
have David Craig here behind me.
He is our director of
Intergovernmental Affairs and
Outreach Our budget and finance
director Laura Montoya behind
me, and we have our compliance
and quality control Director
Policeman Ardo, Raise your hand.
There she is.
So I guess you guys met him and
I'm sure you want to get right
down to it. But
Um, the first part of our slides
were defining the state of the
accounting industry, and it's
impacting the entire country and
New Mexico. We're seeing a
contraction in the accounting
industry. Uh, we've had about a
20% reduction in CPS in the
stadium in Mexico over over the
last five years.
We've seen almost a 40%
reduction in approved
independent public accounting
firms over the last 10 years.
Now, these are firms that we we
vet and approve every year and
once we approve them that gives
them the green light to go
contract with public entities.
On top of that. What's
compounding this problem is the
budget the audit budgets for
public entities that come before
all of you, Uh, their their
audit budgets are being
constrained so obviously the
profitability of public audits
is is going way way down and
it's it's it's causing this
contraction in the industry and
so I just can't say enough and I
know every single agency that
comes before you says that
they're unique and special, but
we are unique and special.
And and I know that there's
programs out there to help
certain occupations and
industries like nurses and
But this is becoming a crisis.
and I think all of you should
really sit up and take notice
because the trend is continuing,
and we're seeing fewer and fewer
auditing firms carrying more and
more clients. Something's gotta
give
And so you know, we've we've
talked about you know our
request. We came to you which,
what I thought was
A logical request and that we're
not asking for an increase in
FTE s, but we're letting you
know that we're kind of busting
at the seams. We're dealing in a
We're in a triage condition
trying to review all these auto
reports. Many of you know, we
oversee the audit of over 1000
entities. We're the only state
in the country. I think that
Does not or that reviews or
audits every single entity every
year.
Um And so we either have to
change your audit act and
recruit reduce the frequency of
audits here in the state.
Or
Uh, we work with you all to see
how we can make whole our
financial audit division since
the statutory mandate to start
working with the courts and
doing something that the office
has never done, and that's
working with private financial
information through the review
of conservatorships.
Uh so we need more assistance. I
think we've already gone through
our request and the differences
between D F A and, uh and the
lfc
On page five of our
Uh, our presentation. I just
want to highlight a few of our
accomplishments just to let you
know that we are making progress
just despite my dire assessment
of the accounting industry in
New Mexico.
Um, as Isaiah mentioned, we
implemented the multiyear, full
financial program to assist
assist small local public
bodies. We freed up almost 2.4
million and withheld capital
outlay. We have the potential to
free up another 2.2 million.
Um, we have called for an audit
of the share system This is
having has never been done
before D F A is informed us that
they are on the brink of
Contracting with an auditing
firm to audit share and
typically, what's done with
these financial systems is
auditors. Look at what goes in
and what comes out.
But no one really knows what's
going on similar to a black box.
And so this audit of share, uh,
is going to shed a lot of light
on what we talked about in terms
of who has, uh, override
authority to override the system
and perhaps deficit spend. We
feel like
This will help respond to the
large amount of deficiency
appropriations.
Uh, we also issued a risk
advisory. Apparently, my office
has a very prominent role in
overseeing the administration of
opioid settlement funds.
basically, if a recipient of
local government misappropriate
their opioid settlement funds
inconsistent with the
settlement, then we basically
step in and stop the flow of the
funds and ensure that they
replace
The amount of funds that they
misappropriated before they can
begin accessing it.
And the last thing Mr Chair I
want to focus on is our future
work goals. I'm only going to
highlight a few bullets and this
is on page six of our
presentation. You asked us to
bring legislation to see what we
can do to reduce appropriations.
I want to call the committee's
attention. Just statute. 9-6
Dash 5.2.
This is the primary enforcement
statute that falls on D F a
To basically get public entities
to comply and keep current on
their audits. Um, this is an
old antiquated statute that we
discussed at length when we
talked about internal controls
of agencies, So we feel that, um
and we're gonna work with D F A
and the state treasurer to see
if we can bring to you, which is
what you requested.
Some statutory recommendations
on how to address the
proliferation of deficiency
appropriations. The other thing
we're going to do is we're gonna
We're gonna look at requiring
audits of other financial
systems.
Ah, in the state. We are going
to be back and requested our
financial audit division be made
whole since that statutory
mandate that I spoke of
Um, Hopefully we'll come to you
in the interim to present um,
the results of our study. We're
gonna study the pros and cons of
a singular item, which is a
consolidated audit of all state
agencies. As I've said, before,
we feel that
The state would realize much
better bonding terms and lower
interest rates with the
Consolidated State Agency audit,
which is called a singular
audit.
And then the last thing Mr Chair
members of the committee. Um and
it's not on the slide, but
We do have an audit fund and it
has a lot of statutory controls
in terms of how we can use it.
Decided fund is a repository for
any operating budget that we
revert and also any audit fee
revenues that we generate goes
into the audit fund. However,
there are great restrictions in
using that audit fund. You will
use it to partially defray the
expense of our operating budget,
And we need more discretion to
use that audit fund to address
our needs. One example is our
servers were at capacity, and it
was an emergency.
And had we had greater
discretion and accessing the
audit fund. We could have
addressed that in house.
Instead, we had to go to the
Board of Finance.
And get that fun so or get that
money. So members, Mr Chair
members of the committee. I just
wanted to least highlights some
accomplishments and some of the
things we intend to do in the in
the coming legislative year.
Thank you, Miss chairs, Mr.
Auditor. Welcome to you and your
team questions so as far as the
differences from the house to
the Senate
The main thing I heard you say
was the extra money for
contracted accounting services.
No, actually for you know, for a
personnel. I think what we're
trying to do. Um Mr Chair
Senator Stein born is we did an
analysis, uh, in terms of our
comparison of wages here in the
state with all my counterparts
in the region, and we are
lagging behind greatly and
again, keep in mind. This is
just a public two public
benchmark.
We feel the true test in terms
of where we are with respect to
the accounting industry is to
include private sector
benchmarks, and I know there's a
company in class study going on,
but I'm not sure that it's going
to consider the unique nature of
accounting.
And address those needs to
recruit and retain the best and
brightest, so really are really
are priority is
To institute better wage parity
and appropriately place our
staff. That's what are our need
is
Right now.
Okay?
Aside from that, though, are you
also trying to get more money
for for contracting?
Yes, we And as I mentioned
before, I thought the logical
thing for us to do is to
describe the situation to you
and let you know you know what
we intend to do as a stopgap
measure, and that is to hire a
contract auditor to help us
during peak workload, But it
again it's triage. It's just,
you know, stopping the bleeding,
understand? And while we do the
wage study, I don't know what's
possible. As far as increasing
salaries differ the chair on
that others, but
As far as contract services to
triage and make sure you have
the capacity to do what you need
to do that seems like mark you
do in the interim, Um, how much
would that be?
I believe we. We estimated
84,000 for a contract. Auditor.
Um
But again, that's just a just a
temporary thing. And just to
paint a picture, Mr. Chair,
Senator Stein born RCR Financial
Audit Division. We have other
divisions that conservatorship
review team. We have to go to
them and get their help to
review these audit reports. We
have a special investigations
division. We have to enlist
their help, so it's basically an
all hands.
Situation, but we're having to
to use folks from from other
divisions just to meet that peak
workload when we get those audit
reports
Okay. Are you asking for
additional left? He's this
chair auditor just asking people
to get paid more just to get
just to get paid more and we if
you all have any influence into
this ongoing statewide study on
Compton class, uh, we want to
make sure that there's a
distinct uh, private sector
benchmarking.
That considers the nature of of
what's going on in the
accounting industry and what
we're experiencing in terms of
having difficulties, you know,
recruiting and retaining
qualified folks. So thank you.
So, Mr Chairman in terms of
increasing capacity in dealing
with that
The only solution is giving you
more money to contract
traditional services or
increasing FTS, which are not
asking for so.
That's really the pressing
issue. I know that the salary is
a pressing issue, too. I hope we
look at increasing, you know,
giving you some funding to be
able to
Bring on some help. Sure,
because you know, we're
requiring these audits. You're
having to do it, and it's
important for the functioning of
government. The functioning of
honest government so
I think, uh,
It's worth it. So hopefully
we'll do that Mr. Chair. Thank
Senator if I may just first.
Yeah. Office didn't request
additional FTE.
But they did request additional
personnel funding because in the
current year
They have 42 ft as you can see
here, but only 35 of those are
funded.
So the additional increase in
the two hundred's category funds
a few more of those FT or
provides funding for appropriate
placement, or, you know,
whatever retention actions need
to be taken.
Um so just because you don't see
an increase in Ft, doesn't mean
that they're not. Yeah, being
requesting funding for more FTS.
Did the house do any of that?
Or Mr Chair, Senator. The House
took the LFC recommendation. I
so that is the budget in front
of you here. Um, however, the
house did take the LFC
recommendation for the special
appropriation to help small
local public bodies, achieve
financial compliance, and that
that was higher than the
executive recommendation.
Um, but but the personnel
funding you see here, That's
what the House adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Okay?
Thank you.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you to all of you for
being here today.
Um, So are you. Are you still
using no interns.
Yes, we are. Um, as I mentioned
we we had two interns, and now
we're working with the flagship
universities to expand our
interim program to four.
The only problem is we're not
sure we can sustain it beyond
this fiscal year.
Um
But there's a lot of interest.
In fact, I think the last time
we were here to discuss internal
controls, we had one of our
interns from Highlands who is
doing very well and progressing
very well in the office and
working on high level work.
In our office. So I I know. Um
Senator Gonzalez your care a lot
about this program, and I think,
you know, per your request and
interest.
We thought to do our part to
fill that pipeline of potential
future CPS that we as an office
should at least be a model and
increase that interim program.
So, Mr Chairman, no.
The overall. Uh
Shortage. Is it statewide? Or is
it that
They preferred to work Private
versus being in state
government.
What's a combination? I think
we're the brain drain continues
even as it applies to aspiring
CPS. I think they'd rather go to
Denver, Phoenix Dallas instead
of staying here in the state.
Um, the standards regarding
public accounting have
proliferating are proliferating.
And so it's kind of a confluence
of all these things as I
mentioned before to the budgets
that public entities, um are
allowed to have for audits is
unnecessarily constrained.
And so you can see all these
things. It's like this perfect
storm. Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
that is really creating this
crisis in the state, and the
trends are are not changing.
It's this is a 10 year trend in
the contraction of the industry
and private accounting is
Likely more profitable because
the more standards you have the
lower the profit margin.
Yeah.
Mr Chairman of the last
question. Let's part is so so
with our university so
Are they stepping up into
Say meeting the curriculum,
adding glasses or
Um
Basically promoting, you know,
the
Endorsement for more
To be into the program.
Yeah. The Mr Chairman, Senator,
the
In our meetings with the higher
ed representatives, particularly
the accounting department heads,
They're concerned about the same
thing, but they're they're
becoming more proactive in their
seeking endowments from higher
education. I wrote a letter of
support, um, at the request of
Highlands University they were
pursuing about 900,000, or
million dollar.
Endowment to improve and and
bolster their accounting
department. So there are funding
opportunities through higher ed.
But if you ask me how to
characterize it, it's kind of a
slog, but we're doing all we can
to work with higher ed to to
grow their accounting
departments and stimulate
interest on the part of
undergraduate students to enter
and stay.
You know, in the field of
accounting.
Very well. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
Um, thank you, Mr
Chair.
So you talked about
The audit act and things like
that. And how were you were
going to bring some language to
us? We're coming to the end of
when we can get a bill drafted.
Do we have a bill that we can
get drafted?
Do we have any? Have you asked
anybody to carry the bill? Well,
no Senator Sunday's last day we
can do it. Mr. Mr Chair,
Senator, we
You know, No one likes, um,
shock treatment when it comes to
public policy and
Uh, I mentioned revisiting the
audit act. Um
As as a last resort if we can
get the resources to continue to
meet our constitutional and
statutory responsibilities to
oversee financial compliance of
every single public entity, then
something has to give. We either
reduce the frequency in which we
audit public entities or we get
the resources that we need. No,
I I get that.
But if we're going to change it,
we have like 24 hours to get
drafted.
So and I'm
I think you audit mean every
little baby sake here. That's
you Know, got $2500 written on
the back of an envelope.
I don't know if they need to be
audited or not. Probably not.
Um, at least not every year.
Um
But if we're going to change it
We got to move on with it or
wait till next year and you'll
be in the same boat.
Saying, I need more money.
So, Mr Chair, but we gotta do it
now, Senator. I think that's
definitely one of the areas that
that we feel needs to be
reformed.
Um it's a lot of work to oversee
these public entities. When you
talk about the material risk and
the and the revenues that they
manage we're talking about, You
know small public bodies that
have revenues under a half a
million. They're not subject to
a full financial audit. But
there's still subject to varying
degrees of financial compliance.
I believe if they're under
50,000, I think they can self
certify. I think you're missing
my point. I agree.
We have to get a bill drafted.
Or not.
So
If we're gonna if we're gonna
reduce your workload, we have to
do it.
Today or tomorrow.
So
If you want to do that, we gotta
do it now. Okay? Doesn't matter
what
Whatever you want to do it now.
Thank you. One of the things we
are pursuing is we're pursuing
what I consider to be. I think
the first element of capital
outlay reform. We're pursuing
legislation to codify Executive
order 2013 006, which basically
requires the withholding of
capital outlay.
Ah, if a public entity is not
current on their audits, But
we're also promoting
Funding set aside to assist
those entities that are having
difficulty particularly small
local public bodies to assist
them to become financially
compliance similar to the
program that we're managing
right now, but we feel that that
executive order should have the
force of law.
Uh, and again I. It's called the
Public Finance Accountability
Act. We feel it could be the
first salvo in a broader capital
outlay reform Senator
Thank you.
Just to wrap this up in Isaiah,
right?
So you did you have how many
bars and the 200? Did you have
this last year to end up with a
negative balance? Let me ask my
budget and finance director or
do you want to step forward?
Showing us a negative balance of
179 there. Correct, Daisy.
Yes, Chairman.
Good afternoon chairman. Members
of the committee and are just to
clarify. Are you asking for
fiscal year 23 or for fiscal
year 24 that we are in
currently?
I think it's 20.
2424 At this point. We have no
bars.
For FY 24.
I'm sorry. Say that again for S
y 24. We do not have a bar. Are
you? Are you under spo?
Your home requirements.
We are. Yes, we are. And have
you asked both for a waiver in
those payments we have not. And
if you haven't asked both for a
waiver
To increase the pay instead of
taking your vacancy savings.
And asking for more FTE s
instead of paying correctly that
would resolve your problem.
Correct. We are currently um
speaking and in
Talks with spoke to work on
appropriate placement. We did
have a conversation with him.
Earlier to talk about that, and
they recommended to us that we
worked more towards appropriate
placement rather than waiting
for the, um
The company class study that
Deloitte is working on right
now. And when did that
conversation probably a year
ago.
And we still haven't got it done
There. That is we, In fact, that
is in process as we speak.
That has required a tremendous
amount of documentation and
every single position that we
have in our office required a
tremendous amount of
documentation, which had to be
performed by our HR.
Personnel only have 42
employees. Mhm employee did one
a day.
They would have 11 and a quarter
months left over to do whatever
work.
Suppose, should react to that
number instead of running
negative, But you're coming in
here asking you for more.
More F T E s.
When you need park proper
placement.
Because you had 30 hired all of
a sudden we got 11 or 12 higher
than 20 days.
You need you need proper
placement.
You don't need more FTE s so why
don't you guys go to spo?
Tell him that
Senate Finance wants the
appropriate placement number.
And we don't have to add the FTS
correct.
Chairman and members of the
community that we are not asking
for additional F T E
We are asking for funding for
the FTE that we currently have.
But that would be proper
placement.
Correct correct.
Simon, You're looking to jump at
me.
Sorry. Thanks, Laura.
Sometimes I get confused with
and Mr Chair.
Uh huh.
They're the agency is not
requesting additional FT.
The executive recommendation has
about $500,000 increase in the
two hundreds.
That is just to fill more of
those 42 ft right now about 35
of them are funded in the
current year.
An increase of 500,000 would
fill more of those FTE or could
be used for appropriate
placement actions. And to your
point right now, the department
should have some vacancy savings
in the current year, because
right now only 30 FTE or filled
but 35 of them are funded. So
there's your vacancy savings. So
the department you know I don't
have the exact projection in
front of me right now, but
There. There probably is some
vacancy savings to start on
certain actions and then with
any sort of budget increase in
the two hundred's for next year,
they could do appropriate
placement actions and or hire
more people.
I hope that answers your
question in Isaiah. I'm looking
at
This page, since you don't have
that page, additional FTE
additional funded FTE requested.
Right?
Eight.
Simon. Mr Chair. I think what
you're referring to is how many
positions does the department
currently have that are funded
that are not filled, right? Is
that the chart that you're
correct? Okay, so that
calculator there uses a standard
cost her FTE across the state.
But we know that
They're every department has
different.
Costs. Even every P code within
each department has a different
cost, like general services
facilities management, their
cost per FTE. They're super low
because a lot of custodians are
funded out of that, anyways Long
story short, uh, this department
or this office is average FTE
cost is a bit higher than the
state average. So that eight ft
that you see there on that
calculator. What I'm telling you
is right now they have five
Underfunded FTE. They have 30
filled but 35 or funded. So yes,
there is a bit of vacancy
savings there.
Senator Rodrigues should have a
question. Thank you, Mr Chairman
to asset Thank you, State
Auditor and all staff and our
staff. Um, when you mentioned,
um
That these are we see? Okay? I
have a question trying to get a
framed in my head here. This
positions that we're talking
about to make sure we
understand. And we're on the
same page. Are they not filled
Because people left they were
filled at one time or are they
not feel Because they have never
been filled? They're still
completely vacant from the
beginning.
On yourself, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Senator, I can't tell you
Why they're not filled. All I
can tell you is 35 of them are
funded. And, uh, I'll leave the
rest to Mr trying to picture
whether they were at one time
failed. And then they left and I
think your staff back there is
not a guest, so they're vacant
positions by virtue of the fact
that they became vacant in time.
They weren't vacant because you
never filled them.
Is what I'm saying, Mr Chairman.
Sure. Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Secretary Senator Rodriguez.
It's a combination of all of the
above.
Mhm. When you start out with 42
positions that you're basically
authorized, but you only found
35.
You already starting at
approximately
What? There's a certain
percentage already imputed that
you're gonna keep those vacant
and they're not going to be
funded. The problem we have also
is we've had just within the
last couple of months. We've had
two retirements. People. There's
a flow. There's a natural flow
within the agency.
Um, that people come in, they go
out. But what's making it harder
in this case is the
qualifications that are required
for the people that we put out
there.
You can only you cannot be a
You can only be a C P A only
CPAs can be at a certain level,
like the audit manager and above
those are some of our vacancies.
And so it takes a certain level
of qualifications. We also
require
Uh, a large number of accounting
hours just to audit so that and
raises the gap. That's one of
the things I think the auditor
was trying to express is that
The
The gap for us, it's harder to
overcome because it's harder to
hire people.
Because the qualifications keep
raising the standards keep
raising. The workload keeps
raising your, uh It's a
combination of everything that
you are. Okay. Thank you. So
basically on along the time
there, some have left. Some
haven't some have never been
filled. And so that's how you
end up with the vacancies. Mr.
Chairman Sonata Rodriguez,
There's a just a natural
attrition that occurs but our
starts out essentially a
Position sort, right. Get. Thank
you very much. Auditor. Did you
have something to say any more
to say on that, or I don't know.
I I do want to mention that. You
know when I took
When I took this office on
January 1st I came in and
employees roll 100% tele work.
And, um
What we decided to do. In fact,
when we had preliminary
discussions at that time we
spoke.
And we made a request to
Institute of 15% retention
adjustment.
To make sure we don't have
departures, you know, in
bringing employees back, and so
that was a higher priority for
us to prevent mass departures
after the pandemic, and I
believe we only had one
resignation after we instituted
a 15% retention adjustment, but
it expires in March. So this
request basically would backfill
behind the appropriate
placement.
Would kind of replaced the
fifth. The sunsetting 15%
retention adjustment.
To prevent further departures
because you know, with a staff
of well, 30, we're at this very
critical state right where any
additional departures
significantly affects our
workload.
Thank you very much for that
explanation. That makes sense.
That's all I have, Mr Chairman.
Mr Auditor.
Monday morning. When spoke opens
up Go get the proper placement
number for your agency. I'm not
interested in adding FTE s
She says she has that number.
I'm sorry. I remember your name.
Bring that sheet up to us.
We're going to do proper
placement than this to proper
placements that adding
additional FTE s and then call
it vacancy savings and do this
shell name with
Already finished.
Yeah.
You're gonna give it to him.
You can tell it to us, and then
we'll make a copy.
Just tell it to us right now and
then you can make copies. Just
explain it.
Chairman and members of the
board. What we have done, um,
with our HR director is go
through each
Filled position. What's the
total number for profit proper
placement?
The total number that we need.
I will have to. Yeah, it's all
have to have to take pen to
paper and actually calculate
that, but we do have it by
position.
Not every position in our office
will be receiving that backfield
15%.
But we are doing for appropriate
placement. Some will be
receiving employees need 15% 15.
What's your total pay, and I'll
do an average
Want to three Isaiah. You know
the number? No Turman gonna do
the math, so she's going to give
you a number, so it's going to
test your skills right now. You
are Brendan subject.
You don't laugh you might be
next.
25 positions.
25 times 15%.
Average salary of 70,000. I'm
assuming
Um, excuse me, Chairman and
remember, some will be receiving
as low as 2%. Some will be
receiving as high as 30%.
But they
So you need $125,000 for me.
525,000 for proper placement.
Yes, I ask a question on the
proper we'll get that number.
Leave that sheet with us get a
proper number and we'll see
where we can get
Simon. Is that bother you any
No, Mr Chair members of the
committee that the average
salary at the state auditor's
office salary and benefits about
120,000, Okay?
We'll use that number exam.
Knowing that we're going to
overshoot.
Rodriguez. You have more quick
question. Just move on. Thank
you. I will be will be quick.
Uh, Mr Auditor, One of your
staff members explained to me a
little bit here. Little Vegas.
What do you define as proper
placement, the proper placement
against what other placements
Just looking fully understand it
market.
Well, the marketing general just
proper placement based on years.
I understand. I'm not an HR.
Director, Mr Chair just to have
your specific Rodriguez. Sorry.
You wanna You wanna take that
based on the on the level of
expertise or type of work that
you need if I may, Mr Chairman,
Senator Audrius, Basically, it's
based on marketing experience.
Yeah, and, uh, where they're at
the current time. It's a
calculation. The thing that
makes it difficult and we can't
broad brush this because it's
individual by individual. That's
so it's that's it. That's
individual as that specific
employee at that was specific
point in time.
Mhm. And so there's a
calculation that factors those
items in and then you you arrive
at a number of the percentage
that you need to increase that
employee to bring them up to
proper placement, and that's in
accordance with us Both
standards as well. Okay, so it's
indisposed. Thank you Do want to
make sure we got that. Thank you
very much, Simon.
Yeah. Worked Firstly on your
phone there.
Texting or calculation. Mr.
Chair, please ignore me.
Alright, Isaiah get their
numbers may not be a broad
brush, but we're going to get it
a number for proper placement
better than adding F to eat
Anything else. Mr. Order? No, Mr
Chairman members of the
committee. Thank you for your
consideration. Thank you for
listening, but we will be back
and we will have a much more
significant legislative agenda
in the coming year.
Well, I mean, we're at the point
where everything needs to get
specific because we're going to
be limited to time from here on
out.
So that's kind of why you're
here today and
Secretary of State agreed with
the house, and she left rather
quickly after class hanging
online.
And so, uh, now they got a
lesson if they even stayed
online, But it's Friday at three
o'clock.
We're gonna so thank you were
gonna do the
The Justice League or the
attorney general. Whatever we're
calling it today, we're gonna
quit for the day Everybody land
commissioner work done and state
treasurer all history and that
its deficit
Just so they know again after
this presentation, we're gonna
quit for the day.
I just thought of crime fighter
the Hall of Justice. You'd have
like this uniform and this
shield and maybe a sword, or can
you name the five members of the
Justice League?
Mr Chairman. That's not part of
my job description. But I can
certainly get you that list even
born when the Justice League was
brown, Mr Chairman, parents to
let me watch a lot of TV, so I'm
trying to catch up.
Aquaman, Superman Wonder Woman,
Spider Man.
I believe Spiderman is, uh,
marvel, Mr Chairman, but I feel
like that The students don't
really want to hear this. So,
uh, Mr Chairman members of the
committee and my name is Austin.
I am the Lfc s judiciary
analysts today we're going to be
discussing the New Mexico
Department of Justice's budget
recommendation. Joining me today
is the honorable role tourists
and he can introduce his staff.
Certainly.
And just the high level for the
attorney general, the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee adopted the FCS
recommendation. The large
differences between the LFC and
the executive recommendation are
mainly in that the executive
recommendation gives the
expansion requests while
reducing the personnel, while
the executive of the LFC
recommendation keeps the
personnel
Flat on alternative to Mario to
add anything.
Mr Chair Committee members.
Mario Cerniglia, D F, a
Judiciary analyst. Thank you.
Austin for covering that really
well, like I said, just really
small differences about 49,000
in general fund difference
between Lfc and exactly and the
house went with the LFC
recommendation, so I now pass it
on to Attorney General Torres.
General. Let me ask you some
questions. Are you in agreement
with the house? Appropriation?
Direct? Yes, Mr Chairman.
Have a nice day.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Nothing else you needed to touch
on. Thank you.
State order. You got two minutes
of your agreement with the
house. I would not come up.
Shit. Amanda, I'm sorry Land
office in agreement with the
house. Madam Land Commissioner,
Mr Chairman. We were absolutely
in agreement with the House
weekend.
You see him? Good. Yeah, yeah.
And treasurer. You're in
agreement with the house.
Uh huh. Not in agreement
sometime next week.
Uh uh.
Tomorrow. I know I said nine,
but
How about 10? We should have
some type of rack up.
On what the House has done.
We'll need to start breaking out
and to some subcommittees.
We know where my guest
Is according to what I know, but
I haven't seen is we're still
short and education by roughly
140 million.
H s D is still another
Shortage. They move some money
around that was appropriated for
housing that we're going to have
to discuss, so we're going to
start
Breaking those subcommittees
out. So start thinking about
where you want to be tomorrow.
We'll go into executive session
so I can discuss some stuff.
About what we have left over on
our side for just so you know,
And so the public knows we still
have 50 million in re occurring
money to do that.
But I do not know how much they
satisfied the exact completely
so
We'll try to get a rack up by
tonight and then have it
tomorrow. Do you let me ask
members? You know, we're gonna
start getting a whole bunch of
papers. Do you want your papers
kept or do you want to Holland
to your offices or
Trashed.
So crashed, recycled recycle.
So if you want your stuff, I
guess get would you get them on
post it so they can leave it on
top of their stuff if you don't
want your stuff.
Will recycle it. But you're
gonna start getting the whole
bunch more papers.
And then just to touch base, you
know, Bot says, you know, we
