East. Then we will have a corn
for at least a subcommittee so
we can listen in. Thank you so
much for being with us this
morning, and I hope you all had
a great weekend.
Pseudomonas will not be here for
a while this morning, so
Will be chairing the committee
and
Okay. This time, it's for real.
We get to get started. Um Okay.
Thank you very much. We've got
A quorum now and we can proceed.
We've got the healthcare
authority and health insurance.
Carey, you are it with the
health Care Authority
Department, right. Good morning,
madam chair and members of the
committee. That's correct. I'm
not it. We've got several staff
here bit the table. Yes, you can
introduce whoever's here too.
A quorum now and we can proceed.
We've got the healthcare
authority and health insurance.
Carey you are it with the health
Care Authority Department,
Right. Good morning, madam Chair
and members of the committee.
That's correct. I'm not it.
We've got several staff here bit
the table. Yes, you can
introduce whoever is here to see
A quorum now and we can proceed.
We've got the healthcare
authority and health insurance.
Carey you are it with the health
Care Authority Department,
Right. Good morning, madam Chair
and members of the committee.
That's correct. I'm not it.
We've got several staff here bit
the table. Yes. You can
introduce whoever's here too.
So, Madam Cheryl, let them
introduce themselves colleagues
from public schools, insurance
authority and retirees.
Of course. Thank you, Neil. I
know you. Thank you. Journal
Keeper Executive for the retired
Healthcare Authority. And with
me today, I do have our deputy
director Keith Wit and our
general counsel, Mr Marketing.
Thank you very much. You can
proceed.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Patrick Sandoval, executive
director, New Mexico Public
School insurance Authority and
with me today I have deputy
director Martha Quintana and our
CFO Philip Gonzalez. Okay.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Robert. You sat in the
cabinet secretary of the General
Services Division. And with me,
I have our risk management
Director Jeanette Chavez and the
deputy risk management Director
Marquita Sanchez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you very
much.
Started Madam chair members of
the committee. Um, since there
were multiple entities sort of
called the table this morning
with so good with your
permission will kind of defer to
I was hoping I could go last
with the sort of forward
thinking plan for purchasing of
health care benefits And so I'll
defer to was it. Um, Mr Cooper
to go first? Okay. Thank you
very much chair. Thank you. With
the presenters Permission. I
just want to ask for a point of
person.
Privilege, Madam Chair. We do
have some outstanding New Mexico
students here today.
Apologize before you jump in. I
wanted to get the case They have
to leave the committee room and
this one. Let the committee know
we do have multiple statewide
officers from our career
technical education
organizations. One very near and
dear to my heart, The business
professionals of America. I was
their state president and their
national president. Back when I
was in high school, which is I
told them I'm not going to tell
you what year was. You weren't
even a distant memory at the
time. But can I have all of them
just stand and give them a hand?
They're doing a great job with
the organizations.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and these folks not only
represent their you know these
organizations, but they
literally are from all over the
state, So I'm very proud of
them. I just want to make note
of them. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, Mr Secretary and
others for allowing us to do
that this morning. Thank you,
Senator. And we welcome all
these great students here.
Alright, Neil, you can start.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair members of the committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to
present today and tell you a
little bit about the retired
Healthcare authority.
As we have more discussion in
general regards to healthcare.
Um, starting off, we can move on
to slide number two, just a
brief little agency overview.
Um, in regards to the retiree
Healthcare Authority. We were
created in 1990 to offer
benefits to retirees. Um, and
with this, as far as when we did
start, we were not pre funded
when this program began, and it
was six months later that we
actually started paying those
benefits in January of 1991.
To anywhere from between 15 to
16,000 members. That's kind of
one of the ways we started. In
addition to that, with the
Retiree Health Care Act was the
11 person board that was formed
and I do want to state that we
have various stakeholders,
representing many of our
different groups and our
retirees who participate under
this program. I will stay with
this board they have taken
A number of steps to ensure the
longevity of this program, not
only for current retirees but
also future retirees. It's not
always lead to the easiest
decisions, but they have taken
thoughtful approaches to really
try and spread the impact as
well as low as it relates to
either are active employees who
are making deductions into this
program or looking at the impact
as far as what are retirees may
have as well as real changes.
So there's a few different
things that they've definitely
done to help ensure this
program.
I'm looking at that next item is
happy to report that our trust
fund continues to grow, and we
continue to see that lowering
our unfunded liabilities. We'll
show a little bit more in
regards to our trust fund on the
next slide, But as we do move
down to Gatsby, 74. I am happy
to report that in our latest
study, looking at this that we
have seen everything actually
going down as it relates to our
total opened liability. We do
see where that's actually gone
from 3.4 billion to 3 billion
We look at it. Look at our net
open liability, which has gone
from 2.3 to 1.7 billion.
In addition, this has led to our
funded status in being now at
44% looking back At the previous
two years, we were at 25 and
33%. So we have shown that
growth in regards to our trust
fund or investments that are in
there leading to the funded
status that we are today, So
we're very proud of that.
On the right side. I won't get
into too much detail, but it
does give you an overview of
exactly what our agency as far
as the composition of our
membership you can see over
93,000 active participants who
are paying into this program
looking for this benefit in the
in the future when they do
retire as far as our retiree
participation. We are over
66,000 with a number of them
participating on our Medicare
plan of about 40,000 members and
then another about 12,000, who
honor pre Medicare plan.
Moving to the next slide, as I
did stay before with regards to
our trust fund.
Um, once again, happy to report
as we look 10 years ago where we
were at $334 Million where we
stand as of December of this
year or 2023, I should say was
that we hit the 1.34. So that's
actually a high mark Forest of
$1.34 billion apologize, So it's
been another high mark for us.
We've continued to show that
growth as far as the trajectory
continuing to climb.
Part of this really has to do
with the condom condom.
The combination of our
investments that we've made in
the contributions that we make
to this trust fund. It is
something that we watch very
closely and that when we do have
additional revenue that is
exceeding our claims.
Utilization. It has given us an
opportunity to make
contributions into this trust
fund to continue to grow it.
With this growth. This is also
led to those unfunded
liabilities that I talked about
on the previous slide when we
were looking at our gas being so
one of the things that we
continue to focus on is making
sure that our projected solvency
improves. It proves as well as
our unfunded status with guys be
74.
Now, when we look as far as the
credit, this is that this goes
too many different individuals
and stakeholders. Over the years
that I've been working with with
with the governing board to make
you know those tough decisions
as this is no easy achievement,
as I did state in the early part
of this program. There was no
pre funding, so it's taken a
while to grow it. But once
again, we're putting ourselves
in a great position to manage
our benefits and continue to
lower those unfunded
liabilities.
I don't to protect this fund as
it is of great importance to our
governing body and our members
is we are proposing legislation
as far as a joint resolution for
the next retiree Healthcare
Authority for the trust fund to
be recognized and protected
under the New Mexico
Constitution, somebody our
pension plans moving the next
slide on slide four does show
our benefit program in that very
top left graph.
It's gonna give depict as far as
two different lines, the top
line in blue is for pre
Medicare, medical and
prescription costs. This is a
program that is self insured.
And then the second line is an
orange line for Medicare
supplement plan, which covers uh
you know their remaining about
that traditional Medicare
doesn't cover as well as with
this program. We also provide
through an exit plan that part D
prescription coverage that many.
Many of our members need.
And that tarp top right chart
you're gonna see as far as
what's been the average growth
and looking at our pre Medicare.
It's been about 5.3% as well as
for our supplement plan being
about 5.9 so having that average
growth you know, 11 has been
slightly lower than the medical
trend over those years, and we
do know that this is rather
good, considering you know many
things in our daily lives
continues to grow as we continue
to see as far as prices going
up, But I think we've made it
made it a strong effort to
really kind of keep these
medical trends down as low as
possible.
Well, knowing that even other
things do affect us whether it's
federal legislation, state
legislation
These are items that could help
drive some of that trend that we
have to always take into account
and really try to mitigate some
of those rising costs to our
members.
Um, on the bottom left chart.
You will see as far as in
regards to our three plans.
There are two pre Medicare
premier and value. It does show
you a little bit as far as what
the premiums are that we do
charge since calendar 2017 to
2024. I won't go into detail as
far as for every number, but it
does show you at least a little
bit of the growth as far as
those premiums. Uh, this is what
a member who has worked.
Ah, the full amount of time to
receive a full subsidy from this
program. This is the portion
that would be responsible for on
the far right of that chart is
the supplement in green and that
would be for those individuals
that are Medicare eligible and
are participating on that
supplement plan. It does show
you as far as what the premiums
would be for them for their
participation.
Um, the very bottom right corner
does show the enrollment numbers
as far as for the pre Medicare
plans showing about
approximately like I said, less
than 12,000, and then the over
20,000 that participate on our
supplement plan.
Moving on to the next slide is
our Medicare advantage and
prescription drug plans. Um,
happy to to look at this slide
and in regards to the eight
different options we offer when
we look at these charts that we
can see for many of these plans
that they've actually maintained
or actually are lower today than
they were back in 2017. I think
the one exception is probably
too are two Presbyterian Medical
May PD plans
Where there is actually a little
bit higher as far as the premium
amount Back versus 2017. Some of
this is due to some of the fees
that we're currently in place
back in 2017 with the health
insurance be that was removed
back in 2019, the federal
government so that had some
impact as far as on our premiums
in the beginning, which is a
little different, as it shows
the transition of these plans
through the years, I will say as
far as the benefits on the
planned design, I know that's
always a concern, too is, you
know maybe we're maintaining
premiums, but maybe we're
passing on a lot of those costs
to our members.
Well, A lot of these plans have
not seen that. I mean, I could
even stay at one of our plans
that had a prescription
deductible that was actually
removed from one of the current
plans, so it's actually
providing a little additional
coverage as relates to
prescriptions for members, So
there's been a lot of those
changes as far as to help
maintain. Maybe there's been a
couple of things where it cost
shares may have gone up a little
bit here, but I also know
there's been a lot of many
enhancements to those Medicare
advantage plans as well.
So it's something that we do
closely monitor and do work
closely with our vendors every
year as we look at those rates,
uh, one of the other things that
does have a strong, um rolling
this is the CMS Star rating as
we know that, as these plans
perform better, and they receive
higher stars, they get higher
reimbursement, So not only are
they providing better quality of
character are members, but it's
also helping to keep the cost
down.
Looking at the last slide Number
six. It's just in regards to
some of the collaboration
efforts that we do have. You
will see on this slide through
the Inter Beat Interagency
Benefits Advisory Committee with
the other four groups of the
Albuquerque public Schools, the
metro public Schools insurance
Authority, uh, retiring next
entire healthcare authority and
the risk management division
General Services Department,
which we know is transitioning
have all been a part of the
Interagency Benefits Advisory
Committee. We have done a
proposals together as you can
see the life insurance proposal
that was recently completed this
last year.
We're all four of us went to
bed.
I can also state prior to that
was the pharmacy benefit manager
or FP were not only the four of
us, but also you and M joined us
through that process, so it was
great to have them, join us and
collaborate and share their
knowledge and and that
membership. We also look for
other opportunities to really
collaborate to you know what?
The consultant and actuary
services we did partner up with
with Nipsey a to go out together
to bed? Um, and then when it
relates to our healthcare
purchasing act for medical,
dental and vision, where
currently in that process right
now.
Not working with two of our
other entities. Um and so this
is a great opportunity for us to
leverage those resources.
Leverage. You know that
experience that we can
hopefully, you know, bring the
best benefits to our members.
Some of the other things that I
want to point out the left side.
But there are point solutions
that we share. We are looking to
do our five that made my
counterpart. We'll talk a little
bit more about claims payment
integrity audit that we're
working on with the agencies
currently right now in drafting
appreciate the work with the
legislators.
But we also work with a lot of
other outside organizations, one
of them being the state and
local government Benefits
Association. This allows us to
talk to other states share
information, see exactly what's
happening in their states. See
what may be opportunities for
improvement that maybe they're
looking at that can be
introduced into to our benefit
plan or this state. The other
one is the public sector Health
Care Roundtable. This would
really works with other states,
but it also works at the federal
level and making sure that many
of these public sectors work
together and
Express our concerns and voices
up at the federal level. Uh, two
members of either Congress
representatives or even on the
executive branch of what we're
looking to do and what we're
looking to achieve.
Um And then the last time there
just, You know federal
legislation that affect us and
then we do do lots of
comparisons to other states to
see where we stand or really
Just talk with them, Um, to kind
of just share those ideas, so
many different areas where we
collaborate. I just wanted to
make sure I pointed out at the
last 11. Well, um the last
though, is just, you know, once
again want to thank everybody
that's helped to to put this
organization where it is today
from previous directors.
Board members. Legislators. Uh
you know, we are in a good
standing. We continue to look to
build upon that and we want to
ensure that this program is
around for current retirees, but
also the future. And so we just
want to make sure that you know
we're protecting the trust fund.
We're looking at this program
and that any steps or approaches
we take, you know, as with lots
of information and data to see
how our program is going to work
in the future, So thank you.
Thank you very much, Neil. I
think we're going to hold
questions until world and I had
a couple of going to wait till
others here. Ask there's but we
can move on to the next person.
Um, we're gonna go here. Your
name here have lost your name,
Patrick. Right. Thank you. And
what we're gonna do. We've been
asked to, um, just repeat,
repeat your name so that for the
Webcast and also for the staff
to keep track of what handouts?
Or by whom, and that way they
can put them on correctly on the
website. Thank you so much.
Alright, You can proceed.
Patrick, and this is from the
public school Insurance
Authority. And they handouts are
here already. Thank you.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Patrick Sandoval. I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Public School
Insurance Authority. And with me
today I have deputy director
Martha Quintana and our CFO
Philip Gonzalez.
Turning a page two.
Was created in 1986 to serve as
a purchasing agency for public
school districts, Postsecondary
educational entities and charter
schools.
The risk program provides
insurance for property
liability school board legal
liability crime, cyber liability
and worker's compensation
coverage is the benefits program
provides insurance for medical
wellness prescription drug
dental vision, life and long
term disability coverage is
Turning a page three.
Looking at today. We serve 88
school districts, 100 charter
schools and 27 Other educational
entities, which included nine
higher educational institutions.
We ensure over 47,000 members
under medical over 55,000
members under dental and over
48,000 members under vision.
We also cover over 12,900
members under long term
disability and over 18,800
members under additional life.
We are a staff of 12 and are
managed by an 11 member board of
directors consisting of governor
appointees.
New Mexico Association of School
business officials, educational
entities at large a hefty New
Mexico any a New Mexico, the
Public Education Commission, the
School Board Association and the
Superintendents Association.
Turning a page four.
Looking at our employee benefits
and wellness well being program.
EMC offers high and low option
preferred provider options
otherwise known as P. P O plans
under Blue Cross Blue Shield,
Cigna and Presbyterian.
An exclusive provider option, or
EPO plan under Blue Cross Blue
Shield.
See our offers Prescription drug
coverage under CVS, Caremark and
wellness and well being programs
through all insurance plans.
We offer high and low option
dental coverage plans through
Delta Dental of New Mexico and
United Concordia.
A turning a page five.
Slide. Five displays names Ia's
claims cost for Medical, Dental
vision, life and disability
displayed with the orange Line.
Prescription drug claims cost
with the blue line and member
lives with the gray line.
I did see member lives increased
by approximately 2000 from
January of 2024 to January of
2023.
We believe this is due to the
passage of house Bill 533 in the
2023 legislative session, which
aligned the Nipsey a
contribution. Here's with GSD
and the exploration of salary
qualifications for Medicaid
during Covid.
The table in blue below shows an
M. C s historic rate increases
over the last seven years.
And turning a page six.
Looking at current initiatives.
She is currently engaged in the
buyback RFP for medical, dental
and vision benefits.
We are in collaboration with the
eye back and ready to release a
request for information on
clinic feasibility to manage
costs while improving
convenience and access for
members.
Collaborating with the New
Mexico retiree Healthcare
Authority and the eye back on
completing a claims Integrity
audit request for proposal and
Gandhian ready to introduce a
bundled Musculoskeletal Services
Agreement Savings program, while
increasing access to quality
care with a $0 cost share for
members.
That concludes my presentation.
Madame Chair member.
Q. Thank you very much for that
presentation. Alright, I think
we'll just go on either is good
for me. So, um you want to
proceed? Thank you very much,
And they will go to carry Madame
chair. My name is Robert Gossett
Jr and the current secretary of
the General Services Division
with me today. I have Jeanette
Chavez, who has our risk
management director.
And Marquita Sanchez, who is our
deputy risk management director.
Thank you. Um, just good. I'm
like the ghost of Christmas
past. I'm going to give you an
update where we're currently at,
uh, with the legislation from
GSD. We will be moving seven.
FTE is over to the new
Healthcare authority. Currently
we have three that are filled
one that we posted last week and
hopefully doing interviews.
In the other ones. We will be
posted last Tuesday. I was in
front of the health. Sorry. The
House Finance Committee and they
selected the LFC budget which
will cover the deficit in the
employee benefits. I know that
was one of the biggest things
I've been working on for the
last 10 months with yourself in
a lot of other people.
And GSC is here to help support
Make sure the new healthcare
authority
Can function and run. But the
biggest thing for us just be
bringing over the FTE s and
making sure when the program
leaves us over to Secretary
Armijo that it was not in a
deficit. We're on track of that.
And tomorrow I'll be in front of
you with the GST budget also, so
thank you very much.
Thank you for that. Update.
Kerry next. Thank you, madam.
Chair Secretary. That's I'm fine
with that. Madam Chair members
of the committee. Thank you for
having this panel today. Um, I
really want to just say, Well,
I'm Carrie Armijo. I'm the
secretary designate of the New
Mexico Human Services
Department. We are in the
process of transitioning to the
New Mexico Healthcare Authority.
The real formal kickoff for that
will start when our budget is in
place for fiscal year 25 on July
1st So, um, really looking
forward to convening with these
partners here at the table to
just work together on a
purchasing plan for health
benefits for new Mexicans and
have a really appreciated the
information in partnership from
these entities.
Um, it also like to mention I
have Deputy Secretary Alex
Castillo Smith with me and then
our DFA analyst for It's
actually the GSD analyst,
Cecilia Romanus. Um, who has
taught me a lot about the
employee benefits fund? Um, over
the past several months as we've
been putting on putting together
the work for this new budget.
So we'll go on to our first
slide.
Um, as we kick off the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority, we
have done a lot of work with the
our partners at the other
agencies in particularly at the
Department of Health, those
transitioning over to the health
care authority as well as the
General Services Department to
really re center and refocus our
mission and vision and goals for
the agency. And so what you have
in front of you is really where
we are headed. Our mission at
the health care authority is to
ensure that new Mexicans attain
their highest level of health.
Both
By providing whole person cost
effective, accessible and high
quality healthcare and safety,
Net services and the safety net
part is really important to call
out because as we become the
healthcare authority, we are
retaining those safety net
programs, including Snap Tan F
Energy Assistance, Behavioral
Health, Um and, uh, Child
support, so those routine within
the agency
But we're kind of taking on a
new focus on health care and how
they all tie together. Our
vision is that every new Mexican
will have access to affordable
health care coverage through a
coordinated and seamless
healthcare system. I think we
all could probably agree that
today we don't have a
coordinated and seamless
healthcare system. Really. It
requires some heavy lifting on
the part of patients to really
understand how to navigate. Um,
I know I speak to people every
day who are confused about where
to go for what? Um, and it
really shouldn't be like that.
The players and
Partners behind the scenes
should be working together.
Um, and taking the workload off
of patients here in New Mexico
to coordinate their care.
Our goals for the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority or to
leverage purchasing power and
partnerships to create
innovative policies and models
of comprehensive healthcare
coverage that improve the health
and well being of new Mexicans
and the healthcare workforce.
Um our second goal is to achieve
health equity by addressing
poverty, discrimination and lack
of resources.
Building a new Mexico where
everyone thrives.
To build the best team in state
government by supporting
employees, continuous growth and
wellness, and I believe that as
we become the healthcare
authority, we're in a unique
position to really focus on our
employees and their wellness for
the first time. Um and then
last, we are third or fourth
goal is to implement innovative
technology and data driven
decision making.
To provide unparalleled,
convenient access to services
and information living on to
flood.
I believe it says nine in your
packet.
So just a reminder the final
transition plan for the New
Mexico health care itty care
Authority was submitted to the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and the
Legislative Finance Committee on
January 2nd in accordance with,
UM 2023 Senate Bill 16. There
were actually two dates in that
bill, the first one it was
requiring an initial transition
plan on November 1st that was
submitted. We received some
feedback from that plan. There
were a couple of changes made in
response to the
Feedback we received.
And we sent our final plan to
the Legislature on January 2nd
starting July 1st. The
healthcare authority will
include all of the existing
human services department
divisions, including, UM, income
support division, Child Support
Services division Behavioral
Health services division and
then our medical assistance
division. So those are the four
programs support.
Divisions.
Um, sort of program divisions
and then we will also be the
division division of health
improvement from the Department
of Health. They oversee the
licensure and certification of
facilities here in New Mexico,
The developmental disability
supports division from the
Department of Health, which
oversees the developmental
disability supports waiver.
The Employee Benefits Bureau
from the General Services
Department. Which secretary do
set just referred to they are in
charge of purchasing, uh, health
benefits for state employees.
And then we are proposing a new
office of Data and Analytics and
a chief data officer that is
part of the executive
recommendation. You'll hear more
about this in our budget hearing
tomorrow. It's not currently
funded in the legislative
request, but we have been in
discussion with the LFC and HFC
on that component. Next slide,
please.
So we really believe that the
health care authority is
positioned to lead the nation in
healthcare, purchasing equity
and access. The healthcare
authority demonstrates the
governor's commitment to
prioritizing the health and well
being of every new Mexican by
creating a single agency for
healthcare purchasing policy and
regulation. The healthcare
authority will transform how new
Mexico purchases healthcare,
leveraging the purchasing power
of Medicaid to improve cost
quality and outcomes.
And here. I just want to call
your attention to the map on the
right. New Mexico actually has
the highest percentage of our
population of any state covered
on Medicaid. We're currently
covering 870,000 new Mexicans on
our program, and we really
believe that there's power in
numbers when you do health care
purchasing, and so we haven't
really unique opportunity here
in New Mexico to improve things.
By using Medicaid program as the
foundation.
For our purchasing strategy. The
healthcare authority will also
leverage, expertise, optimized
data analytics and drive
accountability to achieve
improvements in the health care
system.
Moving on to slide 11 just a
couple of things that are going
on right now, during session to
enable the deliberate
partnership to improve New
Mexico's purchasing power for
healthcare benefits. The
governor is going to issue an
executive order requesting that
the healthcare authority, the
public schools Insurance
Authority, the retiree health
care authority, and the other
entities that are part of the
Interagency Benefits Advisory
Committee back
That we work together on a
coordinated and comprehensive
purchasing plan for health care
benefits for public employees
and retirees that can be
implemented by July, 1st 2025,
and so that's really going to be
the governor's request that we
all work together. Um, and
healthcare authorities happy to
be the convener, but I think
we're we're in the process of
establishing partnerships with
our colleagues at these other
entities.
There's also, um, healthcare
Authority Bill that is going to
be dropped soon. I think
imminently, um, that will
require that I back to make
purchasing recommendations to
the secretary of the Healthcare
Authority for final decision
making and requiring that the
buyback agencies engaged in
joint contracting for health
benefits, effective July 1st of
2025.
So today, all of those entities
are required to do the
procurement together, but they
are not required to join
together in the contract. We
really believe that we will
achieve improvements by joining
up together through the contract
process, so that will be part of
that bill. The bill also
proposes to move the New Mexico
Health Care affordability fund
and that coverage team
Um, including the staff and the
appropriations from the office
of the superintendent of
insurance to the Healthcare
authority affected July 1st of
2024.
Um, that purchasing team is
really doing all of the work
around, making sure that cost is
more affordable for new Mexicans
purchasing coverage on the
private market, and then they
are also working on other
coverage strategies for the
uninsured New Mexicans, So our
proposal is to move that over to
our agency.
As part of that coverage
continuum that we're trying to
develop. And then lastly, that
bill will change all of the
statutory references from H S D
to the Healthcare Authority.
My last slide, uh, just really
outlines the foundational
actions that we are taking now
to enact this purchasing
strategy. Um, from we started
this work back in November,
Really? As we kind of had our
budget taken care of and
developed, but it's will
continue through July 2024. So
there's really three things I
want to call out.
First we are going to perform a
complete actuarial analysis,
including an assessment of the
self insured model compared to
the fully insured model with
recommendations so that that
will guide our next procurement.
We will be making
recommendations to the
Legislature to the governor's
office about where we should go
based on actuarial data, and we
think that's really important
Right now The state is a self
insured model. Um there's not
much risk sharing. There's
actually no risk sharing on the
part of the health plans. We'd
like to explore whether that's
To change where whether we
should push some of that risk
onto the health carriers, so we
will look at that and determine
What options? We have another,
um
Item under consideration today.
State of New Mexico employees
have a $60,000 threshold. That
kind of dictates how much their
contributions are, Um, we'd like
to see whether we can move that
up to make coverage more
affordable for employees. So you
know whether there's room for us
to say maybe we set the
threshold at 80,000. So that
60,000 threshold hasn't really
moved much. We think that
We should really look, take a
look at that so we can make
coverage more affordable for our
employees. The second activity,
which was referenced by both of
my colleagues here is to perform
perform acclaim's integrity.
Audit of the current state of
New Mexico plans. We'd like to
see how they're performing. I
don't have this information
today, so we really feel like
it's essential that we get good
information that will inform our
next recommendations.
And third. We are going to
completely review the current
procurement and contracts using
expert consultants to recommend
favorable contract terms for the
state of New Mexico and advise
us on options for the next
procurement. There are experts
who are doing this work in other
states. They are really doing a
good job helping states
negotiate price savings. Um, so
we are on boarding experts like
that to really help us with the
next procurement so that we have
A real comprehensive strategy.
I'm going to go over the
timeline at a high level just so
I think there's been a little
bit of confusion around this. I
just wanted to call out and
clarify. Um as of July 2024. We
will be executing one year
contracts with the existing
carriers for the state of New
Mexico. The healthcare authority
opted out of the procurement. We
are not going to participate in
the big bid, RFP
Because it was initiated by it,
really another agency, and we
didn't feel like we could be
beholden to contracts negotiated
by another agency, so we will
initiate one year contracts that
will carry us from July of 2024
to July of 2025 when we'll have
that new purchasing and
procurement, um, ready to go
live between July July of 2024
and September we're going to be
drafting a new procurement for
health benefits.
Would based on the
recommendations, um, and
decisions that are made that
will guide you know from all the
expertise and the foundational
actions that we're taking so
that that will be a fully formed
procurement. Um, in July, a in
march of 2025 will be a
negotiation for new contracts
with the new contracts beginning
July 1st of 2025.
Lastly, I just want to call out
that the healthcare authorities
also taking action right now to
protect employees from
unsupported out of pocket price
increases, such as deductibles
and copays without adequate data
and understanding of all
effects. So I am standing firm
on this. I have been asked
whether we wanted to raise
copays for employees. I said no,
there wasn't enough data to
support that. I am not
interested in suppressing
utilization on services, for
example, Primary care. I think
people need those interventions
in order to stay healthy.
Um And so we will have more
scientific method for
determining where we put price
on our employees going forward
with that.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
I think my colleagues and I will
be happy to stand for your
questions. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Carrie. All right.
We've got senator share and then
we have senator career. Hemphill
If she steps back in, and we got
Senator Padilla
Thank you, Senator. Share
Senator Woods now. Thank you.
Senator. Share your first. Thank
you. Thank you, madam Chair.
I wanted to start off.
Excuse me. Apparently, I need to
go to the dock.
Or clear my throat one or the
other. Um, Madam Secretary, And
in here you talked about
Um
Poverty.
We find it here.
Achieve health equity by
addressing poverty
discrimination.
How are you going to deal with
poverty or your agency or
anybody in the state of New
Mexico for them?
Um
Madam Chair, senator share
Poverty is such a complicated
issue and to acknowledge your
point. I think it is really,
really complicated. Not all of
the levers for poverty or within
our agency. They have to do with
things like education and
housing and the job market. Um,
however, our agency does operate
those safety net programs that
are safe landing spot for new
Mexicans who are experiencing
deep poverty.
So we are providing food
support. We operate the child
support program most of our
child support recipients are
from low income families. Um,
and so we're really trying to
provide the supports that new
Mexicans need while they're
experiencing poverty. Um, by
being that safety net for them,
so making sure that they don't
go hungry, making sure that
Kids get the
Get the money that they need
through their child support
program to just be kids so they
don't have to worry about
clothing and shelter and those
kinds of things, But I do think
poverty is more complicated.
This question has come up, You
know? How are we going to be
building out that the sort of
network or suite of anti poverty
programs
Today. Our programs are designed
more like a landing spot. And
not like a trampoline. They're
not really designed to help
people get out of poverty, even
though we do work with workforce
solutions, and I'll be talking
about this a little bit during
my budget hearing tomorrow, but
we would like to come back with
some ideas for sort of
mitigating that Cliff effect and
really smoothing the edges to
sort of help families. Um, being
that trampolines on so that they
can move up, um and off of
public assistance into sort of
thriving lives here in New
Mexico, so our programs
Really are just one aspect of
the mitigation of poverty, but
very important and new Mexicans
do rely on them really heavily.
So, madam chair.
The
When you talked about the
trampoline, that's
That I think is the solution to
poverty. Our our solution should
not be. Our goal should not be
to have the most people on
On Medicaid that that should not
be our goal.
Um, And so I know that a bunch
of people just freaked out out
there. That doesn't mean I'm
tearing people off of Medicaid
with nothing That means they're
getting good jobs that have
better insurance than Medicaid.
Thus better pay.
Thus less poverty. So that's
that's what I see. So right now
we have the most in the nation,
and it appears just when I talk
to people that we want more
people on Medicaid.
And I would submit that our goal
is to have less people on
Medicaid because their world is
better and Medicaid ear's is a
lesser insurance than they would
get somewhere else. That should
be our goal.
Um
And I think that addresses the
whole poverty issue.
I do think that one of the
problems that we have and you
mentioned this is the cliff
effect. So I'm making some
money. My world is getting
better and all of a sudden I
don't have Medicaid anymore. And
now my world is worse.
All of a sudden, even though I'm
making more money, Hmm.
So how do we make it so that it
goes like that, instead of like
that?
I'm gonna get this clear so that
I can speak like a not a frog.
Yeah, I have the perfect thing
for you here.
Hmm. Is this better living
through pharmaceuticals? Yes,
Pharmaceutical. Thank you. Oh, I
need a s a recall. A. I need a
giant horn now on the Alps.
Um
Anyway.
Ah, that's how I think that we
Need to address this, but I am
concerned that just in in in in
bureaucracies in general, no
Not a shot at anyone.
bureaucracy every Barack
bureaucracy and world whether
it's government or not wants to
grow.
And in this particular case
I would like to see a shrink.
Because things are better.
Um, you you talked about
purchasing insurance gsd who's
purchasing the insurance on it?
Um, how is that going to be
different than what we do today?
Mr Chair. Sorry, madam Chair,
Senator share? Um what's
different, I think is that we
will be doing comprehensive sort
of analysis to inform how we do
the purchasing. I think today.
And I just in frankness, and I
think there's probably
historically reasons for this
And I'm definitely, you know,
going to be learning a lot from
my colleagues at the table, but
I think the the procurement
process is pretty
individualized. It's sort of not
There's not really one single
strategy and what we'd really
like to advance is a strategy.
That is informed by data. Um and
I think you know some of the
partners may have more data
actually than what the state of
New Mexico has had. So that's
one of the reasons I'm hoping
that we can work together so I
can learn from them about you
know how their purchasing
strategy might align with our
purchasing strategy. What we can
leverage from them that we're
not doing today. Um, but I have
been asking a lot of questions
over the past several months.
Um, and unfortunately, I have
not been able to get the kind of
data that one would need to
really make improvements in the
purchasing strategy. And so for
me, I don't know where we'll go
for the health care authority
that is going to depend on the
results of all of these analyses
and the recommendations of the
experts that were on boarding to
really give us some concrete
recommendations, and from there,
we'll know what they're
purchasing strategy will be, but
we are really seeking to have it
be more
More aligned more joint together
with the other entities that
purchase employee coverage for
public employees and retirees.
Yeah,
And then
When we did the
Ah!
Um, Medicaid reimbursement rates
Was it last year or the year
before I remember now?
Um
So we did. We tried to bring
everybody in, but
Did we get Did we get? Um all
the mental health?
People in there because it seems
to me and I don't know where I
read this or heard this but the
substance abuse um
Um
What's the word?
Counselors. I don't think it's
the right word and autism.
People didn't get that bump. Is
that true? Ah, madam Chair
Senator share We actually did
increase behavioral health
service codes, Um, have heard
this also on the autism sides
and actually going to meet with
the folks on the autism those
providers to understand more
with those issues were because
they just may not fully
understand yet.
We increased with legislative
support Medicaid RATES
reimbursement rates for primary
care, child maternal health and
behavioral, health and substance
use services up to that 120% of
Medicare right, so those those
were increased. We have another
proposal on the table to take
those up to that 150% threshold.
But it will be working with
providers if there were any gaps
to make sure I understand those
so that that we address that
going forward I as far as I
know, we increased those rates.
But if there's anything
specific, I can follow up with
you and find out if there's
someone that got left out
somehow. So, madam chair Madam
Secretary, I. I appreciate that.
Because I was trying to remember
what we did and things like that
and well.
I don't know. But if we didn't
if we didn't get those, I think
those are important.
Pieces of it. Certainly the
substance abuse a huge problem
in New Mexico.
And I think if we're gonna get
ourselves out of poverty
We need
We need less substance abuse and
certainly autism.
Um, I think that
That that
That's a I think a growing issue
in the world. And so how do we?
How do we solve that?
So thank you. 01 other thing for
the Santa Fe, New Mexican. I
would like to point out that I
did not segued into any poetry.
And I don't believe I was
combative. Thank you.
Any responses for that. Thank
you. All right, we're gonna go
to Senator Korea. Hemphill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary for your
presentation.
In rural New Mexico. There are a
lot of people that are really
dependent upon the school based
health clinics, especially the
students there at the high
schools. Um, I know when my son
who's in a wheelchair was high
school, like it was really
convenient to be able to use a
school based health centers
since it didn't require having
to load the wheelchair up and go
to another location, so those
those clinics are really
critical, particularly and roll,
underserved commune.
Nitties.
So I was concerned when I saw
the article in the Santa Fe, New
Mexican yesterday about school
based health centers not having
received there.
Funding the providers there.
Can you touched on that? A
little bit like what is the
holdup with the funding for the
school based health care center
providers, And is there anything
we can do to help Expedite that
funding? Madam Chair, Senator
Hampel, Um, that actually is
issued by the Department of
Health, and so I will follow up
with Secretary Alan and have him
all suggest that he talked to
you about that. I
The those direct fundings. Don't
come out of my agency. Okay,
Thank you so much. And thank you
again for your help with the
duty waiver stuff, and you've
been incredibly responsive to
those most vulnerable in our
communities. So states, so I
appreciate your work. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. And thank
you, Carrie. Okay, we're going
to go on to Senator Padilla. And
then we have Senator Woods your
next Thank you very much, Madam
Chair and thank you all for
coming together this way, and it
has long been a huge concern of
mine that we have all of these
swim lanes purchasing. And why
aren't we just, you know,
getting together and making this
work for all of us, So I'm
really impressed and glad that
we're finally moving the boat in
this direction.
Um, so I see lots of charts that
show increases in cost increases
in this and that, and I did hear
Madam Secretary. I'm sorry,
madam Chairman. Madam Secretary
did hear you say that in 25 not
sure which month you were
talking about, but that we would
start seeing the actual
purchasing agreements Come
together. What? What should
agencies departments? Um
You know, Um gosh, even higher
education. If that's at all you
know, rolls into this, when
should they start seeing things?
These charts move in the other
direction of
You know, I know H e D as an
example, A lot of the schools
have seen 5 to 7% increases
since 2020.
You know, we're over here trying
to do everything we can Madam
chair to make salaries more
meaningful for employees, but
that's just sort of by itself
becomes a net zero with what
we've done. And then, of course
you attack on just inflation
itself. And I know I don't need
to say all this to you, but you
just kind of paint the broader
strokes of the picture. When
should we start seeing things
truly?
Decline in terms of cost and see
more cost efficiencies that way
or
Stabilization and greater
services. I wherever you want to
address that.
Madam Chair, Senator Padilla
might. What I would anticipate
is that we will be having some
recommendations with some
Valuation on cost savings or
stabilization. Um
Between July of 2024 and
September to inform that
procurement but that the those
the execution of that would be
with that those contracts that
go live in July of 2025. I'm
really acutely aware that we
don't have enough data to make
good decisions right now, and I
think it would be a mistake to
try to
Try to rush into a strategy
that's not fully informed. I
feel like we really need all of
the information so that we can
make solid recommendations. So
from my perspective, we're
talking about July of 2025 about
a year and a half from today.
There were there was some
agreement on a premium rate
increase for employees. But I do
want to say I'm also a covered
employee.
And it is frustrating to me to
have to. I think I took my it
had to take both of my kids to
urgent care one day in separate
visits, and it costs $200 out of
pocket. It was $100 per visit. I
had gone up from 50. I think the
previous time I had gone so I
know how employees are dealing
with these. These really do
impact. The decisions they make
in some of them are not going
just because they want to avoid
those costs.
And so this is really, really
important, but it's also
important that we balance out
getting it right. So I think my
commitment is to make sure that
we have options on the table by,
you know, in July, August
September that we can discuss
with all of you with cost
savings potential that we can
execute for that July 2025
contract.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I'm
really happy to hear that Madam
Secretary and others there with
you and Secretary do set. Um
So is there also a plan to
collapse? Other governmental,
other political subdivisions,
governmental agencies? What
maybe that collapsed him, but
but but invite them to
participate in this very
wonderful thing that you're
doing because I feel confident
this. This is actually going to
produce some great, you know,
cost savings to really the state
budget, the individual agencies
and what they're up to. But are
you inviting others to join you
as well?
Madam Chair, senator. Pdf. That
is the way I envision this
working that all local public
bodies would be able to purchase
into the plan.
We would be doing this on behalf
of all state.
Wide public, uh, public
employees that want to join.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Secretary. Yeah. I mean, you
know, the larger this number
becomes, the more difficult it
will be for, you know,
corporations to you know, and
there's they've got to make a
profit to for their shareholders
and all that business, but it
will make it very difficult for
them not to be at the table with
you trying to figure how to make
this work.
You know for everybody, Um
What is going to be the number
one so that we're aware you
still have some sort of a major
obstacle that we need to help
you with to get this bully
moving in the right direction.
See some smiles. They're like,
Oh, there isn't that's great.
Let's talk about it. Yeah, well,
Madam Chair Senator P d a. I
think you'll hear. I have my
budget hearing this week, so
you'll hear from me about just
making sure that the agency is
adequately supported. We are
absorbing a lot of work and a
lot of employees and I feel
pretty strongly that we really
need to have the adequate.
Sort of program support. And,
um, just that that foundational
structure for agency, including
the talent, the investment in
the talent of the agency. Um, we
probably can't do this just the
way we are today and just taking
on those those staff, So we're
You know, we're onboarding the
experts but we really need
people to sort of manage and
lead this work. Um, and so I
think there's still a difference
there. I mean, it. Just make a
make a plea for our budget in
terms of the program support
side so that we can really make
sure that the work gets done. I
think it's just a very
aggressive schedule. Um, I'm I'm
fine with that. I haven't set a
schedule that I couldn't meet. I
don't feel like it's over
promising, but I think it does
require an investment in the
talent of the agency.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
completely agree with you, Um,
Madam Secretary. So as as the
healthcare authority comes
together, Are we going to see
maybe some cost efficiencies as
a result of this movement
outside of what we're talking
about, You know, benefits and
what have you, But can you just
give us a sketch of what that
might look like or or Is it
still too early for you to tell
us that
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Padilla. No. I've been thinking
about this a lot. There's a lot
of efficiency to be gained by
moving the D D supports waiver
staff over together with our
agency that is really a
Medicaid. Um, it's a Medicaid
funded efforts program, and our
staff will work better together.
I think today maybe
There's been some delays in sort
of issuance of rate increases,
for example, and I think some of
that is really do two things
being in separate agencies with
not one single point of
accountability, So I think that
is gonna sort of result in some
improvements. Um, and then I
think one of the things I'm
really excited about is we do
operate Health insurance
program. We are the largest pair
We cover 875,000 new Mexicans
through Medicaid.
And with that we have a lot of
expertise on quality of care.
Um, how care is purchased? We
don't have the same levers that
have been used on the commercial
market to pass costs on to
patients because it's Medicaid
and there's those are heavily
restricted. And so what I'm
looking forward to is the
synergy between the Medicaid
team and the purchasing team for
the public employees because I
think
We could really do a lot in
terms of that quality wellness,
um, improvement and really
measuring what the outcomes are
that we're buying with with the
value? Um, that investment, So
that's really where I see a sort
of like the merging of
expertise, really having good
results for a New Mexico?
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Secretary. So you know, I don't
know if you know what I do for a
living. I have a business and we
do.
One third of my business is a
lot of consulting work that we
do with, you know corporations
and businesses and government
agencies in any number of
things, So I want to make a
recommendation and you're
probably already thinking this,
but I hope you are, and I hope
you'll at least consider it but
as these efficiencies and
economies of scale come together
that you just described which I
think is I'm so happy that
you're looking at it that way. I
hope that you'll also look at
reconfiguring and being very
innovative.
With salaries and the ability to
To use that efficiency. A
portion of that efficiency to
really bring you the best talent
on the planet to work with this
large entity, this large task in
front of you, so it just seems
to me like as you start these
economies of scale, please look
at it from that perspective as
well. I'd love to. I'm sure many
of us would love to help you if
there's legislative work that
needs to be done to help you to
You know, to recruit train and
retain the best talent. It's
going to take money. It's going
to take money to pull people out
of, say, the private sector to
come and do work like this. I'm
sure that you know, as I know
your background and I know you
and I know secretary to set and
others there at the table. The
executive director's You could
probably make it a lot more
money working, you know, doing
something else, So I'm really
appreciative that you're doing
this work.
But I want to set you up for
success by helping you to be
able to recruit, train and
retain talent and that is going
to cost you money to do that. So
please look at your economies of
scale in your efficiencies and
maybe use some of that to get
that done. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's all I have.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Senator. Did you need a response
from that? We'll move on to
thank you.
Thank you for your suggestions
and recommendations, Senator
Woods.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Everybody here understands this
so much better than I do. So if
you will indulge me, I'll ask a
few questions for it, Senator.
Let him chair. The first thing I
have is a new Mexico retiree
health insurance Authority, Sir.
Um
What is the percent solvency we
have in that right now.
Madam Jared, Senator Woods, So
in regards to, um our solvency,
it is projected beyond 2054. The
actuaries won't go beyond that,
because there's so many
different, uh, elements that can
really change that. But as it
relates to the Gatsby 70 for the
study, they produce similar to
the pensions and looking at
exactly what their unfunded
liabilities are currently
standing at 44%. So that has
been an increase that we've
worked diligently over the years
to get where we're at.
And that's that's always
confusing to me, Um
We're saying we're at 44%. That
means that as long as we have
active, persistent opens
We're going to keep building.
That
Ladder forward.
Um, it's what I assume Madam
Chair and
How much would it help? You
know, we're down. I've heard his
high as 30%. I know it's not
that and ever agency
But what would happen if we came
to full employment in the state?
Hmm. Every f t E that was asked
for in the state of New Mexico.
And we hired them all.
And
Hmm. What would happen to your
fund in particular on that? So
madam Jared Senator Woods so in
regards to our agency, you know?
Yes, we are at 44% funded. Um,
with that are different revenue
sources. We do have the active
participation so as it relates
to, you know, the employees
paying you there myself, 1% and
2%, or even our enhanced plans
that are paying the additional
payroll that we get does go into
our fund to continue to help us.
So on occasions where we do have
more revenue coming in than our
claims Utilization, which we've
seen that for consistent basis
Over the years, we are able to
take some of those dollars and
invest them into our trust fund,
and that's how we've had that
growth back in 2007, you know,
looking at the projections back
then I think we were at 100 and
maybe 33 million. We were to
project to be insolvent by 2014.
So you can see where that is
drastically changed. Looking now
at 2024, where we're actually
now at $1.34 billion in managing
this program, so we've you know,
been diligent with whether it be
salary increases. That does help
us. Um, last 11 years we've had
a couple or, you know a number
of times where we've proposed an
increase to the employee and
employer contributions.
Unfortunately, those had in past
but our board has continued to
find ways to ensure that the
benefits that we put through
whether it's either the
contracts or
For rule changes or whatever
we've done. We've ensured this
program to make sure that we
keep making progress moving
forward, so I really do commend
the board on their thoughtful
approaches to get us where we
are today, But every additional
bid does help this program.
So both of them the count of the
employees and the increased
salaries of the employees. Both
has helped the fun.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods. Yes,
both of those would have a
factor. Now. I will say when you
see, like an increase of maybe
to the employees of 4%. Please
keep in mind. We're only
getting, uh you know, 1% of 3%
of that increases what's being
added to the fund, so it's not a
huge but as we add all that
together every year, it does
help.
And I do understand that and
And sometimes I get confused on
your presentation on Page five.
You show the different it says a
Medicare advantage Prescription
drug plan.
And it shows all the different
Um
Providers here and how
They have increased different
and there
Is this enrollment numbers are
this in
Rates they charge there, which
is that madam Chair Senator
Woods. So on slide number five
that is actually the rates are
premiums that are, uh, charges
by the health plans. So just
looking. If I look to the far
right, you can see where we have
a range of prices from $0.01 of
our Medicare advantage.
Prescription drug plans all the
way on up to
One. That's 100 and 86. Now,
please keep in mind. This is the
full price for our retirees who
are receiving a maximum subsidy
would only pay half of that. Um,
but this is just really show
exactly how it is transpired
over the time frame for 2017 to
where we stand today, where
we've been able to manage a lot
of those costs in keeping those
premiums down for members and
providing them choice because I
know there is a lot there and
seeing a different ones.
But for individuals who may be
looking for a lower costing
plan, or based on their health
care needs. This allows them to
make some of those choices for
themselves that are unique to
each individual. So so, madam
Chair and
Sir, You're telling me that each
one of these plans have a little
bit different options as to what
they will pay.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods? Yes.
If you look in those charts
below that is the different
amounts that individuals would
pay as well as you know.
Unfortunately, Healthcare's
There is some some differences
because it can get complicated
as far as the networks being in
Albuquerque, where you have a
Presbyterian network and a
loveless network. Some of that
with these particular plans do
kind of dictate which, you know,
um
Network you're utilizing, so
that could be part of their
choice, So that's why we do have
multiple plans, uh, as well as
different prices for them.
Okay on Page six.
You talk about the eye back and
you list these
These contributors.
They're at the top of the page.
Uh, Albuquerque Public schools
in New Mexico Public school ER
insurance authority.
When we are talking about
forming this healthcare
authority.
Do all of those
Entities that are has their own
healthcare, such as a
Albuquerque public schools. Well
that all funnel into net the new
healthcare authority.
Madam Chair chair. Sorry to
leave you out. Madame Jerry.
Senator Woods. Um, I haven't
seen the legislation. But based
on the legislation and the
presentation and the transition
report, the idea is to once
again, which we already have the
Healthcare purchasing act in
place, as was stated by the
Cabinet secretary, where we all
go out to purchase together, So
we've already been doing that
over time, utilizing the
resources, sharing knowledge and
forming it.
Um, except I think this year as
the secretary said, you know,
they're they're going to wait a
year and so the three of us are
still moving forward with the
medical, dental and vision RFP
of purchasing together, But
essentially, what I understand
is this is taking it to the next
step that even though we are
procuring together now, it would
actually require the Cabinet
secretary to sign off on the
contracts.
Um
So a little concerned from our
agency. I mean, we're positive
in wanting to work together and
do this, But we are worried a
little bit that this does take
some of the governance away from
our board, who currently are the
ones that approved these
contracts. But that is something
that I know we we've we've been
talking about and looking to, We
just look forward to having more
conversation. Um as well as
looking at the legislation,
although, if I did have a
request, I would hope to see
maybe a year of this discussion
before we
Maybe took action, as I think
was stated before having data
and information is always great
before we do something too
quick, But that is what we're
working towards, okay?
And Madam chair. This hits a
subject that
I've been very confused about
And and, uh, Madam Secretary or
mill? Maybe you can.
Tell me this
We are talking about these
different groups.
Having a board.
That governs them.
Ah, such a rates and things like
that.
So what is there?
What is their role?
When we put together
This healthcare authority. What
is the boards? These individual
boards that actually
You know, set the rates. What,
No. Or is the healthcare
authority now gonna set the rate
is that
Madam chair is that's I think
the crux are one of my questions
there.
Uh, Madam, Madam Chair, Senator
Woods, so the vision is to have
the entities convened together
to come up with their purchasing
plan. We don't have healthcare
authority doesn't have authority
over the funds these different
funds, So it's really we believe
that there was legislative
intent when we were asked to as
agencies or entities.
Do the procurement is the
healthcare purchasing acts
requires us to do joint
purchasing? I think there was a
interpretation that that just
was limited to procurement. We
sort of think that we maybe
there was legislative intent
that we all sort of engaged in
joint contracting to gain some
efficiencies and be sort of, I
would say compelled to work
together in the system.
But you know, the healthcare
authority doesn't have any
authority over the funds that
are utilized for healthcare
coverage. So you know, obviously
that would require some joint
work and that's part of what the
governor's executive order will
be is to ask us to really work
together on a plan. Um and so I
envision the next you know,
starting now.
Once the legislative session is
over through, you know this
period of time in 2024.
As really that formal convening
time to negotiate all of those
details and figure out how this
is going to work together. Um,
but we you know, I I will say I
have been a part of some of the
I back meetings. I don't think
there's governance today. Um,
there really isn't. I think
everyone's kind of just going
off and doing decisions, but
there's not really a formal
recommendation made.
Um, that seems to sort of fit
the needs for everyone. And so
we've we would like to advance
that goal.
Well, Madam chair. I'm trying to
to relate Just what I heard
there.
And I know, for example, um
Back in the day when I was on
the school board and and we
needed to get some Gidget or
that Gidget and and a lot of
times we would go to
To a purchasing agreement that
was done through general
services that that had those
digits. Uh, a solid price on
that, and we didn't have to go
out for a beer.
When we would use their
Uh, numbers. They're They're, uh
Facilitated the people they was
using. So is that kind of the
system, Madam charity we're
talking about here. Yeah, Mr.
Madam Chair Senator Woods. I do
envision because we don't have
the data yet, but we don't
really know what the rates would
be. It's possible. I would say
that by working together we
could get a better deal. I think
that's the that's the goal is to
really try to achieve a better
goal.
Across the system.
I don't know. We wouldn't want
to make anything worse. And so
we are, I think really trying to
leverage the purchasing power of
our agency. I mean, I I
You know we're talking about
about 180,000 Total employee. I
believe when we kind of put the
pools together. The Medicaid is
875,000. It's a lot and so we
feel like we have a lot of
leveraging when it comes to the
negotiation of those contracts,
and so we're really trying to
just achieve a better product
for the covered lives in New
Mexico.
Um
And that is that's the goal.
This is sort of leverage better
rates if, for example, were not
able to do that, I wouldn't I
think that we would then sort of
have a different set of
recommendations that would let
each entity sort of continue
doing what they're doing, if if
we can't achieve a better,
better deal, But I am confident
that we, by working together
would be able to achieve some
recommendations in that area.
So Madame Girard. Senator Woods,
So I do agree. I mean, we are
looking to see how we can
improve health care and rates
And I think that the partnership
we can definitely achieve that
little bit of concern is is
rates are part of a contract. So
for us, we utilize rates and
premiums as I stated before in
making sure we cover claims
costs, but some of that does tie
into how it works with our trust
fund. You know, we kind of have
a
A full approach, not only from
our pre Medicare to our
Medicare, and so we have to take
all this into account. Um, as it
relates to data I know. 11
comment was made. We have data
since back to 1995 in relief
relation to our claims. So every
year during our annual board
meeting, these are some of the
things we look at. Between our
claims. We look at our premiums,
so I think those are just some
of the details we need to work
out is saying, because, ideally
if we could get better pricing,
that's a great thing for us. We
would have savings.
Um, but we do know it's part of
the contract, and that's the
part. We haven't quite worked
out. And we would like to see
maybe a little more time to have
these discussions. Uh, you know,
to form this partnership
together, but
I hope that answers to
Okay?
All right, Hmm.
I will move on. I know this is
gonna let me ask you a couple of
more real quick, though. Don't
get excited, Couple more
questions.
Um
So
On on the healthcare authority
itself. Uh, Madam Secretary, you
You're talking, uh,
About on Page nine. There is a
new office of data.
There that you're talking about.
Um
What's that do for us?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Woods.
We don't actually have that
today. So that is a request
that's part of our fiscal year
25 budget request. It's part of
the executive class not
currently in the legislative.
Um, but what that would do is
really be sort of the
Entity that could provide all of
the analytics and information
for stakeholders including all
of you that you need. I think
today we recognize that we are
not able to pull all of the data
and analyze it that we have. And
so it's really to build out that
information so that we can
really have informed
Policies and decision making,
But it it will take you know
again some talent, um some
resources to make sure that we
can do that. But you're you
know, we're asking for it. Huge
investment. It's a huge budget
investment here in the state of
New Mexico. Total budget is
$12.8 billion. We think that we
should be able to provide more
data in analytics to all of you
into the people of New Mexico
and ourselves for better
decision making.
Um, so that we can show
accountability and demonstrate
accountability to the budget,
and that's really what that's
for. All right, well, and I
appreciate that, and
At that moment in time. I would
like to ask if if each one of
you would would send me
Um
A file of all your contractors
and I I know I've asked you
before, and I know that you all
have agreed to do this before,
but I would like it in a CVS.
Found by year
And so I can do.
I've got a guy that knows a guy
that can sort that.
To my specifications of all
contractors of the state, So I'm
asking every agency for that.
So if you all would
I would do that for me on page.
On page 11 of that scene of Do
you? Um,
the New Mexico health care
On page 11 of that scene of Do
you? Um,
the New Mexico Healthcare afford
to be affordability Fund?
There's going to be transferred.
Uh, from the office of the
Superintendent of insurance.
To the healthcare authority, and
I've got over here and some of
my stuff that
That
Lfc is sent out.
And they said that, uh
That should've tax that premium
surtax.
Uh,
Is is currently at 55%.
And
After 2024
That law reduces the
distribution fund.
And I guess that is the
distribution is 55%, and it
reduces it down to 30%.
And what that makes a difference
is and on her health care
exchange.
We had a record breaking
enrollment.
And it says, uh,
56,000 and roll.
But
Um
We're we're fixing to that that
was for premium subsidies.
Now we're fixing to reduce that.
And and is as many of you know,
We've had a lot of RP funds. We
had a lot of federal funds that
came in and and help.
Hey, for some of this stuff.
What I'm wondering is how much
we're going to be on the hook
for
On some of this stuff.
Whenever we took federal funds,
and we start a program
Do we ever stop one?
And
Is there and all the figuring
that we're doing here?
Are we figuring what is going to
be costing us in the future to
subsidize premiums and and and
do that kind of sort of thing?
Just tell me. Yes, we've got
this figured out, Madam chair.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
Senator. Um, we can respond to
that if you please. But can we
be brief Because we're running
out of time, and we still have
Of the next item on the agenda
we have rolled over the
Department of Transportation,
but we do have the state
engineer's office next, and I
had a couple of questions, but
we want Senator Um Woods to have
his question answered. If you
can briefly do that, Senator
Byrd, Did you have a question?
Okay. Thank you can proceed to
respond to Senator Woods on that
request to get the list of
Contracts in that. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Senator Woods. We
are pulling the list of
contracts. That was a request
made. So we're working on that
Regarding the health care
affordability fund. There is a
bill to ensure that that revenue
doesn't go down so that there's
there's definitely a separate
item of legislation not included
in this legislation. Um,
Hospital seven to make sure that
the
Distributions from the fund to
kind of stay at a level to allow
us to maintain those programs.
I'll happy, happy to visit with
you offline with some additions,
Madam Chair If I could just
state the questions I'd like
answered and they could send it
to me.
Thank you, Um the, uh
The next page on Page 12. It's
his performer, claims integrity
audit of the current s O and M
plans. If you concerned an
explanation to that, uh
On on down, it says, uh at 1020
for releasing new procurement
for health benefits if you could
explain that, if further and, uh
The last thing that that
This.
This is huge.
I want to make a streets around
this one.
It says actions allow.
H. C. A to protect employees
from unsupported out of pocket
price increases, deductibles and
co pack pays without adequate
data and understanding the
effects and so
We had a little problem when it
was under General Services
Department. So
Oh, I want you to explain to me
How we're gonna hold premiums.
Steady.
When costs go up. Thank you,
Madam chair. Thank you, Senator.
And you've got those questions
to get into Senator Woods later
on. Okay, Center, Burke and be
quick on this If you can, ma'am,
Thank you, Madam Chair, just a
quick question. Um
I get calls from constituents
and others, sometimes about
Veterans issues, and I know the
call veteran services because
they have one or two people
inside that agency that will
intervene and and work with via
and so on. So forth. Do you have
anyone in the agency that if a
man one of my constituents or
even a hospital
Um, is getting slow pay from
Providers, even up to Medicare,
Medicaid, rather, um
Do you have people within the
agency that will intervene and
try and help exploit those those
payments and other any other
issues that they may have with
the guards to pay Senator.
Sorry, Madam Chair, Senator
Woods. Yes, we do. We'll get you
those points of contact so that
you can work directly with our
team. We have separate context.
We coordinate with the Veterans
Department on food issues for
our veterans and then also on
the healthcare sides will make
sure that you've got those
points of contact Madame chair
just for clarification, Not just
Veterans, but I mean
Just general people who are
under the Blue Cross Blue Shield
or Humana that are not veterans
sometimes have issues. And and
I'm hoping someone can can call
your agent and maybe at least a
good act as a go between to
resolve these issues that would
be appreciated. If you could
send that out because we could
use those Thunderbirds. Same
thing works for us as well if
there's any issues with any of
our constituents, they can call
her office.
We do have a customer service
team as well as our own account
representatives to help us
facilitate those, so just making
sure you were sure. I appreciate
that, because a lot of people
don't know, even hospitals.
Quite frankly, sometimes I don't
know that you can maybe help
them with an issue along the
way. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Burton. I'm
going to go. Um next, and I'm
going to be to the point and you
can respond briefly because of
the time since we have to be in
the Senate chamber by 11, and we
still have another agency. But
let me let me just ask quickly
now.
But Senator Burton thank you,
senator for bringing this up for
the veterans.
Um, I feel like a true recording
and just pushing a button to
play myself again, because I've
asked this question many times,
truly on behalf of veterans, and
there doesn't seem to be a
result or a solution, and I
brought it up to the Department
of Veterans Affairs and anyone
else discussing insurance for
veterans.
This has to do with the the
health care exchange and how
veterans cannot get insurance if
they want additional insurance
through the health care
exchange. They are told that the
healthcare exchanges just for
those who have no insurance.
And because they have
Through the veterans insurance,
which is meager as we know if
there's anything, hardly
anything for them. They're sent
back home with that. I brought
it up to the veterans
Department several years ago,
and I've called the Healthcare
Exchange office. The response I
get is that Oh, it's a federal
issue. It is in the federal law
that
The health care exchange is only
or people can only be eligible
for the healthcare exchange if
they don't have any insurance. I
cannot imagine that the intent
was to exclude our veterans, so
we need to get that fixed if
that is the problem that it
needs to be fixed because
they're veterans are left. These
are I mean, literally. I've had
veterans who go there. Um, they
don't have hardly any income. If
they're disabled, they have a
little something. Hardly
anything. Some don't have any.
They are physically impaired.
Some
Sharp.
Impaired otherwise and have an
extreme time going to
Albuquerque to apply to walk in
there and apply.
Just to be told to come back
home. That is unconscionable,
and I don't know how else
distrust. This really needs to
be changed. Somebody needs to
take the bull by the horns,
drive it through and make sure
that we get a final outcome for
our veterans. Thank you so much
for that, and then another. I
don't need a response. If you
can just do that, that would be
great and then just quickly on
the retired healthcare
authority. Thank you, Neil. And
thanks to all of you for your
Presentations in your work. Let
me go back and just say that we
know that all this combining of
departments and agencies has
been a huge undertaking to say
the least. And so, um, I
appreciate the fact that you
have decided to hold off on
administratively, attaching the
retired healthcare authority to
H S D at this point amongst
other
Um, places you've decided to
kind of pull back and give it a
little more time. I can't stress
enough how important it is to
allow more time for some of
these, um combination or
combining of the different
agencies only because, for
example, with healthcare, um,
authority, well retiree health
care authority. It is unique in
its own sense. We have
A
Large amount, and I remember the
number you mentioned Neil, um of
retirees that
Have depended on the retiree
health care authority insurance
as their their area. That's
their their globe. But that's
where they go to they, you know,
to ask questions to get more
insurance or two or or to state
their preferences or questions,
whatever it may be, But I guess
what I'm trying to say is that
This is not just a forum for
them to walk in there to ask
questions and do all these
things, but it's their place
their place where they paid into
from their little paychecks from
way back a long time ago to
ensure that they had their own
health care authority, So we
want to make sure that we're
careful. And as you're being
careful, thank you. Kerry and
others in the governor for
Giving this more time. Um I do
have a question because we know
that the collaborative
purchasing efforts that we're
working on are good because we
can get better prices and that's
what we want so that we can pass
on these prices better prices to
the retirees and state employees
and others were health
insurance.
Um, there is one thing that came
up today and I just wanted some
clarification. Carry and maybe,
Neil, Um, you mentioned that
although we are not currently
proposing to administratively
attached the retiree Healthcare
authority to HST. There is a
provision that is going to
require the health
Um, insurance. I still call HST
authority. The is going to
require you to or allow you to
sign off on the contracts that
the retiree healthcare authority
gets into my question. My
question is under what
conditions would you be able to
deny that contract?
Ah and and not sign it. Um, do
you have any parameters that
that we can look at on that, or
is that what you're going to be
working on in this next year?
Madam Chair? Thank you. I think
this is a really important
point, which is, I think What
we're trying to do is create
some governance for the I back
because there isn't really
governance today. Um
But that and I've spoken with
Neil about this. You know, the
intention is introduced. Deny
all the requests. Um, it's
really to just sort of make sure
that those decisions are made
jointly with some kind of
governance structure and and
again, we respect the role of
the retiree healthcare board. If
I think if you know the way I
envision this going would be you
know that Neil and the board are
making a recommendation to me,
and I'd have to have really good
standing or reason to not follow
what that recommendation would
be.
Again. We haven't had a lot of
formal discussions yet. We
haven't really done the formal
part of the convening, so that's
something that will be
discussing. I think over the
coming months what that would
look like, but that's really the
way I envision it.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for that. We are hopeful that if
this happens that your mentality
and effort and an attitude
towards this will continue once
there's a change in
administration. Sometimes what
happens is we do all of this or
one administration and things
change, but we want to ensure
that the retiree healthcare
authority amongst others are
secure in obtaining the best
prices. But that's not only the
issue. The issue is the best
benefits.
For our seniors and retirees and
employees. So thank you very
much for that. But I do have
just a point here, Maybe for
Patrick. A real quick. Um,
Patrick, I know that your
insurance rates have been
increasing by 5 to 10%. I think
Sarah Jebediah brought up a
point, but the thing across my
mind immediately as
Since 2020. They've been going
up 5 to 10% almost every year.
What is the rationale behind
that? Is it the I mean, are you
trying to maintain solvency or
what is the issue and briefly,
please? Thank you, Madam Chair
members of the committee. No,
thank you for the question. Um
We're not really trying to
maintain solvency. Even though
we are solvent. Today we have a
fund balance of 6.7 million. The
issue is really just high cost
claimants and that's our issue.
We're paying a lot for our high
class clean, high cost
claimants. We're seeing a lot of
neo plasm cancers amongst our
population. We're seeing
musculoskeletal and those are
really taking up.
A lot of claims costs, which
then we have to increase
premiums just to try and keep
things leveled off. I see. Okay.
Well, thank you for explaining
that. I just wondered about
that, Patrick. Thanks again,
and, um, just quickly began to
the point here. This is for
Neil. Neil on the supplemental
on your page for that you have
and thank you for your good
work.
You know, I really appreciate
this. On Page four. You have the
premiums for the supplemental
insurance and and the insurance
in general for retirees. Um, the
question that I have is the
supplemental insurance that you
offer for retirees is for people
that are on Medicare and um, and
want to purchase the additional
supplemental insurance.
The question that came to my
mind is is this supplemental
insurance because $240 per month
is what I see here. Um, is that
something that is within the
category of this?
Title called Medigap. I've been
reading about that, and I'm
still confused when you read
about Medicare and how they
recommend that people have a
Medigap plan. Is this
supplemental a Medigap or
something different? Madam
Jerry, you're correct with with
Medicare. There's a lot of
different acronyms a lot of
different initials as far as for
different plans. As far as our
supplement plan, it can be
referred to as a Medigap plan.
It is actually a plan G, though,
when you're looking at the
Medicare, so when you have
traditional Medicare, you have
parts A and B for providers and
hospitals.
Great.
You go into Medicare Part C,
which is the advantage plan.
It'll kind of bundle it up
together, which includes our
prescription and then part D is
our is the normal freestanding
prescription plans, But yes, or
supplement would be similar to a
Medigap plan, and it would be a
part G C and one of the reasons
that triggered this question is
that I read that Medicare after
two months if you're in the
hospital, and even if you have
the original Medicare, you know
you. You go to the hospital and
after two months I didn't know
this.
You will be charged 400. I think
it's 460 something like that
every day, regardless of your
coverage from Medicare If you
don't have a supplemental plan
because Medicare only covers up
to 80% most of the time and the
other 20% is left up to the
person on Medicare. The the
thing is that a lot of people
Believe that? Oh, if you have a
supplemental plan that will
cover the other 20%. Well,
apparently not. Because from
what I read, there's after
again, 60 days you will be
required. Everyone will be
required unless you have this
Super Medigap plan required to
pay 460 a day additional to any
other costs. You have
And so I just wanted to make
sure that our matter gap planned
the supplemental plan I'm
talking about. That's the blue
Cross and blue Shield. Right,
Neil? That is correct. And, yes,
fact going to kick in to cover
what Medicare does not cover,
regardless of the time frame.
Whether it's 60 days after 90
days after any time is that what
I hear Madam chair? You're
correct. There are some
deductibles and copays as it
relates to the traditional
Medicare that at times members
would be responsible. That's
where we do come in to cover
those costs as far as that 20%
that Medicare and the
traditional plans is not
covering. In addition, we
provide the prescription benefit
as well with that supplement
plan.
I see. Yes. So, Neil, Um let me
ask this question then. So if
Medicare says not covered, you
go to a doctor. Whatever
hospital where maybe it's and
they have areas that saying not
covered, or whatever the patient
has to be responsible. Does this
supplement plan Blue Cross and
Blue Shield kick in, then to
cover that Because I was told I
called one time and I was told
if Medicare doesn't cover it,
And they denied. We don't pay
it. Well, I thought that's what
the what the supplemental plan
was for.
Tell me, Madam Jer,
Unfortunately, and that scenario
as you did state if Medicare is
not covering, for whatever
reason. Unfortunately, the
supplement plan would not. It
works hand in hand with
traditional Medicare, so it is
covering those additional
charges. Those additional 20%
that Medicare doesn't doesn't
pay. But if it falls outside of
Medicare as far as what they
cover, it would fall outside of
that supplement plan, with the
exception of a couple other
little enhancements that are on
that plan, But that's how it
would work.
I see. Well, that's where that
came out then that that's why
they don't play some. We're
learning a lot. There's there's
several gaps in there that
people need to be aware of, so
that when they do end up needing
medical care that they're not
surprised, and, um you know that
they know if we need to adjust
the coverage is if we need
additional insurance, at least
give people an option.
To cover more of their medical
costs. Madame Chair your
corrected. We do provide
Medicare seminars. We go out on
the road every October to talk
with members because you're
right. It's a big decision. They
need to know all the
differences. And so we do. Try
to find much education so that
they can understand it when
they're making a choice. That's
right for them. Yes. Thank you
very much for that. Okay? And
then express scripts. Teach me a
little bit here. You mentioned
something about the drug plan
the medication.
Bills and all the medications we
need. When you when you get sick
now we have expressed grips.
Does a person pay extra every
month for express express
scripts as a drug plan, or or do
you just say for retirees? Okay,
that have the supplemental plan
Is that included in that $240.
Or is that separate Madam chair?
You're correct. It's included in
that premium dollars.
I see. Okay? And is that a
requirement? Or is that an
option for people? Madam Cherry
does go with the supplement
plan. So it is a requirement,
but I will say that with our
plans as far as our copays what
we do cover We feel very
confident that our plan is as
good or better than many of the
plans that are out there as well
as it protects you even through
the catastrophic phase, which
some part D plans do actually
not do that. So we're happy with
the prescription plan as well.
Thank you. So one last question,
I know gonna move on is is
The plant. The express Scripts
plan that we have, um,
comparable to the part D plan of
Medicare. And if I have an
express scripts plan do I have
to have part d of Medicare? Or
would that be a duplicate Madam
chair as we do after RFP and
select a pharmacy benefit
manager we do look at one for
pre Medicare plan that's carved
out and then we look at one for
the supplement plan that's
carved out. That would be your
part D plan that would provide
all the coverage and in regards
to your prescriptions in that
benefit.
The supplemental one supplement
you would have, especially our
Medicare advantage do work
differently and that they do use
their in house pharmacy benefit
managers person who has the
supplemental plan.
Is over. 65 has Medicare and has
a supplemental plan through the
retiree Healthcare Authority
than has the Express scripts,
Drug plan and does not have to
purchase the part D plan through
Medicare. Um, because that would
be a duplication, I suppose so.
Thank you for that. That's
correct, and in fact, they do
not allow double coverage on
part D. So I think comes to our
attention. We always work with
members to make sure that they
know which plan that they're
selecting and utilizing. Yes,
and some members will be paying
Twice and they don't know about
this.
So thank you so much We
appreciate you continue to
inform and educate a retiree so
that they can know what their
options are, and we can save
them some money and provide good
benefits. I don't think I have
anything else. Senator, Um
Gonzales. But can you allow me
senator for just because I just
remembered you said you have
legislation. Kneel on. This is
that for increased funding to
maintain the solvency or
Madam chair as far as
legislation this year, we do
have a joint resolution and
protecting the trust fund. Um
through the new big toe
constitution, and I will say
that actually are sponsored.
That Bill is sitting right next
to you as well. Okay, thank you
very much for that, and I'm
going to go to Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair just
follow up. So on the supplement.
To cover the 20%.
Somehow, I don't know for they
would pay 80% of the 20%.
And you always have a balance.
Yes, that true or not, Madam
Chair Central Gonzales. No. So
we are secondary and that
Medicare would pay first. And so
typically, as we describe,
you'll say that they'll cover
80%. It's that difference that
we would pick up. The only
caveat that we do have is we
have a part B deductible that
you do have to meet. But once
you meet that on the medical
side, everything else will be $0
out of pocket.
Ah, so it can be for somebody
who's utilizing quite a bit of a
supplement plan. They could meet
that deductible the first month
and then they would have no
additional charges that relates
to medical for the remainder of
that year as long as it's
covered by Medicare, ma'am,
Sure, the deductible is
different deductible for
everyone depends on what you
choose, or is it 11 fee?
Madam Jerry Center, Gonzales so
far supplement it would be the
same deductible for everybody.
That's under that plan on our
advantage plans. None of those
actually have a deductible.
And the Manchuria. What would
that be?
Um, Madam, Jerry. Sorry. Had to
look back real quick. Senator
Gonzalez, it is 240.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Alrighty. I think for the sake
of time we're going to move on.
I want to thank each and every
one of you for your hard work.
This has been an inordinate job
for you. And we appreciate you
looking out for the best prices
for people and insurance and the
best benefits Thanks again, and
we're going to move to, um
The next one on the agenda. My
agenda is somewhere here. Okay,
Um, thank you. We're going to go
on to the state engineer's
office. Next, um and then the
Department of Transportation as
we mentioned earlier was rolled
over. So we will, perhaps this
afternoon or another day. We
don't know yet on the D O T.
So state engineer's office
engineer, Hammond and staff.
Thank you. Hi.
So state engineer's office
engineer, Hammond and staff
Thank you high.
So state engineer's office
engineer, Hammond and staff.
Thank you. Hi.
Oh, ship.
Okay. Thank you very much. I was
talking here about the insurance
with Senator Gonzalez. So we're
going to move into the point if
we can thank you so much, Um,
state engineer and introduce
yourselves, please, for the
record and the Webcast, and then
we already have your hand down
so we can move quickly. All
right. Good morning, madam Chair
will go very quickly. If my name
is Scott Sanchez I'm the LFC,
analyst for natural Resources
sitting with me today, state
engineer Mike Hammond.
Director of the Interstate
Stream Commissioner, Hannah
Righteously White and my
counterpart from the Department
of Finance and Administration,
Monica Tapia. Um, I'm gonna just
breeze through this. Uh, if you
look behind Tab five, you'll see
this engineer agency code 550.
You can find more. Can you speak
up a little louder? I had a hard
time. I think it's not. Yes,
ma'am. Sorry about that. Thank
you. Closer to the mic. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Um, you can find more
information on the LFC
recommendation in volume one
starting on Page 154 and in
volume two on page 253. There
are also some supplemental
charts showing the agency's fund
balance and water rights
adjudication. Progress on Page
62 and 63 of lfc is Volume
three the only real differences
between the FY 25 budget
recommendations are that the
executive increases General fund
revenue by approximately 2.8
million, or 9% over fy 24.
Whereas the LFC recommendation
increases General fund revenue
by approximately 2.2 million, or
7.2%.
The executive recommendation
includes expansions of 34 FTE
across the agency, whereas the
LFC recommendation adds 27,
supported by an increase of 2.2
million from the General fund.
The difference of roughly
553,000 is due to slight
differences in the number of FTE
funded for water settlement
negotiations, Implementation and
climate change resilience
programs between both
recommendations. The LFC funds
fewer positions in the water
rights allocation program,
largely because of current
personnel surpluses in that
program. The LFC recommendation
allows the agency to fully fund
all new vacant positions through
the use of general fund
increases in vacancy savings.
Finally, the Yellow Sea
recommendation funds. One
additional ft over the executive
in the litigation and
adjudication program.
And with that, I'll hand it over
to Monica.
Earlier. We can hear it on this
microphone. My name is Monica
Tapia. Um, the d f a analyst.
Thank you, Monica.
Thank you. Scott, Madam chair
and members of the committee,
The executive recommendation
includes an overall expansion of
34 Ft. Within the expansion is
14 ft from term to permanent and
a seven FTE count correction.
These changes do not impact the
budget as funds are currently
built in
The 2,000,769 0.6, or 9% General
Fund increase will fund the true
expansion of 13 ft, providing
the agency and overall funded
vacancy rate of 94.8.
The additional positions are
essential to the agency to carry
out the mission and purpose of
the organization, which the
state engineer will provide more
information on I will now pass
it over to state engineer might
The additional positions are
essential to the agency to carry
out the mission and purpose of
the organization which the state
engineer will provide more
information on I will now pass
it over to state engineer Mike
Hammond. Alright, engineer
Hammond, You're next. Good
morning, Madam Chair name is
Mike Hammond, the Mexico state
engineer. Um, as, uh, your
analysts have said. Our request
does.
Um, put forward
A fundamental need that we've
analyzed over budget planning
period of the next five years
And as you know, we receive
significant
Um specials and capital
appropriations last year.
To address settlements, the in
the lower Rio Grande issues in
the Middle Rio Grande associated
with contact under deliveries
and channel ization issues and a
number of things that are
overlaying on top of our our
traditional core mission of
Water Rights Administration and
and compact
Management, Um
We've got a few updates. The
Texas V New Mexico litigation
continues to move forward.
Uh, all of the briefings have
been submitted. In that case, um
and the Supreme Court is due to
announce, uh, the the date that
there will be oral argument.
Um, but I would like to say that
we have 23 other states that
have compact issues across the
United States that have weighed
in with briefings of a Mickey,
uh, in support of the three
state consent decree and New
Mexico. We also had 10
professors from across the
prominent law schools that are
submitted Mickey Briefs in favor
of our settlement as well.
So we have a lot of support out
there. We've also done an
extensive job of integrating the
work between the Middle Rio
Grande and the lower Rio Grande.
It's one system. We got to
manage it like one system, and
we have to work closely with all
of our water users and both of
those basins in order for us to
advance the programs that you
all are funding for us.
We've had several water light
right settlements moving
forward. We have to pending in
Congress right now with, um on
the Rio San Jose and the Real
Hemas and four pebbles are
involved in those and many other
local communities. And and I say
Kia's are impacted by that, as
well as to other negotiated
settlements that are pending.
Actions in Congress as well. So
we expect the need to continue
to grow our resources and what
we've submitted before you this
year would allow us to
accomplish this. This mission.
um, both at the core level to
expand our enforcement
capabilities because water
enforcement is becoming more and
more of an issue throughout the
state.
Um And we also have, um, the RP
dollars that have been submitted
to tour agency. We received
$40.3 million. We've submitted
additional information to D F A
and to this body as well as, uh,
House finance that illustrates
that we will accomplish.
The the spending plan for the
opera dollars with the exception
we did we heard Senator Munoz
loud and clear the chair, uh,
and identifying a specific
project that would, uh, qualify
for a swap with general funds,
And we think the Power Lake Dam
Project $10 million would be one
of those that we would put forth
for that purpose.
Um, we have four major, you know
programs. One is the Interstate
Stream Commission for that
director and Hannah righteously
white. We'll speak to, uh now
and then we'll dive into the
budget numbers. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators. Good to be with you
this morning again. Hannah. Rosy
White Interstate Stream
Commission Director. I know you
have a commitment on the floor,
so I'll keep it brief. Um, I
want to start just by thinking
the Legislature for your
investment in us last
legislative session. We received
significant non recurring
funding That really helped us
jumpstart a number of critical
initiatives.
Across the state, including in
the lower Rio Grande, where we
stood up a groundwater
conservation program in and in
haste, knowing that the longer
term fixes yet to be worked on
with stakeholders in that part
of the region, Um significant
work, um in the Middle Rio
Grande as well to leverage
federal funding with the state
funding we received for Channel
maintenance, flood control and
Habitat restoration.
Major efforts, as you know, are
underway in the Colorado River
basin, particularly related to
the negotiations on post 2026
operations of lakes, Powell and
need and also, we used funding
from last legislative session to
implement the strategic water
reserve. Um, on a landmark lease
agreement with Hickory Apache
Nation, which is, um, really
exciting moment in time.
We are working across the state,
including, you know, continued
success on the Pecos, the
investment the Legislature made
a couple of decades ago. There
has enabled us to maintain our
combat compliance quite
successfully there. The big
effort in Eastern New Mexico now
is work at you Reservoir to
prepare for connection of the
Eastern New Mexico pipeline, So
we'll be working heavily on
that. I think
The most important ask for you
All this session has to do with
staff capacity, so the increased
FTS in both budgets,
particularly the executive
wreck, are going to go a long
way to helping us get those
funds on the ground, leverage
federal funding and help
communities across the state.
Prepare for increasing water
scarcity. The last thing I had
mentioned just briefly.
Is the passage of the Water
Security Planning Act last
legislative session so passed
unanimously. We really see that
effort as critical to helping
communities across the state
Prepare for increasing scarcity.
It's time to act now and be
proactive. Um, and preparing for
those changes, and from a budget
standpoint, that's certainly the
smartest thing to do.
And with that, knowing that
you're short on time, I would
say we welcome you all to reach
out any time we'd be happy to
provide additional information
as needed. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair.
You? Yes. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Your This body is very
interested in our progress on
our
Um, and our staffing and and our
vacancy rates. We've pushed that
down below 16%. Now we've we
hire two thirds of our staff,
our professional staff and we've
been recruiting extensively and
we've been doing a great job of
filling a number of vacancies,
So we feel extremely confident
that the new staffing levels
that we were really Seve.
Will go a long ways to allowing
us to fulfill our obligations
that Hannah also outlined for
you as well. And with that, uh,
Madam chair. We have our budget
numbers that's been presented
and we stand for questions that
you may have
I said this before and many
times and marvel at the many big
big tasks that you work on, and
you've done many of them with
very limited resources, And this
involves water. The greatest
resource we can think of for
everyone, and so I just want to
thank you for the staff.
And D F A staff also, thank you,
Scott. But we're going to move
for a quick question here only
because we're getting already to
the floor. So Senator share year
next and Senator Woods. Are you
sure? I know you're looking at
me like no. Okay. Well, thank
you. I'm gonna wait on mine,
too. So, Senator share very
quickly. Um, so the
Staffing recommendation from Lfc
s 27. You're asking for 34, but
you've got a bunch of empty
vacancies now.
What will 34 do for you?
If you can't feel what you have,
what will 27 do for you? If you
can't feel what you have
Thank you, madam Chair.
Senator? Sure that we we We have
essentially 20 recruitments in
process right now.
Um, that are we're moving
forward on and we're confident
that we're continuing to chip
away at our vacancy rate. But as
you know, there's turnover and
retirements and a lot of things
that go on in that regard, so
there's a base
Uh, great that all agencies
experience and we're not alone
in that regard, but the growth
the need for our growth really
is to expand our capacity,
particularly in the lower Rio
Grande. As we implement the
settlement that we know is
forthcoming there. Um, and then
we have a number of of core
mission issues. As I mentioned
earlier that we need to expand
our capabilities and all of our
district offices across the
state.
In order to ramp up our
enforcement. So we we, we we
will have a core.
Vacancy rate continue, but we'll
continue. Also add professional
staff and grow so our court
vacancy rate might move the same
way as it always does, But But
we have sufficient, um,
experience recently that people
are interested in coming back to
governors government service,
particularly in the water and
natural resources. Okay, Thank
you, madam Chair.
Okay?
Alright. Thank you very much
Senator share and I don't have
anyone else on the list
Questions and, um, I'm going to
circle around to talk to you
later. I have a couple just to
make sure we understand
something that's been presented
here and we can talk offline. So
thank you very much for this and
we're going to move on Senator
Woods. Are you sure you're
looking at me like,
you know, but you've given me
that Look that I'm almost ready
to let you speak as long as you
want, but
Tell me. Oh, thank you. All
right, we're gonna move on then.
Thank you so much, and we'll
talk to you again soon. Sure.
We are adjourned for the morning
a recessed and we will be back
