but I guess there's some people
want to take photography I guess
if you will make in a list with
your names so we know who's
taking pictures and where from
that way in case something
happens
so it's all right to do that
just kill list with their names
and numbers and they represent
on the agenda we're gonna house
bill two today we spend a lot of
time on specials and
supplementals and the entire
budget
they came over the whole about
eleven point eight million eight
point nine million in
reoccurring money that we can
spend which is not that much
money in this type of budget so
We're gonna get started there
and then bill you're going to
start us off the representative
I think isn't committee's gonna
come over and just a minute
right.
They would even be with.
we officially from for at.
And as we go through this
process we'll probably get to a
point in stop and ask questions
and then continue from there so
we don't keep building and
building and and go on from
there.
Thank you Mr chairman you should
have with you at
this key budget issue then the
top.
that basically summarizes.
Of the first page of the report
is going on in the in the
hospital to.
The.
The following pages are
different spreadsheets there we
go over in more detail as we go
through this process if you
would from.
Bills they may have to move that
Mike that's next closer to you
we can get.
This will.
Separatists are going to have to
push a button and get as close
as you can see.
Fund okay.
All right yeah I couldn't hear
myself either.
Mr chairman the health okay that
is coming over to you all.
Is the appropriation for FY
twenty four nine point four
three billion.
About four percent for FY twenty
three.
It it's about the same level of
both executive provided
recommendations.
The house.
basically use the LFC.
Process and the programmers that
were set by the LFC in terms of
our program budgets etcetera so
we're pretty we pretty much
Representative right with that
one there's a few changes of
course but there are.
Other than that measurements
were returned visitation area
public schools is up eight point
six percent.
For FY twenty three.
It's not the same as the LFC
mail yes the recommendations.
It provides about three hundred
million for extended learning.
After getting ready for
education assistance thirty two
million for at risk students.
And forty million nonrecurring
for career technical education.
The subject to.
Our public schools higher
education employees receive an
average salary increase of five
percent.
The minimum salary for
educational assistance will be
about twenty five thousand
dollars.
That's there anymore.
But also provides a one percent
education pensions contribution
increase in provides parity with
state employees for educator
health insurance coverage for
higher ed recurring general fund
appropriate eighty million
dollars.
Seven point eight percent.
Senator also provides a hundred
and twenty million for the
opportunity scholarship.
Early childhood Mr chairman.
The general fund appropriations
for the early childhood
education care department one
hundred and thirty five million
dollars sixty nine percent.
And sharply increased funding
for border prekindergarten and
child care.
The.
Appropriation through CYFD are
up six percent and includes
funding to build hundreds of
existing and use social worker
positions and funding for ever
everybody evidencebased
programs.
Rated as well supported.
To help very Mr chairman.
The general fund appropriation
Medicaid is up one hundred
twenty eight two hundred
eighteen million or eighteen
percent.
It provides Medicaid provider
rate increases greater than ten
percent.
To promote recruitment and
retention of healthcare
providers.
The are you from the general
fund appropriation department
health.
Ten years funding all
developmentally disabled slots
and provide significant provider
rate increases and start up
programs for alcohol treatment
and prevention.
The increase for behavioral
health services.
across the Health Human Services
children youth and families and
early childhood education.
And care departments and other
agencies total a hundred and
sixty four million and recurring
and nonrecurring appropriations
from the general fund and other
funds.
Health professionals reserve
twenty million of opioid Madam
revenue spend housing services
telehealth.
Use.
The research and treatment.
Gentleman that the number
development tourism area.
The recommendation reprimand
Development Department recurring
budget has an increase of one
point nine seven million or
eleven point three percent.
Also makes me want members one
time investment economic
development appropriated a total
of a hundred and six point one
in the one million dollars a
special appropriations.
Including fifty million for
public private partnerships.
Focused on energy related
projects two point two million
for business incubators and
entrepreneurs support.
Two million for creative
industries fifteen minutes for a
local our economic development
actor Liza three million for job
training incentives.
One wanted for outdoor equity
grants ten million for trail the
projector grams and fifty
million for the venture capital
fund.
The tourism department Mr
chairman.
You'll see a funding increase of
two point three million.
For eleven point one percent.
Also approved a total of
fourteen and a half million in
one time appropriation for
tourism.
Which is a two point five
million dollar increase over the
LFC for recommendations for the
agency's top priorities
including oil and eleven million
for national marketing campaign
to create a half million for
local tourism development.
In the natural resources
director chairman.
The
the substitute for House
recruitment budgets of the
department.
Environment energy minerals and
natural resources department and
office of the state engineers
and other agencies
Representative significant
increase in part.
For fiscal year two thousand
twenty four totaling two hundred
ninety one point two million
recurring and nonrecurring
appropriation.
Fund.
Agency budget increases in the
house through include a fourteen
percent increase.
Through the energy and minerals
and natural resources department
at eleven point two eight
percent increase for the
Department fireman.
More than recommended by either
the LESC or the executive.
The seven point two percent
increase in general fund
appropriation for state
engineer.
Including including one million
and expenses of the water
resource allocation and
litigation education program.
Chairman compensation.
In additional for the papers are
mentioned earlier for public
schools higher education
employees.
The house bill two provides five
percent average rate increases
for all employees and targeted
improve creases for many jobs
such as nurses prime minister
that this case workers judges
district attorneys.
Mr chairman and house but
they're approximately has
approximately nine hundred
million for the general fund
special appropriations increase
including all of our madam forty
million for law enforcement
forty million for recreation
center fifty million per match
federal Senator energy
investment twenty million for
higher education building
renewal and two hundred and
thirty million for state and
local rules.
Reserves and other Mr chairman.
The statement land lease general
fund reserves of thirty percent.
And maybe steal some of some of
your goals in the LFC
recommendation.
There is still room.
For over one billion in tax
changes.
This perhaps less for rebates
given the increase in capital
spending.
Six hundred fifty million for
one point zero seven five
billion dollars.
Hospital through still assumes
approximately eight hundred
million dollars and transfers to
the severance tax permanent fund
your turn now money into future
money to address the oil and gas
volatility and long term
decarbonisation goal.
Eight three two also bring
transfer to the water trust fund
and the land of enchantment
conservation fund.
Two one hundred million dollars
a.
Chairman at the prove that
questions.
Your grocery receipt different
spreadsheets here.
And the first one is a.
if you want to stop right
numbers German that is good.
Go into this in more detail
thank you for.
Okay.
Our.
House Bill.
The next spreadsheet.
Is the thank you to FY twenty
four general fund high level.
Summary.
And you'll see the L. HFC column
and that column is is.
Compared to the LFC called.
Thirty years you'll see in the
SCG or seventy six point eight
million dollars.
higher the LFC.
Are the related in public
schools that are reductions of
the proposed to education sixty
eight point eight million
dollars.
Go through the
public schools.
Correct Mr Chairman just a
comment.
Part of that reflects online
forty one instead of taking the
the ninety four million that
came from the land the permanent
fund and sending it to the
public at reform Fund and then
to the general fund HSC moves
the land grant permanent fund
revenue directly into the SCG so
that's why HSC is higher by
sixty eight point eight million
but then if you look at one
forty one it's lower because
that kind of deterrent detour
through the public at reform
Fund went away to just to
clarify that Mr Chairman.
There are also thank you is
that.
you see in the higher education.
Or where it is.
I.
What food banks and.
Agency for.
But.
The details just to make sure.
The company and
I would like to.
You use this
All what is wrong with the.
Right read about it because I do
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for having us here
today I wanted to get agencies
started we're certainly here
legislation I apologize for
being a couple minutes like Mr
chair and big thanks of course
to Mr Valdez Mr agency through
this for a very long time and of
course Mr Abbey Mr Saly.
We.
Movements through the schools
okay great so now we're going
down into
my okay sorry we're on on higher
education and so here Mr chair
committee members on the high
level.
the the largest increase of
course is here to the higher
education department that was
twenty three point two million
combined with other non
reoccurring additional
investments that agency
considered this is for
that the opportunity scholarship
Mr chair there's still a slight
delta between what the executive
projects to be the opportunity
opportunity scholarship cost and
what came over HB to however
that delta has narrowed
significantly also Mr chair
really in conjunction with and a
lot of great ideas from you on
this committee about guard rails
and just ways to ensure that we
know what we're budgeting that
is also part of the budget
language as it relates to the
higher education
Mr chair we we did not we kept
the I. N. G. increase as what it
came in and the LESC framework
it was an area that I think
there was a.
I'm telling
presentations made about why
that's why additional money need
increase could be particularly
helpful for institutions but we
focused on narrowing the delta
around the opportunity
scholarship.
There are a few other
categorical sort of of right
sizing if you will Mr chair
committee members
appropriations to sort of bring
into as close of bounces we
could the person funding at
different higher education
institutions.
going through going down now Mr
chairman to that and it I would
just also say there there are a
number of nonrecurring special
appropriations across a very
wide area for higher education
institutions those include the
opportunity scholarship those
also include building B. R. in
our the building renewal and
replacement I think it's million
dollars
there is there were increase
increases our PS fees that went
through a fairly close scrubbing
by several years of
subcommittees in their HFC
And then I think that with the
two from the higher education
institutions perspective a lot
of good the I. Angie remains
sort of a challenge course
continuing to narrow that down
to around the opportunity
scholarship going down to the
courts Mr chairman
I think it's a point of pride
that
the we met and slightly exceeded
after a few increases the
executive recommendation there
again are also a number of
special appropriations there was
a focus on security at our
courts as well as increases for
our judicial system
that is particularly apparent
sure when you go down the line
fourteen for our district
attorney's.
the district attorney's there
was really just a small change
from the LFC recommendation the
HSD made as I recall I think
it's for the eleventh judicial
district we saw all judicial
district attorney's receive
increases year over year they
were the one that did not have
that so the committee chose
percent extra pay for elected
officials that in this rise
reminded me that it was a five
percent pay for a elected
officials for the district
attorney's themselves the
beginning of the hearing they
pointed out that the increased
compensation the proposed
through the LFC budget
recommendation which you see is
higher than the executive
recommendation was positive that
the this is what amount was
meant to be that increase for
our district attorneys
themselves include it to help
recruit retain and ensure that
that maintains a vibrant
position.
Here on our the public
defender's again the LFC came in
with a higher recommendation
then did the
then did the executive we stuck
with that recommendation and and
adopted that from the LFC course
here Mister chair one of our
core challenges having enough
attorneys enough workforce to
recruit from
it does seem Mr chair that some
of the things the legislature's
done over the past couple years
including the rule methadone
have been helpful although not
sufficient.
Here on online sixteen going
through for the tax and Revenue
Department not really much
change at all I will know how
over Mister chair I think in a
special appropriation there was
the HSC we did do an increase
for potential tax changes the
department acts I think for like
a flat five million every year
to implement potential changes
since we included one billion
dollars of recurring capacity
for potential tax changes the
committee felt it was important
to support them through that
special appropriation.
Going down the line seventeen.
in the department of finance
administration.
We you see a a slightly higher
increase there
And.
I'm not remembering actually Mr
it was Mr chairman about two
hundred thousand for civil legal
services and the balance for
reducing vacancy rate so they
can play a few more people
Representative smiles when it
used to the highlights of the
big and small numbers of
a million plus and and and we
can so that sounds great Mr
chairman you've got to committee
so you can kill CNO that that's
great I appreciate that very
much Mr chair I would note
online twenty two it's not quite
a million very close this is a
hundred thousand for economic
development this is for
incubators and some other
priorities that the department
really highlighted
the here at energy minerals and
natural resources department Mr
Chairman the the slight a small
amount of that increase went to
state parks to maintain staffing
levels and to as they're
investing in state parks at a
little bit of staffing the
majority of that is going Mr
chair to the oil conservation
division in order to do a number
of things that OCD is wanted to
do Mr chairman committee this is
both from making the health and
safety perspective doing their
required
inspections and the like but
also Mr chairman we saw
performance measure.
That they're permitting time
that is the response industry
request for performance areas
right away that the oil and gas
industry requesting has dropped
in to and measure it like ninety
five percent
it's dropped to around eighty
seven and so this was
particularly important to the
committee to be able to inspect
everything that they need to
inspect also for them to have a
quick turnaround time is our oil
industry particularly grow
substantially and now we're over
fifty million barrels a month
Dropping down line twenty six
this one Mr chairman
there there are there are a
number of different revenue
sources here I think for the
committee to really focus on
The court there the big
difference that remains with the
executive is getting the right
balance between expanding pre K.
slots and extending the pre K.
day verses or or or alongside Mr
chairman very strong executive
emphasis on robustly funding
child care at all levels Mr
chair we had a very an extensive
hearing continue to have good
conversations the committee
changed from the LFC
recommendation put a significant
amount more into childcare but
there was a strong I think I've
safe to say committee wide
appreciation for the importance
of pre K. Mr chair committee pre
K. E. we have cohorts in New
Mexico is course you know you
and your members know better
than I
where the pre K. a New Mexico
kids are now seeing incredibly
positive outcomes works the
majority of the funding I think
it's sixty eight million goes to
extending the pre K. day there's
a smaller share Mr chair
committee that goes to creating
new pre K. slots as being
fourteen hundred slots at
there's still a lot of
conversation back and forth with
the executive around this think
there's a shared appreciation
that pre K. A. and child care
are equally important they don't
replace one another pre K.
doesn't take away the need for
all child care on the other hand
Mr chair it does take up a
significant amount of time and
there is a demand out there for
more pre K. slots also Mr chair
just to highlight an issue
there is depending upon
children's age and if they're a
little bit older they in some
communities around the state it
appears that they may be this.
Allowed from going further into
a extending their pre K. A. time
if they if they're a little bit
older that was an area that the
committee wanted to flag and I
would just encourage you all to
sort of keep an eye on it seems
like it may be an agency
decision Representative small
can you touch on that again four
stroke with yes Mr chair and I
may just Mr Abbey Mr see the
silly to elaborate
If a hi in New Mexico child is
going to turn I or can you go
into more detail press Mr so if
you want Mr chair.
Mr chairman we heard testimony
on the house floor debate that
there were an instance where a
child had turned for during the
middle of the screen you turn
five during the middle of the
school year and the school
district descend role that child
from pre K. because they said
the department would not give
them any funding for that child
we think that's an
administrative issue that the
children should continue to get
funding even if the age up to I
just like they do in public
schools and we're working with
the department to better
understand if that was an error
or if that's a policy change
that needs to occur at the
department it's not a funding
issue though Mr chairman the
money is there funding was
limited to one incident or as a
means
Mr chair we've only heard
testimony about the one incident
so I don't know the extent.
Mr chair going on then into
In our aging and long term care
department there was an
additional one million dollars
recurring that was putting in
into the aging the aging
services that was the emphasis
for the committee there's an
additional eight million dollars
special appropriation that would
be available immediately with no
limit to how they can spend it
in this was a thirteen percent
increase
not including at eight million
dollars special so that this was
one of the larger increases that
the committee concert.
Moving down Mr chair
The.
Okay maybe Medicaid tweet.
The.
Here let me go to to Medicaid in
behavioral health care services
there are a few different
changes here Mister chairman
some were based upon
updated projections that came
from the from Human Services
Department that slightly reduce
costs this is also an area where
the committee remove twenty four
million dollars that had been
coming from the health care
affordability fund into Medicaid
there is a ten million dollar
special appropriation from the
health care affordability fund
but because the health care
affordability fund sensually
goes live this year Mr chairman
that was that general fund
or the health care bill forty
bility fund was put back into
the health care affordability
fund
this is a of course Mr chairman
is as you all know the eighty
three million dollars there's a
I think it's a two hundred and
eighteen million dollar overall
increase that's going to
Medicaid
Maybe slightly higher there is a
in particular there is an eighty
three million dollar
reimbursement increase across a
number of different levels and
there's right
There is right information Mr
chairman on this we're we're
gonna see health care
professionals we'll be seeing
significant reimbursement
increases role Emergency
Management or medical services
will be seeing twenty plus
percent reimbursement increases
of course children and and
maternal health care.
Receiving
much higher reimbursements
maternal and child health
Attorney related thirty one
percent child health in E. P. S.
D. T. forty one percent we we
took the so so that was a
particularly I think point of
pride not a big change from what
we came in with in the LFC level
in the main changes there is do
those
lower cost projections from the
department that I know the
department and the see can
explain to.
We did I think something the
note here also the committee and
spent twenty million dollars
from the opioid settlement this
is spread across a number of
different areas it includes
additional funding to go to
linkages it includes one million
dollars for
substance use treatment with
working with sovereign tribal
nations to in a number of other
Amounts going to behavioral
health care
in in other sources services
expanding housing services
telehealth substance use
research and treatment.
the course we have a very large
across all areas
this is on a high level Mr
chairman but a hundred sixty
four million in recurring and
nonrecurring appropriations for
behavioral health care to think
is something that folks are
super excited.
The go into the other.
Some of the other agents here
we they're of no I think the the
office of the governor asked for
and received think roughly five
hundred thousand dollar increase
to support some of the work that
they're doing across the line
number of areas
Of course we have the.
Going through here there was
some additional money Mr
chairman an increase of the
legislative building services an
extra two hundred thousand there
these are the smaller agencies
trying to look.
Thank.
S. T. E. P. C. yes thank you
these are these don't quite rise
to that million dollar level
again but there's a DD PC
increase of three hundred
thousand dollars
the department of the
environment a number of non
recurring special appropriations
for a number of different
projects I understand that
that's appreciated there may be
a need to sort of so the shuffle
where those are to get some of
the work like water re use done.
There was.
One I want to note Mr chairman
online one thirty eight this is
the new office of family
representation and advocacy
there's a question that's been
raised about whether or not
federal funding will or will not
go away for this office the
committee included an extra four
hundred thousand recurring
four four offer a this is a
particularly important tool for
working with families in crisis
I would just highlight this area
Mr chairman there's still
research is being done to
understand whether that federal
funding that we need to will be
there or not and just something
the sort of keeping an eye on Mr
chairman
Crime victims of crime we have
an increase here for the crime
victims reparation commission
including the number that are
related to sexual assault
services there and I think Mr
chair
and then I'm sure that that Mr
Valdez Mr Abbey when into it
I'll conclude mainly with course
again there's significant this
the LFC endorsed recommended tax
change capacity up to one
billion dollars Mr Chairman we
had a eight hundred and fifty
million dollars severance tax
permanent fund
To go to the deposit.
Yes you for page line here
Mister chair.
There's some really good
analysis here that
we're in the midst this is what
we've seen volume and revenue
wise all indications point to
continued increasing oil volumes
of with extreme volatility both
on price and other things the
continued volume increases
through the end of this decade
of allowing for a lot of
uncertainty there those volumes
plateau and I think start to
decrease Mr chair in the mid
twenty thirties
is what is projected in the
severance tax permanent fund
their various levels that
basically putting that away now
it begins to pay for itself in
and around the time where the
oil vault volumes are currently
forecast to start potentially
declining.
Is so and so that's eight
hundred fifty million there Mr
chair
we currently rebates and that's
online twenty five.
but that Mr chair you can see
we added I believe about thirty
eight million dollars and thirty
eight million dollars and
special appropriations.
And.
Other fund transfers at around
two hundred and fifty.
Those are the big things Mr
chair
and I think.
I would turn it over that very
few other changes from the LFC
framework outside of that we did
of course keep our reserves at
thirty percent
Enter over if the strategy is
chairman I like to make one
important point I think on page
three.
And.
There's a lot of conversation
about how much did HSC spend
versus LFC and so forth and I
think it's worth going through
The chosen one forty five that
there's eleven point six million
recurring unspent from the LFC
spending level so you might say
that's all the house left you
but also I would make I would
bring up the question what to
the house spend above LFC and it
turns out the number I have is
twelve and a half million I
think it's worth going through
real quickly if you take out
opportunity which is sort of
really and executive initiative
The LFC was lower and and I
think both the house and Senate
will be glad to have a higher
number than the LFC number like
this twenty three million in
line eleven if you take that out
and you take out a million for
the governor one point two for
the governor DFA which is in
line thirty six well then all
the ads in this column total
twelve and a half million.
So so that's kind of a it this
eleven and a half this left
isn't by accident it's kind of
thinking about the house spent
twelve and a half and leaving
here's approximately eleven and
a half of course the Senate will
want to change any number of
things up and down but it I
think would like to say that the
house was pretty attentive to
trying to think about what what
totally different than what was
starting with the LFC
recommendation and and then one
last point on the LFC
recommendation is higher than
the executive but if you look at
early childhood the executive
funded that almost entirely with
nonrecurring.
With a nonrecurring specials
like a hundred thirty million so
when you adjust early childhood
which is row twenty six.
We're the LFC was a hundred and
thirty three million higher than
the executive because executive
use nonrecurring this think the
LFC spending level was really
less than executive after that
recurring adjustments so.
It's this this is a twelve point
four percent spending increase
and it's was mostly coming out
of the hearings and LFC have
called for thank you Mr chairman
and then.
Thanks to the chairman of the
meeting thank you Mr I think
that appreciate very much the
opportunity and thank you.
He need to get back to committee
good for a few more that for a
few minutes Mr.
I guess this go to questions.
House Bill to is it came over
and then we'll go to special
supplemental.
After that.
Question center share center.
Senator Rodriguez Mr chairman
good afternoon yes Mr chair and
of course all our staff bill
everyone here today just a quick
question first first I want to
say thank you for working
incessantly on this it's never
an easy process we know we've
been here right thank you it was
quite interesting Mr chairman
you mentioned about the higher
education the I. N. G. and so on
because that is something we
worked on all summer as you may
remember you and I co chair and
chair at the higher at Committee
subcommittee and there's still
so much more to be done so I'm
happy that we're able to to take
a piece at a time and do it
reasonably with forethought
because sometimes we take on too
much by the big piece and then
later on have to go back and do
it some happy we're we're doing
that but I just have a just a
couple of points one of the
linkages tell me once again
maybe David Mr chairman can
answer that quickly for us how
much is in linkages I was trying
to find here under because this
is high level and I didn't have
a chance to go into the thank
just wanted to see how much and
if it's I think we only had a
million in there and we thank
thank you Mr chair thank you
vice chair I there is it's three
million dollars between the
general fund and the opioid
settlement I see okay all right
thank you very much for that and
then just a point I wanted to
mention on the pre K. in child
care and information that we
spoke about today through your
presentation and and you know
that as you mentioned Mr chair
that you're right they're
they're both equally important
you know and so what do you do
here to between pre K. and child
care assistance and so on to to
be able to to do the right thing
of that you know that I guess
one of the questions that
crosses my mind immediately is
that if we don't do pre K.
through out year round and we
cut off a portion of it for a
certain amount of time in the
year.
Say the cell or something
whatever amount of time it would
be if we're there's any
interruption in pre K. then it
makes me wonder you know what
how are we going to fix.
Up if we don't do it
consistently how are we going to
fill the gap of what what
programs are going to be offered
is that going to really throw
off parents and providers and
and the whole system that we're
trying to do can somebody tell
me or maybe explain a little bit
how that would work because it's
my understanding that it was
recommended that
we wouldn't have pre K.
throughout the year that just a
piece tell me a when Mr I'll
just added a a brief at a high
level and then turn to to Mr
Saly what we heard Mr chair
madam vice chair was that the a
number of the pre K. programs
including those offered and
those especially that are
offered by private providers
that it's sort of on going out
and so we're supporting those
private year round providers
through some of our work on pre
K. and that it here it's a good
it's an important point that if
pre K. A. offered especially
public schools is a year round
then we need to account for that
on the other hand Mr chair madam
vice chair we need to make sure
that that the the time that
students the The New Mexico kids
can be in prepay which is
evidence based which we have New
Mexico data that shows New
Mexico kids outperform kids from
other parts of the country when
our New Mexico kids get pre K.
they outperform
the you know their peers in
other states that we we
shouldn't be paying the the pre
K. one it's available is again
the evidence
based and tested approach that
provides better outcomes and so
we don't want to
we we want to make sure miss
madam chair Mr chairman and vice
chair that those gaps are filled
but we really don't want to lose
sight of the fact that pre K. A.
any additional pre.
The case lots and additional pre
K. time it does feel some
childcare time not all of it but
some and it is it is sort of the
gold standard in right now Mr
chair madam vice chair we don't
have we know that child care is
important but we don't have the
evidence of this sort of the the
clear and very convincing
evidence around pre K. but we
want to make sure of of those
guests Mr silly can speak in
more detail and thank you
brought up the point exactly how
I was what I was trying to make
that you have sent very
eloquently much more than I did
so tell me Charles Mr chairman.
I would just add that when you
have gaps in the amount of time
that kids can go to prepay for
example there's some school
districts that still only
operate half day that causes
major challenges for families to
be able to participate in the
program because of care options
and so both expanding the number
of slots where you've got those
half days now moving to full day
as well as
Reducing or eliminating waiting
lists that I that exist in some
communities and then also
extending the pre K. school year
and the pre K. school data
include wraparound services we
think helps better support
families doesn't require them to
go to an income support office
and fill out paperwork to
providers like the structure of
pre K. for three and four year
olds better from a regulatory
standpoint and like the chairman
said we're also seeing better
educational outcomes from that
approach as well thank you Mr
chairman thank you Charles for
that and thank you Mr chair
that's the gap and and break I
was seen as we're talking about
this as a parent and those of us
many of us are parents here you
know I I can't imagine the that
gap and how I would be running
everywhere trying to fill and
half of my day or the other half
for whatever needs to be done
it's a big our option for
parents and families so I hope
we can keep that uniform and on
going thank you Mr chairman
thank you for everything
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman we start
with the.
One on the one this.
so one eighty nine ethics
commission.
Allen's confuses me could have
been given them eighteen percent
more.
My reading that right thank you
for it's page three of five.
Line one eighty four eighty nine
eight nine.
The ethics commission.
C..
Eighteen point one percent of.
Then
Just curious why use an
organization I can't figure out.
The difference between bill
share and Senator share.
Were they trying to a twist
amount of us here.
This seems a little unethical
here to give them that much more
money when they seem all we can
do and I mean that series.
No joke.
but as we go down to of.
To the next one ninety two
economic development department.
is that increase because of the
film tax credit they're asking
for.
Mr chair thank you Mr chair
Senator Sir
the there is a small amount
that's connected to a film
academy Mr chair the majority
for the economic development
department is in a few areas it
includes J. to
it includes the business
incubators that are sort of
regional business incubators so
the majority of that is is
I think it the five hundred
thousand for the film academy
a film academy is an increase
of.
That's so those okay correct so
about seven hundred thousand for
the film academy
the rest we were in the a couple
of the other areas discretion
yes J. to it mainly with some
for the incubators okay as we
continue down the line one
twelve energy minerals and
natural resources that actually
combines with
Line one thirty five is kind of
the same question the
compartment Department so when
here we're making assumptions
that oil prices are going to
stay higher volumes going to
stay high and I through that
piece of paper right.
But again if I look at these and
I'm and I'm not sure it's partly
what I'm asking but I know that
there's a bill out there
Senate bill for eighteen I think
it is but I may have to check on
that the basically says let's
over regulate oil and gas and
put them out of business if we
can possibly do that which I'm
sure we can because well it's
just kind of what we do we
destroy whatever's.
But money in our bank.
On these increases are.
It just concerns me that what
we've done here as we said okay
yeah let's go ahead and give you
more money
to create more staff and more
positions to over regulate oil
and gas because we do.
What what what are these
increases are are the
differentiate different rentals
I guess in in both of those so
one thirty five in line one
twelve I think both related to
that but I don't I don't have
the best song trying to I'm
struggling here.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam vice chair Senator sure so
for line one twelve
you get some of this is going to
state parks but the majority
madam vice chairman Senator is
going to the oil conservation
division however it does not
this does not expand regulatory
authority in any way madam vice
chair Senator sure
it gives an in the oil
conservation department there is
some sort of inspection and
compliance but also madam vice
chair and senator share it's
mainly or or significantly
connected to the difficulty and
in ensuring that we have really
rapid response for permitting
rights of way and all the
various responsibilities that
the oil conservation division
has that are intimately tied to
industry and because madam vice
chairman Senator the industry is
We we've slipped again hello our
performance level for the rapid
nous and the efficiency with
which they respond to permit
request I think this is as much
an act to making sure that they
respond to the permit requests
first page you want so this is
in our volume.
Volume one on our page one forty
nine.
Applique this is just one
measurement application to drill
permits approved within ten
business days are target
measures ninety five percent
we've gone down to eighty eight
percent and
this is after even after there
were some more employees that
OCD brought on also so it's it's
for permitting and flooding here
you don't see it on this but Mr
chair Senator I think we're.
Less than fifteen of fifty wells
that we've plugged with based
upon federal funding and then
the there are a number of
inspections.
Yeah we're close on our
inspections there and also
number so it's a mix between
sort of the regulatory and the
permitting side right now the
permitting side is the
performance measure that's up
significantly so the testimony
from the department I think is
to help is much to help the
permitting is it is the
regulatory Mr chair thank you I.
I I appreciate that of the it's
been my concern for a while that
we're not trying to help but
we're trying hard and if if
we're going to get permits out
faster yes a.
And that brings me to the to the
assumptions
and I'm having a hard time with
these assumptions that the oil
and gas is going to stay good
for another decade or more hi it
just doesn't.
Feel right to me because I've
been here oil and gas does that
then it does that it doesn't it
doesn't go down smoothly it
drops.
And
You know it might it drops
precipitously in a week.
it it takes two years to recover
or more.
So
I'm concerned about our
assumptions.
And I'm concerned about that we
will get in our own way with
trying to.
The harm oil and gas and for
those of you that don't know oil
and gas pays all the bills in
the state of New Mexico
practically.
Be careful.
So Mister Abby can you tell us
what the percentages.
Like.
The oil and gas paying the
bills.
The budget what what.
The growth for FY twenty four
was two thirds of the revenue
growth for the total revenue
thirty five to forty percent Mr
chair Senator I would I would
I would add to that that the the
volume projections that we're
seeing you know for for over
thirty years while the price Mr
chair Senator court is the price
fluctuated wildly and we've even
see that bring briefly plunged
to zero.
New Mexico was remarkably
consistent in its volume
production volume for th for.
Over thirty years never less
than five million barrels never
met more than seven now Mr chair
we're.
Fifty two million and climbing
and so those are and the the
numbers that is based off of
Rystad energy some other
international
The name is is at that analysts
the volume piece Mr chair and
senator share the volumes are
certainly fluctuate based upon
price but far less than what
we've been told now again and
again particularly for oil and
in our share of the Permian is
at the lowest cost to produce in
North America is in New Mexico
so so that certainly I think of
all as you talked about an as
seen volatility is very much
part of this but there seems to
be a different sort of
volatility and trajectory
related to volume.
So Mister chair so the forty
percent is is direct.
But certainly if you don't have
all of the people in that in
that industry well you also lost
gross receipts tax Justin's
buying shoes and diapers and all
the other things are here no one
on this argument would later
Representative Smalls.
Just to get back to committee so
I mean questions tied to the
then the last the well I am
concerned about those
assumptions then the last thing
here is there seems to be an
awful lot of stuff in the
education budget that we called
below the line I find that.
In in the past we've tried very
hard not to do that and now it
seems like we're going out of
our way to do that.
So is there what's the
justification for making that
change and then all of.
Sorry
Which page are we on Mr chair
online spending in PED yes
K. to the page ten and eleven
yes.
The.
Can someone.
The thank thank you Mr chair
thank you senator a number of
these of course it it it has the
Then notes here a number of
these are related to sort of
shared policy initiatives
I I one of the highlights here
Mister chair
was our career technical
education line one thirty five.
Between general fund one time
appropriation and the public
education reform Fund we fully
fund a forty million dollar
additional money for career
technical education so I I would
say a number of these are
Sort of shared and and CD in
particular was driven by a wide
swath of of our committee
members we came in at a at a
lower recommendation is you can
see here
online one thirty five the LFC
budget
with the committee decided to
not only increase the general
fund but also the public
education reform Fund.
And their
that Mr chair thank.
Thank Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you return home
it just name is amounts keeping
issues here
It overall in the in the budget.
There's a large gap we hear from
doctors all time which I retain
docks huge gap between Medicaid
payouts and what the rates are.
Does.
And I'm trying to find a more
private had chances to spend a
lot of time with that is there
anything in here that addresses
that gap and and how close are
we to filling that gap quite
frankly because the docks.
It's a new issue.
The of the thank you Mr chair
Senator bir I think the the the
eighty three million dollar
reimbursement increases and it
goes by and and what those
increases by specialty area are
we have that data and I'm sure
that can be made available so
this is a very significant
reimbursement increase I know Mr
chair Senator over the summer.
Wanting to make sure that what
the legislature dedicates in
reimbursement increases actually
makes it into the medical
providers in in isn't sort of.
The the makes it to them and and
doesn't get sort of lost in
other parts of the system there
is not Mr chair Senator Burt we
don't have budget language
related to that we did bring on
extra capacity a LFC to sort of
work to ensure that that there's
some more oversight there
I also Mr Abbey mentioned I
think there's five million
dollars recurring for health
care loan repayment and I think
a ten million dollar special
appropriations so there was.
A significant increase maybe not
to the demand level that that is
out there but is a very
significant increase okay I I
thank you for that as chairman
and again another kind of clean
up on him and I was looking for
that workforce solutions I know
they were they have the whole at
the end of COVID because they
just they just started pumping
money out you know left and
right and they got a whole has
that whole been filled or and we
compensated for that where are
we on on that we we have this
money I like to make sure we
square these old issues way
before we start throwing money
at.
newer programs.
So
Mister chairman Senator that
whole was back filled with the.
Can rescue plan act the state
really funding okay seven it'd
make that transfer limiting the
I know that was the plan are you
know if it had actually happened
in Mr Chairman
early childhood I think on the
one twenty six
There is a again significant
increases there's that that
agency is growing exponentially
specially with the
a way to tap into the fund.
Is this agency have a lot of
reversions I mean did they spend
all of the money that was in the
budgets last year or where would
we be on something like that.
Member I think Edie Edie Edie
State reverted about two hundred
thirty million last year.
Mr chair FY twenty two and
center for FY twenty two it
shows here for ECECD is was
eleven point two million.
and there may have been some
other changes there was
Some very significant transfers
as well although I think those
maybe some of the fund but here
in the yes it's page one sixty
one
Yeah it it shows eleven point
two I I just bring up because on
the.
The growth of the HSD is is huge
I'm not logging the fact we
don't need early childhood
funding don't get me wrong but I
want to make sure that again tax
dollars are being used properly
we actually can disperse the
money that is going into the
budgets are not tying up all
want money that may be able to
use somewhere else and then next
year because this is the the
increase in budget is pretty
darn significant this year
in.
Can you tell me one or two items
that the increases will cover.
Thank you Mr chair the madam I
sent sent over the increases are
very square they will increase
the number of K. five K. pre K.
slots excuse me I think it's
like fourteen hundred new pre K.
slots it will extend the length
of time length of day for half
day pre K. and then a almost an
equal amount in the HSC updated
but in the budget that you have
additional for child care those
are really far away the to the
pre K. and childcare childcare
pre K. all right and all right
yeah I just I just Charles to
Geoff COVID Madam chair Senator
the the massive influx of
general fund revenue this
department reflects the
constitutionally approved a
measure to increase early
childhood education spending
that's why the LFC recommended
putting that into pre cake
separate from these amounts you
see before you is another
hundred and twenty five million
dollar increase that the whole
it's under twenty five million
in total from the early
childhood trust fund that's
covering a lot of the department
initiatives as well as increases
in child care spending separate
from that is a huge buckets of
federal funds that are coming in
to this department on that are
reflected either the sheets and
and there's there's more.
But I'm not and take up the time
of the committee here on that
but I I just wanna make sure
that it because the significant
growth in that department that
they're being applied dollars
may apply correctly if there's a
versions hopefully we can apply
that as opposed to adding to the
budget that much more so anyway
that's all I have Mister
interpreting.
Thank you Mr chairman and thanks
every all the presenters Mr
chairman thank you for being
here.
Excuse me sorry.
so on the early childhood on the
pre K. component I guess there
was there's there's seems to
still be a big Gulf between what
the LFC HFC and and what the
exact do you have visibility yet
on what the exact is going to
come forward with and what did
are they really going to want to
do in the budget I think it you
had no thank you thank you very
much Mr chairman thank you very
much Senator for the and of
course credits you for
forgetting this apartment where
it is you and so many others Mr
chair Senator I think what we've
seen and we had a very extensive
hearing Senator sort of ad hoc
follow up meetings after is that
there's more of a knowledge that
there is a shared knowledge
meant that more pre K. A. is
very positive we've heard Mr
chair Senator Padilla concerns
sort of of ability to program
the substantial increases that
HSC ultimately targeted however
Mr chair Senator by the
The I don't yes full visibility
in terms of the executive orders
but the cases where we're
extending pre K. days that
already exist that is something
that is is fairly
Yes it is extension of the day
Mr chair Senator by the less
challenging than maybe creating
a new slot and Mr chair Senator
by the we've heard
that there is demand for new
slots that there are the the is
you I'm sure you know better
than I so Mr chair we've come
closer with more for childcare
but there is still I don't fully
understand at what level the
executive things is sort of the
very most that we can do
effectively because Mr chair
center for the again
pre K. A. is really been
emphasize is that most evidence
based criteria what that is I I
know that they'll be continue to
be more discussion there and one
of the positive things Mr chair
Senator the I think we got it
and early hearings there was
sort of a sense that.
To move closer to the executive
we should take from he pre K.
and move into childcare seems
like there's been more of an
understanding that a robust pre
Kate increases right and maybe
there needs to be just more
added in the child care somehow
some way that and I that's my
best answer Mr thank you Mr
chairman and and Mr chairman so
if so what did you what can you
draw my attention to what line
the pre K. budget line item is
the because I thought I heard it
could be as high as a hundred
twenty nine million or system.
For fourteen.
Act Mr.
I'm sorry say that again for
page fourteen of your okay okay
have a high level.
What line if you're down at line
starting on line seventy two.
At the bottom of these are the
school permanent fund
distributions and how they would
be used okay there is a number
that this money coming from the
the increased distribution from
the school permit funds will
flow through the general fund so
we're trying to separately
account for that and as you
increase the number of slots
provided a prepay for three and
four year olds you decrease the
need for as many full year full
time childcare slots the same
goes for extending the amount of
time either through the day for
through the calendar year for
pre K. to decrease that the need
for as many childcare wraparound
slot so you don't want to
duplicate funding there keep in
mind the childcare um services
upwards of forty sometimes close
to fifty percent of kids on
childcare systems our fax school
aged and as we're expanding
after school opportunities in
the school year in that
particular K. twelve arena again
there's creating less demand for
the number of students that
would need that support to the
child care assistance program so
the HSC scenario that you have
in house bill to really fully
funds of a big rate increases
for infants and toddlers Care
where we know we don't have.
it doesn't have as a robust
assumptions for increasing
enrollment levels because of
those reasons I just stated as
the department does and it
doesn't fund big rate increases
again for school aged Care
students.
So Mister chairman if if let's
just say we the exact comes
forward and says all we can
really administer or or or or
produces you know eighty million
dollars worth of whatever so
what happened what's what can
the other.
What is that seventy or sixty
million be used for what we
decide to stay in the department
or what is it where does it go
Mr chairman and senator it would
it would would would revert and
you need to make a decision if
you want that money to revert if
in fact that's going to happen
to the general fund or back to
the school permanent fund.
and then what wound up coming
across for the universal my my
Senate bill four which is also a
governor addition to the free
universal free breakfast and
lunch we we're we're looking for
thirty million dollars what
wound up coming across with the
AGFC a budget H. B. two.
There's the LFC recommendation
at seven and a half to focus on
the quality of the school
lunches
Mister chairman Senator so what
are all the sources that could
help make up the twenty three
million dollar deficit that we
believe we would we were gonna
experience based on what we
think we need and this was a ton
of research and analysis that
was done laying out exactly what
we the money would be used for
what are the sources to fulfill
that other twenty three million
dollar gap Mr chairman Senator
there is a current provision in
federal law that allows schools
with at least forty percent
students on free and reduced
lunch to allow all of the
students to get free and reduced
lunch even if they don't qualify
due to higher income levels so
that's in place now I would say
it.
Well funds would we close that
gap Mr chairman other other
sources that Mr chairman that
could help fill that gap.
Mr chairman and other parts of
the budget or other source
revenue sources Mister chairman
Senator I would say that federal
funds could close that gap and
to do that today of it with the
need for more time.
So can I get a maybe some
information on that and how that
might work so that we can figure
out where to go to close that
gap and how to do that
if you could do so a lot of us
shifting years I'll be I know
you want to keep moving with Mr
Chairman on the broadband
broadband and broadband and more
broadband so you know I just
love broadband and we all love
it
what dollars are are going to be
put in for that office to
administer this your number one
for granting and and networks
and all that kind of stuff and
we what can you tell me a little
bit on what percentage of those
dollars are what are all of them
leveraging tool for federal
money succumbing to the state as
well.
So Mr Chairman
the HSE budget that you have
before you has twenty five
million in general fund and
another fifty million and other
state funds basically freeing up
money that was stranded in that
connect you Mexico fund for
these matching purposes so
additional seventy five million
there's a requests that they
received a five minute five
million dollars from the feds
and there's another hundred
million dollars in federal
grants that the department is
receive so in total of a hundred
eighty one million dollars for
being able to quickly deport
black broadband and if they get
the matching funds even more
than that.
So Mister chairman thank you for
that update is there are are
then I again you know just
trying to see such a big project
project process here are there
monies from prior years just
sitting somewhere that we can.
Yes some do we need to do
anything special to make those
available in a and easier to use
fashion Mr Chairman center
that's what house bill two
thousand takes it is not enough
stranded and
And then a is there anything
relates we're gonna come we have
a I have a bill moving through
the legislature Mr chairman and
creating an office of cyber
security it's it's not one
hundred percent a new concept to
state government but it's just
like we did with broadband you
know we're kind of calling all
the resources together trying to
get people on the boat together
are there dollars anywhere in
the budget available for that
particular initiative so so my
my bill does the creation of the
office and senator
Representative Sarinana has a
bill that's going to looking for
about thirty five or so million
dollars somewhere in the budget
to actually administer the.
Requirements of the office.
To the I think the main part of
the house bill two is beefing up
to its capability we're showing
but four million recurring
increase for to it ten million
for cyber security a to a two
and a half million for cyber
security in public at
institutions.
The and then three million for
cyber security the higher ed
institutions so all these.
Corporations are recommended for
to it so it's the house bill two
is a comes over is assuming that
do it will take the leadership
with the fifteen and a half
million funding for those areas
schools agencies and higher at
that's what I ended up as well
okay alright so we have.
Thank you very much thank you
chairman thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you members of
the Senate finance committee and
I'm just going to need more time
as I go through the language but
I've
I'm really interested in and
again I apply to Mr chairman in
terms of the work that you in
the committee of continue to do
you definitely had a big task in
front of you and and with the
amount of resources that we have
to ensure that most needs are
met it's been very difficult.
But with the Kiki Sabetta Fund
and I know that as we deal
specifically with our aging
population we want to start
programs to ensure that they're
going to be resources available
and so here we are thinking and
looking for about forty million
and I understand maybe we came
up with about eight million but
within that just to start the
methodology in terms of how the
the adjusted numbers were
derived Mr Chairman maybe you
can you can help me with that
understand that and then I'm
gonna move in a little bit too
to some of the special
appropriations as well
absolutely thank thank you very
much Mr chair and senator Campos
Mr chair Senator Campos.
We we did a a one million dollar
recurring increase to the LFC
oreo for the aging networks for
their recurring budget I think
it's roughly a thirteen percent
increase to their operating
budget Mr chair
In the course of the hearing
that we had on aging and long
term state of services for our
members clearly said there
needed to be more into aging the
the forty million dollar trust
fund there was a concern that if
that was treated as a food for
us with only the proceeds from
interest received that was
available for the department
that would be actually very
small amounts year over year of
course and so Mister chair
instead
we decided to do an eight
million dollar special
appropriation available in its
entirety so that can for half
hopefully with the recurring
thirteen percent increase given
the department the ability to
start new programs as they need
to beef up what they have and
then hopefully over the next
couple years we can sort of see
what long term trust
opportunities are but that in
short Mr chair Senator Campos
their urgent sort of now needs
were significant enough that the
special appropriation was the
was the route the committee
shows and and Mr chairman I
really appreciate that and so I
have a bill as an example that
deals with a hundred fifty
million at about four point
seven three percent in the
reason for that is to go and
have resources coming and so
that we're able over a period of
time as we talk about taking
care the on going needs to be
able to do that so so within
that when it behooves us to
really invest in what a trust
fund could generate in order for
us to have longstanding services
to our seniors because with a
million dollars as we start
programs we continue if you will
to feed our our elderly
population that definitely is
not gonna be enough even if it's
just going to be for one year
period of a short to two or
three years ultimately what
happens is that we continue to
run short or not serving our our
elderly population and Mr
chairman I realize that that was
a good.
Instances you all dealt with it
but there are ways to go ahead
and ensure that we do have
resources coming in to a very
valid Trust Fund and so Mister
chairman that's the the first
point of the second one is I'm
taking a look at the budget
itself and again Mr chairman I
hope at some point you allow us
to look at the language very
carefully because I do have
quite a few questions I'm just
going to bring up another one
and again it deals with the
methodology so when we go to to
the to the specials in terms of
that it sounds good when we
start talking about if you will
that we're going to be having.
Of the possibility of of an
infrastructure office where we
can truly deal with the
analytics and ensure that the
data driven information is going
to be available and there's two
million dollars there but then
as I go up and I look at some of
the other
items within that maybe you can
help me how to understand how
this is done so there's there is
money for plan design
construction and and road repair
and and so those type of of
concerns come up because here
we're dealing with capital
outlay with our nonrecurring and
yet in the specials and and H.
B. two at all we're putting
those type of resources and so
I'm I'm trying to understand
we're we're each member each
member of the HFC
given appropriation amount and
so when we're dealing with our
are PSP's it's a years five
hundred thousand here or if
there is a going to go ahead and
be a road project that would be
included in this section again
I'm trying to understand the
validity in terms of how how
these type of particular
specials were were arrived at
the thank thank you very much Mr
chair thank you Senator Campos
we so we had subcommittee with
that was a actually a slightly
over half so is a quorums Mr
chair Senator Campos the I think
there was the first Saturday
meeting we had around specials
the we have the executive
analyst and the LFC analysts go
through the entirety of the
special
special appropriation request
and the amounts that came in
with the LFC budget so we had a
full hearing there we had a we
do have work groups Mr chair and
Senator Campos and then finally
a subcommittee meeting
Again to go through sort of the
updated scenarios in the lines
that you noted line seventy two
through seventy six none of
those changed from the the LFC
framework which was very much I
think.
Built around as you know the
sort of the infrastructure
office
in many of the other changes so
so these many of the changes
that are in the various specials
did come about through the
public
the special subcommittee that
was working and that we did take
that testimony from the the
executive analysts and and
various times there were
executive agency participants
who are there to have an ****
excuse me answer.
we asked they answered some of
the questions though so Mister
chairman and and then going back
to this also Mr chairman as we
as we go forward so we started
dealing with supplementals
deficiencies last year is about
three hundred million or so that
was reverted what I'm getting to
with all of all of these things
as we continue to to vet not
only our appropriations act as
we deal with the other aspects
of it we talk about non
recurring recurring and there's
a I'm gonna put a lot of
apples in the basket as we talk
about these things the whole
issue is how are we truly
defining what our budget is
going to look like how we're
going to be dealing with the
separation how we're gonna have
the validity if you will of the
the recurring resources that are
available and then ultimately as
we move forward and using this
is the next generation session
of and again I applaud the work
that you all have done but again
in terms of the vetting and
continuing to deal with so many
of these issues
I hope on this side that as we
deal with it we're gonna be able
to to also provide some
additional responses that are
that are definitely then
assistance to help to improve
what this General Appropration
Act is gonna look like and again
Mr chairman thank you and thank
you very much Mr chairman I I
truly appreciate the work that
you that you continue to do on
this thank you.
Thank you and as we move
towards.
Rack up a special house bill two
will go to specials and
supplementals Max no
Representative Smalls.
You're never going to sleep is
going to use to sleep when you
are chairman of the committee
because I'll tell you what my
mom and what everybody says
right the whole status county
line right not just one person
the whole states build about the
budget so that's something to
think about it it is a learning
process members say this to the
press.
There there is no need for you
and I to become an.
We're headed towards the same
goal line we're trying to make
the same basket right there can
be differences of opinions and
there's going to have to be
movement as long as we
understand and agree upon we can
do our best for the state of New
Mexico because looking in the
mirror you look at yourself and
I'm a look at myself and say
what do we do the best we could
do do we think we did the best
you can that's the most
important I think by I think I
can give you is I don't need to
be the animosity I don't need to
sell newspapers I need to worry
about what's happening in our
state how we fix our problems
and where we end up at the end
of the day in the budget process
that's my goal.
Having that said
We're in a unique position in
New Mexico and and etcetera
couples can hit with the funds
we can set New Mexico up.
For the next twenty years if we
figure out how to invest money
in get return and make an
operational with the.
Thirty two percent increase in
the budget if we pass this one
and what right is that right
it's also staying involved with
a single dependent on oil and
gas and David said thirty five
percent but I think we're at
fifty two include everything in
our dependence on oil gas
include department of funds Mr
chairman yes of up to fifty yes
you so so fifty two percent of
our budget is dependent on one
thing and one thing only right
and we are.
Dependent on world markets our
market to drive that number and
that's the scariest thing that
that we have to do.
When we do a thirty percent
increase over a three year
period.
Anything happens in the economy.
Recession hits inflation go
skyrocketed we're seems very
specific trigger points in the
economy that are slowing.
We have to prepare for those but
if we figure out how to take
today ninety.
And invest it and make it more
money the cabbie out of some
operational right.
Not just saying here's eight
hundred fifty million to the
Senate go park in the permanent
fund because we can do that very
simply and we can turn around
walk away and and and send you
back the budget in and you'll
have to concur because we have
many movements but the exact
still wants to weigh in on the
budget quite a bit.
And so we're gonna have to make
a lot of changes with only
eleven eleven million coming
right.
Eleven eleven point six.
And so there's going to be have
to be a lot of changes but as we
move forward and Senate finance
this is nothing personal right
this is us getting to the end of
the court making the goal.
Is we're gonna make some changes
some your members may like some
members may not like so we may
not like some of them but.
There's some stuff that's going
to have to change in operational
I think you did a very excellent
job from the LFC wrecked to the
to to let you came out with
House Appropriations right the
right control and funding
specific agencies I think we're
gonna have to tighten up a
little bit more to make room for
certain specific things and we
have to figure out the how they
work in center but is you know
food initiative for school meals
they should have that's
something we need to work but
we're gonna make sure before
that bill leaves here that works
correctly and we're not just
throwing money out there at
school districts scene when
everybody have a free lunch when
you look back in the lunches in
the trash can or the feds were
to pay for it or we had other
options to do that so soon
before we get very good I really
about a lot of things including
opportunity.
How we do that to make sure that
those students that one
opportunities there in the
future that we just don't throw
away of for them
The other thing is never
increasing sex budget until they
come to the Senate that way we
know we can get an agreement.
No comment.
I'll go out for COVID.
And then the.
You know it's this is not an
easy job.
What and I think you can agree
that this is this is not just
reading this two hundred eighty
pages of paper.
I mean this is a you are LFC all
year long you understand how the
process works it's not just we
show up for thirty or sixty days
and create this giant budget I
mean two years worth of work and
and the LFC staff is great at it
David you're great at it how we
move forward
we're gonna make a few
adjustments over here.
Know what nothing intended
person anything that they're
gonna get squarely in we're
gonna make a lot of stress mints
and so with that I guess I don't
really go back to committee well
we're gonna start on specials I
should probably head over.
Senator Steinborn.
Was your birthday I'm sorry to
thank you okay question so.
One question good thank you Mr
chair and I.
What issues here and I see a lot
educators here there's a lot of
you know the one thing that's
hard to appreciate all the maybe
it's easier appreciate when
you're in the room is that all
of New Mexico.
Is hoping for the best outcome
in the budget and we have a
balanced budget requirement it's
just a challenging really
challenging process but I'm
gonna get out my fiscal
conservative side which which
Which is kind of interesting
side but I want to ask about the
billion dollar goal that we had
for reinvesting in the permanent
fund and I know we ended up
hitting in the house eight
hundred fifty million.
And I'm wondering if we would be
better served by putting more
reserves to hit that target
knowing that.
That that turning now money in
the future money is essential
like we have to hit targets it's
a strategy writes an investment
strategy so we can create
replacement income for when we
know the oil and gas revenues
are going to decline.
So it's not a flexible thing or
well we kind of cut short so I I
guess I just want to know would
it service better to take
reserves a little lower I mean
that was if you kept all other
things equal and to set up to
the billion dollar level.
That question where I'm not I
would at Mr chair Senator
Steinborn and then go to the
strivings silly
that there is an additional
amount that would be the the
severance tax
the the bonding proceeds will go
back into the severance tax
permanent fund so will be
slightly above the eight fifty
if if you all an understanding
that part of the process I think
it Mr as you said and I think we
very much appreciate that this
We're partners with our the
budget when productions perhaps
begin to fall if we just do a
whole lot one time it still has
an excellent benefit and the
benefit that comes online right
about those times that
production start to fall in
there's sort of a
just rice soup in between there
but this soup seems to the the
more we put in and earlier we
put it into chairman Senator in
the budget you have before you
LFC had recommended spending the
rest of the hundred and forty
million that was unspent due to
fail contingencies last session
so that is included in the
budget they have for me four
thank you Mr.
Thank you we're gonna go this
the gentleman at.
No I don't.
Since to the point.
I would clarify in addition to
the eight fifty the reason the
eight fifty went down from a
billion was transfers to the
water trust fund went from
thirty five two hundred and
transfers from the land of
enchantment Fund went from
thirty five or forty also two
hundred so and there was even a
transfer to the tobacco
settlement funds so total
transfers to long term funds
were still are still over
billion.
David you guys accounted for
that.
Bill.
Earlier told me have not a care
in hospital.
Thank.
Thank you Representative great
thank you and I think we very
much look forward to continuing
to partner Mr chair this makes
are the most substantial
investment in behavioral health
care that we've seen it makes
very substantial investments in
education and I think including
in housing Mr chair and vice
chair it accounts for some of
the additional approach that
that you're bringing forward so
we see a lot of our needs and
that are being addressed in this
budget look forward to the work
of that this committee does in
your incredibly hard work and
look for to talking soon thanks
for the efforts.
How is your Valentine's day
lunch.
So we sent down as they lunch
when they're doing the budgets.
David you're gonna start off on
so Mister well does is
considered a fun specials and.
So at this point if you have a
question about the special right
let's market and it's just a
question and native Germans kind
quickly as we can I have to run
back for one minute and senator
Rodrick subject.
Thank you yes please thank.
At appropriate look at the
larger items not necessarily
every single item in here your
throws if you have questions
regarding that's fine that are
are working proposed to that we
just look at the larger items
were there
for the agencies over the hours.
The food that way all right yeah
I think that'll be good because
it's kind of big and if we go
one by one will be here through
the evening so this good yeah
this proceed with that.
I remember one of the first page
of three million dollars for the
current three percent referral
restaurant cancel service that
is something that was requested
by the
The third council service record
prepare sugar can.
Go on to the next.
Representative.
Course.
The executive.
And agencies requested specials
for individual courts and
there's five pages of there were
dozens and dozens the LFC
approach was to consolidate them
two of the district attorney's
an aggregate and the
administrative office of the
courts and that kept and reduce
forty or fifty appropriations to
half a dozen so HFC almost
exactly maybe entirely exactly
endorsed the LFC recommendations
so if you're satisfied with that
you could go to page I were
begins not page bottom of page
for big big skips all court
probation where I think there is
pretty good the payments in
aggregate between the executive
and LESC and was just with
detailed in the executive or
lump sum then LFC so maybe look
start on Mr Valdez will start
around nine sixty four on page
one this is the I'm sorry let's
go back to pay online sixty four
page for.
Or like fifty six.
Let's go back to work right I
can hear with the beach for line
fifty sake you very much okay
great thank you yep that's a
good.
very very is the additional
amount.
The Texas a representative to
update their systems.
Are regarding
that stages since there's such a
large amount available for tax
changes separate that amounted
to be higher if you're regional
more for Representative by the
LFC.
One sixty four madam chair.
read it a million dollars.
The LFC had not recommended in
the report four million dollars
in there to accelerate this TV.
for MFA for one year.
Using thirty seven point happens
on for housing programs.
Madam chair line are.
Sixty six.
Okay I.
There is
gathered on that before we move
on bill just make sure I said I
need to interject on that point
and I'll speak a little late for
some reason is like closed here
right back to sixty four we're
talking about the
About the assistance and let's
go sixty four page for when you
mentioned the housing and so on
in on the analysis comments I
just want to make sure we're on
the same page as capital package
will accelerate STDs to MFA by
one year racing thirty seven
point five million that's
contingent upon my bill passing
and that is no I've already
asked for it to be heard we're
just changing the date we want
to make sure that's the only
amendment because we don't want
to lose forty million here so
it's will be hopefully past year
than going to the Senate but
just want to make sure we
understood that this was
contingent upon that passing
thank you thank you Mr chairman
that's it you perceive bill
doing a great job.
Chair the next order online
sixty six.
Additional forty million dollars
over the age of the LFC.
And that was for targeted one
Forsman and
workforce to pass the building.
Investors are the data manager
line seventy four on Kate.
Six.
There is a thirty five million
dollars
What we did not adopt the water
first run because it is a fund
transfer now is on another line
with being here Nibert tornado
three down the line here.
Senator it wasn't adopted right
here but it was not drafted as a
fund transfer of a hundred
million not just thirty five.
You're lying seventy nine.
Our.
Your the committee **** further
we did not to do need to do the
entire amount for animal shelter
statewide to reduce it in half
basically.
At the bottom of page seven
managers secretary of state.
Our.
Rekreasi amount of election for
production and election of the
secretary of state's office.
Look forward page five eight
page eight line ninety seven.
We did not from the.
The state election Pronger
productive interactions in white
is is no longer needed it was
fun and I.
no longer needed.
Ryan Warner former senator and
two to two and a half million
dollars.
in addition to the LFC.
For enterprise fund for local
and regional tourism
development.
Ally one of seven.
To the economic development
partners.
We increased.
From the LFC recommendation by
five million dollars per Lida.
Chair lines K. line line one
fourteen there are about
economic development department
the LFC had no recommendation in
that area of the HSA recommend
through two point two million.
For expansion of the business
incubators through the federal I
believe there are some
discussion earlier by that as we
record the other parts of that.
Presentation.
I live.
One fifty madam chair.
For the public private
partnerships.
would increase it from thirty to
fifty million dollars.
Increases of twenty minutes.
And that is the third through
fifth matching funds.
For fans energy related projects
that server.
Here are the ten.
Line one thirty eight.
Are we did not recommend
funding.
In this particular area it is
moved in New Mexico State
University first year to agency
requests.
The agency requests are
receptive to Mexico state.
Reforestation.
Our page one thirty nine our age
ten I am one thirty nine.
Senator was moved.
One point forty seven.
That for the land of enchantment
permanent fund.
Madam going on at the age of
eleven.
of light one forty four.
The ten million dollars
difference yeah it the agency
representative over that.
Mr Brighton Alliance allow for
the interstate compacts
litigation
for.
your Rio Grande.
Colorado lower granted in the
capitol pre merger.
For for for recovery on the
lower Rio Grande Madam Texas
version New Mexico
Representative scene for a
hundred years I believe that.
New Mexico.
forty five madam chair.
Our.
Increase that by for our four
million dollars.
Revert general maintenance
stripper river flows are just
I love you and have a good
restoration.
Matches federally authorized
projects in a number of Graham
by ten million for state match
for federally authorized
projects.
Line one forty eight madam
chair.
R. there's an increase of six
million dollars over the LFC for
strategic water reserves at
least seventy one river water
rights from the hysteria at the
nation.
Representative you're going on
to page twelve.
One fifty four.
there's a maker of actually do a
decrease of twenty five million
dollars for tribal projects.
including matches of federal
infrastructure grants to to
fast.
Madam going out of age thirteen.
Line one sixty eight.
This is for the checking Senator
of seeing your dignity dignity
Fund.
It reduces for forty million
dollars recommended by the LFC
are right thirty two minutes
worth eight hundred dollars of
that.
Find one seventy one.
the LFC and not recommended this
particular item our producer
contracts for rural regional
hospital centers can read that
on that on that line on the one.
On page sixteen madam chair.
Right to fourteen.
there's a mop for being here
from the I agency was not
recommended LESC for the
environment if you conduct
activities prevents water re
use.
In a Environment Department.
Like to fifteen.
Through the same situation the
HSD added money to the dance
Committee revitalization for
environmental cleanup of
contaminated groundwater.
On page thirty nine madam chair.
This is a four million dollars
the committee for is there for
the police officers not for a
lot of the pro members and
reserve officer.
Police officers survivors one
zero did not recommend that
there was an executive
recommendation we adopted.
Right to forty three.
There's a visual twenty million
dollars added for.
Career technical education
initiative.
from talked about that earlier.
Twenty one of what page twenty
one line to seventy two.
there is a five thousand dollar
increase to reflect purpose in
mind demanded a health
professional will repayment for.
Right right through madam chair.
Learn through seventy five.
There's an additional forty
million dollars about the LFC
for the afternoon starship river
after.
there was a question that also.
Twenty three line two eighty.
There is the additional five
million dollars to increase the.
Report provincial demand.
for for the
The director for New Mexico high
school.
my eighty for that same page for
the endowment for native
American studies.
The LFC have not recommended any
anything in there that LFC the
HSD programs and.
Two and a half.
The airline twenty four.
Two ninety seven.
Ten million dollars in two
on the subject agency
recommends.
it is basically requested the
funding goal to.
Our New Mexico state for the
reforestation program.
On page twenty five.
Line three oh seven.
And our agency chose to
for the two point five million
dollars for the for the next
day.
online degrees are program.
In on page twenty six point
three forty nine.
The that is the transfer there
appears system has for fund for
system replacement has.
And that's just the normal we we
do every year after we just said
we're closer to the.
Appears to have.
Madam that's the end of section
five.
And
Over all the supplementals.
Human.
There is.
All.
Thirty.
Raise.
Hello or through the.
The other sectors of the bill at
the.
Section nine.
what page are you on now H.
service the record thanks thirty
and these these are the
recommendations for.
House Bill three in the house
transportation committee that.
The HSA endorsed same resiliency
and then added forty million
more the big item is grow for
nineteen hundred and twenty five
million for a number of projects
around the state without
specifying amounts
let's see and then finally
beginning section ten of the
line for.
Twenty eight you can see the
severance tax permanent fund the
water trust fund and the land of
enchantment Fund.
The.
Pretty much completes thank you
madam chair.
Thank you thank you very much
bill did you have anything else
before we move on thank you for
your thank you all of you and
our staff for stellar truly I
can't say enough I really
appreciate your are there any
questions in the committee
Senator Campos and then we have
Senator Padilla Senator share K.
R. coming thank you very much
madam chair and just just
briefly it's like there is about
twenty million for the
reforestation project going to
New Mexico State University and
I know that you and them New
Mexico highlands in New Mexico
state had a collaborative and we
really want to get the the four
station area going and so maybe
someone can help me a little bit
too to better understand what
that process is entailing and
how it's working because it was
my understanding particularly
with the reforestation center
that that might be considered
for either more our San Miguel
County.
Mr Chairman.
The site has not been determined
they take the time for potential
sites and that's under way so so
it has been selected I think the
sites in more in San Miguel are
prime sites but there were a
couple more so it's not finished
more important however they did
come up with the phase one
project cost estimates ten
million so that fully funds
phase one they can't spend more
than ten million before coming
back to the twenty four
legislature and then all the
institutions wrote a letter to
the chairs of I think you're
committee as well as HSC saying
the the kind of fiscal agent
leader of the appropriation
should be an issue thus the
change from LFC have the EMNRD
and they asked it to be an
issue.
Madam chair and if I may then
who are the other two that were
mentioned in terms of the
possibility of having if you
will that the the problem one
side was just that the Senate
clear for one of the problems in
the Espanola area.
The end I'm not sure the for I
don't recall the for side thank
thank you madam chair that's all
I have at this time thank you
senator and thank you David for
responding Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Just a so I guess the first rule
these come from like we're we're
to the individual line items
come from.
Mr chairman that's a really good
question to just kind of back to
basics of specials.
In the statutes.
Find the special appropriation
request come in September first
they also find that operating
budgets come in I said September
first operating budgets come in
September first specials on
November first ordinary special
appropriations section five for
the current year in the next
fiscal year that's what the
special is FY twenty three and
twenty four you know ordinarily
those amount to fifty to a
hundred million a year they're
kind of add on state agency
operating budgets it is
extraordinary to have this
magnitude of specials there were
request of three hundred and
fifty so if you think and you
tentative LFC meetings if you
think about those meetings the
committee spent day after day
hearing every single agency do
their requests and LFC and DFA
came in very close on specials
but then almost after the fact
in the budget or they came in
very close on recurring I'm
sorry and section four.
But after the fact these request
came in for one time funding.
And they were the LFC had about
forty days to that amendment to
study them even as they're
working on the budgets so the
executive made them the way they
may come I can't speak to how
they came up with the request
LFC is.
Process of examining LFC
developed its recommendations by
looking at the executive request
three hundred and fifty of them
were so that came in on November
first prioritizing them quickly
even as they're working on the
operating budget.
And and in a few cases they were
additional items that LESC
recommended to keep a good
example recreation that was a
successful program to DFA
implemented in twenty four it
wasn't requested by the
executive in
this year in November of twenty
two but it would because it was
over subscribed in demand last
year LFC recommended continuing
it at a forty million dollar
level compared to forty five
million the year before so again
most of these items came from
executive request with the LFC
and in a handful and I think
both executive and LFC
scrambling to try to that these
even as they're working
primarily on the operating
budget recommendations and again
remember these are funded from
non recurring but many many of
them are effect recurring
starting programs will be
ongoing and that's not a
cardinal rule not to do it but
it's kind of a guideline don't
start recurring programs with
nonrecurring fund so that was a
long answer but context for
these items and that's a billion
dollars compared to what's
typically fifty or a hundred
million.
So I thank you madam chair and
thank you David for that it's so
what made the items and Mr all
this pointed out what made them
note worthy of verses the other
hundred or four hundred and
thirty two was working from the
column that was.
HSC change from LFC okay so that
would hand over that's what
those items were in the change
column so there are some that
were significant for which there
was no change he didn't talk
about so you know it might have
been more appropriate to cover
both how they change from LESC
plus the big ones which were
unchanged so then with the
safety and again I'm just
learning the process so would it
be safe to say that these four
hundred thirty one or the.
The old HB to the V. two
amendments that we used to
submit year after year right
when the budget year began and
is that what this is or what
we're I I I trying to figure out
like what.
Where did this come from exactly
I mean I know that that we
talked about in the interview
with but we didn't talk about
like every one of these four
hundred and thirty one items I
was a lot of these meetings did
we we did I don't know you you
did not so on September first
budget request came in you heard
every single agencies request
and rarely to the compass the
special appropriations for the
most part it just encompassed
their request for next fiscal
year's section for FY twenty
four so in the come on November
first LFC staff for analyzing
them many requests dribbled in
late this latest December first
and LFC maintenance
recommendations.
Sorry for these just Mr shipment
to release from departments or
with these from we're with these
from madam chair Senator a
combination of a normal agency
requests go through the normal
specials process as well as a
combination of things that LFC
and its budget guidelines that
they developed in August
directed staff to work with the
committee to proactively
identify large special
appropriation projects such as a
package of things to deal with
criminal justice reform hi to
deal with behavioral health as
an example that we're the
committee may have been more
proactive housing of that not
housing the recreational centers
and then agencies came in
November first with their
requests and then there's some
they didn't even get to LESC
like the myriad of higher
education
institutional request that
normally don't even go through
this process that are now in the
executive recommendation so
unprecedented amounts of money
being appropriated in this part
of the budget
and then a variety of different
avenues for projects to get
funding for the madam chair and
and the Mr Mr Sally so.
These issues we sit somewhere in
the line items that already
exist here or these going to be
amendments to the somewhere they
said in the bill Mr chairman
would be helpful it would be
helpful is I know you have the
P. U. which is what is the
business unit
for.
Do you have you most so would be
great is to tell us where these
are for these are in here.
Page one eighty four.
So you can see I don't want.
Is the first special
appropriation for the
legislative building services Mr
Burciaga sent that in.
Early January requests for Texas
balanced items.
Item one on page one eighty four
corresponds to the first item on
the spreadsheet so if all the
items for which there is an LFC
I'm sorry HSC recommendation or
items following Legislative
Council Service I don't want and
so you look this spreadsheet is
an order of agency code and if
you wanted to provide
environment we kind of know
where environment it will that's
right after health so provide
quick on page two will I begins
Environment specials and so on
this spreadsheet the environment
specials begin on page fifteen.
Page fifteen the first one is
six eighty thousand for surface
water discharge permit.
There
a little out of order but it's
still be in the environments us.
Zero six.
Okay it happens to be a one
thirty four on page.
Two oh six.
The individual agency specials
do not exactly track this what
what department they do track
this bridge.
It might be helpful to point
your where I can find more
detailed hearing numbers these
and madam chair Senator the the
whole point of the spreadsheet
is to help orient you to what to
the LFC recommend what to do
executive recommend what did HSC
recommended how was that
different than the LFC baseline
which state they adopted as a
starting point and then when you
get budget itself those are just
going to be the actual
appropriations amount that
agency reading the eleventh year
here at to try to remember what
is the typical capacity or
what's an average capacity comes
from when it crosses over into
the Senate.
Typically you would have fifty
to a hundred million a new money
if the house did fifty Monday at
ten to twenty.
In a typical year Mister
chairman Senator Padilla what
makes this year so extraordinary
is the fact that oil and gas
revenues of COVID so strongly
that agencies see so and.
Advocate so no paternity to
boost programs for addressed
nonrecurring needs in general
you would want to be cautious
about using the nonrecurring
funding which is what specials
come from to start recurring
appropriations.
They will have to build in the
budget for you all right I
appreciate you answering all
those questions for me so I'm
assuming we're gonna have a lot
of quite a few more meetings
madam chair and sessions will be
on this.
What happened here because I was
assuming you know fifty million
dollars and then we had the
revenue generation that we have
that I'm sure we could two three
hundred million dollars and
capacity coming over when I
heard eleven million dollars I I
just completed.
Chair LESC had two hearings on
specials the HSD had two
subcommittee hearings and one
full committee hearing so this
would be a good idea to continue
work Mr chair thank you senator
before we go on I promise others
to the other legislators here
but tell me once again data what
is the total of specialists now
that we have to look at.
Think about that is to look at
the your spreadsheet in the
packet.
On page nine.
Eight nine.
Of the package.
Page nine.
So LFC recommended specials or
begin online twenty one.
Got it.
One twenty one is computers
which is section seven one
twenty two is regular specials
and section five which we just
saw about page one eighty so LFC
recommended.
Eight eighty six million and the
executive recommended one point
eight billion.
So quite a big difference there
and that's supplementals pretty
much the same that's good makes
it easier transportation LFC
recommended a hundred ninety
seven million the executive
none.
And house bill two is two
hundred forty two million of
special appropriations for roads
we just talked about that and
then also on the back of the
bill of the fund transfers which
we talked about which are
sections section to.
Okay thank you thank you very
much for that so all right we're
going to move on Senator Here
and then we have Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one question so on page
twenty four lines to ninety
seven this is money to New
Mexico state.
For land acquisition in this
came from
From into minerals and natural
resources back earlier in here
somewhere the way white white
with energy minerals and natural
resources want to move that
money.
It says the same thing okay land
acquisition to New Mexico that
was a one madam chair Senator
Campos was asking about and this
is an important reforestation
project they've done feasibility
studies they think it's an
eighty million dollar project
professionally they want to play
a five million I want to grow
five million seedlings the year
right now we're only going three
or four hundred thousand
seedlings so here we given the
fires they really see in the
outlook for climate they see the
need to do that and.
Three institution for
institutions.
Mexico highlands UNM NMSU all
have strong forced to programs
along with the state energy
natural men minerals department
they have agreements and those
agreements have all led them to
say animus you ought to be the
lead agency advancing this
project so LFC recommended to
EMNRD within the agency the
needs for institutions operating
under an agreement said no
animus you is the right place to
send the phase one for this
eighty million dollar project
madam chair so we're we're
looking at then is to buy a
chunk of land put a big green
house or something to grow five
million trees planning design
and maybe some initial
earthworks for ten million yes
Mr chair thank you madam thank
you senator all right Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank if
just a quick question on in the
technology sector I know the
administration had requested a
supplemental for the environment
part of business operations
staff they're processing.
You know upwards of fifty
million dollars a year and and
funds to local governments and
their.
Their that we can have a
bottleneck issue and curious
what your thoughts were about
that because it did not show up
and this is money they're going
to keep.
Processing and lots of other
money they could acquire so.
What it felt like a good one to
me.
Mister chairman Senator that's
where earlier David said that we
understand that there is a
number of HSC additions to the
environment department there may
be an opportunity to re shuffle
those to meet make sure that
their top priorities are funded
it that's one of the.
Thanks we'll keep talking about
it adjourns yeah once I have
opportunity go through this some
show of other questions thanks
thank you senator thank.
All right I don't have anyone
else on the list Center fifty
one let me let me ask some
questions David where we did
that house do anything on the
state employees insurance where
where.
Underpaid by two hundred million
one ninety fourth.
They do every a couple places.
I just need a total so that.
The governor is not violating
statute in order to.
We gonna find section six.
Okay page one ninety two
specials the.
There's a couple of different
appropriations Mr chairman
One is for twenty three point
six million.
prior year shortfalls.
That's also contingent on
Some payment review to make sure
they are actually paying claims
in the past and that also is
contingent on
a premium increases for non
general fund agencies including
local governments to help shore
up that particular fund.
There's another.
Go ahead sure Mr chairman.
Office get their.
so Mister chairman members of
the committee on page twenty
eight your spreadsheet actually
starting on page twenty seven is
small and then on page twenty
eight you'll see a couple of
large ones so there's a
deficiency appropriation for
prior year shortfalls that as Mr
Slee was things twenty three
point seven million in general
fund supplemented by other state
funds from agencies with those
sources and local governments
and then write directly below
that you'll see an additional
ten point nine million that's to
cover the estimated current your
shortfall again both of those
are contingent on increasing
rates for FY twenty four and
would with director.
That's line number that Mr
Chairman the current year's line
number three sixty eight the
thirty the ten point nine
million plus nineteen but one
other state funds.
The twenty three point six to
ten point nine for current year
and he said nineteen or not
nineteen years confusion in
there yes policies Mr chairman
so then the.
LFC budget guidelines were to
not entirely subsidize the this
shortfall from the general fund
so you can you can see the ten
point nine million is general
fund for the current year then
there's an additional nineteen
point one other state funds from
agencies that use that have
those funds as well as from
local governments and other
participants in the plan.
But still gets a short term.
So we.
So Mister chairman that the ten
point nine in the nineteen point
one add up to thirty million for
the current year.
One line up online three sixty
seven as a total of sixty five
million for the prior short so
it's a total of ninety five
million.
And shortfall of one ninety four
going incorrect but no Mr
chairman the estimated shortfall
for prior year in the current
year was ninety six million so
this funds that at what the
department requested then you've
got an additional
about ten million.
In for recurring premium health
increases actually eight point
five we've got those numbers of
DFA eight point five million
from the general fund to be
matched with other state funds
on a go forward basis starting
in FY twenty four to make sure
that they're bringing in
sufficient revenue to cover the
medical costs and not going back
in the hole again.
But we're running a deficit
right on on state.
Premium plans rate of a hundred
ninety seven million.
And then the executive thinks
that we can handle
teacher insurance to the tune of
a hundred and thirty million.
When they're running a deficit
of ninety five I thought it was
one ninety four in in LFC wreck.
That violate statute.
That is not all of the other
person the state could you I
want you guys can you go back
and give us a break down of.
Hello who owns what in that fund
can you get to that point
zoom out mail two point five
million for health care premiums
and break it down by city or
county.
We can do that but we we know
that.
Whatever the amount of premiums
we think one third of that
amount reflects premiums for
employees paid with the general
fund.
One third is state employees not
paid from the general fund
highway department for example
game and fish department and the
final third is non state
employees subdivisions our
universities.
That's interesting because.
To me because I just read
something that says.
We cannot pay a premium to
anybody that's not a state
employee.
Because it violates anti
donation clause if we pay that
premium as a state and they're
not a state employee and they
receive a benefit what
distinguish between on the and I
donation closed between non
public employees and non state
employees so it wouldn't violate
the anti donation clause to.
Pay for a university which is a
sub division of might whether
it's appropriations another
issue but it wouldn't be and
anti donation issue there are a
handful of.
Participants who are neither who
are not.
State agencies are subdivisions.
I guess we need to look at that
pre are but I want to make sure
that's cleared up in talking
about in doing teacher insurance
we can win for this for
everybody in the state that's
not state employees and at the
university's stern of the the
other one that I want to see all
the stuff on the LED PF
projections in because I was
glancing at language in and
shortfalls in in that looks like
we're short for five million in
the alley PFN that works out of
what the but the background is
but it's not where it needs to
be.
We know why that's not there.
Mr chairman the four million is
to set aside money for the
survivors benefits in case
there's a law enforcement
officer killed in the line of
duty you increase the amount
that's supposed to come from the
law enforcement protection fund
for that purpose from two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
per currents to a million last
session.
The amounts that have been
transferred
from OSI to that fund for the
past couple of years apparently
have been incorrect and the
actual amounts now that attacks
and Revenue Department is
administering those collections
have come in a lot less of the
thinking is so if rather with
that money would normally come
out of a the law enforcement
protection fund
but because that fund is short
having to pay out this new
survivor benefits would further
in Paris of the the a
recommendation was to set aside
four million for that particular
purpose in the case of fire
protection fund that already has
a funding mechanism and maybe
something that you.
And so.
Why weren't we give who can give
us the right numbers to make the
transfer.
Mister chairman Senator it's my
understanding those
Numbers were being administered
historically by OSI it was then
transferred a couple of years
ago to the tax and Rev
Department who's been trying to
clean up differentiating all the
different lines of insurance and
premium tax and attributing
those could to correct amounts
to the correct funds and this
just came up last summer that
the amounts historically
transferred to the law
enforcement where higher than
what the amounts are that
they're actually collecting for
that purpose.
Okay.
All right.
Thank you thank you I do have
we have anyone else before I
guess not thank you I just have
a quick question on page twelve
I see that line number let's see
where it is here line number one
fifty four to the Indian Affairs
Department twenty five million
dollars was caught there.
Well matching funds you know it
makes me wonder the LFC had
recommended fifty fifty million
dollars for that and house the
house Appropriations
recommendations came in at half
of that I guess the question
that I have is her of the tribes
going to match have any matching
funds to get.
Funds and federal grants and
this is all for behavioral
health which we know and there's
major problems and tribal native
land so disk anybody contact.
Madam chair Mister chair share
this fifty million in the LFC
recommended.
Regional for those on LFC recall
that there are a lot of some
committees that worked on
various things like a water
group in a.
Housing in state law enforcement
so forth there was an Indian of
there was conversation about
Indian Affairs but it didn't
reach to the point of a concrete
proposal so even getting into
the session there wasn't a
concrete proposal was an idea
and.
But is is the militants to the
house this kind of recognition
will what's the plan and at that
time there was no real specific
plants they prefer that back you
do have a whole from Senator
Shendo to put of the twenty five
reduction I of that he hopes
will go to the.
Endowments at the university New
Mexico in the house to two and a
half and you'll you there's a
hope that.
Another two and a half with
COVID so it didn't it twenty one
away and not twenty four.
Okay thank you for that I only
ask because I didn't know if
we're going to lose out on
federal funds you know if they
were available that's about it
so thank you thank you thank you
Charles Mr Chairman did you have
anything else I know you're
gonna go to special pretty good
and see where they move around
LFC reactions to our.
Thank you to handle I know the
exact.
Is going to want to add more
money a curry.
Into the hundreds of millions of
dollars.
And then.
I think they're gonna ask for a
billion dollars in specials.
Which is only eight fifty left
start wax packages and
reoccurring
We have a lot of willing to do
because House kinda noted their
specials with LFC special that
should lead to some room to move
around.
With a fine tooth comb.
We talked about a language
committee.
I think Senator Campos talking
about that last week.
I talked to senator of.
It's also about capital
Specials and supplementals.
We're going to really dig into
those R. P. S. P.'s are going to
be another big issue two hundred
twenty four million in our PS.
What they do.
With a lot of other people in
the house and they have more of
them.
So try to make more room inside
the budget with cuts
in that the executive either
taken or not.
The friends there couple she'll
come thank you very much Mr
chairman so with R. P. S. P.'s
are you gonna go and put that in
language you're gonna go and put
that under specials are how are
you going to deal with with the
R. P. S. P.'s we're going to see
if we can get to a total number
what they do and then we're just
going to put in all probably put
him under.
No I think we'll get the money
put him under house bill two.
But but in terms of that with
either a a special committee a
subcommittee or or how we can
deal with that with that with
the Senate finance committee are
you gonna put under language are
you gonna go ahead maybe have
the specials deal with it I I
the question I'm asking
who's going to be reviewing your
PSP's I think we'll probably try
to do is a committee of the
whole.
Of the whole committee so that
way everybody knows right I
don't have any are PSP's I mean
I've never even thought about
doing it that way but somebody
may or somebody may know
something about certain our PSBs
and where they're going and what
they're doing other than that
but everything inner.
Everything under four hundred
thousand are half five thousand
R. P. S. P. is probably going to
get harder look.
Separately Mr Chairman are we
gonna have a day or two days or
seven days of for we all bring
sort of things that have come to
us or amendments that were
wanting to take a look at now
that we have is a document to
work off of
because I know that we don't
have the house bill two
amendment process anymore and
four thousand minutes flying
everywhere pieces of paper
flying everywhere well.
You know junior was supposed to
be the amendment process.
I think that people than being
given what they wanted and house
bill two.
Our wanted more money put it in
junior so depends on what you
did right I don't have a single
agency come to meet state can
you give me more need more money
for environment for.
Nobody came to me and said that
right I I chose from the courts
in hearings that we had and so
when people say oh need two or
three hundred here whatever
their they that that's the whole
junior bill process is to stay
away from the amendment process.
as we move forward there some
agencies are going to be short
but there's some agencies that
are over funded to
Mr Chairman so some of these are
not like HB two items amended
their significantly larger than
the allotment that we received
so there's really not a whole I
mean you could try to coordinate
with the few people in there
were some of that going on I
know I tried to work on a few of
those so there's there's larger
things that you know we're all
working on with pieces of
legislation and things that are
going to require I think a lot
more than than what we were
lauded as an individual
legislature.
Well you on your bills in the
meanwhile in food for example
that might be one but there's
others to know that members of
contact and I'm sure all of us
with things that they're wanting
to get done.
Well it depends what they do
right because there's so much
money at the capitol right you
got capital you have junior
right.
You got the governor wanted
participate right and if their
specials and on reoccurring then
we're just gonna have to look at
them individually and see where
we're at.
Given the priority.
Okay this will have I mean I I I
delete those bills if they make
it through their first committee
should come here for a
presentation to be heard by this
committee to decide if it's
something that we can all agree
on it we want to move forward.
Into the budget because there's
no other the only reason a bill
which show up here is that
there's an appropriations.
We're gonna have a lot of house
bill's coming over to write with
appropriations and we have all
the Senate bills appropriations
and and we know some of those
I'm gonna go in some aren't.
And so it just kind of depends
on give you one example there's
a bill here that wants to buy
electric vehicles for every
state agency we can't do it
there's no Chargers no volume
electric vehicles right.
In the agencies don't do it so
some of that stuff happens.
The that's a great example
because that bill probably
wouldn't make it through this
committee because but the ones
that do we're gonna wanna
then those appropriation amounts
into the budget so that they're
there to make sure their account
for someone if not already
account for some other areas
thank.
There's a lot of reading to do
and if you read in the what they
call the wormwood.
Is where all the all the screws
are loose and everything's ****
nilly it is you'll find it if
you read.
Representative on.
Thank you thank you Mr.
