From committee members.
C. line can have a motion.
Second motion for do pass.
Any objection to the motion.
Motion by Senator Hemphill
second by Senator Steinborn any
objections and pass motion.
Sixty two.
Thank you Mexico transfers
allows private companies to be
able to use a but.
Could you stay there and you the
house bill seventy three.
House bill seventy three
mile marker bill that I'm not on
chair sorry.
We just need a representative
there in the chair I can sit
there and look like to a
representative.
In the house bill seventy three
the file marker.
Call in a couple.
I.
You want.
Representative this committee
will ask questions.
All right Mister chair committee
this relates to health insurance
coverage and acting sections of
the health care purchasing Act
the public assistance Act The
New Mexico insurance code the
health maintenance organization
on the profit health care plan
law this is to require coverage
for Bayern biomarker testing.
Questions from committee
members.
Spend more.
Thank you Mr chair and senator.
Because testing biomarkers is
good.
More for the past few motion for
the past second by Senator
Hemphill.
we call the roll yes we need to
call the roll on both of we got
a.
Okay so we didn't do the roll
call on to sixty two first okay.
Senator Wirth yes server test
center.
Who's Diamond.
A two sixty two.
Sorry.
Excuse Gonzales the results yes
there has to.
He can see that.
Hello.
yes.
Yes.
Yes Rodriguez.
Fifteen euros yes yes if you do
pass.
To pass on the transfer connect
transfer and and we're gonna do
Senate bill seventy house bill
seventy three the biomarker.
All the rules.
The number.
Okay.
Campos.
Senator Diamond excuse Senator
Gonzales yes it's always yes.
Well.
Yes yes yes yes yes yes share
their share notices time yes
this time yes it would so you
would still have to Rodriguez
yes in my previous yes Mr
Chairman yes yes.
Six to three to pass to.
Thank you thank you are you are
here for your bills it's great
to years she goes you
representative because thank you
once in there for house bill
four hundred and then we're
gonna quit.
Okay.
The representative then you
don't have to pretend to be a
different.
We're starting to clone so we're
going to do things differently.
Representative you got about
three and a half minutes okay
thank you Mr chairman house has
four hundred.
Describes a study to be done by
the Human Services Department to
review the Medicaid eligibility
expansion Representative
requires study correct
Representative yes yes Mr chair
anybody in the audience for
anybody against nobody runs.
to questions from committee
members Senator Woods this is
spending thank you Mr chairman
thanks for the opportunity.
Please explain this bill a
little better to me if you
would.
from what I understand.
This is a.
Directs the Human Services
department to study expanding
the Medicaid program to all
adults in the state of New
Mexico is that true.
Chair and representative.
Mr chairman and senator would it
does that a study to look at the
expanding Medicaid eligibility
but specifically to individuals
under four hundred percent of
the federal poverty line as well
as other special groups such as
children state employees and
it's simply a study to look at
the fiscal nature of this.
And I don't see a cost to this
study the is it.
In there somewhere
Mr chairman and Senator Woods
there is five hundred thousand
dollars and house bill two to
conduct the study.
Of the five hundred thousand
already put into to do the
study.
And.
For hello do you expect this
study to take chair and
representative Mr chairman and
senator the secretary is to
report back to the LFC and other
legislative committees by
October twenty twenty four so we
expect the study to probably
take it at the core over the
course of a year and then some
time for a report in the plan to
be put together to for
presentation
Mr chair and and Representative
is there any other state in the
union that covers this many
people this much of the
population no not currently Mr
chairman and senator to
jurisdictions cover up to two
hundred and five percent of the
federal poverty line right now.
So the study will not only talk
about the coverage that coverage
how they're going to be covered
but also talk about the cost
cost of the coverage to the
state and
That for low covers what you're
gonna do Mr chairman and senator
in the cost analysis of this is
super important I was just
wondering are you going to use
a.
A third of a self insurance to
do this is that is that the
thought of the study Mr chair
representative to use a self
insurance fund much like we have
now to do to accomplish this
goal Mr chairman and senator the
ideas that this would dried out
of federal funding match of
seventy three percent so the
study is to look at all the
options the current self insured
plans like for state employees
that would be an option to look
at within the study so including
them and moving away from self
insured and moving toward
potentially fully insured but
it's it's really to look at all
those options.
Do you anticipate the this
creating another permanent fund
much like we have the early
childhood fund to try to cover
the cost of this Mr chair and
representative Mr chairman and
senator I don't know it's it's
it could be a possibility that
it's not discussed in this bill
with regards to a permanent
place so so you're gonna study
what it will cost but not have
to pay for it in particular it
just gives us the the general
it will cost us X. amount of
dollars to provide this coverage
under today's are under that
whatever scenario one of the
more than one scenario Mr chair
and representative Mr chairman
and senator I expect so that has
to come up with a complete
financing plan to be presented
to the legislature and all the
options included in that plan so
that the legislature could
decide and then tell me again
you said it and I apologize for
not writing it down the Mr
chairman and and Representative
many people do expect to cover
with this planned insurance
coverage Mr chairman and senator
woods there are currently two
hundred thousand uninsured New
Mexicans so I would expect this
to cover some portion of those.
So we're not talking about
covering any more than two
hundred thousand are we going to
cover what we're covering now
Flusser noted two hundred
thousand.
What's the total number or what
total percent of the population
are we expecting to cover Mr
chair.
Mr chairman and senator and this
scenario the less than ten
percent the F. I. R. reflects
about a hundred twenty thousand
people.
Could be covered under this but
I think that's part of what the
study is really going to define.
Okay.
So tell me the parameters one
more time I'm sorry I'm gonna
write it down this time you'll
have to me again the are you
said two hundred percent of the
poverty level and people under
certain eight Mister chairman
Senator under age sixty five.
To at they have over there over
a hundred and thirty three
percent of the federal poverty
line in under four hundred
percent.
On.
And they're not eligible at
four.
Any current Medicaid coverage
and the reason it's under our
over a hundred and thirty two
because they're already covered
Mister chairman Senator yes.
Three okay
okay thank you very much for
your answers thank you Mr
chairman thank you let me ask
you one question so so this is
to leverage Medicaid correct
yes.
In the in people already have to
be on Medicaid in the study.
Correct that's what are FIR
stones Mr Chairman we would be
studying people who are not
currently eligible for Medicaid
but if we expanded the
eligibility they could become
eligible.
And who determines if there was
from.
Mr Chairman and senator Jack
Mister chair Mister chairman it
would just be under they they
qualify by income so that's why
they would have to be over a
hundred and thirty three percent
of the federal poverty line to a
federal be looked at in this
study.
I think that's it.
In called ma'am.
But I think I think god this
morning.
Will we did discuss cloning
early just clone yourself.
Rodriguez has to pass motion
command second from Senator
Steinborn we call the roll.
And then we're gonna turn.
Senator.
Yes.
Their excuse Senator Diamond yes
there Diamond yes because all
of.
Seven dollars yes.
Well yes we do a different day
yes there share.
Here no Senator Steinborn.
Steinborn yes Senator Woods.
Senator Woods knows Rodriguez
yes in my previous yes Mr
Chairman yes.
Make sure that.
So we're no in the long count to
three seventy three let me
explain something because this
is already in house bill to the
funding is there is build and I
have to pass but we heard it
