Good morning. We're gonna get
started here.
I
like.
We're, we're not gonna hit here
Senate Bill 120 today.
There's still an issue with the
FIR.
OK. On the amendment that came
over so we're not hearing
Senator Hickey, Senator
Steinborn's bill.
So
Madam Secretary, we
Do we need another
in an apple.
Mhm
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um, I want to
start really by thanking you,
uh, thanking you for pushing on
the questions that you asked on.
Was that Tuesday? Tuesday about
have we increased access, you
know, what has been the result?
How do we break down what it
actually means to pay $23,000
for an infant. And so I wanna
turn your attention to a couple
documents in your, um, in
addition to the PowerPoint, I
outlined the budget priorities
for the department coming over
with House Bill 2 from the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, but at the top and in
your PowerPoint, the question
you asked, Mr. Chairman.
about increased access, um, I
was
You know, sometimes when you're
in it, you, you know you're
doing and you're doing a lot
more, but when you see the
numbers 109% increase in
childcare assistance, almost
another 16,000 children served
in 3 years, 18% increase in
childcare capacity, building
more, more, almost 10,000 more
slots in the state.
3 31% increase in pre-K, I won't
read to you, but you can see
there in the workforce 30%
increase in people working in
the workforce. So for us, one of
our top priority um in our
budget as for you, of course, is
for our FY 25 supplemental.
Uh, we wanna make sure that we
are able to fully fund our
family infant toddler. They
provide services to infants and
toddlers with developmental
delays and disabilities, as you
see up top, we've had a 24%
increase in the number of
children receiving these
services since 2021. Um, so
you're, this is just your
handout in here that kind of
goes through it but someone back
there.
Um, so you can go to the next
slide cause that'll show um the
committee, these exact
increases, 250% increase in
Medicaid funded home visiting,
that we've far exceeded that now
we're over 1300, um, but at this
time, at the end of 24, we had
increased by 500 children being
paid for through Medicaid.
So you can see just across the
board, your investment in the
early childhood education and
care department has paid off in
big dividends to your
communities. Um, actually, I
looked up, um, uh, Gallup
McKinley has seen a 77% increase
in the number of pre-K students.
I have it broken down um by all
uh by county.
We have all this data for you
and so thank you, Mr. Chairman
for really pushing on that
question of what has happened
with the investments you've made
so many more families and
children are receiving services.
On the next slide, you'll see
what the governor, our executive
budget request is intended to
do, which is to take us from
serving less than 30% or being
able to help support families
with infant infants and toddlers
to being able to support 46% of
families with infants and
toddlers to pay for childcare,
uh,
the next slide, and these are
slides we shared in our first
budget hearing, you'll see
similar with home visiting, we
want to go from 66% of eligible,
and this includes tribal, this
includes private um home
visiting, going to 84% of
eligible. So again, great growth
and across the state, we are now
in every county um with home
visiting and multiple models in
many counties. 4 year olds were
at universal pre-K, and you see
here with this budget ask we
want to be closer to.
universal for our 3 year olds,
and that helps support families,
um, being able to go to work.
The next slides show you what
our projected growth is towards
a universal system over the next
5 years. This is building on the
first plan we released in 201,
the four-year finance plan.
Data sheet I shared with you,
shared with you on Tuesday,
showed the 115,000 children
under five. So you see the
growth year over year and in
each of the core programs and as
you can see, because of the
declining birth rate, you'll see
the numbers for different
programs do drop in the out
years, um, but we see that we
get closer to a system that
actually can lift up all
families, support the state's
economy, bring children to
school more ready and improve
maternal and infant health
outcomes.
The next slide shows you the
percentage of children that
would be served who are eligible
for those programs, as you can
see, reaching 100% for pre-K,
uh, with 90 67% for our early um
for childcare services, uh, 0 to
3.
Family infant toddler will be
about 30% of all infants and
toddlers. That's amazing access
for young families with young
children who the final slide
shows you what those costs are
in the final line shows you the
portion of those expenses that
are actually paid for by
Medicaid. That's in our family
infant toddler program and our
home visiting program.
So I just wanted you to have a
sense of both where we've come
from. We started this
department, we were serving
46,000 children across all of
these programs. We're now over
75,000.
So kudos to all of you because
you've made those investments,
grateful to our early childhood
workforce, uh, that has helped
make this expansion possible and
to all the people who run these
programs both.
Public schools, private
nonprofit and for-profit.
Um
Uh, so the budget priorities to
make sure that we can attain
these goals is to make sure that
first, we support the Dolly
Parton's imagination library
that this state started
investing in in 1995. We are now
serving over 47,000 children are
getting books on a monthly
basis. I think that was our
number, yes, or, um, I'm sorry.
27,300.
Um, I think that number may have
changed
look at that, but anyway, very
exciting, 548,000. There are,
there's $3 million in the House
appropriations recommendation
and House Bill 2 for home
visiting, uh, that was over the
executive ask, we're hopeful
that we can get a million of
that to the tribal investment
strategy to, to match what the
governor had requested of 3
million for that increase and 2
million to the local early
childhood coalitions. With that,
we will be able to cover the
entire state and.
truly have a state, local, early
childhood.
governance system where we're
making sure that we're not
building a one size fits all
prenatal to 5 early childhood
system, but really listening to
families and providers and uh
local leaders, um, elected
officials in local communities.
Again asking for the wage scale
and career lattice and increase
for infant and toddler childcare
of 29,200.
Uh, that would come out of again
a contingent on enactment of
House Bill 71, which increases
the distribution from the trust
fund. We were looking back over
time, we are now 50% supported
by both the land grant and the
Early Childhood Trust Fund in
206. It'll go down to 26% um
only 26% of the revenues in our
budget in 206 will be from
general fund, not land grant,
you know, so about 100 and.
74 million.
of an almost billion dollar
budget. So really what you all
have done with the trust fund
and the passage of the land
grant is doing what you wanted
it to do, to have a department
that could be self-sustaining on
these kinds of revenues.
We also would like to uh replace
our fit kids so we'd like 3
million to go into special C2
appropriation. Our fit kids as a
system that is so old and it was
only built for billing and
payment.
So you want data, you want
results, we want to know how
children and families are being
served. We want to modernize um
our technology and so we already
have a million from the house in
the House bill uh for from HAFC
and we'd love another 3 million,
uh, and then finally the
childcare quality pilot that, as
you know, was, was 104, um, but
we'd like to see that at 54
million. Again, this is all
contingent on the passage of
House Bill 71, which is
And then I did have a thing in
here about childcare if we want
to get into the breakdown of the
23,000 and and how it plays out
an interest in that, Mr. Chair.
Hold up which slide you're
showing us, so.
Yeah, but
We just need, excuse me, our
members just need to see which
one it is.
Turn your mic back on, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
So as we talked about on
Tuesday, the 5 star program gets
23,100 to serve an infant in
their classroom.
The true cost of that care is
about 24,901.
Um, the cost of to serve this
infant is based on um 78
children, so you don't usually
just have one classroom of
infants and toddlers.
The ideal size of a center is
anywhere between 84 120, but
this is based on one classroom
of infants, one toddler, 1314,
and 1 school age. So you get 78
children being served. If this
program was smaller or only
serving infants and toddlers,
this cost would go up by about
30%. So we like the mixed age
centers. We like when families
can have their children uh at
centers again 6 weeks up to age
12.
A 5-star program actually any
license program has to have a
director on site 50% of the day.
So that's gonna be a cost
driver.
One teacher cannot cover a full
day of care. Care really has to
be offered at least 10 hours
because parents work 8 hours,
they have commute back and
forth. So you have to have
support staff for breaks and
provide care.
The 5-star program has an infant
group size of 8, so you can't
have any more than 8 babies, and
they always have to have two
teachers in the room.
So what you see down below then
is that in that program you're
gonna have almost 16 staff that
are going to be needed to run
that center. 12, about 13 of
them are gonna be teaching
staff.
The others are directors, other
support staff.
Um, the wages are gonna be your
biggest cost, 60%. Your benefits
are gonna be your next biggest
cost, uh, at 14%. So your total
personnel is quite high, and
then you have your education
program expenses, um, and then
occupancy, rent, mortgage, all
those things that go into um.
The, uh
The operating of the center.
That's gonna vary depending on
the program, of course, and the
business model, and then you
have operating reserve.
Uh, and so total non-personnel
is 306,000.
So that gives you a breakdown in
kind of the percent of the cost
of each of these things to
actually run a childcare center.
Um, the revenues are going to
vary if you're a 5 star or if
you're a licensed center, and on
the back, you can see in a, in a
5 star in a license center, an
assistant teacher position is
based on about a 15 hour, $15 an
hour salary, which is gonna be
about 31 the lead teacher
assumption is around 43,000. Now
remember these teachers are
working 2080 hours a year. These
are full-time, year round, um,
educators.
In a 5 star where um the
assumption is an $18 an hour
floor because there's higher
expectations of the staff coming
in.
There's more um curriculum,
lesson planning, things that are
expected in a higher quality
star center, so they're making
about 37,440 and then a lead
teacher in a five star license,
the assumption is around 51,000.
Then I said with the proposed
$18 an hour salary floor.
This would increase this
program's expenses by about 14%,
um, giving that, so, um, and
then down below is um.
Salary assumptions for a lead
teacher and assistant teacher in
license and 5 star, uh, at that
$18 age, it's not as clear as I
would like it to be, but we can
send an update, but that's, I
don't know if that's helpful,
kind of gives you a breakdown of
what.
Happens inside a childcare
center on a daily basis in terms
of making it.
Let me ask you one question that
she on that sheet on how many
kids are in that 5 star center,
is that 8?
78.
78, OK.
And then what are employee
benefits are they getting for?
Mr. Chair, excellent question.
Um, that is gonna vary by the
programs we do build into the
model that there would be at
least 6000 per employee to go
towards either health or
retirement or um whatever
supports, you know, maybe it's,
I mean, they do have to pay sick
leave per state, you know,
vacation time out of classroom.
So the, the business owner
decides, um, you know, we're
paying for benefits out of
paying for the cost of
delivering quality childcare.
you're paying for benefits and
benefits are part maybe part of
the employer's costs are.
Or something, but we're playing
for benefits including
retirement, correct? That's what
you stated.
Possibly they not if if that's
how they use it, anybody paying
for retirements out of that
fund?
So Mr. Cha, basically what
those benefits.
So instead of increasing their
wages where they should be
first. They're moving that off
to to
We just say this is a
Mr. Chair, um, yes, I agree. I
think the market also dictates,
um, like as in most businesses
that um to be able to retain and
make very good business to
limited resources now this,
like, you know.
Getting in line with, uh, I
mean, not getting in line.
Supporting what is quality care.
And I think that's what we want,
um, I think for decades, what
we've.
Dealt with is that the cost,
the, the way care has been
delivered is on because to make
your, your bottom line balance
with 60% coming from wages, that
ends up being the way that you
can break even.
This is basically the crusts
What we have found it's stale
now, but we that rate increases
did not mean wages will not
either.
Yeah, I mean, you need to pay
them their wages and then they
let them determine if they want
to put their wages in health
care costs or benefits. So
there's 25 employees in this
program, correct?
So 25 employees. I don't have my
phone with me um yes,
you're exactly right.
25.
15.6 that can do the math for me
5.5 of them are.
Uh, total staff and then 12 2 27
divided by 164.
So they get about a 16 and
whether they wanted.
My healthcare with the 16,000.
That's just an average. do that
Mr. Chair, I apologize. Can you
do that math again for me? What
we're the benefits are 164,000.
Right
And there's 27.
How many employees do we say 27?
Yeah
Kelly, so 164 just an average
workers' comp, that's
unemployment, that's everything
I know that we're talking about.
So about 16,000 so
6000 yeah so they could take
home 6000 more and decide to
determine whether they want to
spend it on their retirement or
their healthcare.
Yeah, instead of taking it off
the top, let them take it home
in their paycheck, they'll get
the deduction and in the payroll
anyway. I think you ought to let
them employee determinant
instead of saying, well, we want
to employee benefits. Well, OK,
but let them determine it. I
mean, then that's why you're
keeping your wages low is
because you're including a
benefit class, and I don't think
this fund was designed for
wasn't originated to be benefits
that was originated to pay in
and you're keeping your, your
pay at a lower deal if your
average pay is 31.
I think you said.
You know we bring them up to
37,000 a year and let them
determine where they want to
spend their money on healthcare.
I mean, are they eligible for
Bel? I mean, there's a number of
options that that do cost
savings, but I think that's a
number that kind of bothers me
is you're determining the factor
for the employee that the
employee determined where they
want to spend their money, if
they want to spend on
healthcare, if they want to
spend on retirement, that's up
to them.
inflationary costs, but to take
home 6000 or 7000 more a year.
a lot more money in their
pocket. I, I think that's
something we're gonna have to
really look into over the next
couple of days.
Do we really want to continue to
determine that we're gonna give
them benefits.
when the employees should be
determining if they have if they
want to have benefits.
Mr. Chair, I would just say in,
in that, um, as you know, cause
you're a businessman, uh, you
know what's built into that
business, uh, into that benefits
is basic taxes that any employer
has to pay for their employees,
so.
just wanna clarify that these
are, you know, these are
important businesses to our
communities to make sure that
the workforce is there to
To do it, but I, you know, I,
um, and I think that some, some
programs may do that. I also
want to for us to do childcare
contracted slots and that
request for proposal is almost
ready, and that will have more
controls from the um of the
provider, um, what's expected in
terms of salary and things, but
I think it's a good thing what
we've done here in New Mexico
system that actually I'm not
arguing with you about that.
I'm, I'm arguing with you about
pain in Senator Brent has
another number they think you
ought to say.
Uh, yeah, you know, just doing
the, the math here.
Uh, you're, we're paying 24,900.
For student for 78 students that
comes to 1.9.
Mi 42,000.
Excuse me, Mr. Chair, Mr. Brent,
that's actually the true cost.
What we pay is 23, 100, the top
line. Where's the other uh 1800
come from Senator Brands, if
they're a for-profit, um,
income, they require, I mean,
it's, it's, it depends um if
they're faith based, it may come
from the church or the
synagogue.
I think so it's.
Your man is 1.1 don't know
what's that's a $600,000 profit.
That's exactly what the numbers
are.
It's simple math.
Kelly
we can't just what their infant
toddler.
We're paying very healthy rates
for 3 and 4 year olds in pre-K.
And a lot of that is also adding
to the health of the business of
that center and so it it may,
it's not necessarily a holistic
view to say that they're just
losing.
So Mr. Chair, Senator Brandt,
not all 78 children get 23,100,
only the 8.
We'd have to give you all the
rates for each of the age
groups, so Kelly's point, if
it's a pre-K.
And it's a full day there. I
just, I can, we can, I would
love to have a whole.
Well, welcome back to Senate.
It's on Friday because they're
actually
losing um.
I mean we got to understand
this. I mean, you're asking for
more money to share another 100
million and maybe $200 million
fund and and.
You're saying we can't hire
people or wages are too low, and
then when we start really
looking in where we really
spending our money cost for a
kid and what are we getting in
the outcome? We don't know yet
because it's a long road to
Holly.
And so, I think we want to see
that, I want to see that
breakdown tomorrow morning.
Let's do it cost per kid, cost
per age group
and then
I had it on this and I didn't
get my final copy to, uh, to
the, the team. So I have the
total revenues for a center, a
license star because they'd be
serving of the next slide. Um, I
just want to again, to your
point that you brought up
Tuesday.
This is what you bought with all
the great investments and
revenues is stronger
communities, healthier families,
more resilient, uh, state, and
we want to continue the good
growth so that all New Mexico
families who are eligible.
Have the, they don't have to.
These are all voluntary
programs, but, um, I think to
just I so I just wanted to make
that point that um we will bring
tomorrow the actual revenues and
we'll show you the actual cost.
Her child in a 5 star.
For each of these age group, and
then you'll see how many more
children you can serve.
In a license and then why we
like the higher quality because
the responsive caregiving, the
opportunity to interact with the
child, talk with them, that's
what brains, builds the brain.
That's what helps us have better
health and developmental
outcomes we're not arguing that
point. OK, I just want to be
clear that there's gonna be
different.
That's
OK. Any other questions from
Senator Padilla?
Uh, thank you, Chair and thank
you Secretary Kelly and and
everyone John. So uh I wanna
make sure I understand what
we're gonna be seeing tomorrow
because I think it's about a
private business.
Or or what what are we gonna be
seeing tomorrow?
I see nodding and shaking,
so we're gonna see actually the
revenues that would come from
the state for a program, uh,
based on current rates. So this
is based on current rates.
That's what I think we're going
to see. One for a licensed and
one for 5 star or just the 5
star?
We want to see them both,
and Kelly had a comment also
chair.
Mr. Chair, I just like to
request that that be a really
holistic view and also include
what the center would see for
food supplements, but they would
receive for wage supplements
that they might be receiving on
top of it, not just rates. And
if we're looking at pre-K also,
the wrapround hours they would
receive for pre-K hours. And so
we think about a holistic
revenue.
Um, that would go into the
center.
I don't think I got my answer
though. Is this about a, is this
a private business?
We're gonna, I mean, so we're
asking a private business to
open up their books and tell us
exactly what their margins. I, I
don't want to do that. I mean,
that's not fair to that
business, Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla, this is, this is based
on the cost model. This is on
our website, the link there on
the handout you have will take
you to the cost calculator. You
can go right onto our website
and put in your own uh scenarios
of how many children it'll tell
you how many you select license,
if you select 34 star, it'll
tell you how many children you
can have in each of those
classrooms, so this is all
available.
So I can show it to you and I
can also I provided the link and
that people can give you the
output. They'll tell you the
revenue from child and adult
care food program. They'll tell
you about their um enrollment
efficiency, because if you don't
keep a child in every seat all
the time, you know, taken into
consideration.
I, I just miss Mr. Chair, I just
want to be, uh, uh, wanna make
sure that we're, it's hard
enough for these private
providers which we built into
the legislation with the
mixed-use delivery system to
exist and I want to make sure
we're not, you know, putting
ranking them over the coals
because they are in business to
make a profit, they have to make
some money doing this effort,
and I, you know, I don't know
that that's fair to them to have
to
You know, demonstrate all that
for a public body, and they have
to run their business, they have
to meet the standards set by the
department and that, that's,
that's their part of the show.
So, what are our goals for
tomorrow exactly? What are we
trying to accomplish? I really
want to know what it costs for a
kid, and the, the, the whole
conversation is being, oh, we
need to increase our pay. Well,
we just see that in the 164
number that they're requiring
them to either get health
benefits or have retirement.
That's not what the fund said it
was set up for.
was set up to take care of kids
and to pay them correctly to
take care of that.
And so, I, I agree with you. I
don't care if you make a profit.
I don't care if you make, if you
have the amount of kids and you
make $10,000 a kid, that's what
the model is and that's what
everybody's allowed to make a
profit. Mhm.
Nonprofits are are working
differently because they don't
pay any taxes. The for-profit
ones pay taxes on top of that.
So there's a different model in
each scenario.
But the real question is, did we
do this fund?
To fund the children, or did we
do it to say, oh, we're gonna
have retirement and healthcare.
When we're not we're
artificially keeping the pay low
because we're requiring them.
They're deciding that they're
gonna take health care and
retirement out of their pay.
I think the employee ought to
determine whether they want
healthcare retirement, that's up
to them. We're not gonna force
that on them, but then don't
come back to me and say, oh
well, their pay is low, so we're
not doing that well, it's
because you're taking it off the
top.
whatever financial advisor walks
in the door and says we can
offer them system and then you
have a payroll deduction to for
retirement, they'll do it. I
mean, that's employee, that's up
to the employee. I do a set
program for my employees and
some of them participate and
some of them don't.
I have to match it with 15%.
But that's up to the employee if
you offer it to him.
But don't tell me to art were
artificially low and we need
more money or pay when they're
requiring them to have health
health care and retirement out
of their paychecks when they,
they should be turned the
employees should be determining
that themselves. And then
I mean, I just really want to
know, you know, what is it
gonna, what does it cost per
kid?
I don't care if you make a
profit. I don't care if a
nonprofit makes a profit. It's a
different model. It's the for
profits want to turn to
nonprofit, sure they can do that
and not pay taxes, but the, the
nonprofits are, are having a
greater margin than the for
profits when you don't have a
tax base.
And so
That's some of the modeling that
they're asking for an additional
200 million this year, and
they're claiming it's order to
bring up pay and to bring up
these levels.
Let's see where pay is really
going.
If it's really getting into
their pockets, or if it's
The owner and the directors
deciding they want retirement
healthcare and then the
employees are saddled with that.
I, I appreciate that. I still
have the floor and I, you know,
I, it's an awfully large
assumption. I, I, I think that,
you know, business owners, I'm a
business owner, you're a
business owner, Mr. Chairman,
with my business, I, I pay up to
50% of absolutely everything the
employee gets to choose, like
you said, what they want to do
for retirement, for benefits,
the whole nine, and we make sure
that they're very well taken
care of.
But uh I don't want to be.
You know, requiring a business
to show us their practices and
their this and that. What is
this slide then? I guess I'm I'm
confused on what we're doing
tomorrow because I think you
have it pretty clearly laid out
here.
Is that what you, but is this
just for a for-profit or is this
for a not for profit? What is
this one? It's for the you see
that one all the way from over.
I'm sorry, yeah, yeah, it is,
it's the cost to operate a
center at a 5 star level that
would serve 78 children, 6 weeks
to age 12.
So that would be
um expenses. And so what the
chairman and what I had on there
and now I, I can't, uh, was the
actual output, which again, I
would encourage you to go to, I
mean, I know you don't have
time, but maybe some of the
staff could go to the class, do
some, do some of the numbers,
but I agree with you, I think
that, you know, we think about a
lot of businesses in New Mexico.
It's our managed care
organizations or medical and our
health professionals who um um
some some serve 70% Medicaid and
30% like our childcare.
programs do, some are, you know,
entirely, you know, not Medicaid
or entirely Medicaid, uh, and
they had to stay in business. I
mean, they have to be
competitive, uh, and they have
to be able to attract.
And retain a workforce that, you
know, needs, um.
So to your point, they may, they
may give their um their
employees that choice, but they
may also say no, I want to
provide this for my employees.
Some of them go above and
beyond. I mean, many of them go
above and beyond.
Uh, to make sure that they can
support a workflow in our young
children, um, in their
development, so.
So we can give you the, we can
give you what the revenues would
be from the child and adult care
food program and from the
subsidy, which are all state,
um, you know, federal and state
funds that would go to this size
program, and I can run one for a
license center that would serve
a lot more children, and you
could see the difference.
I appreciate that Chairman. This
will be my last and it's more of
a comment, um, so when I carried
the legislation to get this
thing created and to do this. It
was uh probably one of the top 5
stickiest points. I see Kate
Noble out in the audience who
was part of the war room and
helping us get this done. Um,
and one of the things that we
talked about was, and it's in
the legislation.
That there be a career ladder, a
pay lattice, and the development
plan. That's in the legislation,
everybody. So we have to do,
this is education. It's just
early education. So how we look
at our K through 12 education,
higher education. This is simply
the setup for the whole rest of
the game.
Um, you know, and so,
Yeah, I, we don't really have a
choice as a legislature, we have
to do this. It's, it's in law.
And so I'm glad that you're
moving us in this direction. I'm
glad that you're wanting to
ensure that all this is fairly
determined and all that, but uh,
but you know I, I, we need to
get this resolved ASAP. There's
a lot of workers that provide
these very valuable services,
and they've got to be treated
fairly from up to bottom, so I,
I guess we'll see what we're
gonna look at tomorrow, but I, I
see it's pretty much all here
right now. I'm just, I'm not
sure what we're doing tomorrow.
Senator Linder.
Thanks sir.
Good morning.
Good morning. Um,
Mr. Chair, so I, I have a couple
of questions.
If I'm gonna start a child care
center.
And I looked down there and
you're going to, you're gonna
make me
Start my employee at $18 an hour
for 5 star, right?
That's, that's a mandate $15 for
the other.
If I am just starting a company.
Why would I ever give you a
raise because you're telling me
what to pay them, so why would
I?
ever give them a raise.
Chair, Senator Lanaire, thank
you. That is such a great
question. We are not, um,
making, it's not a mandate. It's
the assumptions we use to build
our.
Cost model
To inform our rate setting.
So we say that.
In order for us to make sure
that we have an early childhood
workforce and providing
childcare that they, there
should be a minimum of $15 a
floor for an entry level person.
The it is not mandated. Um, it
will be when we do our
contracted slots because
there'll be a contractual
relationship. Right now, the
relationship is between the
provider and the family.
And this, um, ECECD pays for the
family, um, pays the provider on
behalf of the family. Does that
make sense? And Mr. Chair, just
kind of follow up with, with the
chairman's conversation there.
If I'm a private business owner,
well, we want to take care of
the kids. I mean, that's, that's
the whole thing.
But we've also got to take care
of the employer.
Because if they close their
business.
We don't have any jobs.
We got to balance that. We got
to be very careful with that.
And so to kind of follow up with
the chairman's.
Statement there. If I have a
company and I have over
50 employees, for example.
Don't I have to pay those
benefits for them?
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, um,
great question. Yes, we, we
model into the cost model all
required state, the two weeks of
sick leave, and all those
pieces, yes, they, that is part
of what we model into the.
Uh, rate setting process.
OK. And you, you kind of see
where I'm going.
I, I just want to make sure that
That we understand.
That a private company is
treated completely different.
When you get your when you get
to, if I have 100 employees, my
cost.
goes up significantly.
And, and I know that's their
choice.
But
Then I have another one here.
Hi, Sierra.
My daughter, um,
Is in childcare.
So I have to read this.
No.
We don't take public comment.
Well, it's not public comment.
It's
That's pretty good.
So, um,
Private families pay $600 a
month for an infant.
And if she has an infant and a
child, she's paying.
$2000 a month.
And that's unassisted.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Lanier, um, so can you give me
the, the statement again. She's,
she's paying $600 for her
infant.
Yes. So, so what she's saying is
All childcare centers aren't all
assisted.
Summer
Or privately paid.
So her expense is 600.
And 1000
What, what would be the
incentive for her to
To put her child in it.
In a care center.
So, um, thank you. I think I
understand where um.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Lanier,
so you're saying that the so
some childcare businesses choose
not to use the childcare
assistance program.
Um, they just do private tuition
from families, most of them are
between.
70 and 70% subsidy, 30 that is,
so she's in a center where she's
paying out of pocket and they're
only charging infant and child.
Oh, infant and an older child,
so she's paying $1600 a month
for two children. Yes, yes.
And where the state would pay.
2000, a little under 2000 for
that infant.
Yeah, this is part of the broken
market of childcare because
families can't provide the care.
And I think that's the point is
that $400 400 dollars to $600
whatever it comes out to be.
It's child is struggling in the,
sorry, Mr. Chair, why we, we
struggled in this country to
keep childcare.
Um, in business and to keep them
and so another great thing that
we're using what it.
To pay people good wages to make
sure they have good materials,
they can pay their mortgage,
their insurance, their
utilities, and serve the
children, uh, in a high quality
way.
That's the level of investment
that it takes.
OK
And Mr. Chair, the only other
thing I have is
All of this is
It's good. I mean, this is, this
is what you're doing. This is
The increases
I understand
Do we ever get to see any
results.
So we're, we're increasing all
of these things where, where's
the data that shows us the
results.
So when this child's now in the
3rd or 4th grade, are they up to
reading level or their math
scores were correct.
Is there
Social skills up to level, all
of those. Do we have anything
that you can bring and and show
us the results, Kelly's dying to
answer that question first,
Kelly.
You're gonna get sick of me.
Um, so if you remember back, I
know this is a, I came before
you with a presentation about
what we were looking at outcomes
for these programs and happy to
bring something
and some short term grade. Now
with pre-kindergarten, we're
seeing long-term learning
outcomes through
High school graduation rates and
even higher those outcomes are
different if you invest in
outcomes, home visiting,
um, let me stop you there, and I
don't mean to talk over you
cause we don't have a lot of
time, but Mr. Chair, that
What are the results? How many,
how many kids are up to reading
level because when you, when you
go to our education stuff.
We ain't there.
And if we're going to spend this
kind of money.
Yep
We, we want to see results.
And, and I don't feel like we're
getting those results. I
remember the, the presentation
you're talking about, and that
gives us some.
But
I, I guess what I'm asking is,
are we gonna track these kids
through so we can actually see
the results of everything that
that we're kicking in and the
increasing in the, the new FTEs
is all of this gonna make a
difference.
In the long run.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier, um
excellent, excellent questions,
and yes, absolutely, we, but we
have the early childhood
integrated data system, which is
finally a warehouse and so we
have all of the data on our
children and we're also part of
the New Mexico longitudinal data
systems NMRIS. And so our data
on our young children will go
and we'll be able to track 3rd
grade. Um, we already in our
performance in kindergarten, so
you can see children who have
come through pre-K. It's one of
our performance measures too,
one in math and one in literacy.
We have
amazing, um, outcomes we track
in home visiting on many
indicators of maternal and child
health, positive parenting, and
our annual report, um, she'll
hopefully be out very soon for
24. And then the other one is
fit, but it's on the children
that are transitioning out of
it, but I like your question,
where are they in 3rd grade?
Where are they? Do they persist?
Are they dropping out? The pre-K
evaluation, um, is being updated
from the LFC, but we know, I
mean, when the childcare
evaluation was done.
in this state. That's when.
The people working in childcare
were the lowest paid people in
the state. The programs barely
had enough money to break even
and so I think it's good for us
to think about doing another
study, and there are studies all
over the country that have shown
the benefits of childcare on
later STEM education, and we'll
bring those tomorrow so we can
look and we can share those with
you so you can see that when we
make the investments and we do
quality. We can't just do
childcare. We have to make sure
that it has those high level of
interactions and that the
ator s have the competencies and
the credentials to be able to
deliver that quality care, which
is why the wage scale and career
lattice becomes so important
because if I'm gonna go get my
bachelor, am I gonna be paid
anything better, and we hope
they would be that they would
stay working with infants and
toddlers. All right. Thank you.
I'll look forward to that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Look forward to seeing you
tomorrow.
Uh, center master you're sitting
right there.
The this quickly. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, members.
This is uh Senate Bill 155. It's
a deals with the criminal
statute of embezzlement.
And what it does is it allows
prosecutors to uh combine cases
to make things more efficient
and more effective to make the
sentences more proportionate to
the crime. So for example, if
somebody, you know, steals from
the till, so to speak, uh, once
every 5 months instead of 5
separate crimes, 5 different
cases, 5 different courtrooms,
it would be 1 crime.
One prosecutor, one defense
attorney, one courtroom, and
that uh the penalty would be
proportionate to the overall
harm done to that small business
or nonprofit.
With that I'll stand for
question.
Anybody in the audience and
support.
the laws there, we got one, we
have anybody on Zoom?
Have anybody in opposition?
You want to just note that and
you don't have to talk, you're
good, right?
You can taste in my just when
we're done.
Uh.
Questions from committee
members.
See none can have emotion. I
move do pass.
A motion for due pass. I was
second by Senator Lanier.
We call the role.
Senator Brandt.
We're that you can go back to
the governor's office. Senator
Campos we're done.
Senator Gonzalez.
Yes
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Lanier, Senator Lanier votes,
yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla Bosia, Senator
Steinborn, Senator Tobiasin.
Senator Tobias and votes yes
Senator Trujil.
Senator Trujillo Bosa, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods, Senator Sendo
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Brandt.
That
Senator Brandt votes yes,
Senator Munoz, Senator Munoz
votes yes, we have a due pass 9
in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative.
A time watch out for those guys
in the back corner, don't that
right.
Uh, does anybody want to take a
stab at Senator Figueroa's
Senate Bill 155.
I'm sorry, 252.
Uh, is that you rising up to the
occasion center.
All right, we we text her and
call her, we'll have a response,
right?
Yeah.
I, I've read the bill, it's
just.
Same adding telehealth to this.
All right. Questions. Anybody in
the audience in support?
Senator, just run over the top
line of the bill. I've read it.
I don't see a fiscal impact on
it.
I don't see any other hard
questions just the first section
of the bill amended amends the
New Mexico Telehealth Act to
allow it to be. Thank you.
Anybody in the audience in
support.
Anybody in opposition.
Zoom
answer
Nobody questions from committee
members.
I don't think you want to ask
him a question but go right
ahead and I'm not gonna put the
senator on the spot, so.
Yeah
No, all I'm saying is
Looks like there's a little more
to this than
And you have to judge
surroundings and everything
when.
We were talking about.
people's issues and
Social work, I mean.
If, if I could
They're
senators, it's a video
appointment for social work.
is what it is. And so I I
understand what the bill says,
but
I don't understand how
that can work.
Myself, but I'm not the expert
in the field.
So I'll say my questions for the
good senator when we get on the
floor wherever we go. None of
this changes, Mr. Chairman, the
supervision of the social
worker, all of that continues.
As a matter of fact, I have two
sons that are MSWs. You've met
them and they have actually told
me that.
For all the other kind of
healthcare telehealth center.
You know,
lifeline Lifeline just showed
up. I'm doing my best for the
plane blindfolded over
blindfolded and riding the horse
backwards.
like you guys go fast when you
get off the budget.
Um, this film increases access
to social work via telehealth
because an obstacle popped up in
the spring.
Somebody has a question, so if
you answer his question.
Yeah
OK, so,
Explain this to me. We're
talking about doing telehealth.
OK, so is this in home?
to health? Do they go to a
provider, uh.
For example, I've got a provider
in my.
town of Clovis.
Mil health resources.
And
Uh, they do have social workers
there.
But say that uh
This was
Somewhere where they didn't
have.
Social workers.
So how would someone
go about getting the service,
would they do it in their home?
Would they have to go to a, a, a
facility somewhere and set in
front of a camera.
Explained the damn thing to me
on, on that part of that part of
because
If I was a social worker.
And I've had some conversations
with people.
And if I was a social worker, I
would want to know.
The home environment.
That that was going on.
With mental health problem. I, I
mean, you can dress up pretty
well.
Uh, you know, we, we see that on
TV where we see gang members
dressed up.
To, to really look good in front
of the jury.
And yet the charges that was
brought before him were
For huge and grotesque, but what
I'm getting at.
For a social worker to know the
circumstances.
They have to know the
environment too, so how do you
know the environment?
When you tell.
I guess is trying what I'm
trying to say, Mr. Chairman and,
and senators.
Mr. Tarrant, Senator, I would
draw your attention to the
bottom of page 2, where it says
originating site.
Where a patient can receive
telehealth is already determined
by law and this bill doesn't
change that, nor does it change
the scope of practice or would a
social worker is required to
know about their patient or what
they can do with their patients.
There's a list of 14 places that
are originating sites where a
patient can receive health care
and this bill doesn't change
that. What this bill does, nor
does it change the requirements
for social workers, Mr. Chair,
to have supervision, uh,
licensed master's level social
workers provide services under
supervision. Licensed clinical
social workers do not need the
supervision piece. This bill
doesn't change scope of
practice.
or supervision requirements or
the place that care is received.
What it does is solved the
problem of the word independent
on line 17.
That suddenly this spring
somebody read and said whoa, all
of you masters social workers
out there can no longer provide
telehealth. They've been doing
it for years, reaching our
remote places, and suddenly all
those services were stopped. It
caused such a commotion that uh
they were given temporary
permission to continue providing
pending legislative
clarification. So the tent of
this bill is to clarify that.
peace and let those social
workers continue providing
services this way.
So would you have another
question? No, I have no more
questions, um, Senator Truhill.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator, for making
it here. We are very efficient
here, so keep that in mind for
the future. Um, I, I do want to
just point out that the
authorizing statute for the
social work, um, practice
already authorizes the board,
and I'm gonna read it to
determine the appropriate
application of technology to
social work practice, including
video teleconferencing or
appropriate supervision and
client contact. So it's already
Authorized in the statute that
they get licensed for the board
to make the determination. We
have this telehealth act that we
did kind of before we started
adding this into licensed
professions authorizing
statutes, and it lists who could
do telehealth.
And they were trying to do that
as a shortcut to adding in uh
that telehealth to each
practice, and they left out one,
and so the board had a little
bit of a hiccup over it, and
this literally is just to
clarify that it's all good.
Thank you. Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
actually, Senator, I want to
thank you for bringing this
forward. Um, I have a little bit
of knowledge in this area just
because a couple of our very big
clients we've coached for years,
found themselves in a place
during COVID where they couldn't
help people that needed help.
And we help them innovate their
entire business practice based
upon telehealth so that they
could provide more services to
more people across New Mexico,
um, so really I applaud you for
picking this up and pushing it
through here because this is
needed and obviously behavioral
health is a big focus this
session, and without this, we
are stunting our ability to
actually help more people. So
thank you.
Thank you. Can I have a motion.
I move with you pass motion for
do pass second by.
son
We call the wrong.
Senator Brent?
Yes. Senator Brandt votes yes.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez,
Senator Gonzalez votes as
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
votes yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla Bosia, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasin, Senator Tobias
and votes yes, Senator Trujillo.
Senator, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes no Senator
Sendo. Yes, Senators, Senator
Munoz. Senator Munoz, yes, we
have a DuP pass a in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
Thank you, center.
We'rejour that you guys have
some subcommittee meetings
today.
No, there, there's an issue with
that FIR. There's an amendment
that was put on in public
affairs that the FIR was
tracking correctly as Senator
Hickey told us was not tracking
correctly and so er created a
whole bunch of confusion, so
that bill does cost money.
Unless he wants to strip that
amendment and take it out.
OK, cause it's an expansion.
It's not just extending the
study, it was an expansion of
services.
Right, and then.
Uh, yeah, I think Adrian
scheduled you guys or shouldn't
have chatted with you whatever
subcommittee you're on.
I think so, yeah. I think he's
gonna try to pull two
subcommittees, but we don't have
the one room. Senator Gonzalez.
And they're going up to wrap up
Capitol today.
Don't come back till it's done.
So when you're smiling.
We're
