So Senator would you like or
Center guy a goes here also
right not you both have you want
to present that.
You know.
I'd like that.
Place of all license plates we
could be.
Percent of K. Senator Gallegos
is not here and I hate to pass
over it so thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee hi I have Senate Bill
what is.
I was going to break Paletta but
this is a make a wish.
License plates and it's
important to me I had a son I
have a son Nicholas who was
diagnosed with bone cancer when
he was four and we went on a
thank you make a wish trip back
in two thousand one and so it's
really important to me just to
support make a wish there an
amazing organization and to a
lot of good things for children
who have been diagnosed with
life threatening illnesses so
with that madam chair I stand
for questions thank you senator
appreciate you bringing this
forward.
Anyone opposed or anyone support
of this bill in the audience.
Anyone opposed to the bill.
In any committee members and
comments questions on this bill
is merely to have another
license plate but this one just
such a great purpose thank you.
Thank you senator okay there's a
motion by Senator Diamond second
by Senator Padilla can you take
over the role please thank you.
We're Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share.
Senator Steinborn is excused
Senator Woods says excuse
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
when US is excused seven to zero
yes thank you always such a
tough Committee her thank you
madam chair.
Right.
We're going to go on to Senate
bill two eighty four Special
Olympics license plates Senator
Lopez and Senator share those
Senator Lopez is not here and
you will be all by yourself
there Senator.
This is.
What will be the on.
Thank you madam chair yes so
this is a Special Olympics
vehicle registration license
plate Special Olympics really.
Has been around since thank you
remember which Kennedy was no.
started Special Olympics
and so what they do is they help
people with special needs to
participate in sports year round
and try to keep them active and
involved in the world.
Beautiful.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bringing this
site I know it's near and dear
to your heart and served on the
special effects New Mexico board
for about nine years and my
girlfriend actually serves on
the board now she's the
treasurer of treasury secretary
treasurer the board now and it's
Eunice Kennedy Shriver actually
that created it yes and very
slowly we have also increased
funding to the New Mexico
tourism department through the
New Mexico true program that
administers the RFP to Special
Olympics to to manage the
programming that they do and I
think we have it up to about six
hundred thousand now I know I
put in about three hundred
thousand and several of us have
gone along the way and done a
great job doing that so thank
you for bringing this.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yes.
There is also excuse Senator
Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share yes.
Senator Steinborn yeah.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes center many of us
yes ten two zero.
We have let me let me ask one
question does anybody have any
objections to these license
plates not let's just let's just
roll out it's a little bit of
time so move the way we can do
Mandy Vigil.
We should ask for the public in
order to yes Sir we should have
some is anybody here on the
route sixty six license plate.
Is anybody on the June.
Senator Campos.
You want to make a motion thank
you very much Mr chairman that
we adopt Senate bill three oh
five second.
The motion and a second any
objection to the motion.
Senate bill one forty two is a
license plate for minor.
Any of.
Any questions.
One forty two.
Senator Diamond second.
Any objection to the do passed
motion fell for you go get
Senator Cervantes of.
Senator sure you want to do
Senate bill four thirty nine.
I see the possum buzz is here.
Thank you Mr chair of the Senate
bill four thirty nine simply put
a limit on what the game and
fish department can buy the land
they can buy they can buy up to
million dollars with the land
right now they can they can buy
lands they don't have to come to
us and ask for because they're
generating their own.
Their own funding and so what
this does is say yep you can you
can buy land that's needed for
for right away here easements or
any of those kind of things that
might come up but if you're
going to spend more than a
million dollars come to the
appropriating body to us and ask
for the money so it doesn't mean
they can't just like any other
state agency they have to come
to us and ask for the money
before they buy anything we're
doing that for you know
buildings here in Santa Fe and
other things like that of.
We by the same rules as
everybody else that.
Anybody here in support.
Chair and come up to the Mike.
chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza reserve
this with the New Mexico
coalition of conservation
districts sentence strong
support of this legislation you
know buying land is this a has a
significant impact on the
community and this really should
be legislative decision for
these significant
purchases I mean we look at two
I mean look at tax agreement
development district those have
to come to the legislature so
there is precedent so we do
stand strong support.
Imagine engine support Hughes
ran into the room.
Mr chairman committee making at
the same.
But new push.
Mr holder.
Mr chairman of the committee
members my name is Brandon
quorum here and representing the
New Mexico cattle growers we are
standing in strong support of
this bill if it's going to be a
state position now to step out
and start purchasing private
property I think that the
legislature needs to have a say
in this if there's going to be
any purchases over the a million
dollars.
The legislature needs to have
an.
We've we have tried to express
our views on why.
There should not be any state
allocated acquisition of private
property.
And I understand a small portion
of why we all are wanting to get
some of this done but if we're
going to have acquisition of
private property this needs to
be a standard you guys have to
be able to look at a situation
see it all the way through and
determine whether this is a
proper use of allocated monies
for top with that we stand in
support of this bill thank you
very much.
Anybody in zoom in support.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody in the room in
opposition.
Else why you don't want just
watching what you're doing.
Chairman said that I want you
watching what we're doing what
you already are watching what
we're doing we at any time we
have to do an acquisition it has
to go through an appropriation
process in the capital budget it
goes through both houses and
approval occurs there so that's
so you are watching we only own
about point three percent of the
land mass in the state which is
about two hundred fifty thousand
acres we rarely make purchases
when we do those purchases I
things like even asked where
somebody comes to us and says
Hey we want you to buy this and
open it to the public and that
those properties generate
significant income to local
economies.
we also have properties that are
keeping species off of the
endangered species list are
working towards that for example
the in the members valley so.
I guess ultimately we oppose the
bill because we feel like
there's already process in place
to have that input into that and
because these properties are so
important across the state.
You called the statute that says
you have to legislate.
Mr chairman I do not know the
specifics statute I know that
there are all of our budget all
of our appropriation comes
through the legislature thanks.
For those of you for those of
you on zoom it's gonna be one
minute and we have three people
on opposite.
Friend.
Yes Mr chair members committee
thank you would give me the
opportunity so this bill seems
to be in response to the L. bar
purchase last year that created
the largest state wildlife
management area in the United
States apparently fifty four
thousand acres but I want to
look over the land ownership in
New Mexico where you can graze
cattle on word I think we have
seventy six million acres of
land in New Mexico and you can
graze cattle on.
Ninety four percent of that land
thirty one point five million
acres of public land by US for
service in the L. and N. forty
one point six million acres of
private land so I don't see if
ninety four percent of the state
is open for grazing and
agricultural use and all yeah of
course you have to back up the
cities and everything
when I don't see where it's a
problem if this Department
gaming fish were to add you know
point zero zero zero zero zero
zero one percent to the public
domain and concerned that land
for resident hunters on while
I'm in the chairs which you Mr
chair passed that bill SB one
ninety six that made that so
which New Mexico hires are
forever grateful for you to for
running that bill and giving us
a bigger share of the public
honey permits Representative as
resident only and so I just
don't see why there so much
consternation when us very
relatively tiny portions of the
the land mass of New Mexico
become public concern for all
the species in the state and for
the use and enjoyment of the New
Mexico public thank you thank
you one minute.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee just you will
hear executive director of the
New Mexico wildlife federation.
New Mexico state wildlife
management areas are uniquely
beneficial to New Mexico big
game hunters because as many on
this committee know all an
outsized portion of hunting
opportunity particularly for elk
are exclusive to non residents
of the state unlike other
western states New Mexico
provides approximately thirty
five percent of all L. training
opportunity for non residents
and state wildlife management
areas are the unique property
type in this state that are
exclusive to New Mexico
residents Mexico our federation
strongly opposes this bill.
Because of as a as a person
who's a reporter who made a
living as a realtor for nine
years I find it difficult to
believe that the sellers of
these large properties are going
to wait for the legislative
approval process are and are
going to be that patient what we
saw with the more was a willing
seller and willing buyer if
we're truly concerned about
property rights I think one of
the most important property
rights is the ability to sell
the property thank you.
Like thank you.
We got one more.
Los.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Steinborn.
I have a question
for the sponsor but probably for
the game and fish to these
expenditures of land come out of
the game protection fund.
Okay Mr chair designate
protection fund have any
stipulation that whatever you
choose to spend that there is a
threshold you have to go to the
legislature.
Thank you want to come up and
sit next sooner sure so.
You can be in C. Boyce's not add
shaking.
Mister chairman Senator as I
noted when I'm spoke earlier all
of our we can't spend any money
out of the game protection fund
without there being
appropriation either in the
house bill two for the budget or
if a specific capital
appropriation.
That okay I'm in.
That's exactly true maybe.
The economy every penny you
spend from the game protection
fund has to be in the budget.
That was when you went.
Mr Chairman centers time I
believe that's correct.
I believe that's correct.
Okay even if the yeah one is
fair let me just.
You want to add to that on that
point okay I'm I'm not quite the
minimum of fuss yeah I I would
just say this one.
I think a when it comes to
conservation work anyway you
know we have a need for more
habitat not last for wildlife
and so to the extent that
valuable habitat becomes
available of you to in the
conservation interests to to
acquire that if you're willing
so these were land trusts are
all about and and sometimes you
know those plans are really
priceless to the public long
term and to wildlife in the
connecting pieces of habitat to
one another that connectivity
where you really massively
expand habitat available to a
species to excess reproduce it
cetera so so I'm I'm against the
bill for that reason because I I
think that this is our wildlife
management agency having said
that.
As you all know very well now
you know my goal is that if
we're going to if these
purchasers going to happen that
they're not creating little
private get aways for some
people there's a history of that
within this agency and that is
really becomes a conservation
agency that that become the
purpose.
And not kind of a whimsical
desire for some people to
acquire centrepiece properties
so.
But for those reasons that I
will stand opposed to the.
Thank you.
Questions.
Share I I I see this bill more
of a public transparency bill
they can only lead to greater
public trust and and I would
think that director you would
have to agree that the
commission has seems quite
dysfunction I mean we've never
had a full commission
appointment this the the game
officials lacked leadership
under this administration until
just up until three days we
didn't have enough members to
hold a quorum and so I think
that the the legislature coming
in just to provide a little bit
of this is over one million
dollars this is public money
seems fair enough the all of our
I think we invested thirty
thirty four thirty five million
dollars of public money into
this and so this provides just a
little greater transparency to
the public little bit more
leadership and and I would just.
An argument to say this the game
and fish's lacked leadership
under this administration so I I
stand in support of the bill any
other questions from committee
members look so which one would.
When that general fund money.
And what its use for.
That's a little different than
general fund money when we know
it's going to salary and I
believe that it needs to have a
little bit more information out
there when that happens so they
know exactly what that money is
being spent for this money that
bought this particular L. Boller
ranch was matching funds for
those for that federal money.
You know the the director told
me that that he didn't have to
tell me.
But how he spent his federal
money.
And but he did have to come to
me to get matching funds to
spend that money so.
We're talking apples and oranges
here a little bit.
And it just makes more
transparency if we see where
this money is going when it gets
to a certain volume of this
general fund.
And as far as you know not
having any land for any
conservation talk to the federal
government if you want top that
because they're the ones that
manage most of the majority of
the land in the state in New
Mexico so Mr chair thank you
for.
Thank you center on the question
thank you I haven't secretary
center share thank you for
bringing this forth I just have
a question please help me
understand this this would be
cutting the state's ability to
purchase land if you or me to
acquire land on a timely fashion
I had written my notes here you
wouldn't in other words it would
cut the state's ability to
obtain land if you decide to
have a for preservation wildlife
recreation conservation whatever
it may be if you have for
example you decided you're going
to acquire land but then you
have to wait until this worth
one point one million then you
have to wait until you come
before the legislature to get
approval which means that during
the interim there's a hype the
possibility on how high it is
but there's a possibility that
it could go into private hands
and we would not be able to to
preserve the land this was
intended is that kind of that's
the way I see it but tell me
please educate me if it's any
different.
Mr Chairman etcetera I think
that that's about right yes it
would add another layer of of
that would take additional time
and potentially lose the
property is yes.
Mr chair in the Senator.
Right now he says he can't spend
any of that money until it comes
to us.
Today immediately right now.
So what's the difference I don't
see any difference if the land
is available today and we have
to vote on it today.
The only difference is in here
of all of the things that they
can do.
One of them says purchased land
for game refuge were suitable
public lands do not exist to
purchase land for fish
hatcheries to purchase lands to
be maintained perpetually as
public hunting grounds
particularly land suitable for
waterfowl hunting.
All such lands to be paid for
from the game protection fund
that's the current law.
Thank you we're not changing
that what we're saying we're
adding provided that any
purchase of land with an
appraised value of more than one
million dollars.
Praise I one million dollars or
more shall not be made without
the approval of the legislature
the same way that we buy and
sell land in the city of Santa
Fe.
For the new buildings for the R.
C. or GSD or anybody else that
we were buying property for or
selling property same rules that
apply.
Thank you Senator Mr chairman
thank you Senator for that I do
have a question when you
mentioned the Mr secretary that
you could not do that you have
to come before the legislature
anyway to for this funding it
does that also for federal funds
because it came the game
protection fund gets no state
money really this mostly
non state not general fund so
isn't it or does it have a
combination of federal and
other.
Mister chairman Senator it's
kind of a combination we we
budget and then we get
reimbursed by federal funds to
the requests so we budget twenty
seven million dollars and get
about.
Two thirds of that back in
federal.
Thank you for that explanation
that's all I have Mister
chairman.
Mike can I ask you I don't know
this but my dad was on the fish
on the bottom all of the dollar
sergeants.
And I'm I recall the.
Legislative approval.
Mr chairman I don't know the
specific answer to that although
I thought that this.
I don't.
About that call I do know I was
around we need on this was
obtained and it was because of
the I think it was twenty one
million dollars there was a
specific line item in our budget
that was eleven million dollars.
So.
The only you could still
entering into a contract to
purchase land.
Under the
at any point in time and I think
they did this with the elbow or
correct me if I'm wrong and I
don't know how.
Hi you are in the mix but you
entered into a contract prior to
the legislative approval of
getting the money so how would
that change this.
Mr Chairman with the help aren't
particularly the trust for
public land purchased that
property and held it waiting to
see how financing went through.
Different scenarios and
potential private land owner who
wants to sell needs to sell and
has to wait but your ultimately
correction if they're willing to
wait and willing to take the
risk whether it gets to the
legislature not
of the the we could.
So who's the public trust for
public lands that's a private
company.
Mr chairman to nonprofit yes.
But still private company
private nonprofit companies they
they went and bought the land.
And now and then they.
Got federal reimbursements.
Was the do you know if the
purchase price on the elbow are.
That they purchased it for the
same price that.
We gave them order was there a
difference Mr Chairman it was
the same price we they did a
yellow book appraisal which is
required and then rate that
yellow book price we paid them
the help of price after they
closed on the property.
Can I have a motion Mr can I
just yes Representative so
Mister chair I don't think this
is about the bart certainly bar
please pardon but when you take
private property off the tax
rolls of the county you are
increasing the taxes on
everybody else in that county to
pay for the bonds the school
bond for the county bond
everybody else in that county
gets a tax increase.
When we take something off of
the tax rolls that harms the
schools bonding capacity it
harms the counties.
This is this is a this is.
But effort to stop tax increases
on our schools making it harder
for schools.
That's where I look at it in
Senate bill nine.
We could have passed
unanimously.
Had we had this in there.
That day.
Because none of us wanted to
stop conservation was going on
but there was concern that when
we take.
Property off the tax rolls we
harm the people.
There's that are living there
right now the living they're not
hunters coming in but the people
that actually live there we're
harming them.
So Senate bill nine absolutely
what if passed unanimously.
The negotiated portion of this
will if if the if the state game
commission has to come to us for
money today.
They have to come first money
later I don't think that that's
a legitimate hard.
I don't see what the difference
is accepted now it's very clear
in law very clear at all.
They can spend a million dollars
without talking to us.
They can buy right of way they
can buy smaller facts of land
they can buy easements.
Without coming to us at all we
freed their hands of a million
dollars do whatever you want
with.
But if they're going to spend
more than that we ought to just
the appropriators.
At least listen to what this the
arguments are listen to the
school board that's about to
lose their bonding capacity
we're here that.
So.
I do believe that this is good.
Of the transparency legislation
it certainly puts the
appropriators in the position of
appropriating and it gives them
a million dollars free hand.
So I don't see the the naked all
the negatives that that came up
I don't know.
Today they can buy land in the
future they can buy land.
This just give them three one
million dollars to do what they
want.
A motion for two passed by
sentiment second by Senator
Diamond will you call the roll.
Yes.
Senator Campos who.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez nope.
Their menu LCS.
Six to four yes thank you Mr.
Senator Hemphill you're gonna do
Sir.
Once is water transport.
Market.
Doing so the fourteen.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I have
Senate bill three fourteen it's
an annual water project fund
authorization bill and this is a
filling caring on behalf of New
Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee which
unanimously endorsed the bill
the bill endorses the New Mexico
finance authority to make grants
and loans for water projects
from the water project fund on
November eight twenty twenty two
the water trust board met to
approve the list of projects to
recommend to the legislature for
potential funding from the water
project Fund and this
recommendation follows a
thorough evaluation of fifty
nine completed applications I
just seven agency review team
and the final list of projects
includes all fifty nine projects
whose application requests
total an approximate
a hundred and thirty eight point
seven million dollars and the
fifty nine applications are made
up of projects from four
categories I flood prevention
projects I water conservation or
treatment recycling re use
projects forty one water storage
conveyance and delivery projects
and eight watershed restoration
and management projects and Mr
chairman I have my expert
witness Marquita Russel and I'd
like her to say a few words.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
the Senator really is covered
all of it is an annual bill the
money has already been
appropriated this just
authorizes the money to go into
these requests and projects and
primarily they'll go in the form
of grants usually about ninety
percent and up in the.
Anybody in the audience and
support.
Anybody in opposition.
Committee on to make Senator
Steinborn
Nobody on June nobody in the
audience opposition.
This time when you have a
question for you Mr chair and
senator in New Mexico question
are for these projects all ones
that were approved through the
water trust board.
Access.
Mr Chairman yes all of them were
fully vetted by the of water
trust board recommended and have
been recommended to the
legislature thank you and so
Mr chair Senator market is that
none of the none of these
projects have been added to the
list after that process no Mr
chairman this is as it appeared
back in November right thank you
thank you Senator.
Thank you Mr chair so all these
projects the water trust board
vetted and then they came to us
to ask for the probation so that
they could do stuff.
I thought I heard bill just like
that.
Maybe I was wrong about having
get things better for thank you
Mr.
Yes the Mr chair just real
quickly of.
Which was why I appreciate so
much talking to yesterday and
just real quickly very short
synopsis on how you that these.
Thank you Mr chairman the the
water transport set of criteria
for each of the five eligible
water project types and there's
identified metrics the the HSD
review teams look at these and
they are evaluated prioritize
based on the reviews.
And this is a Mr chair at agency
review.
Of several agencies and they
review these projects Mr
chairman that's correct or seven
agencies that currently
participate in the review
process okay if we if we wanted
to designate a bigger area of.
Projects to look at.
Watershed restoration things
like that that's not really
covered with this because this
is simply a a water type project
board right now
post waste water in and drinking
water and.
essentially that kind of
projects we would need to expand
the the working.
Part of that board the the
definition of that board I would
assume Mr president Mr chairman
Senator yes so there are five
currently authorized project
types watershed restoration
management is an authorized
water.
federal Endangered Species
implementation projects water
conservation which sometimes
deals with waste water but.
that then your basic will
projects and flood prevention
those are the five types if you
wanted a broader subset for
instance waste water you would
need to amend the water.
Mr chair we spent quite a bit of
the summer looking at the fifty
year water plan and doing all
that kind of study and and then
you know well the projects that
were designated out of that is
they thought that needed funding
would it be a a real hard thing
to amend the scope of the water
trust board to look at those
project.
Mr chairman I can't see how hard
it would be that would be
obviously a legislative process
in terms of implementation we
would need to add the expertise
to the board to ensure that
those kinds of projects had the
right
oversight and input from the
stakeholders so that would I
think you want to make sure that
your that your board
Representative the kind of
projects that were being
considered currently the water
project finance act directs the
board members of the agencies of
the board members representative
to review these projects and
participate in their review so
you obviously want to make sure
you had technical folks so as I
understand it for instance three
ninety one will strip out Senate
bill three ninety one is
currently amended or proposed
would strip out a couple of
Executive kind of agencies you
also lose their staff members
review process when you do that
so you'd want to make sure that
you had whatever experts being
represented on the board.
So what that Mr chair sounds
like maybe this is the interim
committee project instead of a.
Well day project ten day project
so thank you Mr more complex
thank you very much Mr chair and
the of course center what really
appreciate you bringing this
particular our bill forward so
much cuter if we could just to
kind of go through this so
fourteen of the fifty nine
approved projects are within
Senate district eight but the
concern that I have is as we're
dealing with wildfires and
floods and of course all the
issues that of adversely
affected that that portion of
the state
where they're not more
applications and and if not as
we move forward
where some of these applications
possibly denied and then also do
we have enough resources in
order to go and take care of
these plus the inordinate number
they're going to be coming
forward over the next couple
years Mr Chairman thank you for
that question the a hundred
percent of the eligible projects
appear on this list in other
years when there has been not
enough money to handle the
demand this year last year we
are because of the high levels
of severance tax bond proceeds
we are very close to having.
The project request so nobody
was left off the list in this of
course they simply weren't an
eligible entity or an eligible
project so everything that was
that that applaud is here right
now
and I I can't speak to why there
weren't more application types
we are seeing as a result of
changes to the water transport
policies made last last summer
we're seeing more smaller
projects there ten of these
projects are going to be design
only grants of less than five
hundred thousand we anticipate
seeing more of those going
forward.
Association is a relatively
large project on this list so so
Mister chair and and of course
Senator and and and this is the
the issue that we really need to
prepare for because I anticipate
over the next several years
we're going to see more of the
larger requests coming in
particularly because of the
issues that we're having to deal
with so again Mr chair thank you
very much for allowing me the
opportunity one pose that
question thank you thank you
Marquita what is another net
water trust fund that never seen
that or heard of that and what
six ballots and and where you're
located Mr chairman thank you
for that question so the unlike
some of the other earmarks that
receive a direct your mark of
of funds the earmarked that
comes to the water project
finance or the water project
fund ten percent of that then
goes over to the office of the
state engineer so one nine
percent as directed by the
legislature over to the water
project fund another ten percent
goes on for other purposes so we
have been
characterizing the funds that we
receive as eight point one
percent so it's of the nine
percent net the the ten percent
shave off over for education so
that is those are just the
severance tax bond proceeds.
shoot so what is the balance of
the fund.
Mr Chairman the the water the
severance tax bonds that we see
I think we have we're certainly
in that the we have two years of
open
bond proceeds so we've been
spending down at a fairly fast
right the severance tax bonds
that you've been that you've
made available in prior years.
Of the specifics on proceeds.
Correct right I don't have that
that information in front of you
me may ask.
How many of these are loans and
how many of these are.
Direct funds Mr chairman the the
policies of the water trust
board find that if you don't
have a right pain constituency
for instance an Endangered
Species Act of flood prevention
project that you will take on at
least ten percent loan there are
now greater abilities to waive
that loan component so if you're
doing just planning and design
in your small system if this is
the second of the projects that
you're undertaking for small
system you can waive the loan
components but the loan goes
from at least ten percent to
forty percent for those that
happen for basically water
utilities and it's based on
their capacity to repay the loan
so that the wealthy here larger
systems will take on a larger
loan and some of the very small
systems would take.
Let me ask you on page seven
there's a bunch for us.
And they're taking on a loan to
do that Mr Chairman they don't
they're allowed to do an
additional match and waive the
loan component so we don't do
loans for watershed districts
for the of water conservation.
At Conservancy they they end up
doing an extra match they have
typically have high levels of.
Leverage our federal leverage.
So when I think senator Wirth
new fund.
We should probably look at this
in the LFC.
And during the interim because
of that these the.
Conservation districts running
should now go to the other fund
and that come to the Water trust
we use should use it solely for
water as we move forward so
We need to look at that in the
introduction because I know like
in Ramon we've Rehm is listed in
here but they've been fighting
there wells and whole bunch of
stuff gaps listed in here for
the help water pipeline.
I don't know about the other
ones and some of the metrics
mean that bill though the for
them is more important than the
soil conservation districts
because they have opportunities
to get out of other funds.
And so.
I I tell you probably next year
and is it this made by rule or
by statute Mr chairman the
eligibility for what.
Statutory.
Okay.
That's something which prior to
look at if we really want to and
we got other funds out there now
that they can go to rather than
drawing down and eliminating.
Somebody for water project
then a watershed project how
many people in in the total
number of people applied how
many did not get food.
Mr chairman of the fifty nine
eligible applications all.
Funding because we believe we
have enough funds
to fund the mall.
Have a motion.
The.
Mr chairman that's okay service
motion by Senator complex
second.
It they're calling for you.
Senator Burt.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales is excused
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator manuals
yes ten two zero thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee I believe we're
waiting on amendment for four
forty two so it's Senator Duhigg
I think sent it up a day or two
ago we have a guy that Senator
let's go into language.
She's going to check for if we
do have an amendment we do have
and then we're gonna go back to
that bill and try to get out of
here.
Representative sheets or.
Do we have a handout for that or
is that we had for the language
changes.
To that end up from.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Mr chairman when it comes to
we're going to start with the
one that looks like this this
got L. of.
I
just want to help and hand out
the hand of we can get a man.
There's about this we're done
with your bills.
Senator Hemphill kill that.
Even every is going to.
Briefly touch on.
Everybody have it Mr chairman we
have a sixty two lines on there
so it's going to be touched and
then on the back of the this is
the language that the actual
that's the full actual language
K. the the the first two pages
are the description of the
language changes that are
recommended by LFC staff as well
as technical adjustments and
I'll briefly run through these
and then you've got a series of
other informational documents
that we can go through it at
your pleasure Mr chairman so the
first recommendation is
Four all in expended balances to
above seventy five million to
revert to the severance tax
permanent fund.
Seventy five million of general
fund reversions are built into
your revenue estimate so that
doesn't do anything.
We are.
This prejudice Mr chairman.
Line three.
I think all the rest of okay.
And that is for both fiscal
years Mr chairman and let's
let's do like three or four
times.
That's one time.
Next one number five.
That's a technical change Mr
chairman to match the transfer
from HSD that was also an
executive recommendation.
CS six and seven R. to align
the probation for the health
care programs that PSA and
retiree health care to the
language that's already in house
bill two for GST to require
those entities to conduct a
claims review of their health
care claims as you know that all
these health care programs are
suffering
Financially thank any questions
on those first.
Five to seven.
Three all unexpended balances in
excess of aggregate seventy
five.
Severance tax permanent fund
we're sitting of the entire
budget the first seventy five
million not spent states in the
general fund and if we the next
million.
Mister chairman Senator that's
correct you we experienced
unprecedented reversions this
last year there's been a lot of
concern amongst appropriators in
both chambers that agencies are
not going to be able to spend
you know all of this windfall
that we're getting from oil and
gas and so the recommendation is
if they can't put it back into
the severance tax.
Seventy five million Mr chairman
is the amount of reversions that
are already built into the
revenue estimate and so this
avoids any conflicting amounts
with the revenue estimate thank.
Winds five to seven.
What fun is this that are about
seventy five million that we
would be affected by this line
with these would be not provide
general fund appropriations.
That difference spent and once
we get seventy five million
reverting back to the general
fund any amounts that we're
getting from agencies above that
would go to the severance tax
permanent fund very so I just
because I had two things going
on I think at a critical moment
there would you would you tell
me that again.
Yes so the first seventy five
million of general fund
appropriations that are reverted
would go back to the general
fund because they're part of the
revenue estimate so this would
avoid conflicting with the
revenue estimate if there are an
aggregate risk reversions above
seventy five million any of
those amounts to the severance
tax permanent fund this last
year we had record reversions of
about three hundred million
dollars well.
Charles the the quote the
language here says all
unexpended balances it doesn't
say reversions.
So I read that little different.
If you go to the language
technical detail.
For.
The same table.
line one I'm sorry on page one
still.
Page three of the of that
packet.
In other words Mr chairman the
first two pages are describing
all the items that are detailed
on pages page one to page for
the public tender so page seven
seven pages of actual language
two pages of a summary
description is items.
Thank you I appreciate that I
began like food sitting on
seventy five million dollar
balances could it be the early
childhood care department could
be not the the funds for this to
chairman Senator it's not an
individual department it's an
aggregate.
So if Medicaid reverts thirty
five million early childhood
reserve perverts five million.
Other agencies revert the
balance to get to seventy five
and then if you get even more
than that It goes to severance
tax permanent fund.
If I may add Mr chairman these
are balances in appropriation
accounts these balances came
from your general fund
appropriation it's not any
balance in the treasury it's
balances of appropriations and
that's standard one replaced
language that's on page one that
appears you're you're after
here.
This is the other language Mr
chair other than the.
This clause.
Aside from the seventy five
million this language on item
one has been in there for
decades so if reversion to
what's new here is that because
of the severance tax permanent
on the general fund or whatever
okay fair enough thank you Mr
that figure complex thank you Mr
chairman and I really appreciate
your accountability as we move
forward and so the the question
I pose is if we had three in a
million dollars that was revert
to this last fiscal year the
issue then becomes what can we
do to improve that so we don't
have those type of reversions in
the future thank you Mr chair.
Question this.
Start line eight Charles let's
go to.
Mr Chairman we're suggesting
additional reporting
requirements for the provider
rate increases to and so that
you can monitor to make sure
that those appropriations are
making for the Medicaid provider
rate increases are in fact going
out for their intended purposes.
And the next one on line line is
removing that your mark language
for the early childhood trust
fund transfers for those
children's behavioral health
services that were of concern of
the CDC to secretary and instead
of the transfer which is fine
infant medical services at the
human so.
Thank.
We're gonna go to the thirteen
truck just rolled through the
number thirteen this is standard
language that is usually a house
bill two earmarking the transfer
of the tobacco settlement
revenue for the health sciences
center it did not come over and
and the house version
recommended putting it in no
change to the appropriation.
Line eighteen the council
questions on those.
One Charles.
eighteen the council service
hasn't appropriation and section
five they requested an extension
of that through FY twenty six.
Line nineteen there's a energy
transaction appropriation
this would clarify the five
million is for the San Juan
County energy transition.
Nine twenty.
This is clarifying that the
Human Services Department gets
this special appropriation from
the.
health care affordability fund
and it's for FY twenty four
usually special appropriations
are for both FY twenty three and
twenty four but it's only for FY
twenty four.
One twenty one if you want to
look at the detail recommending
updating the rural hospital and
provider language to better
tighten that up.
You will need to go through that
in more detail Mr chairman.
Is.
Anybody have any questions on
that one that one's pretty
complex.
Nope I guess we're good Charles.
this is standard language at the
division of vocational
rehabilitation where they would
need some flexibility if they're
not able to draw the federal
funds at the commission of the
blind that they can transfer
money from the other financing
uses to the other category.
We're recommending this is an
executive request Mr Chairman re
authorizing it PED I. T.
appropriation for a business
intelligence system to give the
secretary you an opportunity to
complete that project.
Mr Chairman recommending moving
the probation that you're
sending to the teacher
affordability and teacher loan
repayment
financially programs to section
ten religious spurs of funds
from the general fund to propose
other funds and then you make
separate appropriations and
section four.
One twenty five Mr chairman
there financial auditors at some
of the institutions of higher
education have a raised a
concern that
even though the state has spent
the endowment money for social
workers and nurses and for
using the are both from last
session that because their
component units of the state
that money will not be fully
expended by the time the the
arpa funds are supposed to be
spent so we're recommending just
swapping these appropriations
out
for other appropriations that
you're making from the general
fund and then these would not be
tied to the are for reporting
requirements anymore.
Let's stop right there anybody
have any questions.
They would be attached to other
eligible uses our potus General
Fund in it's just that they're
attaching reporting requirements
to.
The general fund appropriations
and we're changing which ones
would have to report back to
DFA.
Correct so they're still going
to be.
Correct they're still gonna be
is for their same purpose the
probation don't change.
Center thank you Mr chairman and
I don't know in what category
fits in here maybe on the
additional paperwork for Charles
and David that you submitted but
there was a request and
sometimes we just kind of forget
about those things that they're
so crucial for a teenage girls
and in schools to have menstrual
products available on there was
a contingency language problem
apparently there I don't know if
there is that they were really
is here for several days weeks
actually requesting that he be
fixed can you tell me about
what.
The the bill on the house side.
It and the language in house
bill two Mexican tension on a
bill and so the health issue has
already passed that bill so I
think we're okay on the language
it says is contingent on passage
of legislation because that
legislation is we can move to
the for a day or two I see so
maybe they were concerned that
if it didn't pass and be left
out of the cold Mr chairman
senator I believe that's correct
okay and I think they were short
one point six million dollars
from their initial request for
for tampons and other other
things that they need for their
personal needs Mister chairman
Senator when you get to the
spending yes an area that's
where you can read address that
as well exactly thank you so
much that's all I have Mister
chair.
On page we're just P. twenty
five so okay I'm on.
Well let's go to the next the
federal on the second page Mr
Chairman
the institutions have received
probation and there's more in
the bill
For the public health programs
in New Mexico state in UNM and
they'd like to broaden the
record the appropriation
language that and we agreed to
with the recommendation to allow
them to also use that for
actually end elements
and doesn't change the
appropriation amount that you
made last year nor does it
change where it's sitting in
house bill two right now.
So that will align with the
question Senator Steinborn and
yes.
This one is for the public
health programs.
Then.
The next two are in section
eight ones removing some
duplicate layer of language that
was in that section and then the
second judicial compensation the
courts asked that we make house
bill two more last year's
language for the judicial
compensation which were
recommending.
Line thirty four
This is right now the
appropriation contingency fund
needs additional transfers from
the operating reserve so the
governor has money to deal with
natural disasters and so we're
recommending a fifty million
dollar transfer.
The DFA had requested technical
change that this money that the
transportation department gets
be classified as interagency
transfers and other state funds.
Forty four technical change to
update the preamble for the
opioid settlement
that unspent funds would revert
back to the consumer settlement
fund or if you pass that opioid
settlement trust fund it would
revert to that new trust fund
contingent on creating it.
This is another executive
recommendation that we're
recommending adding border
thirty for the second judicial
District Court for pre trial
services they get requests from
the county for that.
and.
PED removing bar thirty to use
educator licensing fees which
part of the different spending
package.
With that Mr chairman of a happy
to answer any other questions
thank you on the item about the
outdoor division and the trails
money they really understand the
language and what we're doing
there this is on line twenty
seven state for.
This one is one of those
items we're we're changing.
The whether it's general fund
there are but so it's it's
technical in nature it's still a
general fund appropriation and
they did actually really good
job of getting money out the
door before and so that's a good
use of our but funds we we don't
think that they'll be stranded
there thank so we're replacing
general fund with our funds.
With the general fund that would
came from our point.
There's this misnomer for some
reason Mr chairman.
If your call after the court
decision
you all put all of the remaining
are to provide in the general
fund we just separately
designated it it is it to for
accounting purposes thank you Mr
chairman and just to just to
clarify is this language only
Legislative Council or Afaria
LFC recommended language we're
not yet dealing with all the
other language things we might
ever.
This this this sheet is LFC
staff recommendations to you for
your consideration because
there's other things that I'm
not seeing address here's the
first one that I I think you
have.
Let's see.
She doesn't match up to the
she's.
Because I don't see the need to
be listed in there and it's in
language over some of these
items that were summarized in
the first two pages of I'm told
that I detailed items like the
engineer I engineer items were
representatives one item on the
summary table things like that
and the order isn't exactly
Conklin because we work swabs.
Let me ask you on on thirty to
the judicial compensation.
What is that language that the
state Charles.
To
the right of.
For the next six.
Forty one on page six so that
that's the language it currently
in the bill and the
recommendation is to strike the
details.
That in red.
So on that one the magistrate
money.
From yesterday right.
Where we magistrates judges.
Looted in the five percent
raises Mr chairman and then
house bill two has other
language for the additional
targeted raises excluding the
magistrates.
Online twenty.
The pages is nine twenty six is
this for the thank you for and
this is another example of
moving
the general fund appropriation
to another use.
Think of the General Fund as
general fund are part and.
General fund non are put.
Go ahead and because of the US.
Allowing the public health
programs to use the probation
for the endowments.
no I I just want to see that
okay.
The questions.
On this on the from the sheets.
So I just I mean people are
taxing and I yeah we're just
saying obviously for the first
time and so I think that I
appreciate the first glance at
this but this should and I know
we got to go on the floor in a
few minutes also will get pushed
out of we would put this
document online and not and if
we have any other little tweaks
that we're not seeing our public
order saying it will have an
opportunity to address Senator
Steinborn.
Languages drafted for the
purposes and if if the public
wants to text and make comments
We're not looking at that we're
reviewing language in our
program before and how we're
gonna head with Mr chairman I
hear you but with all due
respect like you can't look at a
document like this in the five
minute drive I you know we're
you know you're going to mess
things and let's be honest if
languages from the experts
coming from agencies it's coming
from or that it's not coming
from us so people need to be
over readjusted just to make
sure we're getting it right
there's no the surgeons here
it's just making sure we get it
right that's nonsense I hope
that can be across the state all
the this is a way of double
checking our work and ground
sure thing a little bit.
That's all that's why we're.
For two or three times when we
put these we put these online
for the public that that way
when we go back and it often we
just make sure correct we do
that with all these options.
Leisure the chairman chairman I
don't know but I think we do
these work papers at this point
and we're hesitant to post work
papers that are subject to
adjustment of not been adopted
officially I think it's
appropriate for you if you'd
like to share it is not a
confidential document but in
terms of posting it that's our
reservation about posting work
papers that have not been
adopted Mr Chairman we are with
others that I appreciate that
but we retain discretion to not
agree with any recommended
changes anyone tries to pick it
pick out it but I just think
it's cool it's crucial in this.
Fundamental transparency
principle that we share our work
product before we approve it so
that people can comment on just
like any other piece of work
product and it's yeah that is
work product that we're
intending to pass of I'm gonna
have to us why when you ask are
there any questions it's it's
just not.
It's so important that we not
just be given a documentation
permanent ones yeah.
All of you.
Drops you with your coffee.
Mr Chairman.
The work that we do.
Change and then they say you put
this up and I change that so I'm
not comfortable in.
I just gonna say to the
committee I don't believe we're
gonna go to the floor to once we
have a little bit more time but
I had a specific question want
to reckon que okay so.
Mr chairman and you'll see this
document from a early the early
childhood education and care
department.
Mr Chairman I know it's really
far away but so the secretary
was you to you're saying yes you
to okay and so where's are these
either addressed or not
addressed on a wrap up this year
I'm sorry and then.
I thought we were done with
those Mr Chairman Senator
Padilla those are spending
changes that they're requesting
and today we're just looking at
language are just making sure
because I've got a couple of
language things I want to talk
about too so
we're going next.
Did you.
These are just for you to review
and then you'll take a motion on
those at a later date Mr
chairman.
Okay so the next things that I'd
like to show you is there is a
package that looks like this
item at the top it says
executive HB to language
request.
Yes.
And I've gone through and
highlighted for you are ready
which one's the LFC staff
recommended.
And the rest are for your
review.
So the check mark equals the LFC
staff recommended and it's on
the sheet that you just went
over.
That Mr Chairman the ones that
don't have the check mark means
they're not and not recommended
I get okay thank you my staff
yes okay.
So three forty is our first one
right.
Correct that was on the other
sheet.
And that so yes recommended all.
And this is Mr chairman came
from the governor's office.
They noted there agency requests
with the Senate finance
committee for consideration so
then the next check marks are
page for.
When.
Correct Mr Chairman is a
standard we rarely recommend
especially during flush budget
times non reverting language we
rarely recommend program
transfer authority because your
appropriating money for specific
purpose and program transfer
money says you can spend it
elsewhere and that's what a lot
of many of these requests for.
And that's where they were not
recommended.
Mr chairman I can add to that
one reason we don't recommend
which is it could lead to a
reduction in reversions which
part of the revenue estimate if
you had a lot of non reverting
than the seventy five million
revenue estimate might not
materialize you want to take a
adjustment on the revenue
estimate when you use a lot of
non reverting language.
In other cases Mr chairman bar
language could undo the
probation that you have been
working on during the session
you know agencies as.
You know you only let us spend
fifty million dollars but give
us more language to spend
another ten we would.
This simple.
So my.
I mean the way above.
Everybody got everything they
wanted agencies except for a few
tweaks here and there that we
got to fix and get some
understanding.
I don't think they're gonna have
the capacity I remember flashes
a
foreigner fifty million about
two hundred some of that was
with our phone that got.
Two hundred thirty million
actually reverted back to the
general fund.
Or.
Right Mr chairman and then the
final one was the vocational
rehabilitation when the flight
for you and the.
I'm sorry Mr chairman turned out
that the DVR I know there was
some requests there very
important there there yes but
what were they requesting if
you're requesting if they're not
able to get federal funds match
through the commission for the
blind yes able to spend it
elsewhere in the region make
sense thank you.
And that's.
That was the executive
recommendation that we agreed
with and I'm glad they caught
that thank you.
Thank you so I'm a little
confused so it's gonna have a
this new document which check
marks so I have questions of
things that don't have check
marks.
With Phil there is.
Language this is what LFC
reviews and
other checks.
The recommended that we look at
the ones that are not checked.
With the of the staff did not
recommend the Mr chairman but
there.
For you to review.
Okay that's good I don't like
one of the ones that **** Act
but I guess it's still here so.
I mean also the office in terms
of process Mr chair we have a
list of a language.
Is it your intention to only
consider items that are chapter
with me what's the for these all
from the members.
This is the
best right so I sent to Mexico
this is the executive list that
LFC reviewed and LESC said
here's the things we recommend
in the budget I think in Charles
you said a few minutes ago a lot
of it was non reverting
and and that's why they to get
checked in there were some other
Barth Ortiz that could not get
checked so they can move money
around wherever they want so
this is.
LFC staff recommendations on the
second is that if thank you for
that clarification I mean I do
have a few questions on some of
just because I can't I just saw
this.
Part of process it and you know
two minutes time and we're
getting taxed and so.
I want to try to ask you about
question if right now if it's in
this document are not about the
he piece of it from the by laws
non reverting and I understood
it was made reverting in house
bill two do we verify that that.
This number will that in itself
not office and stuff anymore I
don't recall seeing that hang
with in this document Mr chair.
That and then the health care
affordability from one way it's
not a checked item but it's a
far language request from them.
Mister chairman Senator that
would undo your budget
recommendation for the health
care affordability fund by
allowing them to spend nine
million dollars more than what
you're gonna appropriate as
house bill two sets right now
before the fiscal years even
begun.
That I'm looking at page two oh
two under one of four agent one
term services to the key piece
of a drove Fund eight million
there's no non reverting
language there so it I'm
delegating I said I didn't think
it was their ability I don't see
it on the side of.
Okay.
Thank you for.
Actually it is
The items Mr chairman that
Senate finance committee staff
compiled I think from members of
the committee and that contains
both language and spending items
for the committee to consider
when the chairman deems
appropriate we don't have any
comments on this Mr chairman.
Yes.
This is this was compiled by
your staff is Senate finance
committee staff.
I think in coordination and
collaboration with the chair as
well as individual members.
And possibly the executive.
And it's an informational item
for you to consider it includes
both language and spending
items.
The staff don't have any
comments or recommendations on
these.
And then the left.
You may see other got sent an
email when people make comments
about language right you could
added to the list and then the
list was generated from from
that for the so we have this is
the cut off point where.
Where where if it didn't get in
that system.
Then the we're not gonna keep
adding and adding that is.
So that way we can come to an
end.
We're putting into question.
The reason you see a bunch of
papers here is because I have
some other items to put here but
you said that were to cut off
Senator Padilla did you got the
email or I did it that in did
you put stuff in the no I did
not.
I don't think I've had any
language changes so I'm just not
as well and I'm not saying that
all of these are going to be
accepted by this committee but
you know when folks brought them
to me I I wanted to have them
added and it's running around in
circles here you know trying to
get a bunched up and so I I
typically not laid on thing that
if if I'm late on this I think
that's it I guess so you know
but I've got several.
Mr chairman but also these are
not only for language that
they're request for funding
yeah all thank you.
Is going to make sure we
understood.
Senator Campos thank you Mr
chairman so with that are you
thinking of removing if you will
stop time
What we're considering right
here or you indicating that this
is this is final and this is
what we're going to consider
Senator Padilla how many do you
need to at hi.
Did you submit a list yeah no
objections the minutes that a
few emails after up with others.
At at some point we're going to
cut off language Senator B. as I
five or six right you have a few
more.
Just get those wrapped up after
this there's no more additional
language support Google schools
what will Mr chairman I have
some additional ones that are
coming in and that that that
creates that issue our winner
when are we going to stop taking
we're gonna stop today at five
o'clock.
Mr and all the language in any
solutions need to be done your
email agents in that email again
so that they automatically rack
up in a spread sheet we're not
typing them in.
And and so today at five
anything that appropriates
money.
Or lose money because the budget
is so tight.
My understanding from today
they've spent a billion dollars
in in the tax package.
No not on reoccurring money
really left we know that rebates
are coming and
we still have.
What rebates are going to be may
have zero we may have on your
million and so it's going to get
really tight plus we still have
to fund rural health care.
We're looking still looking at
that two hundred million so
things are really tight as we.
As as we move forward so
Go.
One of them five or six just
literally came to me yesterday
so and I think it's a great so
is this language and moving
dollars around or is it what
what what are you wanting by
five o'clock on make sure I get
to my hate to miss deadlines
language were up in our.
Mr chairman I just have a
question for clarification in
here somewhere because we
haven't had a chance to look at
all but before I say it I would
request that or to please to
look at tell me if we already
have in here the issue having to
do with the patient compensation
fund and the health care
affordability Fund is it didn't
get in that was one of those we
had spoken about they had lots
of questions on so I just said
to put in here and then we'll
look at him it has to do with
apparently the patient
compensation fund had only
received like twenty million
and.
And there's sixteen million in
the budget right now and change
with
language for us side to start
controlling medical costs which
are really driving the fund into
a deficit so the intention is by
controlling medical cost that
will help bring down the the
range there I know that.
There is discussion about adding
to that sixteen million.
But I don't see it on this
morning.
I think that's for something
different okay changed.
What about the health care
affordability fund Mr chairman
is a hundred and twenty five
million and.
Some of us just.
Our food.
Whatever HSD childhood for that
in.
So just so you know so the HSD
broader request and will use a.
Really Gerald childhood
education right to change that
language on the thirty two
million Adrian's tracking that
within our list so agency so
there may be a lot of duplicates
that the agency came to you on
that languages and so we're
gonna cut it off today and I
will be well aware that if it's
spending money if it's
Not reverting back to the
general fund well look at those
specific positions of it's
gonna.
Give them authority to change
their budgets
none of those words.
So the final document Mr
Chairman looks like this it says
early childhood education and
care department as the first
item this was compiled by your
Senate finance committee staff
as information for you on
language that's already in house
bill two there's a lot of it
that is contingent on other
legislation.
So it's just fighting for you to
to make sure we keep in mind
that there's money attached to
other bills information item
only Mr chairman is here and I
on the right page thank you.
The one found in yes.
And so this.
What I have to call.
Some of these right.
One.
For the work the program.
Forty.
He.
One thousand for the.
Work and save program I don't
think that that four hundred
thousand the need to be there we
know the programs not gonna
survive unless we require
everybody to add to it I'm not
willing to do that
Thousands.
Everybody can use these.
Two
one four.
Did you do another back up for
the special supplemental.
Add to that that is the case.
We are prepared if you wanted to
revisit the items that you flag
we did analysis overnight and Mr
Simon is prepared to be able to
answer questions on this.
Joining and tell us what number
right you know how once I can Mr
chair.
Yes.
So.
Mr chairman I believe the first
item you had was on page five
the law enforcement programs
it's a it's a pretty lengthy
one.
Sir yes yesterday sure that
helps she.
So page five one twenty six law
enforcement programs.
And this is related to house
bill three fifty seven that bill
provides a six and a half
million dollars per year for
five years for law enforcement
the law enforcement workforce
capacity building fund Disney
that bill provides guardrails
around
that money to ensure the
entities are notified of the
available funding and the money
is used efficiently the
executive requested additional
funding with broader language
without those guard rails which
that was not recommended by
staff
In addition there's warrants a
backlog of money that provides
the some funding for that house
bill five fifty relates to that
and would govern the
distribution of of those funds.
All this is this is all in this
one so use you'll notice Mr
chairman in the language of that
there is thirty two and a half
million for five years for the
law enforcement workforce
capacity
Fund and seven million for
felony warrant enforcement and a
half a million dollars for the
department of public safety to
it
for enforcement project related
to fentanyl heroin and illegal
cannabis.
So I'm ready.
Thank.
I have a question on this one so
I heard before the session.
Sorry sorry so no problem I
heard before the session from
small law enforcement agency has
set a Representative
representative that the funds
were all gone and they weren't
available to them how to raise
the issue of you know sometimes
we appropriate money we put
geographic distribution
requirements for in this
particular case you could save
in language to say some of it
should be segregated for small
agencies who maybe don't have
the deep pockets of big agencies
right they really need this to
be able to compete recruit new
people so I want to ask about
that and what can we do to
ensure geographic distribution
what we do to ensure that small
law enforcement agencies have
access to fund some of these
Senator Steinborn last year we
put fix for that the governor of
veto some language which was an
illegal Faedo strike and then
they didn't do a process so
somebody called from the C.
elements and.
And out of those calls they
awarded the money.
And then and let other people.
I think Albuquerque that
somebody got a big Las Cruces
excuse that one's in there all
the other a lot of communities
so this this there's a bill and
this is the language to make
sure that.
Well and I and I know they were
about to speak as well and I
love to hear your thoughts I
don't see how this plan which
addresses the problem that's why
I'm asking the questions.
So I'm Mr Chairman centers I'm
more not Mr Slee says that's
addressed in the bill in house
bill three fifty seven.
Can you tell me how to dress in
the bill tell.
And is that bill gonna pass.
If you intend for the money to
be spent for purposes it's the
best okay passed HSC yesterday
afternoon Mister chair Mister
chairman of the bill would
govern how the funding is
distributed that's where you
would address those concerns to
make sure that the.
I think that it calls for a more
clear process that's fair and
transparent for everybody to be
able to participate I know
that's the intent printed
around.
The pelicans have built thank
let me let me just kind of.
Get through this because I'm
gonna have lunch with my wife
thank you guys like it or not
right and so is this to this
have you have a specific comment
right.
Then we should probably do all.
We should have you sit down with
the LFC it go through because if
not we're gonna continue this.
We'll never get it done and so
as we think those joing.
If there's a specific question
comment that's less than one
minute.
So we can move through these
real quick if you want more
refinement in the expensive time
a job and get the refinement and
get your questions answered in
the detail level.
And Mr chairman we can find this
list to you with that with the
comments they're they're sixty
five items he has comments on
and we could provide that in
writing if it takes too long I
don't you just provide that in
writing.
If there's further questions you
need to flag the ones where you
have further questions on and we
can move forward and.
Language stuff for his yeah the
special screening.
Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman
Discussed on this package today
line item one twenty six and I
was provided by land some basic
information about that and I'd
like to distribute that
information just for your
edification
so do you understand better what
that forty mills being
distributed to and and and its
purpose.
That's all I have Mister sure
people are aware of that
information.
We'll send the faint yes that
center right now a difficult
though she.
And then as we leave the
committee were.
If not we're never gonna get.
Mr chairman if this was sort of
this was one of the changes one
of the things I want to do it
was just passed out by a staff
member thank you so I don't us
to do that so does this mean
this already landed somewhere on
the list somewhere nope but yeah
that that was on one twenty six
from the pages yesterday yes I
know Senator I'm asking you to
the staff came from Landel as an
explanation of what that money
is being used did you put it on
the list already is my question
Mr chair I haven't done anything
yet health and providing you the
information I'm gonna I will do
it today before five o'clock no
you keep up.
Yeah that's just language.
That's why this is gonna help us
clarify stuff was four percent
we'll get the sheets are you
trying to print in and then
we'll wrap up.
May come into moral let's.
For.
With the Pacific.
That way everything will be cut
off today but I just remember
opening money that's bar
language.
What are.
