Very quickly will start with far
left.
Thank you Mr Chairman name is
Pat Woods
Senate district seven curry quay
in Union County Sir thank you.
Good morning chairman Senator
crystal diamond of those Sierra
and the west side of Dona Ana
County.
Center.
Representative will send.
Senator side but I Hemphill from
Silver City I represent Senate
district twenty eight Grant
County catching County most
distant program County thank you
Mr chairman.
The the good morning again state
senator both the Bobby J.
Gonzales districts six
encompasses part of Los Alamos
Rio Arriba so the Fe and Taos
and we will go ahead with our
first presentation good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thanks for having
me again I'm Kelly cars well
capital outlay analyst with the
legislative finance committee
I'm gonna point out just a
couple quick bullets on this
pandemic and then introduce some
of the folks who are here to
speak with you today I also
wanted to show you that just
below that you should have an
new version of the authorized
but unissued list of Leslie
Billingsley worked with the
board of finance to add a column
that you asked for on the reason
that that project had not yet
gone to the bonspiel so I won't
go through that but that's there
for your information.
So I'm going back to our bullets
on this page you can see it in
this table from twenty nineteen
to twenty twenty two the number
of local projects which received
capital outlay appropriations
the total appropriations and the
current outstanding balance
projects as of December twenty
twenty two there are about
thirty one hundred and fifty act
local capital outlay projects
statewide and that represents
about seventy seven percent of
the outstanding projects in the
subsequent hearings are going to
have after today you're focusing
on some specific project types
which may also be local projects
so the list of projects you have
in front of you today is not all
local projects but primarily
those assigned to the department
of finance and administration to
administer and those are kind of
a general category of projects
that don't fall under any of
these other agencies that you'll
see in the force fourth bought
on this page so water wastewater
projects primarily go to
Environment Department public
school local capital projects go
to the public education
department tribal projects go to
the Indian Affairs Department
road projects to DOT senior
center projects aging and long
term services and other kind of
water projects like a safety as
and dams to the office of the
state engineer so again the ones
will mainly focus on today are
DFA and that fourth bullet you
can kind of get a sense of the
number of probation that fall
into these different categories
and these figures on the number
of projects assigned to each of
these agencies is not the act
number right now but the total
number that they've been
assigned to administer over this
twenty nineteen to twenty twenty
two time period.
I also wanted to point out that
one of the defining features of
local capital outlay is that
demand for these funds always
exceeds the funding that's
available and that has remained
true even as we've seen steeply
increasing revenues so to give
you a sense just from
Legislative Council Service
yesterday I asked for the total
number of requests and total
dollar amounts that are coming
to the legislature for local
projects for this year and they
have received nearly twenty to
twenty two hundred requests
totaling three point seven
billion dollars.
All right for the second time
I'm going to go now to
introduce some of the folks who
are here today and tell you what
I know about who's kind of
prepared to give a couple
remarks if you would like to
hear them that I think
everyone's here everyone who's
here is also available to answer
questions
for you with the we have a few
members of walked into four
million to do stuff before the
start with.
Good morning Mr chairman so me
sorry for being a little bit
late
my name is bill Burt Senate
district thirty three which is
the northern half of Otero
County and all of Lincoln County
Judas to precinct or two and
Chavis thank you Mr.
I'm bill share state senator
from district one which is
Farmington and I was late
because the secretary sent me on
a mission and I always do it she
says.
Thank you thank you good morning
to everyone I'm Nancy Senator
Nancy Rodriguez vice chair of
Senate finance and I'm happy to
see you here today thank you.
Good morning everybody and state
senator Jeff Steinborn from Dona
Ana County the with.
Okay Mister chair and sorry I
just if I may just one more
quick points before introduce
these folks who can speak to
some of these issues so in the
third to last bill on this page
I just highlighted some of the
things you've heard before LFC
is been reporting on capital
projects for over twenty years
and some of the common
challenges that we've seen over
that time period that continue
today yes
that that get in the way of
successful and timely completion
of these projects are piecemeal
funding reluctance to use loan
programs are local revenue to
complete funding for projects
limited and administrative
technical and financial capacity
at the local level lack of
planning prior to signing which
can make a project take longer
and inconsistent batting and
project prioritization on top of
that of course like state
entities local projects have
been dealing with all the
challenges we've been talking
about particular to this
environment like rising
construction costs supply chain
delays
and labor issues those kind of
those can particularly affect
our projects in rural areas
where it can be harder to track
contractors all right and so
many of the people in the
audience today can give you more
information about how they're
saying those things play out on
the ground in their communities
so we have Carmen Moran.
From the local government
division community development
bureau for staff administers the
projects that go to DFA.
she has some remarks prepared
about their role in these
projects if you would like to
hear from her
behind Wesley we have joyous
Farsund she's the executive
director of New Mexico counties
I believe we also have someone
from Dona Ana County Lee County
and anyone else.
Okay
she can make some remarks to you
as well as answer questions
about specific projects we have
a day forty executive director
of the New Mexico municipal
league he's also available to
make some remarks at the
beginning if you'd like I
believe more Webber from the
City of Santa Fe is here and we
also have some representatives
from the City of Albuquerque who
have prepared a presentation and
can make some remarks as well as
answer questions I understand
the Albuquerque folks may have a
time limitation so if you do
want to hear their remarks you
might want to do it sooner than
later but we also have a few
folks here from the councils of
government who are quite active
in providing technical
assistance to folks in their
communities.
For capital outlay projects we
have personally zero.
She's with us southwestern New
Mexico caught and Monica Abeyta
issues within our central costs
and it looks like you were
content as well Senate sentences
Mr point all right
so I think that's all for my
introductions
and there might be some folks on
zoom as well so Mr chair how
would you like to proceed will.
Kelly we have a quite a bit you
know we have a lot so let me
just have you handle it and if
you want to call him up the I'm
not I am asking everyone to be
as brief as possible okay in the
the same thing with our members
you know more questioning so
that we can be fair time wise
okay so I think that I would
suggest that joy and AJ make
some brief remarks and state
representative a lot of members
and then the City of
Albuquerque's since they permit
prepared some remarks so do you
all agree want to come up.
The four record in our system of
introduce yourself and who
you're representing.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee this my name is
Joyce person I am the new
executive director for New
Mexico counties were delighted
to be here today we certainly
have some local experts who can
win more insight to some of
these projects I really just
want to say we are seeing a
number of themes that you're
well aware of and those are
things based around vacancies in
local government positions this
doesn't include just projects
but it's also the finance
department it's all of those
support systems that go into
getting managed if done we are
also seeing the volume with the
by person for structure law and
the art of funds a local
governments are spread pretty
thin on their project management
right now because it's not just
applying that's all the
reporting to the federal US
treasury that we have so that
once again compound some of
their focus for these types of
local projects we're also seeing
of course vendors are stretched
thin it can take days and weeks
and months to get contractors
that you need to get permitting
taking care of and finally of
course inflation some of the
projects will see today are
asking for pre authorization or
a consolidation of projects such
as the one in San Juan where the
reality is they can no longer
afford to do the project based
upon the budget that they have
so they're looking at combining
some of these to make it more
efficient and get them complete.
Mr chair members of the twenty
eight to forty of the agency
believes that.
Local governments we're in the
same boat whether B. cities or
counties.
Our employees number one it is a
capacity issue statewide with
the year of large or small we're
seeing retirements we just did
our clerks training a few months
ago we asked how many of you are
new forty percent of a hundred
six.
So that transition is is a
problem right things fall
through the cracks we're also
seeing in our city managers
eighty within the next three
years we'll see a fifty percent
turnover and retirements cities
and counties are in the same
boat it's a capacity issue in
private industry campaign or
right we are losing clerks that
we would pay sixty thousand
dollars a year to the engineer
firms that are paying them a
hundred thousand a year we can't
compete with that and with a
hundred and six right if you're
if you're in that lowest twenty
percent you can not compete
salary wise with everyone else
so that that's one issue of many
inflation that's number one for
us we have a public safety
building which is on on your
sheet in the red that increased
from fifteen million dollars to
twenty five million dollars in
five years the city decided to
issue bonds issued twelve point
five million in bonds to cover
that gap but that's that takes
time it takes money takes staff
capacity to do that and that's
just one example that supplied
statewide.
Is about the only comment that I
would that is that you didn't
mention anything about audits.
In in the rural area that's very
very hard to.
Mr chairman members we are seen
we're doing our best to help are
smaller members get off off the
bad list we're going to work
with the auditor's office to
figure out what is the more
efficient way to address the
really small communities which
is not cost effective for these
firms to bid on it so we're
gonna support the auditor's
office in that endeavor to make
sure that our small small
communities
Have a response to the request
on the audits very well all
members of the questions
comments.
Mr Chairman yes I do have an I'm
sorry were to stop running
around a little bit busy this
morning but first I want to
thank you for prepare before us
this morning you know it's
always a difficult situation I
know coming from local
government I do know the impacts
that that you have many times
with demands an unfunded
mandates and that's always a
problem we can see here is
legislators and demand things
with legislation and
requirements but sometimes we
don't find the funding necessary
to fulfill those requirements so
I just want to thank you for
that and and know that you have
a lot on your plate trying to
bring together several cities
that we have in New Mexico into
one them one consensus is never
easy and so thank you very much
for that for what you do and I
don't have any questions
currently on the audit certain
fees thank you.
K. very well okay Kelly.
But we focus on the City of
Albuquerque.
Leave they prepared we
presentation for.
Open
the other group that was there.
We will bring of good morning
and welcome to the you can
introduce yourself for the
record your thank you Mr chair
members of the Senate finance
committee my name is mark Moscow
on the City of Albuquerque's CIP
official capital capital
implementation program official
joining me this morning the
director my boss of to the
Department of municipal
development with the city Pam on
twentieth Mr Montoya is a an old
hand here at the roundhouse I'm
sure many of you recognize them
so thank you for the opportunity
to present to you today
regarding the City of
Albuquerque's local capital
projects including some common
challenges and obstacles I'll
make this very brief in June
twenty twenty one my chief
financial officer Sunday Baca
and I presented to the
Legislative found finance
committee regarding the ongoing
challenges the city faced with
capital outlay.
The good news is all the main
points presented in twenty one
have continued upon their
previous trajectory the good
things have continued to improve
and yet we still see us Seneal
said a severe challenges for
example when we presented back
in June of twenty twenty one on
average cost in Albuquerque for
new construction was about five
hundred and fifty dollars a
square foot we are now seeing
bids come in between eight
hundred and eleven hundred
dollars a square foot so just
the inflation and in eighteen
months is is very very this.
This increase makes piece
Mealing funding of projects even
more difficult supply chain
issues delay projects to the
point of that even if ordered
immediately after grant
agreement is received from DFA
the requests for public safety
apparatus such as fire engines
will require that that can't be
re authorized before we can even
take delivery because of the
time it takes to build fire
apparatus.
As you'll see we believe there's
a disconnect within the C. PMS
reporting system and then
finally we in Albuquerque have
seen an increased amount of
nonprofit organizations seeking
capital outlay and the city has
had challenges with both for the
finance and the nonprofits as
far as
making sure that the requests
are allowable.
For construction challenges as I
mentioned cost per square foot
as the previous speaker has
stated we were seeing a thinning
out even in Albuquerque of
contractors who are willing to
bid there is a glut of work in
the market right now between you
and them City of Albuquerque
Bernalillo county private.
That Netflix and Facebook in in
Los Lunas
we had a small number of our of
peas coming without bids we've
had several more with just one
better this drives up the cost.
that you know that even our city
capacity has had issues we've
run out of on call contracts to
Facilitate the smaller projects
they're a great way to speed
along projects but we see it
simply didn't have enough time
I lost a couple project managers
to the private sector.
And again supply chain issues
current PNM transformers orders
are out at least a year we've
been told so without permanent
power to building you can only
do so much testing amounting
inside the building these delays
cost time and money.
Next slide as we have an issue I
would call an issue that might
be a little bit stronger award
the report you get from C. PMS
is the the number of dollars
that have not been reimbursed by
the state back to the city we
believe unapproved notice of
obligation incomers that funds
so I just see a little bit we
have a disconnect between what
the city believes we have
encumbered verses what CMS is
reporting back out to the state.
And our biggest pain point not
pain this pain point is the
nonprofit's of the forty four
City of Albuquerque local
capital requests on your list
today ten of them almost a
quarter are for nonprofit
organizations we expect that
number to grow this year
we don't have a lot of
nonprofits who are just ordering
are coming to us asking for
furnishings and equipment you
know they want to own their own
building they want to own their
own property which we all know
is is very it runs up to that
line of anti donations so we're
we're working with them we've
had to sessions last year and
this year to train the
nonprofits as far as what can be
asked what does constitute anti
donation
but that information as you know
it is a lot and when the LCS
portal opens up that information
tends to get forget forgotten.
We have US owned small issue
with potential duplication of
work between the city of a
nonprofit
we're always looking for
ways not to scare the anti
donation of we've had a for
profit gymnasium charter schools
and renovations on buildings or
property not owned by the city
all received capital outlay
requests last year.
There is some good news
we were told that nonprofits
would be available to request
for equipment and furnishings
that's a great thing but as I
said when when the LCS portals
open anyone can go in and
request anything they want
and we don't have a kind of a
gateway to to make sure that
what's getting requests is what
the city knows is getting
requests.
Full of two of keep it a little
more brief okay yes okay so what
we've done I've I've hired two
project managers to help with
the projects we we've started
hosting in state capital outlay
training sessions we've Heller
rulemaking session
we're working with our planning
department we're going into a
new contracting method a
construction manager at risk to
start designing and ordering of
materials earlier.
And then with all of that the
projects that we have today as I
said of the forty four non DOT
requests on the list fifteen of
them are ninety seven percent
encumbered with notices of
obligation and some of them have
actually been reimbursed so we
don't have CEMS
is not necessarily tracked or
updated both on the city on the
state side we believe officially
so that you can have the most up
to date information Mr chairman
I can can continue with my last
two slides which discusses a
project by project breakdown or
respecting your and this
committee's time we can stop
here and answer any questions.
Where we go ahead and stop and
the New Mexico.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm gonna think more
for the good presentation this
morning actually no comments
just here to answer any
questions you might have for us.
Very well.
the members.
Chairman.
I guess my first question is how
do we help you but you're stuck.
And and every similar markers
for right here they're stuck
right there's so how do we help
the fixes projects those
legislators need to re authorize
them to projects that you
prioritize
I mean.
We're not gonna valley pandemic
donation clause I mean none of
us want to wear orange in the
Bologna sandwiches for lunch
but I mean how do we help you I
mean that's the reason we're
having this right if if you have
projects that are short.
Help us that will let us know
will help back for those seeking
every you can get it done we
need to be successful in capital
and I hope this resonates right
we need you to be successful the
capital and we don't legislators
gonna do whatever they're going
to do to to non profits or
whoever they're gonna give their
money to but we can't do it
anymore because three million
dollars a sitting on the table.
And you talk about the state
getting windfall that windfall
has been sitting there for a
long time and it's not doing
anything supply chain issues are
starting to go away right we
know that I'm a contractor so in
that world you know you can get
panels and in supply chains
recent up inventories are going
to still be low but they'll be
able to make a the time frames
if you know that and and I mean
my big question you is are you
guys gonna go Sanchez and say we
cannot do this project and can
you be authorized.
Mr chairman members of the
committee would be happy to do
that with the the the nonprofits
some of the red a project that
you have for example the
westside sports authority that's
a forty million dollar project
we have about eight million
dollars for it we've started
ordering materials for it that
will store but as far as the
nonprofit yes we will we will
definitely do that I mean that's
a forty million dollar project
you only have a I mean was that
just we should fill it so you
can finish I don't know what it
is but that's a project we
should complete for you know you
see storing inventory for four
years and then sing okay now we
can build a because got the rest
of the forty million that's
those are things I'm looking at
but I think.
You know I I go to your
legislation saying these issues
this will skin me alive.
I look like Senator Burt and and
But I think you guys need to go
those legislators and save this
and.
Projects have issues there's no
way to complete them and here's
a menu in Albuquerque that we
what we want to complete at west
side center whatever you called
it right there's a menu can you
re authorized to that is if we
don't begin to be the big people
in the room and say.
Not gonna work move on there's a
menu.
We're gonna be sitting here this
next year.
just deleting these projects.
On some of these one twenty
nineteen were in cash so cash
can come back to the state
pretty quickly I don't know if
if the board finances sold some
of these bonds and sold some of
these funds but capital outlay
is gonna get tied up in and if
we do Riaz you have two years.
I mean it can't leave it on the
table for ever so thank thank
you Mr chairman that we have
first of.
With the senator Byrd are you
on.
But those and the.
Mr chair up good morning in in
defense of the nonprofit set at
I think I would as a nonprofit
guy up here I know that if a
nonprofit is working with their
community it's not a nonprofit
is going on the building in the
community that but on the
building right and then the
community would be getting
services from a nonprofit so.
You know to make a claim to
leave delineation point that any
building that serves a nonprofit
should get the ax and everyone
else should and I.
That's kind of what I'm hearing
a little bit and I I know that
Albuquerque's atomic dollars to
have a lot of services in the
need of a lot of services a lot
of valuable nonprofit up and
provide them so hopefully there
for the same flexibility
opportunities as any other
fiscal agent on any other
building to make the project
viable.
So.
But you know all the particulars
but a nonprofit to do a lot of
really important work to support
committees thank you.
Kelly.
Thank you thank you thank you
hello Mary Mr.
Representative.
Purcell Cerrone's gonna make
some brief comments on behalf of
the cogs.
Good morning members those that
and I'm the dictates act
director for the southwest New
Mexico council of governments
and I also chair the state
association I have the honor and
the privilege of working with
communities specifically in my
region for thirty six years so I
feel like I've been around the
block quite a bit three my
tenure so thank you for just
give me a few minutes I don't
want to re enter a any of the
things that's already been
discussing to want to talk some
about some positive around
things that the costs are doing
that to help move projects a
line and some of things that
were already doing is providing
that hands on technical
assistance because of the lack
of capacity at the local level
and we are actually doing a lot
of that everything from request
for proposals in doing those
kinds of things so we can get
projects moving and so we
continue to do that and every
piece of it something that's
kind of neat that I'm seeing in
my region and that's really
helping making sure that
projects stay on task with the
amount of dollars awarded and
that's a see more process in
which you hired the contractor
at the same time that you're
hiring the actual architects we
stay within budget of that
particular project it's not an
easy process for local
governments to do but none the
less it can be really helpful
and to ensure that stay within
that project budget the other
thing that's important in
regards to the costs in our and
our rules is that we have an
extensive knowledge of the
federal funding opportunities
that are coming our way and
we're applying for those federal
funds in just kind of looking at
some of the less sometimes I
think what may be difficult as
for you to see when those
federal dollars are being used
as much right so I can see in
some of that there's been a lot
of return on investment from
some of the federal dollars that
you may not be seen from some of
those projects that are being
funded by capital outlay and
there's been a lot of investment
up front that you may not be
seen at that point so I would
just ask that if we can be of
assistance to you in that regard
to we're happy to do that we're
happy to share our our
institutional knowledge that we
have been working with
committees and those.
No doubt that there's a capacity
issue but I can also say that
there's a capacity issue within
the council of governments
themselves because as
individuals working all of the
communities developing capital
program plans applying for grant
dollars all of those things are
what we do to be sure that our
committees are getting the best
service as our region so we hope
that we can provide that insight
for you are in any way possible
so thank you for the opportunity
I'll take any questions if you
have any at this point.
One of the Senator Hemphill
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for seller for being here and I
think everyone up here knows how
hard to work and I just want to
thank you for all of your work
and if anyone in this room
doesn't now I just want everyone
to know that not only are you
one of the hardest working
people in our state but that
level of institutional knowledge
that you bring to the table is.
Representative taking so I I
can't even imagine the situation
would be in in southwestern New
Mexico if it wasn't for you so.
I want you to let us know what
is the number one thing that we
as a legislature can do to help
support your work and support
our rural communities.
So
madam vice chair Senator
Rodriguez and Austin are helpful
I think when I think about that
is just additional staff because
as an example of on the staff
before and not includes myself
doing all this work and we've
been I think in some of the
committee meetings I have felt
despair because I feel like I'm
not to my committees justice to
be able to find all the systems
that we can so I think that
additional funding in that
regard and I think we need them
at the local level to be able to
find that hands on because
there's so much turnover in in
village clerks there's I don't
see as much income manages
although there are some and so
you just see the staff I mean
the comfort level to be able to
gain the knowledge of all these
different programs how they work
with federal how they work with
state how you time it hi you
would do the granting of the
implementation is difficult and
if we could find that at the
local level I think we could see
a lot of this moving forward in
a much more positive direction I
think we're doing the best we
can for the dot and I think we
continue to do that and we're
constantly communicating with
our local governments and how we
can be beneficial and helpful in
that regard so thank you for the
opportunity just to acknowledge
that we are the people at the
local level and we consider
ourselves Hobbs we will pray
that technical assistance thank
you thank you again for seller
for the good work that you're
doing thank you Mr wealth thank
you thank you for being here
before Kelly we go back to you
Mr meant for under the sea just
wants to make a few comments the
sons of.
Good morning can you hear us.
Mr Misia's can be yours
you hear right now okay hello.
Mr chairman Gonzalez can you
hear me now yes forgive me for
interrupting the proceedings
that for non the less the US on
the county manager in Dunya
County it's that we're beginning
a commission meeting a county
commission meeting at ten
o'clock I just wanted to make
sure that we had an opportunity
to address any of the questions
that the committee may have
related to any of the projects
and done in a County I believe
that the reports that we
submitted to staff
I don't believe that there at
any additional questions however
I wanted to make sure that we
were responsive to the committee
and I do apologize for.
Us to go out of.
I DO see yes there is all the Mr
chairman chairman Gonzalez
there's only one project that so
we are asking for Misia's of
give us a second to catch up
with the.
With the setting forth.
That's better.
well yes yes try again.
All right Mr chairman my my
mouth ever have to match up with
the words that I heard you
saying it's okay if there is
somewhat of a delay.
That's.
That that all right go ahead.
Again my apologies for us to be
taken out of the orders that we
have a county commission meeting
beginning at ten o'clock I
wanted to make sure that we were
available to the committee to
respond to any questions related
to projects in dynamic County it
is my understanding that with
the reports to be submitted
the staff did not have
additional questions but I
wanted to make sure that we
remain available to the members
of the committee to respond to
questions related to any of the
projects that are here on this
there is only one project that
we are asking for a review
of authorization and we're
working with Representative
small on that matter the other
is are based on the report that
we submitted our you know timely
manner for completion of the
majority of them this current
fiscal year so I'm here
primarily to respond to any
questions that the committee to
have.
Thank you committee members of
questions to discuss this
project.
This is so there doesn't seem to
be any so.
All right chairman members of
the committee thank you so much
longer all very well.
Thank you.
Back to Kelly.
Mr chair are coming more and
from DFA is gonna join me.
Mr chair members of the
committee so we thought we would
try to act quickly go through
the sheet to projects you have
in front of you and just flag
ones where the entities
identified funding shortfalls or
potentially the need to re
authorize them and to start
common is just going to make
some quick remarks about who she
is and what she does at the FAA
and it point to some of our
staff or here.
Thank you so much and I'm gonna
let tell Wesley.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Wesley Billingsley DFA
capital outlay bureau chief this
one to kind of give you the over
overall view of how the
structure works within DFA so
I'm the bureau chief for the
capital right here and we
oversee all the budgeting some
of the statewide ICAP process we
help with the grant agreement
templates I. CI peas and of
course there are C. PMS
reporting so that's what we do
within our bureau for and so I
wanted to kind of start you off
of what we do and of course all
the state agencies have their
own capital outlay bureau and so
local government division is you
know what DFA uses as a tool to
get all the local government
capital projects going out the
door so I'll turn out to this
Madam.
Thank you so much thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee I was truly impressed
pleasure to be here and visit
with you today but I did present
of find something for you with
information about our group it's
at do you want to introduce
everyone that we have here today
just very quickly we have our
acting director or deputy
director Mr net guy goes he's
here and then also are shop on
boats that are rural investment
the Shannon Dr shin assessor and
then also sherry green of the
budget and finance supervisor
right over here and then we also
brought our team so our local
government division has our
community development team and
we are right now eleven strong
at twelve with me soon to be
thirteen with one vacancy that
we have open truly appreciate
your support with all of that
but did provide for you some
information in here on
everything that we do we not
only let a manage the
legislative projects over two
thousand that our team does each
have either one hundred up to
three hundred more and you know
work very very well with our
grantees and then also we do the
community development block
grant as well we have seventy
four requests there we do work
with idea managed with managed
of some of the tip projects also
and then we also manage the
local government I CIP and this
year we actually received five
hundred and twenty which is a
record of submissions and with
over six thousand projects also
but it's just been amazing to be
able to work with all of the
communities and we appreciate
your time and any information
that you have any questions on
also want to let you know with
what I provided to you I also
have a map of all of of where
all of our project managers
actually manages rate in the
past and so if you ever need to
reach out to any of them on any
of your projects in your area
please feel free to do so as
well as you can always contact
me thank you so much for your
time.
Well thank you okay Mr chair so
I will just go through this
spreadsheet and just highlight
projects where they have
identified a funding shortfall
or a potential need to re
authorize I understand the
Senate finance staff has been
Populating this justification of
status column the evening before
these hearings based on the
information they've received in
the reporting format form that
they developed for these
projects and so we've just been
reading through these and you
can kind of just mark on your
sheet if you like the re
authorization or funding
shortfall common will work for
we can work with them to get
that updated as well so you have
that for your information so on
page one line two and I'm just
going to kind of go through
these and flag I'm not talk
about them in detail and so just
stop me if anyone has questions
and we can try to address them
with the folks were here
Mr chair.
Just had about fifty talked
about I don't know if we have
it.
This is the one hi Mr chair and
members of the committee it's
the one that has the department
of finance and administration
yes the one top of that and also
just wanted to mention since
yeah I have your attention again
but I do have the staff here
with me today and so I just want
to call them to stand if you
don't mind it just a way to you
but they're all here also to
answer any questions that sits
here yes right in the back of
that if there want to just say
the once in A. L. over once it
so well sure sure
In a car thank you for that
opportunity for the yellow on
the top I have found one Rio
revised house as well as San
Miguel County the laci here who
manages those projects and then
also I have next on the blue all
the way down McKinley Cibola
catching grant and Hidalgo miss
don Webster who is here on this
side and then on the top of for
Colfax you Hardik way and what a
loopy miss Donna Stewart is
right over here and then I have
a phone those Sandoval Torrance
Santa Fe Bernalillo Valencia
actually have three that manage
all that area for actually so I
have a Rick Chavis Daniel cat
knack also miss Nicole Silva and
Monica Tapia that manage all of
that area and then actually and
and with one of them Nicole so
was the one that manages
Albuquerque specifically so
that's the over three hundred
I'm with her and then with the
court Sierra and Luna actually
have to project managers that
manage that and that is
miss Annette Abu Dhaka and Linda
Martinez both on this side and
then right in the middle with
the link and Otero and Eddy
which we like to say well a for
that county area and that is
agency Maureen airs who is also
here behind me and then for De
Baca Chavis Roosevelt and leave
we have agency Jennifer McGrath
I hope I thought everybody.
Hello we have a very.
There are an awesome team they
really are they really work hard
to get us projects moving right
well that that helps thank you
so much and Mr chair Wesley and
comments contact info is on this
handout on the second sheet if
any of you are ever having
questions or issues with your
constituents that come up with
projects that are managed by DFA
or three Wesley really any of
the agencies they're both very
attentive and responsive to
legislative request so you
should always feel free to reach
out directly to them.
Members this is an important and
up.
Thank you for your file so go
ahead go ahead.
all right so page one line to
this project was identified as
having a potential funding
shortfall.
Line three potential need for re
authorization.
Money I potential need for re
authorization.
Line eight
funding shortfalls although it
looks like the county might have
addressed this.
Line fourteen that potential
need for reauthorization.
Just one second.
On the one side of the we're
talking about a shortfall.
At this point do we know how
much.
Mr chair members of the
committee it looks like in some
cases projects have reported
specific amounts and in some
cases they haven't so if you
would like Senate finance staff
or LFC staff to do fund some
follow up on the information
you've received so far we're
happy to work with Adrian and
his staff to do that just let us
know what additional information
you need needed seven one point
is how much can we afford right
you know to have all the back
field on it but I think it's
going to be very important.
Okay so Mister chair we can as
we go through these hearings
would you like us to work with
the SFC staff to do some follow
up on the projects that have
identified a need for additional
funding and get more specifics
of it has not yet been provided
okay.
Because I have a quick question
Mr chairman to make sure we're
on the same page killing him
everyone who present thank you
when you set the for example
line fourteen these are projects
that tell me again I I lost you
there was it projects that need
to maybe re authorized yep so
but there's one this press sorry
Kelly but it's just question
mark on to re authorize re
authorized so I just wondered if
they had by some chance been re
authorized in the past and need
another we are so Mr chair
Senator Rodriguez I think I
mentioned this while you were
still out of the room so the
Senate finance analysts have
banned collecting the
information that's in this
justification of status column
and they've been populating the
spreadsheets that you've been
getting with the deadline to
receive this information at
three PM the previous day so
pretty quick turnover between
getting it and then the hearing
so I'm just looking through this
and essentially flagging
projects were in that status
column they have seem to
identify a funding shortfall or
a potential need for re
authorization and what the chair
was just asking is that we do
some follow up after this
hearing to confirm that stuff
and get additional specifics so
will provide that to you want to
have a chance to do that color
coded so I wasn't sure thank you
so much yes so I I think some of
this is just not band Phil just
for time constraints so far
thank okay so on page two.
Line twenty two
there is a potential funding
shortfall identified.
Money twenty four potential need
for re authorization this year.
My twenty eight potential
funding shortfall.
I'm page three.
Winds sixteen potential funding
shortfall.
That looks like it does need
some follow up as well as need
for re authorization.
I don't have anything on page
four page five.
I'm and the sixteen.
Seventeen and eighteen all have
potential funding shortfalls.
One twenty one potential funding
shortfall.
page six not seeing anything at
this time but we will review of
these again as we go back.
And do that follow up page
seven.
One forty nine potential funding
shortfall.
One fifty potential need for re
authorization.
One fifty one funding shortfall.
Page eight.
Aligns and potential need for re
authorization.
Find twenty two potential need
for re authorization.
line twenty four
the entity identified a one
point five million dollar
funding shortfall.
One twenty seven potential
reauthorization this year.
Turn to page nine.
One thirty one potential funding
shortfall.
Paid just and the.
One fifty four potential re
authorization.
Yes.
I know that all line forty four
on page nine.
They have a shortfall okay the
are working with the governor's
office on the.
Well at that for follow up lists
Mr chair.
Page ten line sixty one we've
got a potential funding
shortfall.
Also line sixty three.
And finally line eleven we've
got a potential funding
shortfall online seventy three.
So Mr chair we will look through
all the comments again and see
if we can identify any others
and will work with Adrian to get
you that follow up on these as
well as the additional hearings
you have schedules we do expect
these kind of issues to be more
of a potential issue with the
local projects versus the
statewide ones that you heard
about yesterday just because
there's been a little bit more
of a process on the statewide
side and trying to identify
these things ahead of time.
Kelly and the number so.
Of you don't realize how
important this is.
And though capital outlay such a
big part of our process you know
for every legislative session
and this really brings that.
You know what hello years back
we used to have a system in the
house side but it was a very
time consuming you know but you
know what we're doing here I
think because of the word
spreads out statewide you know
it's going to give everyone an
opportunity to just really start
really concentrating on looking
really hard you know into this
projects no it is complicated
our disagree with that because
of everything that has been
mentioned about labor and
supplies and contractors an
audit and all the things that
make it but I think the
important part of the.
Everyone has to realize this
what is as we go every single
year through the processes what
it does to the system because we
just keep adding and adding you
at some point it's just not
going to work so I think this is
a very good method and this is a
very good here that we can that
field but also it's very.
Economic development for
statewide really brings in a lot
of contractors lot of supplies
lot of everything so you know I
think it's a very quick process.
Well members as the it was
percent and we have a Senator by
the and is there anyone else
that has any questions to.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the presentation I'll just
have to walk in a little bit
late had very very busy morning
you may have already said this
but on the items that you just
reviewed with regard to the re
authorizations and other steps
that are going to be needed are
you going to be notifying these
are to get the individual
members need to come forward
with the re authorization how
how does the reauthorization
work to make sure that the this
falls by the wayside.
Mr chair Senator Padilla so for
re authorizations the grantees
have to fill out a form and get
it signed by the sponsor and
submitted to the Legislative
Council Service so there is an
established process for that
and you know my understanding is
that the chair was interested in
reviewing these projects to
identify things like funding
shortfalls and often re
authorizations are related to
that or other issues so we're
just fighting those for you as
well I appreciate that I know
that I get a list every year of
the re office that I need to do
but as these are rather large
projects as the as you laid them
out the agency is being notified
you need to do this or you're
gonna lose your however hard you
worked on whatever it is right
now sekarang.
Mr chair Senator Padilla that
they don't necessarily
automatically get notified we do
produce sponsor reports that we
sent out to you all that have
the reversion dates flag and
balances for projects that have
significant balances and
reversion dates that are
approaching otherwise the onus
is really on the grantees to let
you all know about those issues
and to be aware of them
themselves I thought you might
say that so I'm glad we're
having this hearing because it's
very important that we do that
it'll be in our individual lists
these are fall in if we were the
original sponsor of the project
right Mr chair Senator Padilla
that's right and then the other
thing I would just say is that
you know whatever additional
work that you all want us or SFC
staff to do on these issues just
let us know and we'll figure out
how to make it happen thank you
very much the stations.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
again good job it you know you
can always tell when somebody's
have lots of experience like
Senator Gonzalez in every aspect
he comes in and just immediately
gets it going thank you senator
that's wisdom experience lots of
years leave the legislature yes
thank you and Kelly really I
just wanted to publicly thank
you you have been given an
enormous task from the very
beginning you were
Sen us lots of questions in this
project in this rific long long.
Hi tech projects also that we
have and I just wanted to just
thank you for your commitment
that you at the many hours that
you put in and so much work you
and Nina into so what we're
grateful to still have Linda
willing to help us in in just
many others that have been here
thank you so much for all your
work David your staff I know we
thank you profusely where are
you David if you're here but if
not the state anyway and all the
staff for your work and DFA you
know what this is about
collaborative about
collaborative efforts and
partnerships right and it's
working together that we can
finally reach a consensus it's
not who's against the other who
is up there to win you should
never be about that because when
we work together we all win and
it's about the constituents are
people so thank you so much for
all your work hi Mr chairman
that's all I have A. L. I just
want to one less common to so.
So very interesting about
capital outlay of.
It's it's unique because you
know what happens in the one
part of the state you know it's
very different from another part
but what is very interesting is
very capital outlay requests has
a history.
The new be surprised how much
history you know happens within
so that's why I say you know
it's complicated you know it's
not a.
One size fits all you know it's
there's a lot of intricate stew
the dynamics of the the bottom
line is one of the best parts
you know up there of every part
of the state to know the
assistance they get from water
sanitation districts from name
you know it's a big process but
you know it really does help so
members is there anyone else
that by any.
If not all will for Kelly
anything else I know Mr chair
the the we're adjourned until
we'd like to thank everyone that
took the time to be here.
