To provide an average
compensation increase of seven
percent for all state education
employees.
Ring minimum salaries to fifteen
dollars an hour fully funds
Medicaid we back fill a number
of one time federal funding
investments and inside the bill
there's key support for public
safety health care and family
initiatives house bill two
leaves approximately four
hundred million for tax related
initiatives Mr Chairman on your
of presentation here gets into
the detail of public education.
Very proud of the fact the the
bill has a twelve point three
percent increase from the prior
year.
It provides the
level one two and three tier
increases that we've heard
throughout our interim in higher
education provides for twenty
eight million or three percent
with no base budget reallocation
increase.
Health and Human Services the
budget includes one point three
billion in general fund revenue
from Medicaid this of course is
a recurring it's not.
Reoccurring investment.
twenty eight million in state
funds for hospitals and nursing
home labor costs as we heard
throughout the interim another
eleven million in FY twenty
three to maintain hospital
provider rate.
a lot of money Mr chairman and
committee in terms of behavioral
health including twenty million
to develop proper provider.
Looting the start up costs to
implement Medicaid evidence
based behavioral health services
one of the things that was most
important to the house members
as the fact now we don't have
we've caught up on our DD DD
waiver issue I don't have that
backlog at this is if this is
approved and signed into law by
the governor.
there is a lot of funding that
we put forth one account came to
the judiciary and public safety.
Considerable amount in natural
resources certainly in
compensation specials and
supplementals.
We also did a other special
appropriation can fund transfer
we adopted the nonrecurring
appropriation of federal
American rescue plan Act funds
much of this of course is based
on the LFC framework that came
out of our interim committee.
But I I just think it's
important Mr chairman to to let
you know I thought
of that the hearings went well
the bill is a five five partisan
passed on the house floor.
Real happy to see that and I do
have we don't see it in your
packet here but what helped me
in explaining to our folks with
what I call a little we have our
cheat sheet set the course for
the color coded version
I think we Representative
because that the Senate finance
professionals to have all the
details okay.
No problem with that I just
provided to our members exactly
how much went into various
categories with those programs
were.
Have it here if you're if you
want to see it this way that
it's.
Under public education those
specific.
Dollar amounts that went toward
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit on
native Americans an at risk
student appropriations both in
recurring and nonrecurring.
Specifically when it what went
into public safety.
Of the public safety package as
we call it the economic
development package education
workforce package public health
water and natural resources then
of course we have a section for
compensation I don't think you
have it looks like this.
We use this.
I'm happy to share this with the
committee if you like Mr
chairman.
This Monday because.
Okay and this is good you have
it there this is good because it
really helps the committee
understand specifically what's
in there you what category so
we're happy to answer any
questions or go through any more
detail as you might might see
fit I know the staff did a good
job here.
Madam chair there does need to
be copied during three
different.
West coast he claimed what's in
the pack okay this bill run make
copies of these.
For IBM and so madam chair the
the recurring overview the first
three pages or the narrative the
chairwoman Lundstrom went
through.
On page four is the one page
general fund recurring high
level this compares executive
the LFC and finally HSC actions
you can see a road fifty.
Right column the HSD had a nine
point six million to the
spending level and.
The LFC recommendation for a
total of eight point four seven
billion the next three or four
pages have the details in the
same way.
FY twenty two exec LFC in HFC
per every agency general fund
overview with.
including a percentage change.
On page eleven.
I'm sorry.
Page.
Eight is what we call a public
school high level this public
schools are forty five percent
of the general fund
appropriation these two pages
explaining the changes from the
current fiscal year for public
school leading.
The page nine.
For a grand total of three point
eight seven million or twelve
point three percent increase in
one eighty eight for public
schools.
Then below that are the non
recurring for public schools
including from the reform Fund
on page eleven.
Is a one page high levels for
the higher education budget.
Of that increase totals of nine
point seven percent.
I'm sorry.
it total seven hundred and
twenty three point eight million
or three percent for instruction
in general and then the rest of
it is below the line including
the department on page twelve is
the financial summary for the
general fund.
You can see that.
HSC action left general fund
reserves at thirty point three
percent or two point five seven
billion spending four twenty
three.
I think the kind of the
understanding in balancing what
the house did with what you may
consider is about ten million
more of recurring probation and
fifteen million more of
nonrecurring appropriations will
leave reserves at the target
level of thirty percent.
On page.
Page fifteen
some technical adjustments that
were made already in house your
other hand out is following up
on some of the questions that
came up in one of the caucuses
yesterday and was to provide
more detail on the nonrecurring
appropriations and generally
they're nonrecurring
appropriations because of about.
Two billion because general fund
reserves at over forty percent
with a billion more than needed
for one time.
Non recurring general fund
appropriations and then there
was about seven hundred million
of our per revenues also in the
general fund.
There are were available and
still leading reserves of thirty
percent so here on page one for
example it says page one of the
nonrecurring handout specials.
Specials total five ninety six
five point six page two forty
eight this from the general fund
and the biggest ones are listed
in the in the following detail.
And then beginning on page three
or every special supplemental
appropriation in the back of the
bill.
And then beginning page that's
about twenty pages.
The specials for nonrecurring.
The regular and then beginning
of page twenty five.
This is a summary of general
fund slash are put Merican
recovery act appropriations also
nonrecurring and think total.
The total section five is one
and half billion and you can
find that total on page.
Thirty one.
There are real numbers put about
four from the bottom seven
hundred and fifty one of the
General Fund in sections nine
ten eleven and a total of one
point five two billion section
nine is transportation
appropriations which are about
four hundred million section ten
is of.
Wide range of appropriations
that are listed on.
The gentleman.
Page twenty five and then
finally section eleven this
transfers to funds which in
effect counters brokerage
purposes of procreation so
that's the spreadsheets that are
in your packet and
Your turn it back to you.
Thank you David thank you Mr
chairman this is a very very
good summary and certainly we
stand ready to answer any other
questions I can take you through
the whole nonrecurring pace
for any at any other rate during
I can on a pro your attention to
and that was on the financial
summary.
By the right page here.
This
message is on page twelve.
This is our checkbook for the
new members may not be familiar
with how these work.
Chairman.
New Mexico that up make sure
we're on the same page the
recurring packet okay recurring
page twelve please thank you.
This is this is the summary of
everything so to speak.
You look at the reoccurring
revenue and we did the consensus
revenue update.
when we started to build this of
course in H. A. F. C..
You can say.
What the percentage change of
recurring revenue is.
You go down to the to the
brought their you can say that
we have maintained a thirty
point three percent research.
Now there was some talk on the
floor yesterday the comedian
that needed to be higher.
The maybe a thirteen percent
spending was too high.
That's not what the public said
I mean and not what we've heard.
Is that it doesn't make sense to
have a reserve at sixty percent
and spending at six you know
when you've got all the needs we
do in the state of New Mexico.
We've got many many needs at all
of your committees in the
interim have heard.
And a lot of that's been
addressed
I think it's important that we
have the money working for us
and economic hand out there so
I'm Mr Chairman as I say we're
happy to talk about what we've
done with non reoccurring.
The state told the groups last
in our special session.
Thanks to our good work with
Senate finance we didn't spend
everything.
We waited until the thirty day
session where we could do the
integration of funds would not
general fund on reoccurring
other state funds and federal
funds so now we have got a
multitude of different funding
sources that go into those
projects.
So I I appreciate that we didn't
spend everything every nickel we
had in December so we waited
until now.
So we're we're we're ready to
answer any questions Mr
chairman.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam chair and into the
presenters
thank you for all the work and
sounds like you know if you
really to cancel the paper
the first time on the committee
here I haven't had an
opportunity to ask questions
like this before but I had a
couple.
In terms of on economic
development and lead to
economic developments come
forward and said that they
believe they have a.
Lukewarm pipeline of about a
hundred million dollars and
projects I guess there's about
seven million dollars it's lying
there right now
they have a pretty good feeling
that there's fifty to eighty
million dollars of that one
hundred million in projects that
could potentially be some game
changers I know we hear that a
lot from from those
organizations when they come
forward I think you set the
number twenty five million they
were looking to at least have
fifty million dollars at the
ready can you give us any more
information on why he felt like
a putting the target twenty five
right now when they believe they
have something in the
neighborhood of about seventy
seventy five million in
potential projects.
We have our forces.
Center if you look at your
budget we have something hard
economic development you know
here with their there is one and
that was on on the to in order
for percent finance members when
the house heard agencies we try
to hear me there day before more
day after and you know they
agencies could change what
they're doing with their lives
and then we'll have the recap of
what they put it in here in New
Mexico
Well I just want to understand
what the HFC Committee chair
wanted to do with this because
these are pretty important you
know matter so we could use as
we can and we don't you know
there's if I could the handout
that we provided to you I've got
economic development listed here
and what we've done for economic
and and recovery regarding jobs.
It's over a billion dollars in
here total with different
programming.
Whether its infrastructure
hopefully this business based
development and so forth venture
capital program technology
enhancement the local economic
development acts true it's if
it's only a twenty five million
in here.
The it it's also true that is
the senator said we had worked
together on we wanted to make
sure that what we heard is what
you guys were going to hear you
know that calm most like the
next day kind of thing I wanted
to make sure that that came
forth.
and and that's what the process
is about if you feel like you
need to put more in there are
certainly that's your
prerogative to do that.
One thing I did forget Mr
chairman is different not to
talk about where we think we
where we feel like some things
that slip through the cracks and
I don't know if the staff is
already done that regarding a
couple of things you mentioned
can we talk about that because
there are some things that we
know we've slipped up on we've
been working with Miss Iglesias
Mr Chairman.
Technical correction list the
district attorney's fourteen of
them did not work secluded from
the seven percent range you may
choose to do more that's a
little more than a hundred
thousand accommodate them that
was a technical error there was
a project that should have been
named on the roads that is the
north west loop in Albuquerque
it's clearly on the spreadsheets
but it didn't survive getting
drafted in the bill so reflect
the intent of the house so you
don't have to drive it but it's
it was the intent of the house
and was ordered to leave that
out so staff will bring that
list to you to consider for
adjustments madam chair part of
what Mr Mr chair part of what
happened is we're if we've got a
new software program that we're
yes run in
over LFC so there's some of
those things that dropped off I
mean we would have never
intended not to give the dust a
salary increase leader deals you
know there's things like that
and couple other language things
that we can share with you
through the staff thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam chair
second and I want to just chat
about I would like to do
something with the lead to peace
on our site here and I guess
we'll talk more about that in
our in our pieces of the show
there on the nursing programs
they were really looking to.
To go from a to we we had a
whole presentation on this week
we heard all the values and
virtues of moving this along in
the right direction and I know
that money was I believe money
was and I'm not quite sure from
the original amount that they
were looking for but they were
they were hoping to receive
something like fifteen million I
think you came in at five
million that's a sixty six
percent two thirds kind of cut
to what they were hoping to
accomplish I could have the
numbers wrong but that's I want
women happening at once I might
mention because it's I think it
was set at ten they were looking
for fifteen.
What happens Mr chairman and and
senator is that when we that we
talk about specifically the
general fund portion but that
doesn't include the federal
match so in the highlighted
sheet that I have in front of me
when it talks about hospital and
nursing home labor costs.
In including federal funds is
over a hundred seventy one
million.
State so so part of it is is
what our general fund pieces and
then yes anticipation is is
that's match them for both
hospitals and nursing homes.
In which Mr fully follow up on
that too Mr chairman.
Hold on a two on.
I believe your question Senator
Padilla is around the fifteen
million that was done in the
special session million to
higher education of program
development fund for nursing
programs council to allocate
five million of that to the
nursing programs were as they
were looking for the full
fifteen I believe them that's
that's more accurate thank you
don't you're talking about a
higher end question okay the
would be the funding and
includes the full fifteen it was
spread out over three years of
the flyers to accelerate the
disbursement that's going to
talk about your ideas for
fifteen minutes and Mister
chairman Senator there is
another thirty million for a
endowed faculty positions in
nursing programs as well to to
fund the ongoing operational
costs.
and then on to rural primary
care clinics I guess there was
an additional two million that
they were looking for
Did you know anything about that
I I don't know that it was cut
completely or if the two million
was simply unavailable or what
what happened there.
As part of that was rendered
meaningless to came in in the
last week from Mister Riley
who's the head of the
Association certainly have merit
it could be matched by Medicaid
that was not request or interest
standing seated considered so
it's a new life.
Yeah thank you there was also
the secretary of state's office
it was I guess the cut made a
four million dollars to their
programming for the transition
over the new districts I'm not
quite sure what that that amount
was or what that was.
You wish to comment on the
center for the and so the
secretary of state because we
over funded her in the last
election for the congressional
run me over funded her and she
had a million and a half and
correct me if I'm wrong David
that was there we're going to
transfer that money and then
they're hearing this is that I
don't know what's in the bill
they're hearing in rules of that
bill will come to us and again
that's where we'll put money in
for the secretary state
yeah it's a conversion from
nonrecurring to recurring.
Wonderful appreciate that thank
you I'm almost done Mr chairman
I think we have plenty time to
do this on crime victims
reparation commission sexual
assault services page one twenty
two this is on the the
The substitute bill one twenty
to one eleven in order to
complete the work that they were
doing and they I think we're
budgeted two point six they were
looking they have a plan around
that would require five million
that's another two point four
million does that money come
from somewhere else that the
that the now generally when
incident happening on some of
these more high profile projects
we do a portion and then the
Senate does a portion and that's
what we advise some of the
agencies and the advocate groups
rather than us because we want
to re we want to be able to
leave X. number of dollars for
the Senate to work with it may
not be the same priority we have
and there's certainly noticed in
just a quick review as a junior
bill there's also been funding
provided that way so we were
looking at everything we look at
the request from the agents say
and then with the individual
members put in I don't know what
that total is yet we're we're
not done with it but we do know
that there's some in there for
junior.
And then follow up the very
important to distinguish between
coats and comments that are
below the request here so based
funding for C. B. or C. for
these programs is two million so
their request was to triple to
double the funding.
Tripled the going to have to
fund the request was to triple
the funding so the bill that's
coming to you doubles the
funding doesn't triple it.
So that just to clarify the base
amount and that the five million
was an increase to the base.
And we do look at those
percentage increases to the base
and sometimes it makes sense but
when it's when it's not much
even though it's a small amount
we still question.
and the the you know so most of
these questions I just asked Mr
chairman we're just on statewide
kind items I have some district
things that you know but I'll
take those up with the committee
itself will be here and and
yesterday I think we heard from
our chair that the capacity that
was sent over was a hundred and
twenty two million for things
that the Senate can do is that
still accurate in what you
brought forward or.
Senator Padilla we have a
hundred twenty twelve million
in that's not on reoccurring
money so we have about.
I will get the dollar amount
from the budget of reoccurring
money we have a pot of
reoccurring money intifada non
reoccurring money.
Thank you and then on the
potential of a tax package
attacks whatever we do can you
tell us a little bit more about
what half the house is working
on in terms of we've got some
items on over here I've got one
related to so security might
have heard about madam chair by
security council.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
yes inside the framework is four
hundred million dollars the tax
committees generally know that
that's what they have to spend I
know that we've seen some just
our staff tracks what comes out
of the tax committee so far as
bills told me they're the
smaller tasks I mean in terms of
what though those amounts would
be.
In the past and with the new
chair now maybe things have
changed but in the past a lot of
those tax committee built
bridges table temporarily tabled
until the very end of the
session and then they're all
brought together and put in one
big package working with the
Senate tax people.
I hope is that's what happens
again this year because we
certainly we don't want to go
beyond that framework amount and
there's different things that
are coming out Mr chair and
madam chair so that's what we do
here I was on that committee for
nine years before I came over
here but what I guess more
directly my question was related
to what are some of the bigger
ones that you all are pushing on
your side Mr chairman what I
have seen is a rebate tax
rebates that is bound something
that the chairs talked about
these two briefing us also some
but not much talk about gross
receipts tax cont I haven't seen
that being super push by anybody
I mean it's considered because
you know as an executive mask
ever everything is considered
but those are the the big thing
I've seen is more long rebates.
Thank you Mr chairman and then
again this will mention that the
social security income tax
exemption the way it stands on
the Senate side right now it's
looking like about a hundred
eighteen million is what that
would potentially be the first
year so just want to give you
that information and open
meetings so you're aware of it
and that's all I have for the
moment Mr chairman thank you for
allowing me to ask these
questions thank you madam chair
thank you Sir Senator Rodriguez.
Chairman good afternoon madam
chairman and bill and our staff
of course thank you all so much
for your work I just have a
quick maybe a couple of
questions let's go back a little
bit too and David maybe you can
help us the risk of the the
primary care issue that was
raised you know Dr Scrase
apparently I don't know if his
here but apparently was under
the impression that there were
five million dollars in there
for the primary there's a
provider rates Medicaid provider
rates but apparently they were
okay in the budget and so I saw
the language yesterday in the
Senate lounge as I was talking
to Larry Martinez and to David
here but I I saw the language
that was eleven million dollars
in there for provider rates for
hospitals which we want to keep
they need every penny but
there's nothing in there federal
for rift off for the rural
primary care so we were trying
to see if there's a way we could
at least but maybe two million
and that would leverage eight
made and towards that for these
clinics in the rural areas
Mister chairman Senator I like
Mr Abbey testified earlier that
was not part of the original
request a recommendation from
the executive so this is a new
item that HSC didn't even have
before it so it's an item that
this committee could certainly
consider there are I'm leveraged
General other state funds in the
department of health for repairs
that are not pulling down
Medicaid that might be another
thing to look at we raise that
for a number of years County
supported Medicaid nine percent
of it goes to the parliament
health and then it's not
leverage to bring down Medicaid
dollars that might be something
to look at as well for the
committee and and savior general
fund dollars for other
priorities and and to me you
know what really matters is that
these clinics have a way just to
continue not only survive which
isn't really doing but continued
to serve since the fall and if
we look at it that way thank you
Charles Mr chairman maybe look
at that also but I want to make.
Sure that in doing that that we
don't cut other areas from the
department of health that we
that are really serving people
on this pandemic and this hard
time that we're going through so
I appreciate if you can look
into that for me and then one
other thing is on the nursing
David explained to me once again
you set the perhaps there fifty
there was a fifteen million
dollars there for for nursing
and they ended up with five the
other ten were taken out to just
say could be stretched out in
three years and they can still
get their money other funding
to fifteen million.
it was so special session.
Was intended to start up new
programs and I know you've heard
testimony what we need for the
for the.
Educating more professionals the
question is how fast can the
purpose gear up how fast can
they provide faculty the intent
the LFC intent of recommending
the fifteen million was to kind
of phase in expansion of
programs and a lot of ways we
think is about as fast as they
can go if they could go faster
that could be a good thing and
if you want to go faster it
would require more money it
would simply require authorizing
ten or whatever number you
choose maybe the full fifteen
million if it doesn't all get
spent it will presumably revert
to the funding would be
available for the following you
these are clearly recurring
expenses so one advantage of not
allowing you know the first
years you can be sure that
you've got a head start on
funding additional notes and
follow for so those are your
choices chair Senator thank you
thank you for that explanation
my understanding and I got a
list yesterday Mr chairman that
apparently nineteen to twenty
applicants were already lined up
to to do that this I mean it
would only be able to fund about
two or three so I just wanted to
to tell you we got a list of
those yeah I was looking for me
but I don't know where it's at
in one of the things we member
also in the union hospital
there's one point seven million
R. four and R. PSP to expand the
nurse practitioner core which
was in the LFC recommendation
and the House Appropriations.
But I can again having had that
conversation with you and health
sciences center we know the
demand for nurses there we know
the demand for students to enter
the programs is there but it's
going to be hard to find
instructors and mentors for the
for the students so that's just
something to keep in mind how
fast they can go.
Thank you thank you David for
that and one final question Mr
chairman I I noticed that there
were twenty million dollars in
there to assist with maintenance
for the judicial complexes for
the courthouses we have unfunded
mandates that are pretty huge on
different local governments and
we require they have buildings
of the State basically requires
and to maintain a no funding
goes with them and so the
judicial complex buildings are
very big in addition to like
public health buildings and all
that but let's look at one the
court houses there's just not
enough money usually in county
coffers to be able to maintain
these buildings to a decent the
distant decent of weight and so
the twenty million that the LESC
had recommended was in there was
going to go to the AOC and as a
matter of fact I had a bill
because it was contingent upon a
bill passing so that asked me to
carry it through the of the
association of counties and and
others and so and Senator Griggs
had also worked on this a few
years ago and so I just wanted
to see what the rationale was
behind excluding that because
all it was was twenty million to
help the counties match to help
match their funds that they use
for maintenance of these huge
buildings so they would still
have to come up with the same
amount we just help with the
other other matching funds Mr
Chairman I think that kind of
filter the HFC in the nice but
not gonna have category in New
maybe we think that.
Thank.
Providing space for district
courts is a County obligation by
the constitution so most
counties are doing that on their
own there are a few that are
struggling with it but is the
end of the day it is the
counties constitutional
obligation provided so that was
some of the thinking it HSC was
nice but not going to have
compared to other things HFC one
thing that came out of nowhere
which was very important for
them to address was the new
state engineer Mr Hammond came
in with the request for forty
million dollars for strategic
water initiative so that was the
challenge of HFC to try to
figure out how to accommodate
those appropriate request and
and that was one of the nice
things kind of fell by the
wayside to accommodate the
waters pre orders okay look we
may wind just revisit that if we
can only because we know that
there mandated and we know it's
a responsibility but we're here
to be reasonable to and and if
it's too much responsibility
that we give them too many
unfunded mandates and no funding
to accommodated the gonna fall
behind they did a poll statewide
and I I saw the pole in the the
survey and they are behind I
don't know if it's a hundred
fifty if it's millions or
thousands or what account number
the numbers but they're pretty
hugely behind on this these
funds are thank you very much
that's all I wanted to ask thank
you madam chairman.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chair good to see you all As and
here's our LFC dative serve up
that as well for the seal I'm
definitely there's some
priorities you know we're all
hearing about of that that are
important to me whether it's the
food programs are you know I I
can go down the list there's a
few I do want to ask about Mr
chair and madam chair so the
nursing on the nursing side of
it they're saying that they do
that they are able to spend all
that money and we're all
counting we need to ramp up as
quickly as possible so I
personally would think it would
make sense to give them that
opportunity they claim they can
do it too given that opportunity
as long as we put sideboards on
it you mentioned the R. S..
PCP nobody made based on this
kid that up yes there you are
past the reserves and public
service program I I always get
that acronym at UNM so when
wanted to you know to call go
out the door and with those that
have capacity at the.
and not to serve rural areas I
think this is something we
talked about so but any rate
Question on the tax cut capacity
madam chair Mr chair if we with
that with that four hundred
million does that fit in the
framework of our.
Of our savings.
Mr Chairman yes right when you
look on page four.
Of the.
And you look at the tax revenue
changes for HFC totaled it
that's it's online three that's
where it shows Mr chairman the
four hundred million.
What what is that it's on page
four for the house bill two FY
twenty three general fund high
level.
The clerk with thank you for
that fits with so it is this is
accounted for Mister chairman
Senator.
And
If there thank you.
That's a Mr chair at I think
it's just have one other
question which is the nine eight
eight crisis line that
There seems to be a bit of
difference between what what
makes B. two currently funds
which about one point.
Five million I could be wrong
and they're asking the executive
wanted four point two five
million I believe.
That I know of is super
important super effective
Dealing with mental health care
and everything they're trying to
stand up I'm just curious if
there was what the thinking was
on why we landed on one point
five at this point.
Mr chair Senator because the
LESC had recommended putting
some of the start up costs and a
nonrecurring where's the
executive just put all of the
cost into recurring.
The agency and remember the
presentations earlier the
executive recommendation could
afford to do that because it
didn't fully fund Medicaid out
of recurring it put it out of
nonrecurring.
Thank you so
thank you for the reminder to
trial so Mister chair Charles
are you saying that that that
four point two five is funded
it's just only part of a ten
recurring arrests as part of its
funded in returning in the other
parts funded and nonrecurring.
Senator Steinborn the reason for
that is because he stated that
the start up costs so when they
start that program up to build
infrastructure on that will go
away and the reoccurring will
pick up the operation.
I think you just look for the
looking for that one but thank
you all that's all I have
Mister.
So what.
Real quickly Mr chair.
this is a pretty specific
question on appropriate.
Cefic deal it's under
Compensation appropriations
section eight and it starts on
page two TN online TN and it
talks about the suspect for
which that we're doing to return
and employees for public
education and it says.
In here.
Go districts may distribute the
equivalent of one quarter of the
three percent in the form of a
fabric retention strap which for
each returning employer no later
than August twenty twenty what
my question is so we're going to
pay three percent of one quarter
of the pay.
Period is that after the seven
percent raise that we figure
that is that after the reefer
ship raise with figure that
that's my question Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator Woods that
provision is the three percent
across the board raise that
would start this fiscal year the
school districts indicated that
they would struggle to implement
that effectively if not given
some flexibility and so the HFC
Provided that flexibility to
basically take the equivalent
amount if they want.
And paid in the form of a
stipend by the start of the next
fiscal year
so the employee should all get
the equivalent of that starting
at the three percent and then
that should build into next
year's salary schedule for all
of those public school employees
three percent and then they can
do what they want at the
district level with the
additional four percent for a
total of seven percent.
Okay so and it says no later Mr
churches no later than August
twenty twenty two and there was
some concern by some
superintendents if you paid too
early they may actually sign a
contract are they may not sign a
contract to come back to work
for you in your district so
there was concern if they could
wait until the very last minute
to pay that to make sure that
those district employees come
back to work for the district
does that make sense Mr
president okay sure Mr chair
Senator they have the
flexibility to do it either way
they can start paying their
employees on the bill signed.
Or they can wait to give them
Given that money in the form of
the state that it would be up to
the locals to decide how they
want to pay their people but the
intent of house bill two as it
comes over from from house
appropriations and finance is to
give people three percent rates
starting in the fourth quarter
of FY twenty two across the
board.
So so from what you're saying Mr
chair the the pay on a three
percent raise or they can pay
them a step forward at the end.
Senator becomes a really
difficult for those those
institutions to saying what is
three percent on the number of
days left instead of starting at
the beginning of the school year
their contract and say here's
the entire seven percent so what
he's saying is whatever that
number is for those months of
service you're gonna receive
that as a stipend of bone not a
bonus you can do bonuses they'll
got audit findings because of me
and so that's how they'll get
the three percent immediately
and then when the new school
year begins a seven percent will
kick in.
All the way around okay.
They ask for the flexibility and
the house appropriations and
finance again in that
flexibility so I have not heard
back from the superintendents
association that this is a
problem in fact what I heard was
that it resolve their issues the
language of their I don't think
Mr chair it was a problem it was
a definition is with the one
further definition of what it
was causing trouble because it
in with the audit funding either
on the deal another question
I've got is
under the statewide hunger
initiative
It seems the request for was.
Is about five point five million
more than what was awarded.
What's the justification of of
the difference between what was
in the budget and what the
request was.
Mr chair good question thank you
Mr Mr chairman and senator
part of it was is that during
the hearings the way we had
understood this is that it would
be sent to DFA for distribution
to these other agencies.
That you know in terms of health
food was going to be distributed
and the infrastructure like
trucks and that kind of thing Mr
chairman that they would need is
that not correct well I think
too and I think it's so much
some of that also was just the
house might do some of the
settlement that's what it boiled
down to that you know if it's.
It's a good program but we
weren't sure with some of the
agencies how it was going to be
delivered just from my seat on
HFC when we were asking that how
is is actually going to be
delivered.
If I could all of the request
came in for twelve different
agencies and then they all ended
up to DFA which LESC didn't have
an opportunity to review the way
the request came into the
executive budget
recommendations.
Okay.
In my last yield Mister chair.
And it's it's reason that I
couldn't vote for the framework
earlier.
Was the fact that we're using
state money to buy privately.
And I have real heartburn and
there's two places in this
budget of five million dollars
each one to energy natural
resources one in state game
committee
of game and fish in both state.
Of one of the users as to
purchase later.
And I have real heartburn with
that that we've we've done beat
that battle but I needed to
mention it again.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you anybody else madam
chair thank you tools begin work
on house bill rather quickly and
the they're still a lot of money
to move around and some cabinet
secretaries are going to be
hearing so I I want members to
be well aware this if you look
at and I'm just gonna talk about
economic development secretary
in her comments she didn't ask
for any increases in the that.
And and staff tractor comments
and you can go back and watch
the video of what her priorities
were when she came over we help
we were organised discussed lied
about
just remember this this is the
reason
the tractors that because they
come in and what one thing one
day.
Watch TV in the one another
thing another day and and so we
need to be very sure what their
comments were in track with what
they want.
thank you Mr chairman if I could
add on of this will happen with
us some of those things were
never even requested.
So we can't we can't do anything
with it till it gets requests.
So thank you very much for your
time today thank you before we
get to Senator Kernan real
quickly
Our time line that we're we're
building.
Because LESC is working on the
budget and framework.
And we changed up we're gonna
have to move really quick.
And so I'm gonna give it a
perfect example for the capital
bill everybody knows our
capitals do today tomorrow it
takes four days to rack up that
bill in council we still don't
have the governor's refuse
inexact rex so we we don't know
when that's going to hit we end
in a week and a half.
And so far timely to be pushed
because given what ever changes
we make the house bill two.
That takes about two to three
days for the staff LFC to start
making those changes make sure
the correct putting back in
house bill two and whatever
numbers we can so we got a lot
of work to do we're gonna have
morning committees we worked out
a backwards calendar about how
we're gonna do this I think in
the mornings done what I say
we're going to hear built in the
morning.
Have
you.
So we're gonna have a a language
committee and budget
subcommittee the clock start
going over language so as
members in every every one of us
are getting can I get two
million for this or can I get
this language change for that we
want to either give that
information to don and LFC and
then the LFC is gonna go in
there and they're gonna do a rap
sheet of language comments from
members that they're hearing and
then dollar comments from
members that we're hearing and
then we're gonna have the
subcommittee start reviewing
those those language comments
we'll tell you how much we're
gonna have to to move on in the
budget or where we can move
money around to accommodate some
of that stuff and we'll have
those subcommittees do that we
probably gonna have that have to
have that wrapped up by next
slide Monday Monday or Tuesday.
so they can begin to start.
Putting house bill two together
and then we'll have a data
reviewed in the guy.
I think part of that that plan
is that this committees will
need help yes Russian on that
scenarios that will bring it
back the subcommittee give
direction outside state LFC will
provide to Senate finance for
you all to vote on the recall
one draft these guidelines these
are the fourteen I haven't done
anything yet the differentiate
what hospital to changes to
thank you for recurring changes
such as I special sections.
At eleven for all other spending
half of those and then you will
vote to approve those drafting
guidelines those guidelines what
what's the will take to actually
put together a bill so that
hopefully by Friday we will be
able to have a vote on the bill
so we'll have some committees at
leading up to Wednesday where we
have tracking guidelines on.
Through the fact that lines and
then give LESC a couple of days
to help us put together the
Senate finance committee.
We are gonna have a lot of room
because we do have a hundred
twenty two million dollars.
That we put in the hundreds
diversification Fund so there's
gonna be funding available for
us to appropriate just make sure
the guidelines are you know what
changes of pace in New Mexico
I'll give us an example you know
in palisades Senator Gonzales
will be alright with this no
they talked about having the HM
to go from the bottom of the
village to the top there's other
things that tells wanted read
also is looking at an event
center Gallup once in a guest
discussion part Albuquerque
squawking about a new arena.
so there are things that those
things should change New Mexico
and they can be environment
things.
For station River remediation
we're good with all that.
That's one time money and and so
we need to be very careful in as
we do that so let me everybody's
districts difference from
Senator Rodriguez who has every
restaurant in the world merry
janitors at the court room but
Senator Campos who needs and
stuff in Las Vegas and in and
fish hatcheries of warm water
pitcher has restored the I.
forty.
In center burden on the court I
mean it you may have a new
visitor center by Sandra I don't
know what it could be those are
some of things that we need to
we need to think about and
Senate finance yeah for the
members audience that's not a
feeding frenzy for you.
That's the legislative
appropriation that we're going
to see that that we think is
good for our districts in that
makes New Mexico grow.
You can talk to members all you
want I don't so if that'll make
it on the language but everybody
in this room wants something
from you right now twenty
Senator Kernan.
So as we move forward just be
ready to be overwhelmed and we
have to move quickly in just
because of the time line and and
the system to build the budget
so.
The with that so the two
subcommittees we put together
the budget subcommittee will put
Senator Rodriguez as the chair.
Senator Hemphill Senator Padilla
center share in center was.
And then the language of the
committee will put Senator
Campos as the chair.
Senator Steinborn Senator
Gonzales center Burt Senator
Diamond.
Yeah so if you bring anything
that a language or additional
money change bring it in the
paper and I.
That way we can say who brought
it.
And in those the exact language
so nobody gets confused said I
didn't say that.
Instructed me he noted already
little wonder what these.
I need either a printed out
already but I just want to make
sure that we just need something
important.
We need some for verification
say you email that and you know.
Charles not here but I got an
email from last year from
Charles out of the system like I
don't know what that is to a and
it was year old and for me I
would bring it in the there's a
a sheet in the secretary's
office that has a list for non
that we can just stick it in
there and and that we recognize
it so that's going to be very
critical anybody other questions
about that can.
Any other questions about the
subcommittee's here.
We're all good.
Senator Kernan.
I don't see Senator Ingle in the
room.
What.
So.
Senator Kernan sitting down.
Yesterday Senator Ingalls Bill
we had two men.
So we sent his bill out as
increasing general fund that was
not the intent so we had the
wrong amendment.
And so we need to fix Center
Ingles bill today with the other
amendment we had and so that we
have that here will pass it out.
but that was issues etcetera in
goes down then we can get the
committee report out any other
questions.
One more thing so so we're going
I'll be talking to the execs.
the secretaries.
To make sure we know where
they're at so if they come
asking you for something
different we'll have a
difference of opinion which
usually happens if you're new to
finance everybody wants to ask
you for everything in there's
only so much room but we're
going to see what the exact
secretaries are short and then
we'll have that conversation and
involve committees and so so it
goes.
Any questions there's a lot of
language to look at anchored you
look at language very carefully
sections back in the bill
sections nine and ten are very
important to what's happening
the money's up front in the in
the sections in the back of the
bill.
Okay Senator Kernan thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
and today I have tried the
markets with me as my experts
we're bringing a piece of
legislation that addresses an
amendment to section seven dash
nine dash seventy seven point
one in deals with the New Mexico
gross receipts deduction for
Medicare payments received on
nursing homes and hospices for
health care and palliative care
services to Medicare
beneficiaries legislation
enacted in twenty sixteen
amended this section created
confusion regarding the
continued applicability of the
deduction to nursing homes and
hospice providers New Mexico
health care association
discovered language which
created exposure and liability
of taxes for nursing homes and
hospices.
The New Mexico health care
association drafted the language
before you and work with the
taxation and revenue department
on language before you.
The department of taxation
revenue has to clear this was
the initial intent of the
statute in twenty sixteen before
and after the legislation
introduced in the twenty sixteen
legislative session they agreed
with the recommendation to amend
the same section of law so that
it clearly stated the ability
for nursing homes and hospice
providers to take the G. R. T.
deduction TRD also agreed that
there is no previous liability
owed by nursing homes and
hospice providers and the
exemption should be taken on a
Bank which to make it clear that
this is a valid G. R. T.
deduction can be claimed on
nursing homes and hospice
providers for Medicare benefits
and with that will stand for
questions.
Thank you Senator Kernan anybody
on June in support.
Operator.
Anybody in opposition on them.
You see none in the audience
anybody in support.
Anybody in opposition.
Early we know we're which side
of the aisle we're on yes it is.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And I know that that will not
questions from committee
members.
The second.
Motion for a new passed by
Senator share second by CENTCOM
Campos at call the roll.
Senator Burt yes thank you very
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Diamond.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator share yes Senator share
yes Senator Steinborn yes
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
would use Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
Rodriguez yes and senator Munoz.
Yes.
Eleven yes.
Thank you Senator Kernan thank
you very much meeting.
The
committee recap Center Ingles
bill do want to get somebody up
there.
Did you want to do that the
retirement.
Thank you can give me the actual
bill.
We'll get to the actual bill or
your yeah.
And so what happened yesterday
is is we have an amendment I had
a general fund appropriation on
it and I had another amendment
that didn't have a general fund
appropriation on we were emailed
and sent.
One with the General
Appropration when we should have
had the general fund
appropriation so this ammendment
pass up amendment Richard I
think it's.
Or.
Yes that's correct when we're.
All.
The Singapore Center and cold
ice tea against some.
Your available for you looking
for the capital of the amendment
removes the language center for
the amendment removes
appropriation.
And in this ammendment.
So I I guess what we need to
we'll have to strip the
amendment off that bill and then
replace it with this ammendment
so the amendment that we had
yesterday not the one currently
running.
Operated three hundred forty
five thousand dollars the
general fund that was the wrong
amendment this this ammendment
right here that's an appropriate
any money.
Currently on the magistrate and
judicial retirement money over
the.
Out of the out of the out of the
legislative retirement fund
we've been supporting that
magistrate and judicial we're
gonna put twenty million twenty
million dollars in the J. R.
right retirement pension fund so
they we no longer need to fund
this out of
Out of our legislative
retirement.
So I guess we are on Senate bill
one fifteen one fifteen nineteen
a motion so Mister chair made a
motion to strip the amendment we
apologize for.
Mr chair have a motion to
reconsider we need a motion to
I was reading Senator.
Those two right there the voice.
I have a very important I need a
motion to reconsider.
Motion to reconsider by an organ
donor status have a second by
Senator Diamond.
We're back on the bill.
And then I need to speak I need
a motion to strip the amendment
so move in the second line
center on.
We're back on the bill.
Senator Ingle.
Mr chairman it's if your staff
thinks it needs to be changed as
I made it any of your staff
check with the the.
Richter here that runs the
peril.
And he wrote to me wrote the
other main road other amendment
the other amendment and he put a
general fund appropriations in
the amendment we did okay your
amendment yesterday and your
comments where we did cost any
taxpayer and my money so that
amendment actually took general
fund money and that was the
issue why we had on this front.
They did that because we and I
talked about it in the the phone
has enough in it and then it
will revert back and.
Will you change the twenty
twenty twenty two that's fine
with me.
Objection amendment.
We have a motion to pass on on
amendments four six four point
one.
Our motion and the second
Representative motion second by
Senator Rodriguez.
Any objection to the main thing
that in.
Act on the bill questions on the
bill.
J. two passed again.
Have a motion for do passed by
Senator Gonzales the needs to
get much sooner but the.
And your.
We call the roll.
Thanks
again and but it was on Senator
Burt yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill.
Yes Senator Padilla yes.
Could be a test center here yes
Senator yes Senator Steinborn
yes your Steinborn yes.
Thank you yes Senator Rodriguez
yes Senator Rodriguez yes no
yes.
Is.
Revenue yes on amendment in the
bill.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee R. to take every
time are you still in Senator
Brandt in roles with you and are
they still in rural supposed to
go back it.
I guess back in the three thirty
I wouldn't dare show I'm presume
they are all going look the
meeting.
Yeah easy has a bill here this
one real quick and and etcetera.
The reason.
All right Senator.
Thank you madam chair Senate
bill one seventy two is a return
to work.
E. R. B. retirees.
And it allows them to return to
work without suspending their
pensions for up to thirty six
consecutive months as long as
employee has not worked for the
E. R. B. in the last ninety days
for school system ninety days
prior to their employment the
ninety days prior is what is
current law right now that they
could return but they have to
give up their pension this is to
deal with the teacher shortages
and
Stand around in Dennis rose from
the superintendents association
this is their building brought
forth so what that'll stand for
questions.
The questions have Senator Burt
to get.
Thank you madam chair just is
this specifically for teachers.
This is specifically just for
teachers okay and it has a time
limit on it is that correct it
has a time limit so the a
teacher Rick decides to return
to work they can only do it for
thirty six months.
As long as they have not been
working in in the last ninety
days at any E. are being higher
in institutional anywhere they
can return to work keep their
pension flowing while they're
working for the next thirty six
months okay good so you got an
IDA gap in the they returned for
three years basically so current
okay okay that's all I have
Senator anybody else Senator
Padilla Senator Gonzales next.
And we have Senator Campos let's
go to the effort you madam chair
of sinus thing Campos that was
that okay thank you very much
mentioned so Mister chairman so
on the
so they're drawing their pension
for the thirty six month is
over.
Yes Sir Mr Chairman in center
they can return to work in
receive their pension.
And work up to thirty six months
and then they can't there they
will be able eligible to do it
anymore and then Mr chair madam
chair Mister chairman so are
they are they putting more money
in for those thirty six months
into their into a pair at the
same time to kind of help
balances a little bit.
Miss madam chairman and senator
their money when they are re
employed that will be going rate
into the RB they will not be
here it will not be receiving
that benefit.
There will only be seat
receiving the benefit they
currently eligible for so if I
leave my wife for the best
example she retired she has to
sit out ninety days she comes
back to work she still receives
her pension she gets her salary
and her deduction for her E. R.
B. retirement in her in her
payroll deduction she's not
eligible for any.
Which is still going to pay
still gonna pay and Mr chairman
and and and and do we have any
sense for what.
Well they are drawing their
pension and while they're
getting a salary for the thirty
six months so I can see the
benefit there but do we have any
feedback from teachers and
whatever that my my thing is if
I'm not adding this to my
retirement.
The new Senator a second happen
awhile back if you might recall
with some equipment madam chair
center.
This is been a struggle with the
E. are being parent in return to
work the whole time is is if we
bring somebody back to work and
they're paying that portion in
their pension they're not
eligible in.
If there's no perfect fix to it
it could add additional provide
final three years average salary
if they make become higher level
teacher and they don't want to
spend their there are a.
Their retirement.
So in order to fix that problem
he can come back for thirty six
months and you get your time and
so you can not increase your E.
R. B. retirement if they return
to work instead I'm not all
suspend my pension you have a
new tier level teacher I can
come back to work they get the
new tears and they can have a
higher of finalize what shall
we.
They will not receive their
pension other work they can have
a full plate Mr chairman if I
may interject for a moment just
Senator Gonzales really wants to
make a point on that being an
educator.
Thank you madam chairman of Mr
chairman of the Senator Padilla.
The portion of the return to
work.
Does not approve.
So it doesn't matter to the
base.
But yet they do have a
contribution but it still will
not accrue to the base but I I
appreciate that miss madam chair
Mister chairman Senator that was
really my question I'm just
trying to figure out you know.
To me that they are going to be
receiving to.
Checks every month for our rough
in their rate I'm just wondering
how they're going to feel about
contributing to something that's
not going to the bottom of.
To their bottom line Sen.
I guess it's a personal decision
folks will have to make thank
you thank you senator and we
have Senator Gonzalez again next
Senator so madam chair Mister
chairman of.
The question that I have is
If someone were to decide to
come back.
But only on half time basically.
That it would still be only the
thirty six months.
Mr chairman and senator
I don't think they're eligible
to come back on a part time
basis you have to come back
completely.
All.
Madam chair of the Mr chairman
of.
I think this is something that
all of the members of my
speaker.
Thank you so so not on it is
always okay now it's not the
case there are there is yes.
Representative lo.
I don't know if you saw little.
Just recently also like four
days ago there was a program.
In the internal for calling the.
The new America.
And the addressing the shortage
is and say you know that we do
have a lot of retirees.
Want to come back as we don't
want to come back on a full time
basis.
And you know those are the kind
of adjustment so we have to do
is still some big.
As a new way of addressing
certain issues that we have.
But all the.
I know that for the.
Yes this Mister chair Mister
chairman I just have to hire a
lot of people on the halftime
basically.
Because that's what I needed.
You know and sometimes I have to
individual so would make one
positions so I don't know maybe
we can just.
This is a billable for maybe we
can just go.
You know E. R. B. about that.
That that's an interesting
question that the
superintendents didn't think
about it because you could have
a two part time teachers going
to classroom or working half a
day after that time there I
don't have Mexico would nurses
here where they are the madam
chair all Mr chairman the I was
I even had individual so would
come just for two hours which
was like a quarter.
Yeah so you know.
Hello my question yes thank you
thank you very much for so she
can we just get an answer on
that Mr.
Chairman for get back with
Senator Gonzalez yes all right
thank you good question Senator
already and then
I'm gonna go ahead and go to
Senator Campos and then I'm
gonna go to diamond but I also
have senators to Siah Correa
Hemphill so let's go to Senator
Campos next thank you very much
madam chair and of course
We applaud the sponsor for
bringing this forward but the
question I have records of the
rules and rags and a couple of
things the first is that
when we decide to retired we
seek that permission and so
basically our background is
checked to see if we had been
working at any time during that
the that that period we've been
out and of course rig given
approval
but with that it are there any
conflicts that you can think of
that would go and still created
issue if we're approved to go
ahead and go and
can be employed but at the same
time somewhere down the line the
individual is found to have gone
to work during that period of
time and I'm just asking are
there any rules and rigs that
will we'll complied to this for
a specific piece of legislation.
Madam chair and senator I think
he are be able to determine
those rules that if they work
somewhere else in the prior
ninety days to coming back in
that building email so madam
chair and and Mister chair so
you're indicating that the rules
are going to go and be
promulgated by ERP I think the
the rules are promulgated in the
bill on the back.
On page.
For
Line ten through eleven.
Nine to eleven AM sorry and the
whole key there is to eliminate
any of the conflicts that may
occur with people returning to
work thank you very much.
Senator Gonzales reading the
bill that may be an IRS penalty
that they may have to work full
time they can't work part time
and receive their benefits
otherwise Iraq's.
That violates their statute in
reading the the legislation and
that is in.
Certainly for questions.
Sure the gentleman about all
what happens there is so.
Because they're not be
considered an employee.
Because they still have their
budget from the retirement part
so anyone coming in this part
would be almost like of.
Like a substitute basically.
Okay.
The biggest Senate three year
contract a one year contract
whatever the school did teaching
contract as it usually nine
months so they sign that
contract for service for nine
months many be committed to that
nine months whether they stay or
not is up to them.
chair of the Mr chairman
list things have changed you
know what it used to be is that
all.
But if you were over twenty
hours then it was considered
full time.
So
anyone under you know I mean
that's a state or federal you
can.
In madam chair center I think we
allow them to work up to twenty
five thousand dollars under the
limit currently but if they go
above that and they have to
suspend their pension so that
that language in it I think
there is a bill in prior years
that allow them to earn up to
twenty five thousand and then
once they are in that cap then
they the.
And either suspend their
retirement.
And go to work full time or not
work.
Thank you okay Senator Campos
you still had the do have some
questions that was it I I got I
think you meant okay thank you
Senator Diamond you're next and
then Senator Correa Hemphill
thank you madam chairman and
thank you Mr chairman I think
this is a great job I think is
right on target for getting
teachers back in the classroom
not just teachers but good
quality teachers and experienced
teachers I have heard the same
concerns to Senator Padilla
mentioned though echoed for for
the last couple days and and
really echo this morning at the
school board meeting so.
Mr Chairman having these these
return to work teachers still
having to contribute back into
their retirement their ERP
without any way of ever
accessing the level be a return
on that investment is there any
way that we can create this to
be an even greater incentive by
removing not and I only say that
because it seems like the
workforce shortage is you know
outweighs the financial shortage
of that may cost explain to me
and the.
Currently if an employee wants
to set the out that time frame
and they want to spend their
retirement then they can
increase their retirement
benefit in ERP we're allowing
them to come back to work and
get their retirement but they
have to pay deduction which they
will never increase their E. R.
B.
base then they have to make the
choice.
You want to come back with the
new standards that we passed out
here the other day at a higher
rate and get a final three prior
final three years final average
salary they have to do the
pension schematic to figure out
of if they'll make a better
return on that otherwise this is
only one portion of a problem we
gotta fix and pensions have
always on return to work this is
always been an issue of how we.
The employees want to return to
work and they don't want to
spend their their pension.
How do we hold the pension funds
as sustainable and not having
the conditional on benefit to
employees so that the employees
going to have to choose I think
thank you madam chair it's a
great additional great self I
think it's a good teachers that
system thank you thank you
senator all right senator Correa
Hemphill thank you for your
patience thank you madam chair
thank you chairman for bringing
this important piece of
legislation forward we have over
a thousand teacher vacancies
right now so we this is really
not necessary and I totally
support this however I do want
clarification about whether this
includes ancillary up right
through the bill and I didn't
see where it specifically says
just teachers so our ancillary
providers and administrators
also eligible.
Madam chair center I can answer
that question I'll get you an
answer but I can't answer that
okay all right thank you madam
chair.
thank you Senator Gonzales has
just hand up maybe on that point
he may be able to help Senator
madam chair Mister chairman of
the they do.
In fact that's how it started it
was because of special ed the
shortage in specialist.
Okay thank you for that
clarification madam chair just
one additional thing I do want
to also reiterate that I know
that a lot of retired teachers
want to come back and find like
teacher mentorship which is
really necessary to for creating
that quality educators and so if
if we can add some flexibility
in there to allow teachers to
come back on a part time basis I
think that would be able to find
a lot of teacher mentorship
opportunities in the schools as
well thank you madam chair.
Enter I'm.
Can Senator Gonzales may
remember this but we passed a
bill awhile back where you could
come under come back to work for
pay under twenty five thousand
and I have to suspend your colon
which you could only do it for
certain time I don't I'm not an
expert in teacher Phil I don't
want those pay
will discuss it with the the
superintendents and can see what
language they come up and this
is.
I thank you thank you Senator
Padilla for the second time
thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chairman so I'm still
kind of hung up on the thirty
six months because of this and I
don't know this and I help her
works with the C. R. V. an
average of the high springs.
I I Mr B. as in every pension
fund is based off your final
average salary for the last
three years.
And so it your final average
salary if you're making fifty
thousand a year for the last
three years that's what your
pension is based upon this is
the last three or the high
three.
Last I think it's the last three
I I'm sorry I.
Last I last five years are your
final average salary so as
people move up the ladder do you
think that your highest rate
will be in your your last years
where you should be the highest
at so you get your five years
final average so.
And do we have anything I you
know in the bill or anywhere
else this is what they would
start out with a start on the
baseline again or because we now
have ideally were about to raise
the baseline to fifty sixty and
seventy
I'm just trying to figure out
what is the worst the motivation
going to be here to really want
to get back to because it
because it be great if you were
able to take your last three
thirty six months this is set up
and and add that to your
calculation for your retirement
fund this bill you're not
allowed to do that yeah I know I
know that you but it's up to the
school districts and and what
teacher licensure they have at
their level one two or three
tier so that would be the school
districts setting their pay on
their based upon their teacher
licensure and then the you know
if they have a master's degree
in there they're gonna teach P.
then there's additional paid the
thank you madam chair Mister
chairman I and again with over a
thousand vacancies I think we
need all of the above solution
here and this is definitely a
great one thank you.
Thank you senator good points
Preciado third party okay and
then I know Senator Gonzalez I
was ready for a motion but we
need to there's been a little
bit of a of a man of his
confusion or maybe something
happening that I understand
there may be or may not be
somebody on soon we to for
public comment we need to do
that is there anyone at all
I was brought in note that there
may be some when soon if not
maybe they it was from the back
to last bill or something I
don't know if I wanted to make
sure we get public comment if
there's anyone who wants to
speak.
Not enough okay he's that are is
the master here's indicate
there's no one reason their hand
so how about in person do we
have any public comment from
anyone okay visit
the committee marks head of the
council university presidents
and we've also looked at Mr
around he could be here today if
something came up but we support
this legislation does get
teachers back into the classroom
and like the chairman said is
that they can to spend their
retirement if they choose to and
build their retirement percent
on from that point so when
you're when you're tired of your
be you get seventy five percent
of the top five they come back
insurers to to suspend that they
can build up to eighty eighty
five ninety ninety five and up
and so that's that's that's a
decision they can choose to make
for they get their retirement
and then the rate of the into
the fund which helps with the
side of the solvency of the fund
chair members thank you okay
thank you mark comments let's
get all fallen support anyone
else's part of this bill.
Thank anyone against.
Okay no one again so far so do
we have a motion to set aside
just a little.
Okay there's a motion to set
aside a second from Senator
Korea Hemphill
all in favor signify by saying
aye.
The post.
Yes thank you thank you senator
with this.
We have a.
Senator.
If they were going to go on to
Senator Brandt and we've got
Senate bill thirty four the wet
of shooting that does not sound
like a good title.
Senator.
Thank you madam chair and
I'll explain the bill for just a
minute.
it started
With the.
Education Committee meeting that
we had asked to.
we're students as well as the
security personnel from the
schools brought this issue to
our attention as an LFC.
That if someone threatens.
to blow up the school first
place above the screen it's
crime.
But if someone calls in a
shooting threat to a school it
is not a crime in New Mexico.
One of the only states that is
not a crime to do that.
So law enforcement has no.
The ability to go out and
investigate it because they can
only investigate a crime.
so this started out as a felony.
we tried to period you know make
it exactly like the bomb threat
in the Judiciary Committee I
think they wisely change this to
a misdemeanor.
It still allows for law
enforcement to get involved.
but it doesn't make it a felony
and I think that was a wise
decision so I actually plan to
keep it that way
and the reason it was sent to
this committee is because when
it was a felony it would have a
financial impact on the budget
now that it's a misdemeanor it
actually doesn't have a
financial impact on the budget
so I talked to senator Wirth
about moving it to another
committee he said now just good
take the finance
that way it's got its to
committees and since it was
already scheduled we side to
leave it here but want to bring
it to you let you know it has
been changed to a misdemeanor we
change the wording a little bit
that was omitted Judiciary.
and basically we added the.
Of it new do that says whoever
commits.
Making a shooting threat is
guilty of a misdemeanor
and so it took it out of the
realm of felony so.
With them and I think that
explains it pretty well
It allows law enforcement to get
involved but doesn't put anyone
in jeopardy of a felony.
understand of that.
This type of law applies to
adults.
It really so if if the students
that's been one of the big
concerns with this bill over the
years that if a student wants to
call in.
Well then they that gets kicked
over to the juvenile system and
we always hope that the juvenile
system is going to get that
student to counseling they need
and those kind of things that
they need what we know from has
to is that it was actually an
adult who used to be a student
at the school.
Who had made shooting threats to
the school.
Nothing could be done because it
wasn't crying and eventually
that person acted out on those
threats of course when they
acted out on the threats then
it's a crime.
But there was nothing that could
be done to intervene.
Before he came until the
students at Aztec high school
and so that's why they asked
that we bring this bill up and
bring it for three or four years
this is the furthest we've
gotten where we got Judiciary to
say let's make these tweaks and
we got some.
Thank you with that Mr chairman
I yield.
Many on and for.
And make sure we're gonna run
our time or.
So you have the one minute thank
you Mr chairman and members the
committee this is Katie.
Speaking on behalf the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
point seven thirty four this is
one of those bills we really
wish he didn't eight but we do
it and we absolutely these crime
threatening mass violence and
makes you.
In fact we think it should be
for the family is originally
intended to
on the stand previous you need
to stop.
The cavalier possession slightly
farms in our state is one of the
biggest crime problems we face
seventy every tool to stop
whether that cracking down on
those requirements to just log
transactions or appropriately
criminalizing.
We urge the committee to support
the system thanks thank you.
Thank you.
Of the else on them anybody in
opposition
Not anybody in the office in the
audience's support.
Anybody in opposition.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator yes.
Thank you Mr chairman yeah let
me sure.
Often one time the FIR that you
have the LFC FIR shows it so no
one fiscal impact but if you
look at our Senate finance.
list.
That is the first off.
The LFC has.
F. I already came out today this
is not our binders of the the
FIR fiscal is twenty four to
forty eight.
Could process.
And this is just another
instance where LFC is
overwhelmed with other.
The reason that we.
Okay Mister chairman thank you
and thank you.
In New Mexico thank.
Your bill's thank.
Whenever Johnson I do want to
make sure that he gets you she
just explained yes yes thank you
can to make sure all employees
what's that twenty four.
In the table.
The end of C. dated.
That would be to the school.
The cost on our.
Forty
one PED forty eight million.
Twenty four thousand to forty
thousand.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator yeah I know you've been
working on this for a while I
was with you when we went in we
were in Aztec several years ago
and and we can walk through the
school and we saw the
devastation there and and
what occurred or walked to the
scene and and everything and I
think that community has done a
beautiful job of supporting its
children and taking care of
their
emotional well being over the
issue that occurred in the whole
town Ingle town got behind
turning the town around on that
particular matter and there's so
many other wonderful things that
happen in a staff you know we
should know them for other
things as well absolutely not
beautiful ravine it goes right
through the middle of town.
But Mr chairman and and senator
I think philosophically I'm
trying to figure out what we
really trying to accomplish here
because I would almost rather us
air on the side of.
As many.
Calls as possible verses maybe
maybe philosophically maybe
slowing the the the or for
making folks nervous about
calling and I guess I'm just
trying to figure out what we're
trying to accomplish.
I I guess I'm not Mr Chairman
center I'm not understanding the
concern.
if if a student calls in so
let's stick with schools and
says whatever we get stuck on
understand this applies to any
public building including this
building.
someone called so they're gonna
break bring a aren't kill
everyone of us is not a crime
state New Mexico.
Just so let's but let's that was
school so that's what everyone
likes to focus on.
if a student calls and says my.
Last eight said that he is going
to bring a gun that's in has no
fear he would not be under any
criminal penalty under this.
He is relaying a threat that is
in his throat he's not
threatening he's leading the
school know that there's a
threat.
I think that's what you're
talking about.
I don't think what you're saying
is if a student is threatening
to come and bring a gun that we
should do nothing about I do not
think that you would make that
kind of state at all so.
But under current law right
that's one thing I don't think
that that's what you're trying
to say so I'm just trying to
clarify so I'm understanding
correctly
but under current law nothing
could be done to the students.
There's literally no.
Nothing that law enforcement can
do they can't go and say you
know your student made this
threat or your child made this
threat to the parents and so
we're going to get there your
child the help they need.
There's nothing they can do to
force that intervention under
current law.
With this there would be because
they would there would be a
crime has been committed.
So they would be able to
actually intervene.
Representative currently they
can't do a thing out can school
if they can figure out who it is
yes.
The law enforcement is saying
look there's not a crime so we
can't even investigate the help
you figure out who this.
Because we're only allowed to
investigate crimes Sir job to
investigate crimes.
So we can't even help you figure
that that's your job now
sometimes if they're in a
community where there's
resources are stretched
extremely thin they may be able
to help out but they don't have
to if there's no crime committed
so this makes it a crime to make
that threat.
Now we all assume those threats
are being made again I think
aronie Asli we assume they're
being made by students.
In the situation aspect that was
not a student I was an adult in
situations across the country
that's been adults.
And students.
But for some reason we always
want to focus on the student
side and I think that's because
we're concerned about the
effects on the students I am to
I want the students to get the
help they need the intervention
that they need we cannot force
that intervention if there's
nothing they've done is wrong in
our state I hope that explains
why I'm doing this it helps
really does Mister chairman
Senator thank you I haven't
heard you give this presentation
before I recommend maybe you did
I did a couple years ago I think
in education or someone about
this I'm not sure I think you
went there
Are you modeling this at all on
other parts of the country or
something that you saw that was
successful or is this is a state
Craig Brandt original I want to
make sure I understand where
this came from also Mr Chairman
center I'm not seeing any model
language on this
when I've talked to.
In the past.
And and I understand every time.
The the PS changes every time
someone changes I get a
different opinion they feel like
the best way to do this was the
type to bomb threats.
I in my analysis for more
analysts I think they put in a
California
law that as I've looked at a
like languages and that they
don't have it in their bomb
threat area so
This seems to be the most
logical place to put it.
When I had as a felony.
I'm here now to be honest with
this committee as to whether
that is the best place to put
it.
but that's where this so I'd
like to move forward and
continue to work with with
Senator work phone at the we're
talking we can tweak if we need
to he's supposed to be getting
his opinion to me on it but he's
tied up right now in rules and
so we have been working Mr
chairman and senator so the last
question I had is are you aware
of the fiscal impact changes to
the new analysis and and can you
tell us how you feel about this
I am now.
so it looks like it's twenty
four to forty eight thousand
not really sure.
Why I guess because we're adding
something that they would
investigate where they would
look at
I was told by the finance
committee that by taking it from
a felony to a misdemeanor there
wouldn't be a physical impact so
so I'm a little confused but
that's okay it's it's very
minimal.
Appreciate it Mr chairman so
soon as it comes and I'm sure
we'll just take a look at it
will probably still be here so
thank you thank you Mr.
And.
So.
Thank you Mr chair just two of
Senator previous point there if
we look at the bill on the on
the first page of cases making a
bomb scare consist of falsely
and maliciously stating B. says
making a shooting threat consist
of falsely and maliciously
stating.
So it and then it describes a
little bit different between a
fireman all.
But it's the same words that
we've had since nineteen seventy
five we just replaced bomb with
file.
Otherwise I mean there's a
couple of things in here we've
added shooting threat over bomb
but.
But this isn't.
Somebody dropped this up in
nineteen seventy five and it
stood since the.
That.
Sure thank you Mr chairman and
and thank you Senator Brandt
knows the mother of two young
daughters to go to public school
every single day I really have
one job that is far superior to
anything else over doing that
let this life and that is a god
given responsibility to provide
and protect for my kids at all
time and I feel like I'm a
subcontract that duty out to a
school during the day and it's
the scariest thing that a parent
will do every single day the
interesting thing here is you
are is is that the threats that
are often coming from the
schools are you know we have
consequences for bomb threats
but the reality is we don't read
and watch on the news a lot of
school bombings the sad reality
is is there's a number of school
shootings which is heartbreaking
and so to hold individuals who
threaten our kids not just my
own that New Mexico students
responsibility is absolutely
something that I take serious I
think any of us as parents can
say is that if someone
approached us directly and
threatens to kill or harm our
child you know what and natural
instinct in us would be to to
prevent out to protect their
children at all costs and so we
need to do whatever we can to
hold us accountable hearing this
I just want to thank you for for
bringing this forward I also you
mentioned something that really
resonated with me on opening day
when we had the protesters in
the house and that's how
vulnerable we are as legislators
in this building and to hear
that if someone threatened to
come shoot up this building is
not the crazy this is not an
impossible thought and that
there would be zero consequences
for them to come here and do
something horrific is also very
scary we don't have anything on
the books to just protect us
from that threat so this is long
overdue thank you for thank you
for thinking of not just us but
more importantly the kids out
there so thank you.
We have members make sure the
right.
By our.
We're.
No it does not.
Not just related.
No this is what always comes up
Mr chairman everyone thinks of
school first because that's what
we see mostly
you know when you and I were in
school bomb threat was a very
common thing I don't remember
how many times I got out of
school because of a bomb threat
that seem to always be on final
state I don't know why
but nowadays shooting threat is
the in thing
and so everyone always related
to school it's it did come from
that but it applies to every
building price to any public
building mall.
Your anyway.
Senator.
Senator yeah you and I we.
This bill one from public
affairs I think we work on
together I try to help improve
back then but
It's funny I read it today
differently and I don't know if
it's the same language or it's
differently but and I think I've
narrowed down where in the bill.
I think.
The language needs some work.
I know what you're trying to do.
And
So obviously you know I've had a
bill memorial on to work on
setting school violence with
guns and.
That was interesting episodes
but
You know if on page what what
I'm worried about this bill the
current language Mr chair.
Is it the language is different
from be from may there's there's
some extra words in the that I
think need to be looked at and
that is adding the words online
twenty two.
The person making the threat.
So what I worry about is it kind
of inferences he's a secondhand
report not just the person
making the threat but
referencing a different person
making a threat and that to me
sounds like it I report.
So this is going to shoot up the
school.
If that if that.
Gets to provide and somehow
false or malicious then this
that could be prosecuted
reported pretending to actually
do something good report
somebody else's actions as
opposed to you know I'm the one
that's actually done it but this
language is in here.
The person making the threat
referring to that other person I
think creates a problem the
unintended problem and I thank
you Mr chairman and senator you
you should be on Judiciary
because we're to fix that.
That's actually been taken out
if you look in the amendment
from the Judiciary Committee
on the page one line twenty
three strike for another person
and that was the exact reason
that that was taken out I don't
know
you know how sometimes drafting
doesn't get exactly what you're
wanting that was caught in there
so that has been taken out so it
wouldn't referred to that third
person which I think is your
concern.
Well
Mr chair no it actually doesn't
it's the it's the words the
person making the threat.
It's not even the words or
another person I know that was
taken out.
But it's making a shooting
threat.
Lists the savior of the person
that the person making the
threat.
Again those words refer to
something second hand you're
referring to the person making
the threat as opposed to make
your you're the one making the
threat I think still has the
same problem getting the words
or another person that made made
it worse so.
I think that needs to be fixed I
don't know maybe that's my read
on this I have to keep reading
it but.
It's anyway I'll just provided
it at that and I think that's an
unintended.
We have to restart not.
Here in center provide more I
come up.
Sure.
Yes we have that so thank you
Senator.
Candelaria.
We got.
Yes Mr chair the Senate
judiciary I believe removes the
word this where.
One other person and I believe
they also removed.
The person making the threat
didn't didn't.
Does the okay I'm gonna do
mistaken funds.
Poses during my.
What else is on.
Is there.
Yes my concern for I think I
feel Mr chair Senator Sir that
the language preceding or
another person kind of a similar
to or another person that when
we say that the person making
the threat refers to another
person meeting that if you were
the one reporting another
percent well or this case the
person making the threat which
would be the same as another
person as I read it.
That basically you could be
reporting something with best of
intentions but if someone
determines that to be.
Malicious or false it's not just
about the person making the
threat it's the person reporting
the person making the threat
that's how I read that language.
The person making the threat.
It's not it's not first hand
it's referring to someone else
that's how I read it.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn
I.
I think the what I guess what I
would say is I'm not sure that
that those words necessarily do
Implicate some of the making a
report about what someone else
might do but after the
Removal of for another person.
I think you're correct that
those words there's no reason
for them to be in there still.
Other than to make them more
confusing and less clear thank
you and so thank you for that
and so my point is Mr chair the
last thing we want to do is have
the opposite impacted putting a
chill on people.
Coming in because they could be
persecuted granted I'm sure you
know malicious and false or high
probably legal standards have to
be proven in order to be
prosecuted but nonetheless I get
what you're at I just think the
language used to continue to be
tweaked on and on.
I'd definitely be more
comfortable if we made sure we
were absolutely precise before
we voted on and passed it out of
the committee but but that's
that's my preference about the
chair thank you very much thank
you Michelle and I would just
ask one of the things Mr chair
Senator you madam is not
intended for children and that
it's intended to be done out
that the adult level but the FIR
says that children likely would
be the ones prosecutors that's
what Senator FOR.
There is.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for bringing this
forward as a school psychologist
I guess my my main concern here
is how we often will react with
punitive methods to try to
control behavior or motivate
behavior in a certain way and I
I work with a lot I've this is
my twenty eighth year in
education I work with a lot of
students over the years children
with serious emotional and
behavioral challenges and I work
with a lot of kids who have
threatened
just.
Montanus Lee made threats
whether they intended to follow
through or not but my concern is
if we are only responding in a
punitive way and I'd like to
hear what your thoughts are how
does that.
Make.
The safer make our community
safer if people are charge them
with a misdemeanor for making
those threats do you have data
to show that that would actually
creates a steeper community.
Mr chairman Sir no I don't have
any data
I I really consider this more of
common sense.
What we're doing now has been
working.
we're having more and more
shooting threats you hear about
it constantly on the news if you
want to go over for Kenya's and
they don't get it in your area.
But you know at least weekly.
The school is shut down because
of shooting threat.
that's why the focus goes goes
back to schools.
Because that's what happens the
most I think the maliciously in
in the bill which again is a
German law that's been used
since the seventies actually
it's been used
well look at my analysis about
three hundred years the term
goes back in black's law
dictionary
and so I think that protects
against a lot of that what
you're talking about I also
understand that the the DA.
Business early gonna charge
someone every time this happens
we're gonna work with the school
if they can get intervention
before
you know they're probably only
going to and and again.
It's it's hard to know it
depends on who your DA is.
But they don't really like
charging a lot of kids with
anything.
I'm sure they're gonna try to
work with you as a school
counselor but this gives teach
I'm sorry school psychologists
there's a huge difference or
didn't mean to us to move you
as a school psychologist to
going to work with you to try to
figure out where the
interventions we can give to the
student before we take it down
this path but it does give teeth
to it for you to be able to say
look they could charge you but
we're not going to.
We're trying to work with you
and get you the help right now
you don't have that you don't
have that ability nor does law
enforcement have that ability so
maybe in your school situation
you found a way to deal with the
US but around the state they
have not
Mr chairman and senator are you
saying that you believe that the
root cause of our increased
shooting incidences or threats
of shooting is really because we
don't have enough laws.
No I'm saying that the this
particular act so threatening.
The crime until they actually
shoot up the school.
We're actually bring a gun to
school just threatening to do so
is not a crime.
I think we have a lot of other
crying built a lot of other
crime laws when it comes to
shootings that aren't being
enforced but that's getting onto
a whole new different subject
and I know that the chair
doesn't want you wasting
Committee.
Thank you Mr chairman for that
response I guess my only concern
is the.
The tendency to respond to the
situations like that just with
punitive methods and not really
addressing the root causes and
often if we respond only with
punitive
consequences we can exasperated
problem and it doesn't really
address
that the issue It doesn't solve
the problem it's just it can
contribute to the problem so if
we have a child who's
threatening to sue shoot up the
school because they don't feel
part of.
Their community or their angry
at a teacher you're not really
solving not helping that child
solve that problem but you're
creating a bigger problem
because now there.
Dealing with an additional
stressor or misdemeanor charge
or threat of that and not really
helping the child get to the
place where they could actually
solve their issue could solve
their conflict.
Mr chairman right now there's no
recourse.
There's nothing you can do about
it all you can't force anything
they could threaten every day to
kind of shoot up your school you
can't do that come thing under
the current law Mr chairman I
would say that you can
absolutely offer counseling
services and other interventions
to reverse you can't force
anything so I guess we'll have
to respectfully disagree on
that.
but they could do it over and
over again and you can't force
anything you can offer the
counseling you can even try to
force the counseling is a school
district but as soon as the
appearances show we were it's
illegal.
I'm gonna sue the school.
There's there's no more
conversation as you know.
And so
that's why this law needs to be
put in place there needs to be
some T..
To the situation where someone
is calling in and threatening to
kill the students in your
school.
When you have to go into
lockdown for those kids in a
classroom and traumatized every
student in that school because
there's been a threat.
That should be a crime.
And it's not.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yes Sir.
So I can put it in the.
For the past six.
I have.
So.
Trying to.
Trying to figure out how we how
we get to the door.
Thank you Mr meters an
honorable.
You're just basically summons
for.
The judge orders packaging or
something.
The people correct.
Yeah
we're trying to really do in the
school shooting practice.
Right at the language.
I could be in the water for the
full.
The.
Which means a minute over here.
Follow the NMAA.
So.
Really trying to deal with Mark
Hughes are in what's happening
in real time in New.
Eighteen year old.
So so Mister chairman that is
one target of this bill.
Early in in in your situation
where two guys are shooting pool
and thank you Matt the
malicious.
Thanks so so there's you have to
meet that level which again is
well established over three
hundred years of precedents in
law.
So you know that you have to
meet that threshold it's it's so
when you're shooting pool and
you're joking around you tell
your body you know Hey man you
very me in this game despite the
strong voice are
now.
That doesn't reach that
threshold I don't think anyone's
ever going to be charged for
that.
yes schools are one and one
intention yeah we just had a
shooting and skip synagogue.
Last month.
It happens.
How many threats have been made
to synagogues.
Now in Texas it was a crime to
threaten to shoot up a synagogue
in New Mexico it's not.
Mexico is not a crime to
threaten to shoot this building.
Now the act.
Like brought again here and
actually started shooting
obviously that's a crime it's a
little too late.
To do any kind of interventions
to little too late to stop it.
I guess we're saying it's not
the non arrest herbal offense
and maybe if you go back to the
judiciary and talked them into
making up with the then it would
be rest of all the.
We have to start somewhere.
It.
Yes Sir.
Many new they really were
different for it is.
Going into the school in the
fall.
Last year there there.
That should never be about
especially for education K.
state.
the state.
Never we are.
Think that anybody that anybody.
Mr.
We can limit This some way it's
a to shin really from.
That's.
This.
But it's not.
It was.
I don't know that.
Or not.
So so Mister chairman.
The reason the screen comes up
is because they always bring it
up everyone always brings up
schools right away because
honestly when I think we would
all agree when we hear shooting
throughout the first thing we
think of as a school.
We don't think of the synagogue
we don't think of the church we
don't think of the mall we first
think of the school because
that's the most common place
pretty much anything involved or
So it doesn't actually say in
the title anything about school
threats.
I did try by the way what you're
suggesting.
A couple years ago I think
that's the one that Sir
Steinborn is remembering that
went through public affairs that
we worked on in public affairs
it was narrowed to school.
We're trying to tie it to the
bomb threat because it's the
same type of trauma is the to
the same type of situation.
That that's the reason it's
under the bond for this reason
it's here and it's a and it.
It is.
Applicables there is the right
word to every situation.
Thank.
What are.
thank you for and that this
other with.
Senator
I think it's clear that up what
I was what we were kind of
occurring on earlier so like to
run it by you in the committee.
and this is basically just to
make it very clear that this is
just first person person making
the threat this is who we're
talking about we're not talking
about secondhand kind of stuff
I'll just read the making of a
shooting threat this is on page
one starting line twenty one
making a shooting threat
consists of falsely and
maliciously change we're stating
to communicating.
Also in this week's maliciously
communicating to another person.
Strike that the person making
the threat with an intention.
To bring a firearm or property
so I'll read the whole thing has
changed.
making making a shooting threat
consists of falsely and
maliciously communicating.
To another person and intention
to bring a firearm to a property
for use the firearm with the
intent to.
We have to read it again.
Can you explain to bring that to
to us so.
Make sure the sponsor and.
Mr is a little bit of a
modification on what the F. I.
R. suggested to.
on page three and actually I
think I like what you did a
little bit better what they're
suggesting because you took out
in order to intimidate that
person
because it's more of an intent
to intimidate.
The you're the one in the
facility not and just one
individual is that where you're
really my intent it's just
clicked it's it's it's it's just
clarifying.
Mr chair says clarifying that.
That it's.
The threat that the violation
here's the person making the
threat that's all that you're
it's a direct communication not
it removes the language about
the person making the threat it
just says communicate player so
do you want to speak to that Sir
at all or.
The.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn
The.
The idea is I understood it was.
There to take a some superfluous
words
Can cause confusion nearly.
that person
the person so the idea here.
Maybe another way to to say it
would be
making a shooting threat
consists of falsely and
maliciously communicating to
another person one's own
intention.
to bring a firearm.
To a property.
Just the my understanding is the
ideas just to make it abundantly
clear that this only applies to
threats the person makes about
their own intention and not of
about other people's.
They're saying this in writing
from the chair if you can.
Okay.
Many from staff.
The.
Senator on the amendment and in
I guess we can draft an
amendment.
And bring it back to to provide
its the new Judiciary.
So Mister chair just of the
question to the amendment
The the person intends to bring
a firearm to a property or use
the firearm.
Well.
Bring firearms a lot of places
I'm bringing a firearm to the
range it's not a threat to
anybody I'm bringing a firearm
to my house from the store.
So I'm I I I get that but the
real thing is I need to use it
on you not that I have that.
Mr chair
Senator I think you bring up
another point that the amendment
doesn't deal with that issue
that stress and that's existing
wording of it that the amendment
doesn't even deal with the
amendment the I'm proposing just
kind of cleans up that is the
person making the threat that is
the violator but you bring up
another good point I think
that's problematic that would
benefit from having a little
more work and work.
And then I have one question
chairman John this more question
I guess.
So if we change it language what
if they make some you know
Facebook works right kids are
in Snapchat or Facebook or
whatever.
And someone sees that they want
to make a threat this is
happened right.
Dissidents they see the threat
so does that amendment.
Wipe that off the record so.
That's a question right because
electronic kids chattered
through electronic devices
they're not.
Home on the phone my kids Hey it
handy talk someone only again on
Snapchat.
In so does that eliminate that
John is Joan is my expert
witness.
Well charge Republican caucus
for that do you have a billing
account and address will take
care of.
Mr chair and members of the
committee
I think it's part of what you
said is the.
The other part of your question
Mr chair I believe is yes
if a kid sis on Facebook the
another kid intends to shoot.
And then the kids use.
saw the intention communicates
that.
I don't the I believe the answer
is yes that could is not looking
at exposure however the simple I
believe brings up a potential
other concern which is
You know the when you read the
statute you at least to me the
natural first thing that comes
to mind is of someone calling
into a school or something like
that.
But
As written I believe the statute
would make it.
The crime to communicate the
intention even and.
Contexts where the school would
never be informed right so if we
could put it on Facebook.
The school wouldn't necessarily
ever receive the communication
and but it would still be a
crime as long as there is a
communication or statement of
the intention to do that thing.
so that.
Sort of it a separate issue but
I just want to raise it because
it was.
Senator Brandt twenty.
You see the issues that we
brought up Mr chairman I do
You know the and the attention
of judiciary's changes which are
all the lawyers.
Was to what was to also clean up
that we're wouldn't.
Go on the third person who's
reporting that someone else made
a threat
they felt like the language they
propose did.
And now I'm confused.
So.
Because
Well.
As you know I'm not an attorney
and I did not sleep at all of
the in last night so it doesn't
make you smart as well.
Or is.
Yeah Senator let me ask you this
since we have a better turning
them Judiciary does.
In their entire person
membership.
Do you want to get with John and
in center Steinborn it and
address our concerns of the
amendment I know we're gonna be
back here in the morning.
but to do that if that's the
will of the committee.
I think it's important that we
kind of get right and means we
do one thing it and.
Kids live on electronic world
and it takes it out of it right
we're trying to do is trying to
address an issue that.
The nineteen seventy six lost
still has land lines and pay
phones still put ten cents.
In that issue and and I think
that's the best thing to do for
us to do is try to figure that
out on the we do have better
attorneys but I want to make
sure we get it right is so you
don't end up on the floor in
this building discussion of.
Is it do this or does not do
that so.
You're right with that.
Make a law we need to make sure
the laws right for put on the
books we have any other comments
on the amendments that we want
to see our.
You so you you you know John
Miller.
What our intentions were no
questions were in the committee.
And then I think we're coming
back tomorrow morning.
if John if you get that get with
the center branch in in draft
those amendments to get the
council drafters amends make
sure that we're thinking correct
and.
And then we'll start again in
the morning.
That fact thank you Mr percent
thank you.
I think that's it I don't know
if we're going to the floor not
I haven't seen it for.
With the the I think they're
still going.
It.
Chairman.
They're on the finger on the
first level.
Six.
Capital outlay in.
The sixty.
If you.
So.
That margin growing.
