A New Jersey and County.
Mr chair bill share senator from
district one which is San Juan.
Campos thank you very much Mr
chairman of state senator Pete
Campos representing all or parts
of seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico and that
Senate district eight it's
always great to be here thank.
Thank you Mr chairman that
senator Michael Padilla
Representative southwest
question Bernalillo county very
very happy to bring it this work
done finally let's get that
here.
Thank you Mr chairman I am
Senator Siah Correa Hemphill
from Senate district twenty
eight I Representative Grant
County catching County most of
Socorro County.
Chair and everybody else welcome
I'm senator Jeff Steinborn from
central Los crucis all the way
to the Sierra County line.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman of
state senator of a little Bobby
J. one son is representing
district six up from Los Alamos
Rio Arriba something in this
box.
Good morning I'm Nancy Senator
Nancy Rodriguez from Santa Fe
district twenty four thank you
morning George we know some from
Senate district for an ever
present small McKinley and San
Juan county counties we're gonna
get started we do have.
Zoom on we had.
Then vice chairman let you chair
and present the bill okay we
don't have anybody.
And then we can go to the
audience to support.
Go ahead.
Q..
Good morning to our presenters
good morning Senate bill one and
with me I have a Senator Duhigg
with me also signed on on the
transparency issue and and
she'll help us discuss that I
think Senate bill forty eight
which is now Senate bill one in
the special session has been
well vetted and and projects are
put in the transparency issue
has been resolved with some
language which is in the back of
the bill
and so these are the house
projects and the Senate projects
combined together
in everybody knows whether
projects are we verified and we
know.
I don't I didn't ever see a
transparency issue with this.
I think that we're well placed
in projects in people's
districts that knew what their
constituents wanted and where
the needs were New Mexico.
and it was well vetted
In the legislative process came
along you guys legislators we
all represent different areas we
all know there's different needs
in every single area in the
state of mind for domestic
violence in police vehicles and
so those are too high priorities
in my district that were
underserved that helps us get
money into our districts for
those needs that don't get
capital outlay capital outlay is
not operational money.
The general fund money is
operational money and so these
are very important projects that
had to happen within each
district and with that I'll feel
for my.
Want to talk about.
Thank you so much Senator Duhigg
thanks for all your work thank
you madam chair so yes so if you
turn to the the back of the bill
the last provision provision is
going to be a temporary
provision so it it only applies
to the special
And I'll just I'm just gonna
read it not withstanding the
provisions of section two dash
three dash thirteen NMSA
nineteen seventy eight and
legislative joint rule twelve
dash one the Legislative Council
so shall publish on legislative
website a searchable list of the
probation contained in this act
as a pass the legislature the
name of each legislator who
allocated portion of the
appropriation and the amount of
the verified allocation
volitional be published no
earlier than the day after the
governor signed this act and no
later than thirty days after
treatment of the third special
session of the fifty fifth
legislature so what this
language does is it creates a
transparency provision for this
bill that looks a lot like what
we see with capital outlay where
LCS produces the searchable list
of of all the allocations the
names and how much each
individual legislator gave to
each project so it's going to
look very familiar based on what
we've done it with capital
outlay and then and and as I
noted this is a temporary
provision applies to this bill
online my understanding is that
there's there's an agreement
that going forward it will work
on an overall approach to
transparency Hey as it relates
to junior funds
but you want as as Mr chair
noted our talk about general
appropriations it's it's kind of
a different animal and we're
talking about capital outlay so
we just want to make sure that
we approach that in in a really
thoughtful way of we're also
getting input from.
Senate finance and house
appropriations and LFC and all
of you who know a lot more about
how these appropriations work
than than someone like me who's
who's not on any of those
committees the other thing to
note with the shape perfect
practice that transparency
provision is that nothing no
information will be released
until after the bills signed by
the governor so she doesn't know
who's projects are whose when
she's doing that signature and
then they have until thirty days
after treatment but frankly if
she were to sign the bill
tomorrow and LCS could get that
list out five days from now they
would be able to release that
information earlier than thirty
days if if if they so chose.
Mr chair thank you senator Hank
did you have more to add to
Senator one else.
I think we've covered the bill
we passed out during the thirty
day and and pretty much minor
language changes on the Senate
side that we're making
adjustments there was some
authorizations that they had
scored as non reoccurring that
they moved to reoccurring by the
executives comments there's one
common that we still haven't
figured quite figured out we're
trying to figure that out
and so
We think will stand for
questions okay thank you very
much Senator Manasa Center
Duhigg I understand that there's
no one and soon but I'll call
for that once again is there
anyone on zoom that may want to
make a comment.
For on this bill Senate bill
one.
There's no one to confirm all
right then we're gonna go to the
committee and in the committee I
had sent the share and we're
going to need to go to the
audience oh sorry thank you
thank you the audience yes I was
going to at the end and no it's
good to do it now anyone in the
audience for the bill.
Or against the bill.
Thank you madam chair we've got
a text message that the
foundation for open government
has their hand raised hello who
owns them I didn't sing
okay is this present we do have
a Shannon this is.
Okay there is too is that if he
or she should.
Okay thank you yes Shannon are
you there on soon.
Want to give you an opportunity
to speak Shannon Kunkle okay.
Can you hear me yes thank you
Shannon you can.
Current members of the committee
I'm mission in Congo and the
executive director of the New
Mexico foundation for open
government and we just wanted to
say that we stand in strong
support of this transparency
provision and really appreciate
the efforts to ensure that the
public understands which
lawmakers are supporting which
projects and we think that this
is a really great staff for good
governance.
Okay thank you thank you very
much Shannon for that anything
else.
Okay thank you very much for
that information for your
comments and is there anyone
else on zoom now semester
Meister that we work on no okay
thank you very much okay now
we're going to go on Senator
from the committee unless or
someone else I want to ask Miss
again in the audience wants to
speak.
Okay I don't see any hands so
now we're going to go on to
Senator shares Senator Padilla
and then Senator Gonzalez and
then Senator Burt thank you.
Thank you madam chair I'm just a
based on what we heard a minute
ago on page six of wind eight
nine and ten.
that's the the money for the
rail runner I move that to that
we strike that strike everything
on late line eight nine and ten.
Six six.
Nine eight nine and ten section
ten.
There's a motion on the floor do
we have a second.
Okay there's a second for
Senator Woods thank you senator
and
This have a roll call on this
thank you Sen Chris hello.
discussion yeah of course thank
you thank you.
Yes Senator we have Senator one
second just many names here
Senator Steinborn okay just bear
with me a little bit because I
have like six names all right so
why don't we go on to discussion
on the motion K. and we have
The names that I have where they
actually for the bill no one
indicated whether it was for the
motion I would think they were
on the bill that's for the
little confusion as so why don't
we go anyone here on the bill
okay okay fine so but we have a
motion already and the second
for discussions so we're going
to go to the on the bill to not
on the motion.
Okay fine so on the motion that
was just made then we're going
to have Senator Steinborn and
they were gonna go back to with
there's no one else on this
motion we're going to go back to
the bill after that we have the
others thank you.
Thank you madam chair so.
What this amendment seeks to do
for those that are less the to
remove a million dollars
specifically for the purposes of
reducing the fares of the rail
runner Transurban.
And
I guess Mr chair I know madam
chair Mister chair I mean I know
that you know you said that
there is a balance for.
For the rail runner and the
question I asked that I mean I
would love a concrete.
Answer to is is that restricted
money are we talking apples and
oranges here what they're able
to use their budget for at that
reserve they have as opposed to
what we are appropriating
morning for which is to
basically subsidize lower fares.
yes just say that question again
sure madam chair Mr chair so
what the amendment seeks to do
is remove one million dollar to
support the rail runner and
temporarily decreasing fares
expanding schedules and
improving operations and of
course the intent of this I
assume is because of high gas
prices want to help people out
by making Representative runner
more accessible and and get more
people using it seems like a
good intention.
I know I've heard so I mean the
sponsor I don't know what his
rationale is for the amendment
so maybe I'll start with that
question Mr chair then I'll I'll
go and other questions.
Thank you Senator yes center
here can you explain the
rationale behind a motion so
madam chair there's two things
here
the first is this is House Bill
to junior from the regular
session plus a million dollars
so first of all I think we've
we've changed what this is but
if there's really ninety three
million dollars out there and I
believe there is ninety three
million dollars out there
we can certainly take care of
fares with that amount of money
we don't need to spend another
million dollars on it as as I
see it
currently the rail runner has
very low ridership and would it
make sense to have more writers
on it maybe but I don't think
that this
achieve that goal.
Them and so I think that it's
this is the million Bucks not
well spent sure thank you for
the rest Senator Diamond thank
you madam chair thank you for
that Senator Here so you know my
concern is that.
First of all I don't have a
problem personally adding it to
this bill.
But although I'm sure we can all
think a lot of things we left
out of this bill having said
that given the nature of
partially why we're here to deal
with these high gas prices and
help people out make sense I
guess I'm just concerned if that
the argument is they don't need
to million because they're
sitting on a cash balance do we
know for certain that that cash
balance or sitting on is not
restricted.
Is not restricted for
infrastructure something such
that these pots of money or kind
of an apple an orange you Mr
chair hold up a document I don't
know what that document is will
make copies for you but but the
federal probation just to the
rail runner right a total about
ninety one million or in twenty
one in eighty three million in
twenty two there carry over
currently is sixty million
dollars in carry over right now
the ridership is about two
million dollars a year and so
they have sixty million in
federal funds through the Rick
rescue act of the cares Act.
In the the cares Act for larger
men and so that's how they got
that total of sixty million
sitting there
the rail runner can carry for
that balance in the can use it
for operations in any way they
see fit so they could come back
and say we're not gonna charge
ridership because we have sixty
million dollars in federal funds
they can they can do whatever
they need to do for
appropriations for track repair
they have the flexibility with
the federal funds to do that but
that's a large amount of money
sitting there in the regular.
Mr chair thank you madam chair
Mister did someone tell you with
rail runner that they can use
that money for operations or to
reduce fares
we checked with.
The other currently using for
operations we checked with the
LFC and they checked with the
middle Rio Grande called again
so they're currently using that
money for operations they can
currently do this on their own
reduced rates and not charge
rates under the federal cares
Act and and so they can make
those adjustments with the sixty
million in federal funds we have
to remember that cares Act is
going away at the end of this
year there's some money that the
executive not spending cares
that we're gonna lose and dollar
amount we don't know what that
is yet but the federal funds
should be used first
in sixty million dollars is a
large amount of prize money
other train more to.
Thank you and madam chair Mister
chair and Charles are put you on
the spot the LFC got invoked
this is something that you all
of reserves that the San.
Madam chair Senator yes that's
correct just the context of we
did an evaluation of the rail
runner.
Eight years ago which felt they
needed to be more strategic
about mystic writer should.
To give you some context in FY
eighteen farebox was only about
six percent of their total
thirty four million dollars
worth of revenue they mostly
rely on G. R. T..
Revenue they rely on federal
grants which there is a huge
influx of federal funds
through the pandemic to offset
revenue losses as well as to
support the ongoing operations
of commuter rail lines so would
you consider that amount in the
context of what the historical
revenue stream is about thirty
four million there's a massive
federal funds that that can be
used to help support improving
the use of the real and.
Okay it is sorry the stated that
horses so then be redundant but
this will be my final question
are you one hundred percent
certain that that federal money
can be used to subsidize rates
and.
Well madam chair Senator the
money that they receive from the
federal government was basically
to back fill that six percent
plus so is brought operational
support for the railroaders and
if there's nothing in state
statute that restricts their
ability to do the kinds of
things that I think we're
contemplated with the million
dollars okay thank you that's
all I have for now check thank
you thank you very much we had
yes we have Senator Padilla on
this on the motion and then we
have senator what's on the other
hand thank you Senator Padilla
thank you madam chair and Mister
chair I want to start I'm
speaking now on the amendment
but I want to remain on your
list for the bill wants to go
back to having so madam chair
and and I don't know Mr chairman
here anybody but do we have a is
there somebody from the real
runner here's or somebody here
to answer some of these
questions.
I don't see anybody Madam chair
Senator of Franklin not sure
where this appropriation.
Do we know.
No we only heard about this in
the last maybe thirty six hours
that's why I'm asking I'm with
you on that that's the last I
heard about the weather
probation come I can understand
adding flexibility if we're
going to do some economic
stimulus but when you have a
large the cash balance of
federal money that doesn't
include the thirty four million
in the general appropriations
that they currently receive
through G. R. T. so you put that
on top of the sixteen they're
they're almost a hundred twenty
million
in FY twenty three and so they
they have a lot of money and I
just don't know how they're
gonna spend the sixty million
that's that's a good question so
madam chair Mister chairman so
that's my question I mean I you
know what what is this really
going to be used for anybody
here to answer those questions
specifically and one million
versus sixty million of what
what's the what's the big deal
I'm trying to figure out why
this one million is so critical
here.
I'm not going to answer that for
you I I I would assume that we
were thinking that if we're
going to go to rebates and those
people that that are using the
commuter and and you guys it
drove from Albuquerque to Santa
Fe I know there was traffic
today and there's construction
the ridership may go up
and so they may want to
alleviate some of that cost but
if they're only paying six
percent of the ridership costs
to come take it
It's my still firm belief you
you have to use federal money
before we back to the general
fund.
People don't think a million
dollars is a lot
into you gotta go to work every
day on the back end of a shovel
and.
And work for a thousand dollars
a month or two thousand dollars
a month try to make a living in.
Then sell a million dollars is a
lot of money to everybody.
And so Mister chair Mister
chairman do we know is this
million dollars going to be able
to have the ability to choose
for the secondary and tertiary
transportation services that
they were sort of born when the
real runner so as an example
when you when you get off the
the road runner in Bernalillo
there's a bus that picks you up
I think and I've written it a
couple times but I've never
gotten one of those buses after
where that'll take you to the
middle of the town or something
can they use it this meant this
million for those purposes also.
Does anybody know.
And madam chair and senator I
have no idea if they can do you
know what I'm talking about
those other things so that's
another good there's nobody here
to answer these questions about
why they need this million
dollars and having a hard time
understanding why we do we do
this.
Thank you senator I think that's
it by someone else in your list
for the bill thanks.
Thank you thank you yes you are
the bill we have Senator Woods
next Senator Woods on the
amendment thank you yes ma'am of
the reason that can support this
amendment is not only do we have
money already in those funds
that they could take it out of
but we can direct the.
Through this legislation to
reduce those rates for for peer
to to we do not have to fund
that because they're already
fund so if we feel like we need
to direct them to reduce funds
for period of time let's do
that.
I can always ask for
of monies in the future if they
run low on money but right now
there's a stack of money there.
So let's see what.
Seems reasonable to just
director.
Yeah they'll say it's an
unfunded mandate.
But it's it's a mandate that
there's there's been no cash
reserves right.
So that's my opinion thank thank
you Senator Woods there's no one
else I'd like to say a few words
on this too is that
you know the way I see it is up
the ninety two million dollars
that was supposedly appropriated
from the from the federal
government has been no secret
obviously it's there everyone
has known that and there was
still time and effort put into
recommending the one million
dollars there must have been a
reason and a purpose for this
nobody thought that there was
zero in there in the budget but
there was still a consensus that
this million dollars would be in
there but here we were coming to
the finance committee today and
dismantled something that has
been very much vetted discussed
and hopefully agreed upon so
that we can finally get these
funds out to the community
regardless of how much money is
in this whole amount whether
it's ninety two plus this one
million or just ninety two it's
all going to the public.
And especially now during this
pandemic when we have had such
great need greater than ever and
now with the gas prices going up
what's so wrong with adding one
million dollars to whatever
amount is there at this point to
ensure that in fact we can lower
the rates the tickets for people
to get on this train who can't
afford five or six dollars a
gallon for gas.
To me that seems like a very
good way to help people a way
that we can provide for them to
be able to make the trips they
have to make whether it's to a
doctor to whatever else they
need to do you know for their
needs.
It's not going to waste and it's
not going to hurt the coffers
here to continue we're in the
process that we're working on
right now additionally one thing
that I've seen the last twenty
seven years that I have been
here and this is not new what I
see today is that we get at the
last moment we get information
that says
there's funding here and there's
nothing to prohibit use for this
or that there's no restrictions
all this was done in the last
few minutes for ninety two
million dollars.
It takes a lot more than a few
minutes to determine whether
there are restrictions and
whether they are copycats in
there that may in fact inhibit
the ability.
Of this fund these funds to go
into the intended purpose could
be there for infrastructure
obviously there for
infrastructure says that there's
no limitations right no
restrictions so there for
infrastructure there for
maintenance apparently and
they're also supposedly for.
Can be used for operational
support is what we hear now.
Okay can in the last few minutes
we have determined that.
I don't think I'm ready to vote
to remove something of this
nature when I know in fact it
will help lots of people and so
that's where I am and formal for
that if there's no one else here
with the anymore comments on
this ammendment senator Munoz I
see your hand race thank you
senator.
Madam chair I I think our staff
looks at the numbers very well
and comes up with it justified
answer we as legislators would
you rather have another million
dollars in rebates.
Or would you rather have a
ninety million dollars or sixty
million dollars in the and fund
that that the rail runner has
appropriated with that service
on the rail runner about twenty
twenty five I believe we're
gonna have to pay another
million dollars or a hundred
million dollars in bonds that
hasn't been paid off in thirty
years if the rail runner wanted
to use that money they can use
in any way shape or form maybe
they should prepay some bonds
and then we should change
ridership
but a million dollars is a lot
of money.
And staff in us we didn't know
about this till yesterday
evening I the first I heard of
it and so we start looking and
you find out who has cash
balances of an agency or
department has cash balances and
high cash balances are expending
the money in general fund money
in state money it's a different
situation when the fed gives us
money to relieve pandemic relief
and the agency that runs around
runner doesn't use it to reduce
rates to increase ridership to
become more efficient then there
becomes a problem of what's
gonna happen to the money are we
gonna since ninety two million
back to the Feds for free.
Are we gonna try to use it to
increase ridership so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Munoz all rights and any
other comments on this no we go
for a vote on the amendment Pat.
Senator Burt yes Senator Burt
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Gonzales no Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share yes Senator
share yes Senator Steinborn.
yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez nope Senator
Rodriguez no and senator Munoz
yes senator Munoz yes that is
nine yes and to know.
Thank you all right so the bill
has been amended and now we're
going to go back to the bill so
on the bill itself weird went to
zoom actually initially I think
for the bill so and the audience
to so do we have let's see I've
got Senator share back on the
bill that we have sent them to
go on the order Senator Padilla
center gun Silas Senator Burton
diamonds diamond incentives time
okay got it so Senator share
done madam okay thank you
senator want to out thank you.
The quick no.
Senator Padilla thank you madam
chair thank you Senator
so this is probably
you know one of the more
transformative pieces of
legislation that we probably
have this year on top of all the
other wonderful great things
that happen but is approximately
how many projects do you think
madam chair industry chairman
will be positively impacted by
the fifty or so million or fifty
one million dollars in.
How many total well there's
three hundred and thirty six
thirty three four hundred ninety
three projects so four hundred
ninety three different impacts
across the state and we can go
to each member and say okay
where did you put your money and
for me in my district you know
we are surrounded by the the
Navajo Nation using and we get
payment in lieu of taxes or
property basis so low full for
us as a city in the county he
Miller taxes doesn't cut up come
on up up enough for operational
costs so police vehicles are
priority you know they they're
eighty thousand dollars apiece
nowadays
plus the all the equipment
that's going to go in a moment
that totals but I mean just in
my district who McKinley County
is one the largest counties in
in the state maybe an hour and
twenty minutes from Gallup to.
One point.
is very critical then having
those operations for everybody
it's it's going to be different
across the board I can't tell
you what priorities are in the
eastern side of the state
they're just as role as we are
in if there's a wreck on that
real road here either depending
on the state police or the
county share for there is no
local sheriff I don't think in
in in the mornings in state
depending on those to come
through domestic violence is is
dear to my heart and in we we
try to get a new building in and
we need places for those people
to go when there's trouble with
inside their family I think
that's critical for me but
across the state it's such a.
Great thing to do.
And in the process of budgeting
and when I came in fifteen years
ago the budgeting process was
very secretive.
You had to have be on the inside
you had have had time here.
In some of these new legislators
that are finance of only been
here for a year it takes a long
time to get on fine and so not
center Campos and center
Rodriguez I don't how many years
you were in the legislature
before you move to provide it I
think it was here six years and
and I moved to finance and first
and and so you have to to learn
the budgeting process.
Eight billion dollar budget
doesn't just grow overnight.
in as we move forward in the
twenty first century we have to
change what we do New Mexico New
Mexico has great visions we just
need to succeed in.
And as we move the budgeting
process forward.
Transparency it is one of the
key issues because this used to
be done completely different
there be some leftover money and
and people would send Senate
amendments and in trying to get
money and in language for their
priorities and it was it was
picked and chosen through and I
think the budget process need to
completely change the way we do
things in New Mexico as we move
forward in the new economy in a
New World a new process.
We have to change this is a
beginning of a change.
Now as we move forward we learn
yeah we we learned a lot as we
go through through what happens
with our nonrecurring
appropriations and are
reoccurring appropriations DFA
can change those appropriations
automatically without
legislative input where the
program body the inflation have
the ability to change
appropriation that we says his
reoccurring and nonrecurring.
That needs to be fixed next but
we as legislators.
You mentioned I think yesterday
you go to the farther section
and in the grocery store in the
milk and eggs right and I spent
thirty to forty minutes in the
grocery store I had to get my
months my skin had a put back
because I spent so much time
there was melting get another
one.
And so we talked to our
constituents and they tell us
what's happening in their lives
and what their needs are or if
they can get through the DMV or
if they can get services from
CYFD or if they need more help
in certain areas in their
schools and that's what this
appropriation is for is for
legislators to speak into the
budgeting process to say that
their constituents needs are and
applied across the board
throughout the state.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chairman I I was hoping
you would say a lot of what you
just said because when you look
at the list and you can you
really review this legislation
it is really I'm impressed with
my colleagues I want to say
thank you to all my colleagues
for really listening to their
communities they are really far
reaching and and and there's a
huge birth here when you look at
you know the the variety of
types of projects and really
this is where
you know the future comes from
and big things come from and big
ideas and so I just want to
thank my colleagues for just
really listening to their
constituents and making this
happen for the also want to
thank the governor I mean the
governor heard us as a
legislature heard all of these
community organizations and
decided to call us back here to
get this thing done the right
way so I am very grateful to the
governor for helping us to do
that and hopefully all my stuff
is left alone as we go through
this process but but I
completely agree that we need
real reform with how we we
budget you know in this
legislature that took you
mentioned you know six years for
you we had some other numbers
thrown out here took me nine
years to get to this committee I
want to do this the very first
year I got here so I'm just I'm
very excited to be here but I
think we need some real reform
and I I've already noticed since
you've been chairman gentleman
knows that we've already seen
some great transparency here so
thank you for that but in terms
of transparency Senator Duhigg
thank you very much for your
work on this making sure that
this got into the bill from here
one I was approached by a
community organizations and I
just you know I gave all my
information out there's no
reason to hide anything there's
no reason to to withhold any
information this isn't our money
I don't I was talking to Senator
put a hand I don't we don't own
these offices we're temporarily
serving in these offices
and so we should have all the
light of day on all of our
appropriations every single
thing that we do so I'm glad
that we're starting the process
of making this step this project
for this type of legislation as
transparent as possible because
you know we need to build trust
with.
you know Mr Mrs New Mexico and
that's this is one way that we
do it so thank you Senator
Duhigg for doing that
When we talk about fifty one
million dollars Mr Chairman what
are the since you've been here
how with the numbers that we had
years where we've had I I want
to say that we have more than
fifty one million dollars one
year and then since I've been
here and then we had another
year of it was maybe Dawn about
ten million dollars or something
like that do you know what the
the Rangers have been do you
remember I'm madam chair and
senator I can't remember all the
range is off the top of my head
the last two years they've been
around twenty five fifty million
in prior years we do junior
bills for like road projects in
so you could put appropriations
for road projects in your
district which maintenance is
becoming a big issue for DOT and
so they've done been done
several different ways
executives love them hate them
they may not like everything
legislators like to do but
they're not driving of pot holes
and they're not.
The ones in the milk and eggs
section
so it's very I think we need to
come up with a formula as we
move forward to say okay here's
a priorities tighten up of some
of the restrictions so we're not
in this position again and I I
can't blame the executive for
saying well I I want to make
sure I got clarity on everything
but I think we need to tighten
up how we do it and how it works
and how we move New Mexico
forward but the key thing is
this it's right in people's
front doors.
I went into some of the stuff
and there's one for for as you
well know how many kids go to
school the school go to the zoo
right.
there's just every little thing
you can think of in here that
really just hits right between
the eyes of what's happening in
people's district I think that's
key.
Thank you madam chair insurance
that's fifty one million on an
eight billion dollar you know
operating budget or general fund
budget so it's it's it's you
know to you and I well maybe not
to Mr chair of the most of us
that's not a lot a whole lot of
money versus the eight billion
but it truly does hit the ground
you know what we're its most
meaningful appreciate some
really happy with my colleagues
it came together and are going
to make this happen
but yeah I mean we we need some
reform and and and to modernize
this particular process where do
you see is going from here
because you know we're gonna
come back in January against
secretary couple months now
where do we go from here on this
on how to appropriate this best.
You know this get by this one.
And let's go to thought process
to LFC and and through the
intermittent start bending some
some of people spot because
everybody's process is gonna be
different you guys in
Albuquerque and in you
representative Juan County right
I represent three counties
Senator Woods over here
represents three counties in I
think
there somebody the
Representative six compass
looking.
He Representative six I think
Senator Singh Ingle has quite a
few numbers of that's just we
need to have a conversation
about how we how we prioritize
and how we how we move through
this in and then come together
and fix it.
Thank you madam chair and the
other thing that I noticed of
that was really I think help for
heroes there was a minimum
amount that you could allocate
that I think helped also because
you were putting five thousand
dollars towards something that
wasn't gonna get done you had to
put a and M. in what what was
the minimum amount.
The minimum amount was fifty
thousand.
So that can be meaningful if if
we just look at our capital
projects and how those have
stalled.
we had twenty nine hundred
capital projects going into the
session we now have six thousand
capital projects coming out of
the session and we have two or
three people that manage capital
outlay that's an issue that
we're gonna have to top tackle
and in the next session in New
Mexico we hope that these
projects and they seem small
with small money can move very
quickly.
And you can get spent really
well as long as they do it that
way but small dollar amounts or
large dollar amounts there's one
for study for health care New
Mexico one of our priorities
throughout the legislature.
So as we move forward small
projects can move just as
quickly as purchasing a vehicle.
In large projects can move along
just as quickly as smaller
projects but we're gonna have to
sit down have a real discussion
about how much money we have
sitting capital outlay how we
move this process forward how we
show transparency
it has legislators as we
appropriate money but that's
going to cry reply across the
board to all branches of
government to the executive to
the judiciary the legislature.
the judicial branch is is
appropriating money that we give
them to the budgeting process
but they need to tell us where
it's going to induce a program
in which judge also.
The exact needs to do the same
we're all in this together and
we're only to bring clarity on
what we're doing and how we're
doing it and more money schools.
That's all I have madam chair
industry chairman again want to
thank my colleagues I look at
these projects that regardless
of what side of the aisle you
might be on or whatever it's a
very impressive list of work
that's going to be done in the
state as a result of this thank
you madam chair thank you
senator put all right we have
Senator Burt next don't let
Senator.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you
Ostentation on this
and they're doing thank you for
the transparency issue and I'll
bring up madam chair a comment
that I try to bring up as often
as I can.
And many of these
projects in this bill say
statewide.
And I know we're doing
transparency for the public but
like system transparency for the
legislators who agree to do this
and if we say that something is
going to be a statewide project
that maybe at the end of the
money being spent we have a list
or some kind of indication where
that money was spent was a truly
spent statewide
because I personally think stem
the flow to to different parts
of the.
And maybe it's to be that way in
some cases but once a statewide
I expect things to be spent
statewide and so I'm hoping that
we can be transparent when we
look at statewide application of
of these programs with that said
couple things a couple of quick
questions
Statewide media literacy program
page twenty nine under section
nine.
The statewide media literacy
program for public education.
In can you refresh my memory
just to what is a media literacy
program.
If this is a breaking can we get
clarification on what that is.
Madam chair and senator if I
remember correctly PED and and
I'm trying to get few years back
right did a literacy program
with chambers of commerce.
It and they were trying to get
letters saying the school and
bring up the graduation rates
and so I'm assuming that that's
going to go to PED that two
hundred thirty thousand is what
you're talking about yes yes
that's going to go to PED for
for media literacy in in PDF
prior regulate the money in the
role.
From a statewide perspective of
two hundred thirty thousand is
not a lot of money but I'm
hoping that will find its way
into you know all of the
counties and and as many as a
nice school districts as we
possibly have
because I I'm I'm not again sure
about their application of what
they want to do with that media
literacy programs pretty broad
based in I just wanna make sure
it's it's giving kids reoriented
to reading or whatever the case
may be within those those very
special for kids you may have a
problem in that particular area
madam chair and senator we
encourage members to get with
agencies in the cabinet
secretaries so this may be an
existing program and PED may in
additional budget increase for
their media program which they
may already be budgeted to PED
and and so it made the
additional money adding that to
to PED where people thought that
that was the needs were but we
encourage members to get with
cabinet secretaries not create
new programs.
But to expand on programs that
existed throughout the state and
so that's.
My best guess where the thank
you Mr right in on that point
before I go on Senator Senator
Gonzales had something on that
point you Senator proceed and
then I'll get back with you but
it was on that specific point
thank you all Madam chairman of
some things.
For all I'll give you the real
brief but all of this goes way
back and actually started in
with the Albuquerque academy
with the law Bob McCann and at
that time with Luke Luke done
Lujan downs from all.
From twenty twenty and his
daughter and then from there at
the or regional program
initiated in California and the
New Mexico and a few other
states were brought in and
eventually try to expand as much
as possible to all districts the
original concept and bringing in
the thought of you know what
happens with media in itself and
the message that it sends and
the awareness for students to
understand what they're trying
to do to to media so that was so
one of the parts to the scene
the gender seen you know the
many things that come up through
media that is so overly very
well program that you know the
schools that have initiated that
so then.
You know going back and forth
you know there's been you know a
lot of you know.
A lot of districts that
participated but you know they
only tend to is to bring it to
every district and what you're
seeing there part of my funding
is in there because you know I
just believe real strong on it
and it does so really good work
you know as far as of the
school's working with this now
since then the school has
widened and there's a lot more
that's being offered you know
through media literacy in fact I
just attended a a program last
week for the students Intel's
brought me in and they work with
me and we're getting really
sophisticated you know they have
much better equipment much
better technology the it is a
good way to engage but also to
teach you know what happens and
what is advertising really do to
you that you have that
experience of being able to
identify good advertising medium
or bad advertising and what
they're trying to lose your to.
And I appreciate thank you for
the clarification on that that
gives me some foundation work
with and madam chair of course
anytime I see me obviously it's
going to not read let me but let
me so I want to come to check
into that and I I just wanna
make sure that also that whoever
puts together program so so
forth is presenting and then.
Nonpartisan data within this
presentation so it opened
everyone you know when I went to
the Harvard school of I
appreciate school of
broadcasting New Mexico state
way too many years ago we were
taught that you investigate well
sizes story present both sides
story and then let the listener
or the viewer the reader decide
on on on what is right and I'm
hoping that's the policy that
will be made for the media
literacy program so that
information is is may so that
kids can make a their own
decision and not let down a
specific path because I'm afraid
that in some states we see that
happening and I certainly don't
want that to happen in New
Mexico I don't think it's fair
as far as I'm concerned thank
you for that clarification one
other question
actually two quick question
sixty eight sixty two
providing professional
assistance to mental health and
physical well being of student
athletes and again I just wanna
make sure that that is a
statewide program that goes to
all colleges with I think this
is under a higher in phone
number correctly one make sure
you hire it is going to all
athletic programs and all of our
colleges would be junior college
branches or the main campuses
it.
Mental health and in sports is a
big deal right now there's a lot
of.
non sports issues it are
involved which right now we like
to make sure that that money
spent for the property in the
park profession and for the
purposes it was originally
meant.
Madam chair center that's one of
my probation and and another
center because when I was
actually at a college rodeo NM
issue the athletic trainer was
there and they had just had the
incident with the football
player and he was talking about
mental health issues in in
athletics we've seen it in the
Olympics this year very clearly
athletes are affected the
football player in in in the
middle health issues
he said this is a priority for
us we don't have the staff would
have the training and head
trauma hidden football
me and even tied to any sport
soccer same thing
that the mental health of in
athletics although that
appropriation money is directed
to you and and and and issue the
only two programs that I knew
about I don't know if any if
eastern has a mental health
Policy in the athletics I I
couldn't tell you for the other
university but those
appropriations went to mental
health for them and I appreciate
that madam chair thank you and I
appreciate Mr chairman.
mental health behavioral health
in all categories all the.
In the world today is much
bigger issue than has been rules
complicated it's it's
complicated by technology and by
influences from all over the
world and I I just really hope
and appreciate the fact that we
can clarify some of this for
student athletes and and maybe
because there's a huge problem
with suicide as well within that
category so I hope the money
supply quickly and makes a big
difference it's it's an issue
thank you for that last issue is
I don't know if we did this last
time we did you notice all of
this money.
Is supposed to revert at the end
of twenty twenty three that's by
the time this is signed and it
kind of goes into process that's
a year and a half.
For example there's a lot of
vehicles in here under can we
get all those vehicles within a
year and a half there's a lot of
things that I do with if the
construction if we can contract
for them get the the the the
materials needed within a year
and have time to complete that
project so I'm a little
concerned about the reversion
date of the end of twenty twenty
three
and if that should maybe be
extended I don't know how the
people feel but I want to bring
that table K. somebody else has
the account but that's a that's
a pretty tight window in today's
environment with with materials
being short changed as well as
just in the industry that we
deal with not being able to
perform quickly as they have in
the past you madam chair
centered the unencumbered
language which is critical to
what happens is if you are under
contract and and Gallup McKinley
buys a police vehicle the
contract delivery date is passed
as long as that on income Byrd
that that money will not revert
so those contracts that are put
in place whatever they therefore
even if it's for mental health
with a provider they have to
provide the services before they
can get the
Vehicle and it's a year and a
half because something's on the
slow boat from China
one part they're under contract
the money's encumbered
unencumbered language income or
language these remain and that
Mr chairman I appreciate the
comment on that because I that's
typical operating processes but
I didn't know that would be
different for the junior money
which is kind of unique from.
You know your tier so thank you
for that clarification I just
hope that as we let people know
that this money is now available
to them this very prominent in
the in the letters memo or
whatever we need to do to
bring notice to these
organizations that they know
that that reversion date is the
end of twenty twenty three so
that you will get moving on that
and make sure that they at least
have a contract for these goods
and services as we go forward
Madam that's all about thank you
thank you senator Byrd good and
good point right we have Senator
Diamond next and then we has
time.
Thank you madam chairman and
thank you Mr chairman presenting
this bill if it's feeling a
little bit like deja vu for
those of us watching it's
because we're looking at the
same programs in the same
projects that we just passed you
know six weeks ago you you
mentioned some of those Special
Olympics animal shelters
domestic violence drug we have
bulletproof vests for law
enforcement the same of valuable
and necessary programs and
projects that this committee and
then both chambers unanimously
agreed were needed for New
Mexico programs and projects in
here that have been identified
by legislators who understand
their district better than
anybody else and so all of these
are worthy and for for reasons
that that defy explanation for
me this bill was vetoed by the
governor now her reasonings
included transparency it wasn't
properly vetted there wasn't it
wasn't fiscally responsible but
but I want to thank you Senator
Duhigg for being here today and
presenting the transparency
provision that you did today and
you did a great job I'll have to
say that I think this committee
and I'm confident that the
legislators that I served with
have been expressed during the
this thirty day session we would
have gladly put that that
language in the bill at that
point had we known that she was
going to use that as an
explanation or reasoning for a
necessarily be doing such for
the projects that need to be out
there and in New Mexico I do
want to say on the topic of
transparency that this process
not just in his junior bill but
in capital and under this new
Senate finance committee has
never been more transparent in
decades and has been recently so
I think that this was never been
a transparency issue when we
talk about not properly vetting
programs or projects in here the
irony this is when we come here
as a committee the only addition
to this bill that we're looking.
Pat was a one million dollar
addition to our rail runner
that's already sitting on ninety
three million dollars the could
spend the same money to do the
same thing and it can't be
explain to this committee what
the money's for aware that
wording came from that's a
project that hasn't been vetted
the only addition that made it
in here had been properly vetted
but to say that the rest of
these projects that have been
identified by legislators that
are needed in the community are
not properly that it is
disrespectful to those of our
serve because we answer directly
to the constituents on the idea
of fiscal responsibility I want
to note that the only changes to
my projects personally in here
for that she moved one time
money one time expenses that are
located to recurring revenues
that was the only change I have
to say if there's such things
fiscal irresponsibility some of
those programs and projects that
are funded didn't didn't need
recurring revenues and so we
actually added on instead of
being fiscally responsible we've
added act actually added on
additional expenses you guys did
a great job of presenting this
bill but these junior projects
and programs are just as good as
they were last month and they
need to this money needs to get
out to our communities I think
it's very clear that the
governor's veto of this was a
punitive reaction to us to
legislators to send a message by
the executive I don't think it
was by accident that she vetoed
a Supreme Court justice minimal
salary increases on the same day
we're not operation operating on
equal branches of government
here it was a message back to us
and yet they were sad reality is
that in that message it had the
largest income on on New Mexico
and small programs and projects
that we need in our community
they don't qualify for capital
outlay dollars so we are here we
should be here to undo all wrong
that this governor did it's a
shame I expect that unanimously
we will pass this bill it just
like we did a month a half ago
and it's just saying we were
here in the first place but
thank you guys for all joining
us to make sure that we do the
right thing for New Mexico today
thank you.
Thank you Senator Diamond okay
we're gonna go to Senator
Steinborn your next thank you
madam chair and Sanchez I'm very
glad we're doing this lot of
very important funding to the
state in this bill so commend
all parties for turning it out
and and coming forward with that
also really appreciate
transparency piece let's
remember this is taxpayer money.
So taxpayers absolutely have
just are foundational right to
know what's going on with their
tax dollars and so so this is
long overdue and I think those
that have been working for years
to kind of bring this
transparency and I'm glad it's
finally coming to this
particular bill and since we're
seeing so much good bipartisan
support for transparency I want
to point out to my colleagues
that.
You know this is bringing
transparency to one part of our
process to a fifty million
dollar bill in this case or to a
capital outlay bill that maybe a
couple hundred million dollars
we have huge blind spots where
we don't have transparency in
our legislative process over
people fighting to get us to
pass legislation spend billions
of dollars New Mexico there's
twenty some odd states that
require those that have higher
lobbyists and interest groups of
any persuasion Taft report the
bills that they're working on.
The activity of lobbying in
every session we always look at
a bill we go where the hell did
this come from right who wrote
this bill and we should not
number one we should we as
policymakers need to know this
information for a vote on a bill
the governor needs to know
before they Here she signs that
bill citizens need to know the
mechanics of who is pushing
legislation so that they can
weigh in as does the media so I
I I urge everybody I've
introduced bills for years comes
to your committee Senator on
rules committee
to fog that's listening let's
let's close the big some of the
biggest transparency loopholes
in the legislative process let's
make it bipartisan let's join
those twenty thirty six it does
public Colorado did in fact they
are.
They are not only.
passed a law requiring that all
this report which bills are
working on but how much their
contracts are state of New York
doesn't lots of states do that
too and they did it and I think
so we could there's a separate
bill that does that too by the
way existing so it'll be coming
again and I would welcome any
bipartisan sponsors that want to
be part of closing some of the
biggest transparency would
possibly have in the legislature
but this is a great step forward
in this really positive and so I
thought it support it and that's
all I have thank you madam chair
apologist one of the thing and
use that as we think about
junior funding Mr chair you know
the difference we junior funding
and capital outlays that.
Because we're able to serve
programmatic budgets and not
just capital needs kind of like
you address mental health and
it's going to be on you know
your community and you know I I
help take on the abandoned
uranium mine sites you know
taking on these different causes
I think sometimes junior
transcends our county boundaries
and you know it's a policy
opportunity that is different
thing capital acts as we
consider reform we should we
should consider.
That is well it doesn't kind of
fit the same boxes capital
outlay which we probably mostly
exclusively keep in our county
jurisdiction so.
All I have thank you thank you
for Steinborn okay we're gonna
go to Senator Woods your next
Senator.
Chair.
I've got four things madam
chair.
The first thing there was many.
Many times in this bill that the
legislators put money towards
far equipment
that kind of stuff in.
I would just like to to get out
the information that we have the
state fire fund to buy that I
quit line.
I'm not objecting to them doing
it but there's other sources of
financing and we need to get
that word out to the legislature
so they can go many of the fire
departments already know that
but it's a application process
and maybe they applied and
couldn't get it but that's
number one number two.
In this bill through three
different places but talks about
On page twenty two.
Page twenty two nine of twenty
one twenty two and twenty three.
And it talks about New Mexico
home grown produce and there's
also
Mentioned and that's under aging
and long term services.
On page twenty five there's a
mention under department of
health about a similar deal
to match federal funds to expand
on senior mills market nutrition
programs and and page forty two
page.
lands nine to thirteen minutes
out of the department of
agriculture and what I'm getting
here is this.
Many times.
Funds come from many different
agencies and that's my main
gripe about government.
You have to search for these
funds many different places and
a lot of times they essentially
do the same thank but because
they're spread out on many
different agencies it's hard for
consumer or a constituent of
yours to provide.
So you know there's nothing we
can probably do about it but
it's a pain in the rear when
your constituents says I had a a
constituent as where can I find
money for of of assisted living.
For for a a building.
And I want to economic
development not funny films
money and and USDA has some
money.
But in addition we have to go to
all these different things to
provide the same money are are
fine black funds the other thing
Do we have the I'd like fund as
we do far fund for public safety
I know there's some federal
monies that you can get
equipment for for sure soon and
and.
Of those people but it is there
of a state fund.
That you maybe can use for
matching the things like that
which I don't know and so this
may be matching funds what
they're using this for.
And the fourth thing.
Madam chair.
I don't know how to do this.
But I would like very much.
To.
Tell.
Representative.
To lower their fares for like
the time.
Without any funding in our part.
I'd like to put parameters
around it so would not date
certain when they're going to do
this.
And
I'm not a word Smith I have to
have everything draw the council
service.
But I would recommend an
amendment to this bill.
To dictate to them to lower
their fares.
And I can't make a motion
because I don't have the word.
But I would just ask madam chair
if there would be any interest
in that.
And I don't know how to do that
other than just let us.
So other than that that's all I
have madam chair.
Thank you Senator Woods let me
just get some at least on one
possibly two of your point
Senator let's ask the staff is
there a fund I went blank you're
trying to figure out we know
about the state fire fund but is
there any other fund that the
department of public safety can
actually access that separate
from the far funds from local
governments manage madam chair
there's local revenue sources
for those the state revenue
sources the law enforcement
protection fund which isn't
necessarily the same as the.
At the grant Fund for fire
there's a fire protection fund
which is more general than
there's a fire protection grant
fund which is more capital
intensive for like the bigger
expenses like fire trucks which
can be a little bit more
challenging for local
governments verses the cruiser
for a sheriff's officer I have
to check to see a law
enforcement protection fund how
that can be spent that's pretty
much spread at a pretty then
statewide you have put a lot of
money and through house bill two
for operating cost for
recruitment and retention
stipends for local governments
which could then free up other
revenue sources instead of
needing to spend money on that
they could spend money on our
cruises or other equipment that
they've got locally.
Okay thank you Charles thank you
senator is that the sufficient
at least for discussion now on
your on your request to your
concern thank you thank you very
much and one more thing I I'm
not going to pass over this
because
you know Senator Woods mentioned
about the possibility in some
way that we would require the
rail runner is that what I
understood Senator to lower the
fares as a requirement but no
amendment because we don't have
the amendment ready as we
indicated here and so that and
amendment of course as we know
unless it's ready here and it
would be prepared and ready to
put out for for discussion and
then a vote would happen but
because we don't have it but you
know you can proceed with that
discussion if you prefer to to
proceed with this any senator
can put an amendment the proper
form this as of to date we don't
have it in the bill and there's
no formal amendment thank you
for your point your comments
okay we're going to move on now
where are we Senator are you
done with your comments thank
you all right senator Correa
Hemphill thank you for your
patience thank you madam chair
and thank you Mr chairman and I
just wanted to really
acknowledge all the work that
went into the revision of the
original bill I know that there
was some language that was flag
some agency changes that were
made and thank the staff
Lorraine John and LFC staff
Senate finance staff I know that
a considerable amount of work
went into this bill and I
personally appreciate the
opportunity to work with re work
some of my language that could
have been an issue going forward
in New Google agency changes so
that I think that what we have
today is ultimately a better
bill than what we started with
thank you senator do heck for
the language for transparency.
The and and really thank the the
governor for giving us this
opportunity to create an even
better built and what we started
with so thank you Mr chairman
and that's all I think you
Senator Hemphill all right
Senator Campos you're next thank
you very much madam chair and to
the
members of this committee to my
colleagues I want to thank
everyone of you because
it's very evident that we do
have the fortitude in order to
go forward and to make some
resounding change in terms of
the processes that we've used
for the capital outlay for the
general appropriations act for
the supplemental appropriations
act and in moving forward with
the comments and the direction
that has been laid out for us by
our chair person by the members
of the committee by the work
with transparency all these type
of things are very important to
the taxpayers in New Mexico.
But to go forward now is going
to be key and in that it means
how are we going to put together
these pieces stick with a forty
two that has been established
and not have anything fall back
so that as we go forward with
consistency what we're going to
find is that our state will
become much better because of
the work that is going on going
to be put forward by the members
of the New Mexico legislature.
I'm really excited about it and
the reason I say that because
over the last thirty years I sat
I've listened I've participated
and I've observed.
But what I anticipate from the
work that's going on for the
future we are going to go ahead
and find New Mexico is
definitely going to have an
opportunity to elevate itself
with the hard work of the
individuals that are here that
are committed to that.
I could go through each project
we could go ahead and talk more
about where we expect to be but
right now the key is going to be
this you have people that are
committed to this number one and
more importantly as we go
forward that commitment is going
to be translated into work
during the intro into more
education when it comes to how
we are going to let people know
how we're gonna be working with
the resources that we do have
and then to also be cognisant of
the fact that with the Evan flow
often times with to provide our
resources that are available
today that may not be available
tomorrow so it'll be up to us to
ensure that there will be that
continuity so that we have
better planning when it comes to
the general appropriations act
when it comes to the projects
that are out there so when we
fully funded project it's not
gonna be that we're gonna have a
billion plus held in abeyance so
the whole key for each and
everyone of us now is to take
this as a reset resounding
message and take it back to our
communities to let them know
that the changes are coming and
it's thanks to the New Mexico
legislature thank you very much
madam chair thank you Senator
Campos okay next we have Senator
gone order just thank you madam
chair of the make a motion to.
To approve Senate bill Senate
bill one right.
Senate bill one as amended okay
there's a motion on the floor in
the second from Senator Padilla
in for discussion only because I
just wanted to make a comment
here quickly and just to say
that you know this was a a
process of very much intense
collaboration partnership team
work so much took place to get
to where we are today but at
least one thing was proven that
in doing these three things
T. more collaboration and
partnership sometimes compromise
sometimes negotiations whatever
it may be we can deliver we can
return taxpayers funds back to
the public especially when the
need is so high the way it is
and we see it today so I want to
thank also Senator manos and
Senator Duhigg and the working
group who worked so hard to get
all this done and our leadership
in in just all involved the
public for emailing us and
talking to us about the needs
and stressing how strongly they
felt about having some of these
projects and programs finally
get get approved and someone I
want to thank the governor and
her staff all together our staff
LFC and finance everyone I can't
thank you enough for all the
help in the the work you've done
this so thank you very much to
our committee also and now we're
going to put this for about
thank you there's a motion the
second set.
Senator Burt yes Senator Burt
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator Padilla yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzalez yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator bill yes Senator share
yeah Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator road is
yes and senator Munoz yes
explain my the Senator yes yes
that's you.
Thank you very much senator
Munoz thank you madam chair I
think Senator Campos at some
very key points as we move
forward The New Mexico is always
ridden this roller coaster ride
of highs and lows and more
monies come from and as we move
forward when I hope and and I
really do hope that we can hold
whatever at that we grow our
budget slowly we don't grow
rapidly and that we can sustain
what we currently have but if
the date and time comes
in those of you that haven't
been through cuts there's very
few of you when I came we had to
cut a billion dollars on the
budget they're very painful
they're very hard to do people
want to protect their territory
Senator Campos on something
that's very key is that we keep
our budget and capacity that we
can sustain it for a long time
without having to ride the
roller coaster would make those
cuts to start a program and then
to stop it and then it started
again is very time constrained
we've seen that in the
behavioural health the issue
with the prior executive we
don't want that to happen again
in New Mexico but we need to be
prepared for so as we move
forward people need to be
prepared that has our budget
moves me maybe I actually maybe
have a lot of money and we have
a lot more opportunity but we
don't want to come back and make
cuts that are drastic and hurts
New Mexico thank you madam chair
thank you senator all right I
don't think we have anything
else do we on the agenda that
was the only thing so thank you
to everyone to the public the
audience for being here and I
think we'll adjourn I don't know
where house bill the female is
but we're gonna go back to the
floor yes we're gonna be moving
back down go back to the floor
in in the the bill is.
we may well we're gonna go back
in if the fee built there we
will come back up into the feed
mill and ride the elevator quite
a bit and try to get an estimate
thank you very much thanks
committee members.
