of today, so.
Presentations, but also in lieu
of trying to accommodate what we
need to do to be able to finish
this morning.
So with that, I, I'm gonna have
a
Hadron Avila, walk us through
the.
Process
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So this
morning we're gonna hear the
unified court budget. So to
start things off, Felix Travis
from the LFC will go through
every branch of the judiciary,
present the agency ask the
executive recommendation, and
the LFC recommendation.
Uh, after that, the
administrative office of the
courts will give a brief 5 to 10
minute presentation and then the
Supreme Court as well, and then
the administrative office of the
district attorneys. We are not
going to go into every single
court and every single district
attorney's individual budget
requests, the presentation will
be done through Felix through
the unified presentation. If
there are any questions from the
members related to specific
judicial districts or specific
DAs, they can ask those
questions and at that time,
those specific um
representatives from those
courts or DAs can come up and
present and discuss and interact
with the members or some of them
are online and they can jump on
through Zoom.
So, ideally we should be done
within an hour and a half.
Thank you. Thank you, Aiden. uh,
Mr. Chavez, go ahead and start.
And thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
can introduce myself. I'm Felix
Chavez. I'm the LSC analyst for
the judiciary, and with me is
Maria Smiglia, my counterpart at
the DFA.
Um, for your volumes and volume
2 for the um unified budget, the
roll up of that would be in um
page 21 to 22 in volume 2, again
in volume 2, it's pages 21 to 22
to see that roll up to give you
a bird's eye view of everything.
And um for the and volume 3 on
page 42, there's a district map.
give you an idea of the
districts for the judiciary as
well as the DAs.
Give you all a second to get
there.
Volume 2, if for volume 2, it's
pages 21 through 22.
That should be the roll up of
all the courts.
In volume 3, it's page 42 as the
district map.
Give you guys an idea of where
everyone's coming from.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. With
that, I will be presenting the
LFC recommendation, the
differences between the LSU
recommendation and the executive
recommendation, as well as flags
that HAFC had for each um for
their decision making.
With that for the unified
budget, it should be in your
packet labeled courts. I
apologize if there's a confusion
there. I, I was told to make my
bullets into one and that caused
some confusion, but it should be
the one labeled courts, and in
that packet, there is what we
call a high level.
It should be page 3 in that
packet.
And that gives you an overview
of the um of the differences
between the executive and the
LFC in a visual form.
But with that, um, for the uh
LFC recommendation which was
chosen for this by HAFC. The
recommendation appears to be a
slight decrease, especially in
volume 2, as you can see, it
seems like LFC cut every budget,
but that is not the case. It
appears a slight decrease,
however, after adjusting for
pretrial services, which the LSC
recommendation recommends moving
to AOC for a better
administrative process there,
um, the recommendation outside
of that is a $5.5 million dollar
increase or 3.
1% in general fund. The LFC
recommendation primarily funds
the judicial salary increases,
personal benefit rate increases,
support staff and security.
And the recommendation also
supports um security efforts due
to recent and historical
security issues for the
judiciary.
With that, the differences
between the LSC recommendation
and the exact recommendation.
Quickly the executive
recommendation for all the
courts overall exceeded the LFC
by $9.5 million in general fund.
And um the difference is there,
but then the similarities
between the two recommendations
is that they both fund judicial
salary increases, personal
benefit rate increases and
security.
And um the um the differences in
expansions for all the district
courts in the metropolitan court
are primarily due to again that
the LFC is recommending all
expansion requests for pretrial
services be centralized in the
AOC and these expansion requests
will be funded through a grow
appropriation.
And finally, for all the
district courts for the unified
budget, the um HFC flagged just
one thing for it, they flagged
that the pretrail transfer that
were the LSC is recommending to
the AOC. They flagged it to make
sure that the um FTE related to
pretrial services remained
within the courts.
Basically, in other words, they
want to work out any human
resources issues there for the
transfer. They want to make sure
that the courts keep their
employees and have no um HR
issues basically.
And um with that, that is an
overview of the unified budget.
And um with that, I would like
to move on to the Supreme Court.
That's OK, Mr. Chair.
Please do.
Thank you. So for the Supreme
Court, um, there is no packet in
front of you for that. I'll just
be speaking on that.
And um for the volumes in um
volume 2, it's pages 11 through
12.
Give you all a second to get
there.
With that in um overview of the
LFC recommendation, the LFC
recommended an increase of
$467.9,000 or 5.1% increase.
And it supports um some
positions including court
finance uh court financial
manager. It also has um judicial
salary increases.
Funding for student next term
contracts and the requested
increases in other costs.
For the differences between the
executive recommendation and the
LFC recommendation is that the
exact recommendation exceeds the
LFC by $31.1,000.
With the exact, the executive
funding, um, a different
financial, a different financial
position, and financial
specialist, and night watch
person and partially funding
travel and training.
Both recommendations fund salary
increase, judicial salary
increases and access to Westlaw
database.
With that, that's my overview
for the Supreme Court. Uh, Mr.
Chair, could I move on to the
AOC?
Thank you.
With the AOC or the
administrative officer of the
courts, excuse me, um, they will
be in your volume 2, it's pages.
13 through 20.
Give you all a second pages 13
through 20 again in volume 2.
Thank you. And um in that packet
on page 3, excuse me, the packet
in front of you labeled AOC.
Is the fact that I'm referring
to, and I apologize for the
confusion.
Um, in that packet on page 3 and
4, you will see another high
level that gives you an
understanding of the differences
between the executive
recommendation and the LFC. It
has also shown up here.
And for the overview of that,
um, the LFC recommends
increasing AOC's general fund by
2.1 million or 4.2% above the FY
25 operating budget.
That recommendation includes
funding for administrative and
magistrate court, um, rent and
leases, rents slash leases
increases, interpreter hourly
rate increases.
Um, funding for critical IT
services and personnel funding
for pretrial services. Again, to
mention the biggest difference
here is that LFC is recommending
pretrial services be centralized
within the AOC so that inflates
the budget, but outside of that,
it is that 4.2% increase.
And the um the differences
between the LFC recommendation,
the executive recommendation is
that the LFC exceeds the
executive by 4.2 million and 3
4.2 million, I apologize, $4.2
million in general fund and 3.96
million in fund balance.
Um, this difference is because
again, the pretrial services
funding is being centralized in
AOC and that fund balance
difference is because the LFC is
recommending using revenue be
put into the AOC's Supreme Court
automation fund, as well as
their juror and witness fund in
order to provide a one-time
funding in order to um deal with
rising costs of jurors as well
as their critical IT needs.
And um
Outside of that, the LSC
recommended some of the
agencies' expansions related to
access to justice and assisted
outpatient treatment through
grow appropriations.
And the flags from HAFC are as
follows. They, um, they flagged
the um lower level pay issue
that I believe the AOC will also
be presenting on um, they, they,
HAFC is working through ideas of
either funding a pay study like
what we have for the executive.
In order to see how those pay
bands are structured and also
possibly provide some funding
for those lower pay bands is
what HAFC has um flagged for the
AOC.
And with that, that's what I
have for the AOC's overview.
Moving on to um another cool
acronym, the AODA, the
administrative Office of the
District Attorneys.
And um in volume two, that is
pages 55 to 56.
Again in volume 2, it's pages 55
to 56.
I'll give you all a moment to
get there.
Thank you and with that, the
overview for the AODA is um the
LFC recommendation includes um,
excuse me, the um LFC
recommendation for the AODA is
it includes a general fund
increase of $176.9,000 or a 5.1%
increase to provide funding to
maintain the um case management
system for the final phase of
implementation.
With that, the differences for
the um LFC and executive
recommendation is that the um
The LSU recommendation exceeds
the executive recommendation by,
oh excuse me, I, I flipped that
the executive recommendation
exceeds the LSC recommendation
by $154.7,000 in general fund
for the AODA.
That difference is mostly in the
um LFC prioritizing sustaining
this access to the case
management system while the
executive um provided funding to
do continual maintenance on that
system as well as providing
funding for recruitment and
retention, as well as training
and education.
But HAFC flagged for the AODA is
that the um
Which this flag was not included
in the LFC recommendation in
those partially in the exact
recommendation and that is the
request for $998,000 for
licensing for.
The all DA's offices in the
state to have access and to
provide maintenance to the case
management system that the AODA
houses and is developing.
So that's what they flagged they
wanted to provide funding for
this because this is, um,
without this funding, the case
management system would no
longer be operational.
And following that last but
certainly not the least is the
um district attorneys and
Up on the TV is the um high
level which is also in the
packet labeled DAs or district
attorneys, and this shows you an
overview of the um differences
between the executive and the
LFC for every district attorney.
gives you a roll up of it.
And um with that, the overview
for the district attorneys.
Um, breaks down to this the LFC
recommendation.
Um, increases general fund
revenue by 3.7 million or 3.4%
compared with the FY 25
operating budgets. Again, this
is the overall increase the LFC
is recommending.
The LSC recommendation funds new
attorneys, backfills, some
lapsing federal grants of
general fund revenue provides
some funding for contract
attorneys, covers some personnel
rates and funds and legal
support.
And with that, the differences,
the differences between the LFC
recommendation and executive is
that the executive exceeded the
LFC by $1.9 million in general
fund.
With the general fund
differences being primarily due
to the executive recommending
more funding for personnel,
recruitment and retention and
salary increases, the LFC did
not include the salary increases
because the LFC funds salary
increases in a compensation
package and uh through the
agencies' individual budgets.
And also the executive provided
more funding for lapsing federal
funds.
What the HAFC flagged for all
the district attorneys is that
the um they flagged the budget
recommendations that the
executive of the LFC had for the
newly elected district attorneys
in the 3rd district, 6th
district, and 11th Division 1.
They, um, these 3 new elected
DAs came up to HAFC and
explained that the budget that
we are working off of isn't
their administration's request
and the HAFC um granted, granted
them.
Excuse me, let me, let me, let
me rephrase that. HAFC basically
told me and Mario to to develop
some um options with their um
With what they want for their
administration.
And that was flagged that HAFC.
And with that long winded
presentation, it is over and now
we are, now we can go for
questions on um the specific
DA's or courts.
Very well, thank you. Before we
do, um.
Uh, DFA, do you?
Oh no. Do you have any comments?
Mr. Chair, committee members
Mario Semiglia, DFA judicial
analyst, uh, Felix covered it
very well, so in case you guys
have any questions on the
differences, I'm here to answer
them, but Felix is your guy.
Thank you.
Very well, thank you.
Um, members, uh we have uh
Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very much and uh
You know, uh, a few days ago we
had a presentation on the AOC,
uh.
For the PTO.
And would either one of you like
to address that, uh, you know,
they, they, they come back to me
and they say, you know, we
misrepresented what we're doing
here.
So, uh, would either one of you
like to comment on that?
Or you know what I'm talking
about.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, um,
great question. I do know about
the uh what's going on with PTO
but I can tell you from an LFC
perspective, we're, we're
waiting on um.
If there's any um
Legal changes that.
We're basically just waiting on
if there's any legal changes
were to happen and allow that to
happen or um if not, we'll just
continue going as a status quo.
OK.
Mr. Chair.
Senator Woods, uh, similar to
what Felix said, there's a
Supreme Court ruling now that's
kind of staying the PTO issue
that the administrative office
of the courts and the judiciary
put on they're basically waiting
for legislative action to see if
that gets addressed, whether or
not the there'll be something to
allow it or disallow it that
comes out of this legislature,
um, in which case DFA will
administer that properly, but
until that happens, you know, I
don't think it's appropriate.
To comment on it right now.
Guys were Mr. Chair, gentlemen.
We're in the budget committee.
We need to budget for things.
So we wait till next year to
budget for that.
I don't want Mr. Chair, I don't
understand.
I know it's an issue, a legal
issue.
But
One way or the other, we need to
budget for it, Mr. Chair.
So if it's, if it's an increase
in in salary the way it was
presented.
For the future,
Mr. Chair, I need more
information on that.
I need more information before
we can make a decision.
If we are going to, to
Who with what they're wanting to
do and then I understand they're
telling me that uh many of their
fine clerks and managers can
get.
Better job somewhere else.
Because we can't compete, and
it's trying to bring the
salaries up, and I understand
all that.
But I also need to understand if
we need to budget for more
money.
For that.
And I don't think the LFC.
Committee budgeted for more
money for that.
In my, Mr. Chair, am I right
about that?
Mr. Chair, Senator, would you,
you are correct in that I did
anything for that. There was
also no requests associated to
PTO budgeting, so good. So we've
got 22 deals we didn't have a
request. We, we identified it as
an issue. Mr. Chair, we need to,
to flag that somehow.
To, to
To try to qualify something here
to whether we're going to do
this, not do this.
Reasons for both sides.
So we can make a legitimate.
Decision here.
So, uh
This chaired the, the, you know.
It looks like we're, we're,
we're nudging up the
The budgets on everything here
where she wants to come until we
Until I do further study, uh, I,
I really have no other questions
and I apologize for not having a
direct question to.
But uh
That's the only thing that I'd
like to flag is, is that.
PTO.
Senator Woods,
Senator Trujillo on that point.
can respond. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, Senator Woods, my
understanding is that there's a
bill that has started in the
house, and we're waiting to see
if once that comes over to us
then we'll have a more you know,
concrete conversation, but part
of the challenge that I think
we're trying to figure out as a
legislature is if we move this
forward for the courts, we have
state employees that then will
be under, under.
Um, served in that same idea. If
it's good for the courts, it's
likely good for the state
employees and what's the budget
with that. So it is kind of up
in the air, but I believe it's
starting in the house.
Very well, thank you, thank you
for that.
No more questions, Mr. Chair.
Very well.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and uh in terms of the
Question that I have, it's
related, of course, to the
unified budget and some of the
things that have occurred
particularly because of maybe
the change in district
attorneys, and I know you've
already alluded to
Part of that in terms of the
differences, or if you will,
additional resources needed.
And I don't want to work outside
of that unified budget, but I
would like to, uh, Mr. Chairman,
with your indulgence.
At least here from maybe one of
the district attorneys in terms
of
What they were left with with
the budget that was flat, and
then at the same time, how we
can utilize some of the
resources again, I, I like the
modified process that we're
dealing with here today.
But, uh, the two things that
concerned me, number one.
I really want to hear from
district attorneys and then the
second is, as they see the
adjustments within the budgets
as they've taken over offices
and they've started their terms
and it's not in all cases, some
possibly are continuing, um, I,
I, I wanna hear if you will, the
people that are um in the
trenches dealing directly with
this uh at their level as well.
So I, I don't know, Mr.
Chairman, I could be out of
line, but I would at least like
to hear from one district
attorney.
In terms of what they're
experiencing and how they're
working directly with our
analysts to uh help to, to, if
you will just adjust and uh to
work with this issue with, with
finance. And again, I bring it
up for a couple of reasons,
going back to uh Senator Wood's
point.
In dealing with the resources if
we don't have all that
information, we could be making
some decisions here that we'll
have to revisit later on maybe
with with supplementals or in
some cases might even be
deficiency, so if
I'll
work with your discretion, Mr.
Chairman, on, on that. I would
just like to at least maybe hear
from one of the district
attorneys, but if that's not
allowed, I understand that as
well.
Uh, very well, Senator, um.
I don't know if we do we have
anyone in the audience? I know
that.
Chairman my district attorney is
here.
like
is
Uh, he's with the 3rd Judicial
District.
And I believe he would have are
you able to do that search? OK.
I think he would be the best
person to answer those
questions.
Chairman, with your permission,
could I just, uh
Mr. Chairman with that as well,
uh, we're gonna be asking the
district attorney must see us if
he would also make sure that he
is going to be there by the
microphone because all this is
being recorded and we do have
the individuals that are out
there that are paying attention
to this particular presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Go ahead, Mr. Chairman, thank
you so much. Good morning to the
members of the commission, or
excuse me, the committee, uh, if
you take a look at the document
that I distributed to you very
quickly.
These are the circumstances that
some of us find ourselves in.
The prior district attorney.
Although the governor, when she
appeared.
In Las Cruces in front of at
least 1000 people at a public
safety community meeting
basically it indicated that they
would provide or support the
district, the 3rd judicial
district, and getting 4 more
prosecutors.
Um, I thought it a bare minimum
that that would be included in
the budget.
But what was submitted was a
completely flat budget,
something that I did not
anticipate and did not learn
about until November because of
my inability to perhaps
communicate with the outgoing
administration. So I really feel
with all of the dynamics that
are occurring in Donana County.
We have in December there were 7
prosecutors on staff. Now
they're 17.
And that leaves me with about 2
or 3 more positions that I
believe that I'll be able to
fill in the near future, but it,
it puts us at a disadvantage as
soon as I found out where we
were at. I did reach out to both
uh Felix and Mario to talk about
the ability to really submit uh
what is necessary for the third
judicial district. I can tell
you that I'm reorganizing the
entire office into a manner that
is a far more effective
prosecution.
tool and you'll see the, the
structures within the
presentation, but what I was
confronted with was basically
finding out on the first of
January that there were 1,271
cases that had been pending to
go forward to the grand jury.
That's even just at the very
beginning of the uh
initiation of criminal cases,
uh, to find out that some of
them had been pending for over a
two-year period, so we've been
going through this, this number
of cases methodically we've
already identified 500 cases
that will have to uh push
forward and I think that that
Figure will ultimately be closer
to 1000, we found 2,394 cases
that were in Warrant status,
which means that the effort
hadn't.
Really become serious in terms
of tracking down individuals in
the community that I outstanding
warrants, some of them for major
felony uh matters. The last page
is what I would have submitted
if I had been given that
opportunity, I would have
submitted this request, which is
really for two attorneys to lead
investigators in what I call a
forensic accountant, someone who
can help address white collar
crimes, uh, and white collar
related cases because of the
length of time that they take
someone that could work with
businesses to help them refine
the losses that they've suffered
due to crime so that we would
have the ability to progress
with perhaps higher level of
felony prosecution. So, uh, I
just want you to take into
consideration that I think that
there's a few of us that were
found in this.
Unusual situation where the
outgoing administration really
was not uh perhaps appropriately
focused on what the needs were
or had gone, had become
frustrated with the
underperformance of the office
and didn't feel that there was
going to be the opportunity to
elevate the performance of the
office. This is certainly not
the case in the 3rd and within
the 1st 36 days that I've been
in office, we have already begun
to make really substantial
improvements.
To the overall process we're at
a 93% with our uh staffing. My
concern is not making it through
the rest of the uh the rest of
the fiscal year because the
first portion of it because
there were so few attorneys that
they're certainly going to be
vacancy savings, but, but the
concern is going into next year,
not being able to sustain the
operation, not having any
opportunity to make improvements
to the uh to the to the uh
operations. So with that, I'd be
happy to.
Respond to any kind of
questions, but I know that some
of the other district attorneys
find themselves, so I'm
appealing to you to really take
a look at the LFC
recommendations and see what
this committee can do to make
modifications to really give the
district attorneys, the tools
that they need, the headline.
When I was sworn in was um Maus
takes office in crime.
panic.
Because there is that kind of
prioritization. We just finished
having Las Cruces days up here
and the number one priority of
the Chamber of Commerce is
public safety. So being in a
situation where they're, you're,
you're the recommendation is
that you get a 0% increase is
unsustainable.
Mr. Chairman, if I may, I, I
just wanted to make the point.
That with that a night command
of course our analysts both with
LFC and DFA for the work that
you all have done.
And the rationale behind that as
we move forward, there needs to
be some additional work done,
and again not to work outside of
the unified budget, but to
continue with that same process,
that's all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much for allowing
me that opportunity to have
someone talk about this issue.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, could I, could I
comment? Yes. Um.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, um,
just to clarify, the DA's aren't
a part of the unified budget.
So just to clarify that they're,
they have their own budget, they
don't have that process. And
just to reiterate, um, HAFC did
flag the new elected DA's
budgets for work, so there will
be work in HAFC as well.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Campos, and thank you,
um.
For being here and presenting
them to see us.
OK, uh, pretty well, we have um.
way.
We have a first uh we have um
Senator for you and then you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, no, I didn't have a
question. Thank you though. Um,
uh.
Appreciate the, the information.
When um uh was the last time
that pay study was completed. Do
we know? And you mentioned that
there's a need to move forward
on a pay study.
to share, um, Senator Trujillo,
there the there's an ongoing pay
study in the executive that will
report their findings in this
year.
And um they want to use that
same idea for the judiciary.
Um, Mr. Chairman, yeah, that's
what I understood, but has there
been one done in recent years? I
mean, if the executive, we know
that it was many, many, many
years ago, but I thought that
there had been one done more
recent for the courts.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
I was just told the DAs are
working on one currently. They
have a slightly different one
than the courts. I know we have
robust AOC representation in the
room, so if I could ask any of
them when they're.
um last study was I know that
they were left off of the
executive one that happened.
Kind of big one a couple of
years ago, uh, in which case
that was the, the theme coming
out of HAFC was that hopefully
we can find one of those now for
court employees, but I know the
DA's are working on it
currently. All right. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Um, so,
You know, we've been talking for
a couple of days now, almost
since the session started and
for some of us before the
session started.
The courts.
are going to play a huge role in
our
Our health care and uh upgrade,
um, reform, and making sure that
services get out.
Big part in, in fact, when you
look at Senate Bill 2, it's $8.7
million.
There's a huge part in and my
concern, Mr. Chairman, is that
when I look at the, just for
example, um, I know in our
community we've got great
concern about crime.
And I believe other communities
do too, and in part of the
challenge is the delay in in
investigations, the delay in
prosecution, in some cases, the
delay in getting it through the
courts, and I know the courts
and the DA's are all working on
that, but I just for the life of
me can't figure out why we would
Take their recommendation and
then make a recommendation to
fund them $1.9 million less than
what they've asked us for.
And, and to me that's like
bodies on the ground, I mean,
live bodies on the ground. Those
are attorneys, those are
investigators, I don't know
exactly what those positions
might be, but it makes me very
nervous that we're not fully
funding what they say that they
need, or at least closer than
$1.9 million.
And at the same time we're
putting a huge
Ask on them. I'm not gonna say
burden because I think it's a
positive aspect that we're
putting a huge ask on them, you
know, major player in this
healthcare reform, Mr. Chairman,
I'm not looking for a response
to that. I just think we need to
really think about if crime is
an issue.
Senator, I would want to
respond.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Trujillo.
Great question. Um, he
understands the concerns,
however, we, the LFC has budget
guidelines that that every
analyst has to abide by, and
that's
We're moving on to more um
Um
Pro prolongated growth instead
of the up and down swings, which
means we have to stay to a
certain percentage increase in
order to keep that afloat. So in
those constraints, we had to
work in.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, then I
would, I would just say like I
would be one to just speak up
and say we've got to go beyond
that.
I truly believe we have to go
beyond that.
Well, Senator, um, and that was
gonna be one of my questions
too.
So
Uh, senator.
Tobias first and then we'll go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
And sir, thank you for this
handout. It's helpful. Um,
you're showing a 49% increase
cumulatively from 2019 and
violent crime, and I can say
that that's at the forefront of
every New Mexican's mind, um,
not just your district, um, but
I'm looking at your chart here,
there looked like there was a
really steep decline in violent
crime in 2023, but now a nice
steep uptick in 24. Um, do you
know that percentage and then
what's the percentage of
increase?
decrease in 2025 so far.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chairman and Senator, I don't, I
don't have that statistic in
terms of where we are in 25
other than by going by what I
see in the newspaper in the
number of cases that are being
filed now at this point in the
number of of motions that we're
filing to detain individuals in
custody, and certainly that is
an uptick, but it's an uptick
due to the fact that we've
jumped from 7 to 17 prosecutors
within a 30 day period.
OK, thank you. That's helpful.
Um,
I share Senator Trujillo's
remarks where it, it
Some of the things we're seeing
here baffle my mind. I'm new
here. I'm a freshman, so I'm
looking at things from maybe a
different lens, um, but I don't
see a trend anywhere where crime
is decreasing significantly. Um
and I think New Mexicans feel
that. I just spoke down in the
rotunda this morning, um, on
behalf of victims of violent
crime and the families down
there who were representing
their dead family members, and
we hear those stories day after
day after day.
Um, so I think that we need to
have some robust conversation
here in this committee, um, and
I understand your constraints,
but this is a problem that is
not going away for New Mexico
and it, it affects every single
person that lives in the state
and we do.
We deserve to live in safety.
And I don't think most of us
feel like we're living in that
situation. And then I'm looking
at volume 3, page 43, this
beautiful chart that they've
given us, and I'm looking at my
district, which is in
Albuquerque Metro, and this is
unreal. It's absolutely unreal.
Um, so we, we have to make broad
sweeping changes. So thank you,
thank you for presenting that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chairman, would you permit me
just one other comment.
Achieving or attaining
prosecutors.
is one of the most competitive
markets anywhere you just cannot
find them, um, districts are
competing against each other to
try to come up with prosecutors,
the rural areas struggle
enormously, but the third
judicial district we are now at
the highest level of attorneys
than we've had probably in the
last 12 years, but it is a
struggle and the only way to
accomplish it is to having more.
competitive compensation for
these individuals, especially if
they're trying to get anyone
with any seasoning or any uh
lengthy background in
prosecution. I really hope this
committee will take a look at it
and I know that you can talk
about um uh doing additional
studies and I think you've been
informed that there's one going
on now, but the reality is, is
that that study probably won't
be accurately reflecting the
cost in order to attract.
prosecutors uh into the
different offices around the
state.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for that response.
Senator. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just a couple of questions. Um,
District 3, don't go anywhere
yet
Just a, just a quick deal.
I want to point out in Las
Cruces.
If you get into the rural areas,
I know why we have problems
finding AD or DAs, you know how
hard it is to find prosecutors,
um.
You know, cause I'm from San
Juan County, it's difficult to
find sheriff's officer
everything right now because of
the rural area. So if we have a
problem in a, in a metropolitan
area like Las Cruces, I would
say we definitely have a
problem.
Um
My question is,
You know, this, this is a good
example, gentlemen, you did a
great job. This is, this is a
perfect example.
Is anybody working on the same
page.
In other words, are any of these
groups working together?
So for example,
I feel like the courts are in
one side.
And then the um AODAs.
are on a different page. Does
that make sense? Like, we have
this crime rate, it's not just
about prosecuting that is our
issue we've got, we've got to
get to the crime itself.
And
You know, I, I don't want to get
on a great big soapbox here, but
we, we've got to put these
people in jail, is the court's
helping you.
Do your job, take out the
personnel is a court's helping
you do your job to bring down
that rate, I would say Mr.
Chairman, Senator, I would say
yes. uh, all of us bear a
burden.
In terms of being able to meet
the standards that are there.
Um, let me give you a good
example. I'm a former district
court judge.
And so at the time when the bail
bond Reform Act was pushed
through.
Um, prosecutors were the
district attorney's office was
Filing motions for extended
custody in almost every case.
And I asked him why are you
doing that? You know that you're
not meeting the standards.
You're filing a motion and
you're not backing it up with
what's necessary.
And they said, well, because
that way if something happens
and this individual is released.
It's the judge's fault.
But you didn't bear your burden.
You didn't bear your standard,
so now we're seeing um uh an
uptick in the number of
individuals that are being held
because we're doing the extra
work. It is an elevation of
performance that's necessary in
all the the stakeholders that
law enforcement, district
attorney's office, judges in
terms of fast tracking cases,
but meeting the standards that
have been set, I believe they
can be you just have.
to do the extra work and be
prepared, and I'll give you a
real good example, an
individual, basically already
with a charge had already been
let out of custody and so he
would picked up another
extremely serious charge. Will
the individual says that he has
a place to live, so we went the
extra step of really making an
inquiry where do you live and
why are you using this address?
It's his daughters who wants
nothing to do with him.
Feels that he's a direct threat
to her and his grandchild being
able to take the extra step we
were able to keep him in custody
because not only is he
dangerous, but he has no, no
real roots in the community will
disappear. Uh, you do the extra
work you can accomplish more,
but that's at every level of the
system. One of the things that I
feel I enjoy is I know where the
choke points are.
In the criminal justice system
and we are going to methodically
address all of those points so
that people have a greater level
of confidence in what all of the
stakeholders are doing. I, I
think the days of having to
point at one another in terms of
who's to blame should be put
aside and we basically have a
much greater degree of
coordination and collaboration
so that we can achieve the
desire that this committee would
want to see. Well, Mr. Chair, my
response to that
um
The population of New Mexico has
not increased a whole lot over
the last.
5 years. Let's say 5 years.
So, I understand how, how you
need personnel, but what is
driving how you have that
shortage.
The shortage is it the court
cases that that is the actual
crime rate or is it the um the
actual court cases, you don't
have enough.
Prosecutors to go in and
prosecute. You don't have Mr.
Chairman and senator, you, you
don't, at least the historically
in the 3rd judicial district,
you don't have enough
prosecutors, you're spread too
thin. You can only do so much
work, you don't, uh, prioritize
properly though that's what
happens when there is a lack of
personnel. So that's why I'm
really wanting to encourage the
committee to look carefully in
terms of perhaps more robust
budgets for.
the district attorneys in order
to bring in greater numbers of
personnel, reduce the caseloads,
be able to pay more attention,
fast track cases, prioritize the
more violent cases find a way to
reduce the time frames that each
step takes in the criminal
justice system.
Thank you, that helps.
Mr. Chair, yes sir.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, on
your question about how the
agencies coordinate with one
another. I know locally, there's
something called the CJCC, a
crime justice coordinating
council. So, I think that's the
acronym what it stands for. And
that's where all justice
partners in local regions meet
to, you know, figure out issues
that they have locally. And I've
been to the Bernalillo County
one where they've discussed
various um various measures to
take for me efficiency of
justice. So
they have local meetings of the
justice partners in different
areas.
Thank you.
Right then I have, I have one
question for you. Um
The AODA.
So
It looks like LFC.
So their past budget.
is only being increased by the
LFC and the executive.
By I don't have my calculator,
but it looks like it's just a
little over 100,000.
Yet they, they are showing.
Like 5 major
Deficits in personnel.
Mm
What, what is the cause of that?
How?
How come we're not taking care
of that in the general?
And and they're having to do
that as a separate ask.
Mr. Chair, Senator, great
question. The um AODA came in
with an ask of around almost 50%
increase.
And again with the constraints
that we had, I know the um the
case management system was one
of their priorities. So we
funded it in the constraints
that the LFC had.
And that's the explanation as to
why there was the increases, but
again, HAFC did flag.
The, the, um, case management
system to be funded fully.
So
Mr. Chair, so
The AO AODA is, it's like the
umbrella though, right? Is it
the one kind of holding
everything together, uh, Mr.
Chair, that the AODA doesn't
have that big of a role the AOC
is the one that does a lot of
the human AODA that AOC has more
of a grip on what the courts are
doing. AODA is more of a support
service for training and some
coordination, but the AUDA does
not have complete re over all
the district attorneys. And I'll
also mention that a lot of
attorneys' offices have.
And chronic recruitment and
retention issues, meaning
there's a lot of vacancy savings
in their budgets.
So that's another reason of why
the personnel was increases
weren't as um
Prioritized.
Mr. Chair would be OK if uh Mr.
Tedro from AODA.
Please do go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Rick Tedro. I'm the
executive director of the AODA
and just for a quick
Felix was just about there on
it. The AODA serves as a service
agency to all the district
attorneys statewide. They are,
you know, they are their own
budgets, they're their own
agencies, um, but the AODA's
role is primarily to support
them statewide and where we saw
the deficiency sort of that I've
mentioned to you all before was
You know, close to 2 million
right now that I just flat out
need and that's more for what
I'll say IT needs. Um, it is the
new case management system that
we're building as we speak.
Um, but we weren't funded almost
Almost a million dollars that
will be needed next year just to
run the new program that
includes licensing, storage,
maintenance of the new system,
and that was one of the, the
deficiencies that we had pointed
out. Another one was.
You know, the need for uh
cybersecurity person to help
statewide. Uh, we did suffer a
ransomware attack last year. Um.
Do it helped us a lot.
Um
But it's just, that's where
we're going and that's where
AODA needs to go while they
support the DA's is really a
focus on what I'll call the IT
section of stuff. Um, I know
some of our numbers were a
little different based off of
vacancy savings. However, I can
tell you right now, um, I
started in January. Right now we
don't have any vacancies. We've
hired two programmers, um,
another IT network specialist,
you know, with a real big
emphasis on, again, getting the
IT system.
um the computer software systems
that all the DAs need statewide
in place. So that could have
been some of the discrepancies
also, however, we're not at that
point right now at AOD.
Senator, thank you.
Mr. Chair. So kind of along that
same line, so
Or all of the the DA is gonna
have access to that program. Is
that, is that the point of it is
to get all of the DA's on the
same.
Page.
For lack of a better word.
Mr. Chair, Senator Lanier.
Right now we have one, we call
it our our statewide case
management system. It is over 20
years old. It it is to say it's
giming along is giving it a lot
of credit.
Um
And so 2.5 years ago, we were
provided funding at AODA to
build or to purchase and, you
know, bring together a new
system, a new system that we've
gone with it's called
e-prosecutor. Um, it's been 2
years, over 2 years now of
building it up, getting it
ready, it will serve all the DA
statewide plus other agencies,
Department of Public Safety will
have access to it. uh LOPD, it
provides discovery to the
defense attorneys, you know.
electronically, so, um,
The Attorney general's office
will have access to it. So all
these different users, of
course, mean users fees, the
licensing fees that go with it,
but this system will tie in a
lot of the actors that go before
the courts, so it, it, it's
gonna be hopefully very
Much more efficient, but yes, it
is statewide for all the actors.
It will be before the courts.
All right, thank you. Very good
answer. I just, um, just to kind
of in closing.
I, I just look at it maybe from
a different view.
Um
I do separate the court system
with the DA's. I, I just
separate them. I don't know if
that's correct or not, that's
how I look at it.
And we dumped a ton of money
over the years into the court
systems.
And our numbers aren't coming
back.
Any better.
Sometimes worse.
So
You know, maybe, maybe we ought
to channel our money towards the
DA's now and get them all
working together and on the same
page and
And that, that's just where I'm
coming from. I, I feel like the
DAs have kind of got left out
maybe a little bit, so.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Very well. Is there anyone else?
then uh we'll move to, uh, we
have someone in line.
Right now, uh
We have from the 13th judicial
district.
Uh, we have someone that wants
to come and we have attorney.
I know
Can you hear us, and if you can
mute, I can hear you. This is uh
District Attorney Barbara Romo.
Good morning. Good morning. We
can hear you.
Great.
Um, thank you so much for
allowing us to, to speak this
morning. I will be very brief, I
promise.
Um
I also have with me in the
office my CFO in case there's
other questions that, that you
need answered that I can't
answer.
Um, my county, my, my district,
the 13 judicial district covers
Sandoval, Valencia, and Cibela
counties. Our agency is
requesting that the LFC
recommendation, which is
$233,300 base increase or 2.6%
increase for our personal
personnel category are base
increases to fund two new
attorney positions.
I just want to emphasize to the
committee that fiscal
responsibility is critically
important to me. It was drilled
into me from my time in the
military onward. So I just wanna
emphasize that we do take the
monies that you give us very
seriously.
And FY 24, our agency reverted.
Less than 1%.
Which is, which was actually
$1,201.
Also for the last 3 fiscal
years, our agency has been
fiscally responsible with zero
audit findings. And with that, I
will stand for questions. Thank
you. Thank you for your call and
thank you for your concern.
Who
And uh maybe just going back if
um.
If you can just clarify a little
bit better what your question
is.
Oh, I'm, I'm sorry. I, we're
having a little bit of technical
difficulties. I, we didn't
really have a question. I think
um we were, we're kind of
communicating with your IT
people, and we were just
indicating that I was online
because we're not able to change
to 13th judicial district. So I
apologize. I didn't mean to go
out of turn. I, I missed the, I,
I, we didn't have a question. I,
I really apologize for the
inconvenience.
Any response from
stuff.
No, there's no response on we do
have one of our senators, go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and ask
him just looking at
I'm sorry, sir, what was your
name?
Fernando Mecias.
Um,
OK, so I'm looking at this and
we were just talking about this
like you're trying to attract
and retain
Seasoned attorneys.
And a senior trial attorney
makes $106,000 a year blows my
mind. You can take a high school
degree, get a quick
certification with the heavy
highway association and
Operate a climate controlled
front loader for $120,000 a
year.
So, uh
I mean, are we revisiting what
we're paying, uh, trial
attorneys because I don't know,
I, I would probably just go with
the front loader job.
Quite frankly, Mr. Chair. I
thought you were suggesting to
me that I change career paths
may consider,
you may actually consider that,
but we need you, so don't do
that, um, but this is woefully
inadequate. I, I can't
understand.
How this works here and Mr.
Chairman, that that's for a
senior trial attorney.
So you jump even lower for a
trial attorney.
And a lot of it is based on
experience and there is some
degree of flexibility depending
on the background of the
individual to modify that
compensation upwards, but yes,
these are not competitive
salaries, and I know that a lot
of people would like to do this
kind of work, but they um.
find offers better in better
locations we're competing with
El Paso that has much better
compensation levels for
prosecutors $16,000 a year, Mr.
Chair. I'm sorry, so it's
definitely more than 106,000
ladies.
How much lower are we in
compensation total package then
maybe our surrounding states.
Do you have that information?
I don't relate it to the
attorneys for the last 6 years I
had been the county manager for
Donana County. I can tell you
that they're salaries in El Paso
County government was certainly
anywhere from 10 to 25% higher
than some of the compensation
levels for county employees, but
I haven't really done a study or
been part of an assessment in
terms of a comparison between
the prosecutors or just
Lawyers in general.
Thank you, and I'll just say,
God bless you all because this
is not easy work, um, I'm sure
it's very frustrating, um.
Probably often in our states,
um.
But to know that this is the
compensation we're talking
about. I'm, I'm
A little in shock actually. So
thank you all.
We are doing this work. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
to him.
Two of these because
Oh, very well, um.
I, there are quite a few more
questions and there's some, but
I, I think we are understanding.
Very much, you know, the, the
concern and
See where we need to go back and
really uh
Analyze this and also regroup,
you know, with our part.
As a committee, and I know that
there's quite a few that are
online, but it's gonna be.
You know, I feel like, you know,
thanks that they are online, but
at the same time, the fairness
to you that you're in the
audience, but I would rather
just leave it here.
And let us work.
And then uh we can come back uh
probably very soon in the near
future to see what we are going
to be addressing.
And uh work with that, but I
wanna thank all of you for being
here today. Go ahead.
Thank you
I respect the committee's
process. I'm not going to leave
you here longer. My name is
David Thompson. I'm Chief
Justice of New Mexico Supreme
Court.
I just want to reset something
as you go back and deliberate.
A lot of these are very good
questions.
Looking at your agenda.
OK. You have a judicial system,
which we're talking about today,
and you have a judicial branch.
Supreme Court, those courts are
the judicial branch. We are part
of this judicial system.
And we need corrections in the
executive agency.
We need the DAs and executive
agency. We need public
defenders, separate commission.
We don't oversee the DAs, we
don't oversee the public
defenders. We don't oversee
corrections. I just want to let
you know as you review.
Um
Our budget.
That you take those two
considerations in to place.
If you look at the bottom of
your
Name tags
You will see you divide
yourselves in the counties.
Some counties have numerous
judicial districts in them.
The 8th and the 4th.
The first
You probably have 3 senator.
Berna Leo is the 2nd judicial.
Repres
uh
represent DA my spoke.
He is in the 3rd judicial
district that's made up of a
number of counties. We oversee
13 of those, OK? There's 13
judicial districts.
That we oversee as a court.
In the Court of Appeals and then
the Supreme Court. So in this
conversation, I just want to
stand up briefly and I respect
your time and I'll, I'll step
back and I did feel it was my
obligation just to
Alert to.
Um, those differences, unified
budget is a court concept only.
OK.
The ADA's worked through the AOC
but they bring their budgets to
you individually.
Public defenders is more of a
unified system because they're
on the commission.
But
When we talk about the unified
budget that is, that is a court
concept.
I thank you very much for your
time and in the moment to uh
thank you very much to speak
with regard to judicial branch.
Thank you, Senator Chair.
Very well.
Right, very well with that, uh,
we recess until this afternoon.
Thank you for being here.
