The money.
Yes that that that was the.
We know that this happened on
the house floor ready Mr
Chairman no that could on the
house floor ready Sir.
Of the act on the house floor.
That was signed in designated
site info.
I don't know why we would have
here.
There's another amendment so
we're back on the bill.
Question about doing just that
thank you for.
So we have another amendment.
One.
You have a copy of them and I
don't know Sir Mr chair copy
them and you take that copy.
There was would you take in your
copy them and she will tell and
taken the conference you went
out the back door.
And told to take a copy human
donor.
We re Mr Reddy said that it all
right here.
He didn't have a copy of a copy
no he got him kind of one now
thank you.
There is calm down.
Maybe I'm a little hoarse but.
Little better sure this your
amendment so
Move the Senate finance
committee member number one.
House Bill five oh five for
discussion.
We're on for discussion purposes
but on the Senator explained in
New Mexico Mr districts a.
Districts one little entity
there are twenty four.
All it does.
Ten million dollars to plan
design and construct a
reproductive health clinic in
Dona ana county this makes that
go away.
We explained.
Thank you Mr chairman and so
that thank you for explaining
the amendment etcetera so so
we're in the in Dona ana county
this is going to be a what
what's the this is very
important to have this
ammendment so can you talk to us
about what's the.
The square footage you have
anything any details on it no
idea what I notice is ten
million dollars on abortion
clinic.
There are.
A couple of reasons a I don't
think the state of New Mexico to
be paying for that.
B. if it's that important let
private enterprise building
doctors build things all the
time without state money.
all businesses so what do we
want to but we want to pick a
winner down there as opposed to
letting the market pick.
Why do we want to spend money on
this product.
Okay.
Sarah sure what if what you're
saying questions what if it's
not one of its a fertility
clinic.
One of its.
Mr chair all I have to do is say
with the governor said he was
going to do this is gonna put
ten million dollars for abortion
clinics he said that.
So I'm gonna take your word for.
Well I guess we look at the
definition of reproductive in
the.
Right yes any other questions on
them and.
See none.
Have a motion on the.
One moved to Pasco there would
do pass.
I'm in second.
We call the roll.
Yes there come.
No.
No Sir Diamond yes you're done
yes Senator Gonzales no it is
also Senator Hemphill.
Yes.
Yes.
Senator share yes this year yes
Steinborn the there's no Senator
Woods yes Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yet on the
amendment no.
You.
No now.
Back on the bill any questions
on the bill have a motion for
members on the bill.
Session by Senator Padilla
second by Senator Gonzales
receivers Tim is also raise your
hand for second.
It serves all second we call the
roll renewable.
Revert no Senator yes.
Yes I'm in.
There are in solid yes.
In solace yes Syrian center yes
Senator Padilla yes they do a
test center share no through
here no Senator Steinborn yes
there so I'm going yes Senator
Woods in words no Senator
Rodriguez yes yes yes chairman
yes.
Thanks committee thank you Mr
chair Senator Shendo we're gonna
get you one forty six on the
right now.
We already took public comment
and one forty six we bowled over
because we don't have a quorum.
Senator Shendo.
The secretary if we just
sort.
Along for signatures and Asian
of.
Thank.
When you run court.
It'll compare to other states
are you able to seize on the on
the length of the vehicle you
go.
Love the lord though Navajo.
Reservation for many years The
New Mexico eight for those who
don't know or tell them hurry up
and run
which is not my language.
Choose your language edition of
and.
And thank.
Right.
Okay she's on her way
I know you were halfway through
this a Mr chair members of the
committee and
commitments were made to.
Madam chair of the Senate
Representative Republicans were
here but the the sections wanted
to of were removed in the
amendment and so we're now to
the sections three.
And four and then Senator.
Secretary you too hopefully
she's.
We we had another meeting.
I Starbucks.
We were we were in the building.
We just amend the tax package in
this bill right now.
You try you try I think we have
another one recommended.
I'm gonna have some fun before
we leave the yes I know we've
we've got we've got a few more
days I think we're gonna have
some fun.
Never go enrollment last few
days.
Hello this is.
A good afternoon madam
secretary.
Or any.
Thank you.
Seventy six with questions from
committee members.
The costs of school street and
secretary of one question for
there is a lawsuit over
administrative fees in this
there's fees inside this bill
there's a lawsuit about pet food
in the cold of the.
Why is seventy nine percent of
T. R. D.'s general fund budget
based on fees.
Mr chair I believe you're
talking about the three percent
and administrative defeat it
goes to the general fund not
to be separated but
there was a period of about ten
years where the LESC was using
not withstanding language to re
direct the administrative fee to
TRD is operating budget but that
hasn't been the case since I
think fiscal year nineteen give
or take a year.
That the fee that we collect
because the general fund.
That doesn't really take no
fifty one million dollars or
seventy nine percent of general
fund budget in fees.
That's what you're collecting
three percent is fifty one
million dollars is that really
the correct amount in fees that
you passed through.
Mission of fees bill.
It only took sections wanted to
out we took the fees out.
Okay Mister chairman
I don't think this bill is is a
little relating to fees but
taxed have doesn't typically run
an accounting of all the costs
that are supported but the costs
that are supported for both the
state and local G. R. S. W. shin
and Administration not just our
IT systems but also our legal
defense of the tax code
The odd to the entire audit
apparatus that tax return
apparatus so I I do think that
that number is is probably not
far off the mark.
The much everything we do other
than NVD supports the tax
program on behalf of the state
and the locals.
I do know that Sir the correct
amount and you're not sending
the correct amount to the cities
and counties.
Mr chair how do we know that.
We're distributing the right
amount of revenue you know we're
not overcharging them on fees
because I believe this lawsuit a
couple years ago cost is forty
nine or fifty million dollars
more than a hundred ten million
I think they settle for less new
Mr chairman the the lawsuit
you're talking about this file
by City of Albuquerque and many
local governments joined was
about a completely different
issue it wasn't about the
administrative fee I know that
while the not withstanding
language was was being used in
house bill two there was talk
about local governments filing
lawsuit to my knowledge they
never have about the
administrative fee the
distributions lawsuit we did
settle for fifty million dollars
and that was about it a
different issue.
And when we settle those
lawsuits how do we budget that
not much money a settlement that
just come out of the general
fund reserves Mr chairman the
settlements if if there are any
are allowed by statute to come
out of distributions to the
general fund so in in whatever
distribution month next followed
the settlement we would have
netted that out to send to local
governments rather than the
general fund.
Thank.
no other questions or would.
Thank you madam chair.
When we start talking about
omitted property what we talking
about Mr chair madam secretary.
Mr chair and Senator Woods
omitted assets would be property
that is required to be reported
for property tax purposes but
but wasn't reported so could be
any number of things that could
be.
It meant you know related to oil
and gas production and it could
be pipelines that could be any
number of things but it wasn't
reported as required and then
either through the county
assessor or the state it was
assessed even though it wasn't
reported and this was a of a
real big deal and Harding County
a few years ago can you kind of
review of minute of that that
what happened in that the there
was a lot of property out on the
rubble dove that was omitted
from the tax rolls and the way I
remember that.
Share there was a state
assessor.
That did that
Assessing not the county
assessor.
And we're having trouble with
that assessor getting out on
certain parts of the state and
actually looking for this.
So.
With your agreement have we
gained any on that have that we
have do we have more Senator
state assessors now what are we
doing are we contract in that
work out how are we doing better
on that Mr chair and madam
secretary Mister chairman
Senator Woods thank you for that
question when I started at the
tax department in twenty
nineteen there was a lot of
tension at the time about
omitted assets and the thought
that counties and other property
taxing entities were losing out
on property tax revenue due to
some of the assets not being tax
and there were some county
contractors I believe and I I
don't remember off hand if this
was an Harding County or
elsewhere but there were county
assessors and county contractors
who were going around and
addenda find these omitted
assets and attempting to assess
them and at the time before I
arrived the tax department was
sort of telling them to cease
and desist that's our job when
when I came in at and with the
new property tax director we
said now I mean this is our
statutory authority to
essentially assessed some of
these properties like pipelines
but we would love their health
so if they have lists of
properties go ahead and send
them our way and we would love
to investigate so we have worked
more collaboratively with
counties and their contractors
if necessary to just make sure
that if they have information
that can lead to a proper
assessment that we get it we
look at.
So we're no longer discuss
state to do that we we are
allowing the counties input on
those that's correct and and
Mister chair and senator with
it's been a while since since
this is risen the my level so I
think the collaboration is just
working well and that's why I'm
not hearing about it but yes we
welcome any information they
want to provide sometimes the
methodologies that counties and
and their contractors were
attempting to use weren't quite
correct but we take the list of
assets and into the field work
if necessary okay I'm gonna talk
about a different kind of
property that county staff for
right now and then if you don't
have expertise in it will I'll
understand because it's it's
it's it's probably something
that these people in this
committee to don't understand
very well and that's account
tax.
And that that that that and I
don't know how much you know
right off the top of your head
okay the cat Tax is is the the
couple away from.
Share and and.
Senator the the cap taxes done a
lot through the last four and
the reports turned in from the
left up board as to movement of
cattle and and they'll fall into
a a County
to to graze or are come from out
of state and the last four
actually comes out and inspects
those gathering cattle and count
they expect room for health but
they also inspected for numbers
and that is turned into the
county
I believe those.
inspections are turned into the
counter they may be turned into
the state I don't know which but
anyway of the status of the
county assessor actually uses
those numbers to help determine
the taxable value and the tax on
those cattle and then of course
we all know that the agriculture
tax rate is a out of the Lori
tax rate that is determined you
know as the value of what's
earned off of that property so
I just wonder the and the reason
I bring this up because I just
wanted to make sure everybody in
the committee New a little bit
about that particular tax.
There's another tax that I don't
know a whole lot about and I'm
hoping that you got the answer
for this one.
Have about this is bill affect
the processing of the film
production.
Tax credits no Mister chairman
Senator Woods this bill would
not affect any anything to do
with the film tax credit okay so
where are is there any tax
credits that we are.
Are affected by this particular
bill Mr chair and and Senator
Woods just sorry to
Restate what I you know I my
head's in property tax but I I
should turn attention to the
section that deals with the
credit application process it's
possible that could affect the
timelines for receiving and
approving a film tax credit some
of the state that answer but it
doesn't expand the credit or
change how much will be paid out
anything like that but there is
a section in the bill that talks
about you know basically our
timeline to review and approve
or deny a credit application for
any program any credit
Section three in the old bill
now I think of section one with
the amendment
so it that that section does
affect that basically we it's as
we would receive a full
application before timeline to
review or and and approve or
deny would start and in exchange
for that we've decreased the
number of days we have to
approve from one eighty to one
twenty days okay and and course
that would make some difference
when we have tax credits that
are or refundable.
Exactly what does does this bill
have anything to do with the
refundable tax credit no Mr
chair and and Senator Woods it
it wouldn't make anything
refundable that isn't already it
can it wouldn't have any fiscal
impact on the amount of credits
or eligibility it's just the
timeline to review and making
sure that we have a complete
application for credit when we
begin our review and and that's
what I'm more of a little bit
concerned about if we change
timelines and they're refundable
tax credits to make sure that
you know they are refunded on
time or or claimed on time to be
refunded.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
yes in in the event that a
taxpayer and has all their ducks
in order and they have a
complete application for any tax
credit whether it's refundable
or transferable or or whatever
if if they submit to us a
quality application they can
actually expect to get their
credit approved sixty days
earlier okay.
Okay and.
It says also that the.
It's hard to believe this.
But Senator Ivey Soto and so if
on this thanks Chris and this
lack of the perception of
correctness of that assessment
would you like to comment on
that Mr chairman and madam
secretary here Mister chairman
Senator was thank you for that
question and that question does
relate to section one of the
original bill which of course
now has been amended out but you
know basically there's a section
of a law that says
the department issues
assessments when we believe
taxes owed by a tax payer at and
that the the presumption is that
the department's assessment is
correct.
I think there's a basic
misunderstanding the difference
between the presumption of
correctness and the burden of
proof totally different things
and the burden of proof and all
tax cases like most civil
actions is the preponderance of
the evidence the judge or the
hearing officer's going to
decide the case in terms of who
seems slightly more or less
correct and all the presumption
of correctness really does is
put the onus on a tax payer to
challenge our assessment it just
says we think you owe tax and
they can come in protest or they
can pay and then finalised it
for a refund to say no I don't
think I owe the tax rate with
different amount of tax and it
really just all it does is put
the onus on the taxpayer to
bring forward their case and
present their case first but the
case is still good decided on a
fifty fifty percent
preponderance of the evidence
standard and every state tax
system and the IRS tax system
all include some version of the
presumption of correctness it's
necessary to have a functioning
tax system where we assess and
they either pay or protest.
And with that Mr chair when we
when we get our.
Appraisal statements.
Earlier in the year then later
in the year the taxes are due
statement of taxes due.
Nothing has changed on those two
items and then you can only
protest it during that period of
time.
And after that period of time.
It's a done deal that's correct
senator Mr chair the protest
period and all tax programs the
ones under the tax
administration act and the
property tax code I get more
calls on that madam secretary Mr
Chairman then nearly anything
because people don't read those
statements when they get a they
they say well it's not a bill
said Rep there's not bill
throughout over there to the
side don't worry about that is
not a bill but it actually could
have a big change on their tax
out because of the appraisal has
gone up and a lot of the
assessors are now use an.
Google earth to determine if
there's new stuff out there and
going out to appraisal much like
you're saying they're using
contractors to provide those
those items that are on the tax
roll a new improvement of Erika
or anything assume an insider
dancer doing the same thing if
they see more reply and then the
used to have their will the
they're probably going to go
over there and and talk about it
and the only other thing I've
got and I think the the the
chair is covered when we start
talking about
Attorney fees.
Being paid by tax and
Representative if they lose an
argument.
And.
You know I I really have a hard.
Burn on that.
Does that does that cover.
Most everything that if if I
challenge taxed Representative.
Item taxed Rev loses you
automatically pay more tax money
thoroughness fees no Mister
chairman Senator Woods it's it's
very few and far between that a
judge or hearing officer
whatever
Direct the department or the tax
payer in that case to cover one
you know there attorney's fees
in the four years I've been with
the department I'm gonna guess
that it's happened about three
times so less than once a year
on average is the department
directed to pay someone else's
attorney's fees repair under
thirties but very rarely anyone
else's okay and Mr chair.
Now that of aired this bill to
my satisfaction you probably
won't hear another peep out of
me when is when I hear it again
thank you very much all centered
the vultures are always looking
to tax people.
They fly over my house with
Google earth all the time.
And and the problem with this
bill as if you don't report and
they can penalize check is that
correct if I buy a new computer
and I get the tax statements or
did you get new assets this year
I don't list them and they can
come back in the fall we.
We're not reporting them correct
Mr chair and you know he goes to
a question of whether those
assets hypothetical assets
you're talking about are subject
to the property tax code that's
but but if something is supposed
to be in the property tax base
and it's not reported than
someone is avoided their tax
liability and they should be
brought to compliance so whether
you know in the hypothetical
you're talking about whether
that would be subject to the
property tax code or not I I
don't know but this is an expand
the base or anything and and
actually it just gives in in
that hypothetical situation
gives the taxpayer a right to
protest which right now that the
tax code a silent to they they
may even be denied a right to
protest if there's just like
that so this is I hope I see it
is taxpayer friendly and making
sure that they have a right to
due process if that happens to
them yeah that's the problem is
no businesses and like ours we
move a lot of assets we don't
know me by an asset and then get
rid of an asset within a year
then that's not reported in and
then also Representative asset
that we see on Google earth and
so we sold it and it was in the
middle of that and say well you
know it for that time frame and
they can't verified I mean
that's the problem of the
vultures they come out and they
picked the loans I mean they
show up at your office you
better hide your pains in your
pencils and everything else
because of try to tax you on it
in certain areas I mean you may
not you're looking around the
room but they do it believe me
they do it the tax appraiser
McKinley County I live about
three miles down a dirt road and
over the hill and through the
gates can make you want to go
through my gaze to look at my
Barnes I get one's been there
for fifteen years at those
chains
they will try to tax you so.
In my part of the world.
The
Operate in multiple counties.
And Johnny gets to charge
tractor on the tractor where
it's at at the time or the cafe
where she's at at the time each
one of those counties in in
cattle Tax each one of those
County sent out a paper just get
how many cattle do have in the
county and how long you have
been there so they do at least
allow you to determine the
months that you have on there
but a lot of that depends on
rainfall too so you can be out
of compliance.
Because you turn that in once a
year.
But the rainfall was such that
he is able to raise over here
not only here but just saying
thank you for your words they
even went so far as to change
the monks.
In center city and trying to
make their land taxable.
And I believe the monks in
Silver City and and I think the
secretary for members this
conversation he make us but he
told the tax attorney that you
should probably go to hell.
And that was coming from among
them but well that's a little
strict rent there.
That's how far some of these
assessors will go then the rules
are straight and they'll try to
change things I mean there's
certain things you should
probably leave alone monks nuns
right previous.
so Senator Gonzales where do
that set for one forty six fifty
minute motion by Senator
Gonzales second by Senator
Rodriguez.
Representative Lara you do next
I'm gonna try to do is Senate
bill in the house bill would.
Senator.
Our test.
Senator Campos yes yes Senator
Diamond for Shendo yes.
Shendo.
Somebody's got a Valentine's
dinner.
Yes it's all
there have yes Senator Padilla.
Senator yes.
Senator share this long as
Harper's not here yes.
For the function that yes.
Consider what.
Woods yes that Rodriguez yes yes
yes to Reno's I have to.
You have to get shot and she
vultures.
Eleven zero passionate of thank
you Mr chairman Laura Committee.
We have the sponsors of the HA
are here yet because we're gonna
hear them.
The quick
meal army ho.
Forget the sponsors are.
we are doing.
Senate Bill
House Bill five thirty three.
Representative.
Lara
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee of of possible I
thirty three house provision of
finance committee substitute for
House Bill five thirty three is
what is the insurance
thirty bill that brings school
employee insurance up to GSD
parity of this bill Mr Chairman
representative Senators is
Party has appropriation in the
budget HB to I think it's thirty
two million dollars and this
bill is actually the enabling
language to get that up to to
get us rolling on that for
teachers.
will go to the audience anybody
in support.
Anybody in up of stand your
good.
Show stand around and support
anybody in opposition and nobody
on soon questions from committee
members.
Mr.
Go ahead.
Senator Woods.
Researchers this is what's in
the budget right is in the
budget this creates parity.
This is.
This is the issue where we
didn't want.
I
want to do quality from the
insurance to one percent
increase that we passed on in
here and on the floor right they
wanted to create the teachers
health insurance rate of pay for
a hundred percent.
But that would cause an issue
parity but short of fixing right
here throughout the and teachers
and we don't want to I don't
want to start that fight because
we're getting a parity right now
this and so the one percent
insurance
three six four one percent pay
increase was helping offset
everybody across the board for
insurance costs
this is the parity bill that
brings them to parity with Pat
Woods Senator it it doesn't do
that.
This line which the money's in
the bill but but what it says
here this is eighty percent for
employees making less than fifty
thousand page eighty percent is
what we do for our state self
insured program I believe in
that right Senator for.
I use that as an academic paper.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
that is correct so that eighty
percent for someone making less
than fifty thousand dollars is
currently
in this statute for state
employees and this bill would
Pass that on to schools and
charter schools to also have
that same contribution schedule
for those employees that make
less than fifty thousand dollars
okay and and so the question
with that Mr chair.
And and Representative is simply
have we got money in the budget.
Through we put money in the
budget did would do it to the
the statewide distribution
formula.
Of to to fund this both this
benefit.
Through the distribution of the
statewide formula of schools the
of the distribution formula the
the that's how we did it we put
it in to the formula that way so
we put adequate money in there
to fund this.
Through the distribution formula
or did we make a special
assessment our special payment
due to schools how do we do
that.
Mister chairman Senator yes the
the the funding will be included
in the SCG for the school
districts okay the SED so we.
That's the confusing part to me
we're making an.
Senator three different layers
here.
Eighty percent is what we do.
For the self insurance fund to
make it equity then we drop it
to seventy percent if you're
making more money and if you
make an even more money would
drop at sixty percent.
And so when we start up in
equity.
Not so much we're we're we're
saying the more money you make
the more you can afford.
But that's the way it's written
up and that's the bill that you
have before me so I understand
that but we but what I'm getting
at.
Are we sure.
One where the S. C. D.
right because.
School people school.
Teachers very every year in the
school district and some years
you may have.
For level three teachers that
level two teachers and level one
teachers and.
I wonder.
This is a crystal ball this is a
moving target.
Would you agree to that Mr chair
and and Representative.
Mr chair Senator yeah you you're
you're correct it it's not it's
this bill doesn't address equity
if this is the Parities and I
believe Mr chair Senator that if
this is the one of the first
steps that we're taking to
ensure that everyone is is is
has our health hazard health
care coverage.
But what I'm getting at I'm
worried even more about the
school district themselves
because we never know till the
day school starts.
At how many school teachers with
have and at what level of school
teachers are so.
How do we protect those school
districts how do we Mr chairman
and representative how do we
keep the school districts.
On this deal is our emergency
fund so more at bid that you can
draw on if you happen to hire
more level three teachers and
you had the year before you see
what I'm saying we're trying to
get these teachers to move up in
classification for their more
training better teacher that.
Situation and so.
I think you understand my
question Mr Chairman
representative how do we keep
the school districts will.
Mr chair Senator.
The eighty eight I I I
appreciate interstate example so
so this is a school district X.
has excellent teachers level one
level two and level three and so
via the the SCG at the school
districts will receive the
funding for those teachers
because Mr chair Senator the
school districts have
projections as how the what
their staffing levels are for
example if we have a school
districts Mr chairman and
senator that.
Has vacancies.
For those teachers they're still
gonna receive the funding from
the state through the SCG.
So okay so what with the way
that works is is the school
districts anticipate this is
what our staffing levels are
gonna be that's what they report
to the PED and that is the
amount of funding that the
receipt for those teachers
whether effective date the
reporter there's twenty teachers
at this certain level Mr
chairman and senator but I left.
For the during the summer for
whatever the left for whatever
reason Mister chairman Senator
but the school districts are
going to receive the full
funding for the twenty teachers
even if there's fifteen there.
Representative answer let me
help element school cash
balances can offset some of
those numbers and then they'll
report in the next year as an
increase in the increase that
number to the to the SCG as we
appropriate that but they have
cash balances and look at.
so
Volume three and cash balances
for school I don't think there's
any school is short on cash
balances to offset those numbers
for.
Six months.
Okay.
when we don't let our renewable
thank you Mr.
I would be on the COVID on the
our in our state.
Representative.
You're welcome quick question
did the language in.
This bill this House
Appropriations substantive
reflect what ended up in the
budget.
Mr chair in center yes that we
that think it's a approximately
thirty two million dollars okay
ask the question because.
there is.
This bill seems to raise tell me
if I'm wrong does it right the
health care contribution.
For for teachers making over
fifty thousand dollars a year.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn the
current tier structure for
books the participate with the
public schools insurance
authority has been outdated for
many years it's the original
contribution levels since
nineteen eighty six so.
Someone who makes twenty five
thousand dollars or more in the
current schedule has to be has
the employer would pay sixty
percent of that cost so now when
we look at the new tour schedule
somebody making fifty thousand
dollars a year it's going to
have a benefit of home.
Of that eighty percent coming
from the employer why is also
that individual that's making
between fifty thousand and that
sixty thousand has an additional
benefit of ten percent of
benefit of getting a higher
contribution from their employer
and then of course those
individuals that make sixty
thousand or more going to be
paying at the same level that
getting that same contribution
that they're currently getting
now so that was the idea of this
parity was to take these
antiquated contribution levels
that have been in place since
nineteen eighty six and bring
them up to state employees and
bring those
school's back up to parity with
the state.
R. Rep resentment so with people
making between fifty and sixty
thousand a year will see it
increase contribution where yes
okay I think that's a little bit
of a narrative out that that's
not the case but that's what I
wanted to just clarify that is
the case
okay well that's great and to
those to you and and
Representative I know you've
been working on this year trying
to get help teachers out and the
problem with these health care
costs I congratulate you and get
stuff done and.
We love you more and with but
yes this is great and I'm glad
we're we're doing more of what
we're doing a one percent raise
as well to help help you can
professionally so I have thank
you thank you for the question
your share.
Thank you of Mr chair.
So.
We've talked about this before.
It used to be the people work
for government whatever level of
government teacher of federal
government whatever because they
were just better benefits.
But potentially better pay if
you work in free market
somewhere.
With the budget.
Were the attraction.
But now Mr chair we're we're
paying more and more benefits to
the detriment of every other
business in the state with
seriously or harming other
businesses we talk here all we
need more state employees we
can't hire more state employees
from.
Neither can the private.
Businesses out they can't hire
anybody either.
And
I think we need to.
We need the unintended
consequences of all of this is
that we harm private business.
Up and down the line whether
it's somebody restaurant or
somebody Oil Field.
And so you know we keep we keep
raising wages we keep raising
budget I understand why but I
also know there's an unattended
call on intended consequence out
there that there's fewer and
fewer people.
Working outside of government.
And while we need quality people
inside of government.
We also need people that are
outside of government that are
paying taxes and not taking back
same taxes.
if we're just gonna keep the
economy functioning at all.
And I don't mean that derogatory
toward any state employee I
understand that that's.
But.
But if we keep doing both sides
of the coin.
We harm the people that are in
this room advocating for
themselves because the people
out there don't even know what
we're doing to.
And they won't know what we're
doing to.
Until it's too late.
So.
I'm I'm not going to support
this because at some point we
have to stop.
Straight up competing with
everybody that's not this
building.
For government buildings.
So we need to let.
Compete one where the other
compete on the money to compete
on the budget but can't compete
on both because then you destroy
every other business in the
state.
Thank.
Senator argue that point with
you all day long when you have
The state have forty schools in
my school district and then we
have thirty.
And there's only gonna be maybe
sixty people that want to be a
janitor at the school.
Make maybe thirty thousand or
less we've brought up to fifteen
so I don't know what it really
really making only a limited
amount of people want to be
teachers there's only a little
lemon amount of people at one of
the school counselors
we know the teacher shortage has
occurred can rent bills for that
I have another one text in that
we know that there's no employee
shortage due out the state when
we have CYFD with twenty seven
percent vacancies about two
hundred employees we know that
any any agency that comes in
there's an employee shortage
across the state.
Right we know the things that
are most important to health
care to workers is health care
and the highest cost in their
paycheck is health care.
And so.
If we want to keep these guys
clean schools and during the
COVID in the and that even after
COVID had clean twice as hard
and they and I know this because
my wife and the janitor the only
ones required to be at the
school for New Mexico principal
and janitors only ones required
to be there.
but I I think that.
And arguments cutting you
because.
All of the amount of people are
going to be a cafeteria.
There's only a limited amount of
people that really want to go
into the schools and that's.
That I think I have a motion
from.
The revenue shares of I was just
gonna meant mentioned something
if I may Mister chairman thank
you for that and I want to thank
Representative Lara and the nice
lady here you know as I was
looking at this whole thing we
look at the the salaries that we
have in here thank you for the
nice information but no matter
how much we do it seems like
we're still under funding at
teachers and our teachers aides
and and school personnel in
general and so I think this is
the least we can do to help our
employees one thing to think
about is that the amount that
our teachers fan I'm preaching
to the choir but so true
sometimes you forget is that
this is gross pay by the time
everything else gets deducted
they take home so much less but
one point number two is that in
doing this in in helping
employees with their premiums as
much as we can for their
insurance we keep healthier
employees intact better
education for kids when our
teachers feel better when
they're healthy interacting on
and on it just goes on for the
family and also our health care
facilities are busting at the
seams with people at the
emergency health care centers
and other areas of our health
system and so it overall helps
the healthier we can keep our
employees the better off we are
this is a small price to pay
really for what we're doing so
thank you very much for that
that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you have a motion
simply have a question just a
motion for the past I said yes
commissioner I can tell we call
the roll.
Yes.
The number of the number.
Yes Campos yes domino's
domino's Senator Gonzales yes
that is also yes yes.
Yes yes yes yes and share go to
shared Senator Steinborn Jeff
Steinborn yes there was.
And what is no Senator Rodriguez
yes yes yes.
Yes yes.
We're gonna do next.
And our a representative for H.
G. R. eight is here so you may
try to do one or two more bills
and.
We're gonna have a.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Senator Hickey you're gonna have
to be quick.
Yeah yeah go Mr chair.
Mr chairman and committee I'm
coming to you is Senate bill for
to within amendment the proposed
amendment is being passed out to
you basically what it does is it
strikes the appropriation that
is contained in the bill but
what is it also important in the
bill are the criteria that need
to be changed with which the
finance authority in the program
can use the investment it is
essentially removes requirement
that venture capital funds have
to be matching it's really tough
in the market rates because
you're getting a number of
investors for the but for them
that exactly matches difficult
the bill raises the maximum
investment in one industry from
ten percent to thirty percent
that's just in one type of
industry state pharmacy what
technology there's a still a ten
percent to any one receiving
entity that would allow us to
the NMFA to make differential
rate investments below market
rates which is common in this
type investment and as
protection this is really
important for proprietary
technical trade secrets and
there is a fifteen million
dollar
Fund put into house bill two to
support this and we stand for
questions anybody in the
audience and support anybody in
opposition.
Millions of.
This very quick.
you got one minute Terry.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committees I'm very well
president and CEO during.
We support legislation because
provide necessary funding and
we're for state investments in
New Mexico for this long time
innovator in the field one must
be surely help our stage
directly arconic over the long
term and here thank you know why
they're setting industry we are
support thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you questions from committee
members Senator so Mister I know
this is been around for a while
will kind of return on
investment have we had food.
From these projects before I
mean how many Canadian
businesses succeed and help with
the grow versus how many failed.
Senator share.
This is a investment in start
ups its venture capital it's not
something that earns a
percentage per se that's this is
such as a loner investment and
just a simple small business the
it's hard to say because of the
different kinds of sectors that
can be invested in as we learned
yesterday and bio science that
sector is exploding there is a
fund for that but this
Fund is particularly for
minorities and rural areas but
will also invest in appropriate
technology to firms have been
vetted and hired to oversee the
investments to be and and these
are professional investing firms
to oversee the investment to be
sure that the progress being
made is is appropriate the right
people are running at and and
where else to get additional
investments to add into what the
state is investing in so overall
the
the number again the number is
very
certainly up to twenty five
percent will hit it big but the
reason that people go into
venture capital is that when you
hit it big you hit it really big
the other thing that this does
so there will be the there will
be some that don't make it
that's just the nature of the
business but the other critical
part of this bill is that this
is a jobs bill this is that
people have to come and stay in
New Mexico to grow this business
and to grow jobs that that that
middle and job higher income.
Mr chair so this is a.
Venture capital programs this to
state get anything back from it
or do we just.
And out fifteen million dollars
and hope that a business
succeeds in and pays taxes
somewhere along the way nose Mr
chairman and senator share the
state becomes a co owner and so
they get the equity back when
you know when they put in so
they put in a million and it
knocks it out of the park and
the investment comes out to
a ten million I'm sorry they put
in a hundred thousand then they
get it goes to ten million then
they get a million back so comes
back to the state.
So.
Mr of care I think that's what I
was asking has are for capital
process grown or shrunk would
put fifteen million dollars into
it is there ever a time when
it's self sustaining.
The yes I mean and in terms of
the money comes back and it had
like the bio science fund that I
described I'm sorry senator
Munoz described the other day
you know the money comes back
into this.
Can become more self sustaining
so this is to help get it off
the ground.
I don't know if if your expert
witness can answer this but how
much money is in there now and
then what did we start with me
what's.
With the growth of the funds
thank you Mr chairman this bill
is the Business and of an
amendment to or an add on to the
LFC endorsed bill last year
House Bill one four which give
thirty five million dollars to
the fund so it was a last year
piece of legislation we've just
hired those two firms that
Senator Hickey talked about
we're about to launch those two
new diversified efforts into of
venture capital so we have not
yet made our first investment we
believe that these are necessary
for us to achieve the mission
that house bill one oh four set
out which was to provide
alternative methods of venture
capital for New Mexico
businesses small businesses
particularly in rural areas.
Okay so so Mr chair and get this
straight so we put thirty five
million in and did nothing now
we're putting fifteen million in
and hope to do something Mr Mr
chairman and senator
it takes a long time I mean it
took a year to be able to find
the right firms to right find
the right person to be able to
put into this office and as they
got the experience of last year
all interviewing firms who would
be working with this they came
back and said you're going to
need to change these different
pieces to attract other
investment outside of what with
the state would be putting in so
the it is really at the start up
phase of fifteen million is
being added to it and the
recommendations of these
investment firms who are
overseeing investments are what
are before you today so that we
have greater latitude in what we
can investing in higher
probability of a winning
investment.
Mr chair.
So these are more risky
investments.
In the of the bank or some other
land which may is that true.
Mr chair and senator sherry yes
this this is venture capital
venture capital by definition
there is risk however venture
capitals what powers this
country and his power in our
neighboring states to vastly
exceed where we were twenty
years ago this is what we need
to do in New Mexico with the
money we have is to get into the
areas where there is investment
and return to growth so it's
it's risk reward but yes no this
is that we could put this money
in the bank and and for a little
while interest rates are up get
something back but nowhere near
what we can get the winning
investment.
So Mr chair there private
venture capital.
Businesses out there oh my god
it's the excuse me Mr chair
Senator my god.
My name today yeah.
You can both claim you've been
elevated Mr the.
Yes I mean Silicon Valley is all
about investment Nashville is
all about health care investment
you move to Boston it's all
about health and technology
investment there is there are
trillions of dollars of venture
capital waiting to find the
right areas to invest in it is
it incredibly if they're doing
incredibly well.
So Mr chair if there are
trillions of dollars private
money flowing out there what we
need fifty million in state
dollars because we want them to
come to New Mexico and we become
a partner with that in New
Mexico and then we require that
they stay in New Mexico and
create New Mexico jobs we with
all the Ph.D is we have more per
capita than any other
Not money here in the state to
go into the next round when it
really grows and this is saying
Hey if you come here we have
money that when you need to grow
we're going to help you grow and
by the way keep your investment
here and keep the jobs here.
So Mr chair I understand all
that I'm just wondering why why
the taxpayers of New Mexico.
Want to put fifty million
dollars and one of trillions of
dollars out there from other
investors in the world who could
certainly come to New Mexico I
mean you're right we have to PH
dis we have.
I don't know how many
inventions.
Four patents Representative
Harper has out there who know
left the room because I
threatened to walk out he came
back and.
But the.
But that's an example he's got
lots of patents is a smart guy
that used to smart building the
legislature obviously.
But struck last year.
I don't know if you've turned
any of those into a business or
not I doubt it because he's
still here.
Why would not a private investor
invest in one spent.
Why do we need what we what what
did we need to invest in him
misters Mr chair and senator the
reason we need to be there is
that they can do the start up
but then when we want to keep
that in New Mexico these private
investors the trillions of
dollars are set not sign saying
no great idea we're taking it to
Boston we're taking it to
California and because we
because there's not money here
in New Mexico to step in and say
Hey great idea we're going to
keep this year we're going to
give you the money to expand and
make even more money.
This so Mister chair the
So we're we're looking at some
seed money to plant the seed
here five hundred but then it's
good it's got to be watered from
everybody else in the in the
country to make it grow and
prosper.
Both Mr chair I mean we will
find some of the and senator we
will find some of the water as
well because again we want to
keep it here.
On a on a grand scale since
we've not spent any of the money
get any idea how many venture
capital.
Yes you hit it big but what if
you if you plump everybody
together.
What kind of return could we
expect off of this.
You get twenty five percent
that succeed seventy five
percent of fail.
Is this this is success outweigh
the failure in financial terms.
Mr chairman thank you we have
the state investment council has
been operating a similar kind of
program more traditional than
ours their ten year return
again for some a similar kinds
of investments is six a little
over six percent
national it's about thirteen
percent.
Mr chair when we give the money
to R. S. I see.
Why do you need Mr chairman the
just I see last year for the
programs that they operate which
is primarily for returns of the
as I understand what the New
Mexico associations they
suggested they had enough
capital to to fulfill their
mission this was intended to be
alternative to help provide
funding to businesses in rural
New Mexico those that are not
just hi tech bioscience this is
to diversify.
Mr chairman and senator they are
very conservative I mean they
are graded on how much return
they get every year in in the so
they're looking for that six
percent they don't want to be
able to get up to thirteen
twenty five percent that's not
there that's not what they do.
Thank you.
What kind of I would then so we
move the amendment for
discussion purposes a motion for
discussion purposes second by
Senator Rodriguez any objection
to moving the amendment.
Seeing none.
Amending.
You know right scene from that
thing.
school Hammond a motion to adopt
them and.
A motion by Senator Hemphill
second by Senator Rodriguez.
Any objections to adopting them
and.
Okay we're back on the bill
senator Byrd had a question
thank you Mr chairman just just
curious.
And I I see this periodically.
This looks like a tool that the
state is going to use to drop
you know this is here I
understand that.
And right now it's parked under
NMFA one would it be under
economic development I mean that
would seem to me like a logical
place.
To put this as a an additional
pool to draw people here to the
state.
That that we have three
investments very conservative on
SI see very industry focused
such as to get shovel ready at
etcetera on economic development
this is more in the tradition of
true venture capital so they
complement one another across
the board.
And I understand that I just
seems like.
It is in when so we're trying to
better interest in the state to
build businesses state when you
come to say you got to go over
here to get the venture capital
back over here to get the lead
in the and and the need to bump
into got probably somewhere else
to get licensing and so on so
forth.
It seems like it's a very in
efficient way to do business and
I think that maybe toward people
from coming here I mean we have
the elements but if it becomes
cumbersome limitation months and
months and months or years to
get this thing done
For all the effort we're putting
forth they're not we're not
gonna get any advantage of that.
So so I I it just seems to me
like we need to consolidate all
of this.
Maybe under economic development
so that that it's a one stop
shop so people come here get the
job done and so forth.
Thank you Senator Burt and Mr
chair we actually they
complement each other the that
they are they have very
different approaches as I as I
said and they are working very
closely with one another to
coordinate this again is venture
capital venture capitalist they
would not necessarily want to go
to economic development economic
development is building a
particular in.
Certain way as I said Senator
ready for warehouses coming over
the border lead money and what
have you this is for start ups
this is riskier than what
economic development would do
and certainly riskier than what
S. I. C. would do but a prudent
investor you know spreads
spreads their risk for their
investments across different
types of portfolio and that's
what this is doing I I I
appreciate your answer Mr
chairman but it to me and it
just.
It doesn't make sense I I I I'm
I don't understand why we're.
Piecemeal it that way venture
capital we whether you you have
an established business wants to
come in here just to expand or
you're looking to.
To.
For lack of better term wildcat
a little bit to bring in a new
technology or something like
that it still seems like it
should all be focused in one
place because one can draw from
another you can still drop from
one another now but you gotta go
different departments here there
even in my town you know you got
economic development over one
office and you get licensing and
stuff downtown of the city and
then you got the banks or a fund
set aside for someone like this
in and becomes a cumbersome
process so I I I I appreciate
what we're doing here
but it just I just think we need
to rethink how we how we do it
that's all I have Mister
chairman.
Thank you Senator the cashier.
Wait what.
Just a few questions chair.
So the way I read this.
We're removing the requirement
for the venture private capital
equity fund to have matching
funds with our investments that
right.
Mr chairman it is our intention
to have the matching funds in
place and for most of our
industry will be able to do that
for us to get into certain
industries maybe some that are
agriculture supported there may
be a difficulty in getting
matching funds from traditional
accredited investors they're in
it for big dollar with big
returns and we need a partner
and some of those ventures that
are looking for a different kind
of economic development return
and so we are concerned about
getting the matching investment
as outlined currently in statute
the one to one from an
accredited investor because this
will likely have a high economic
development return bottle the
but lesser financial returns
with some other industries so
this is an attempt to allow us
to get it into more rural areas
the notice that that there was a
bill through the year that they
talked about a three to one
match.
To one match and this is not a
more one to one match this is
just no skin in the game.
Mr chair and Senator Woods that
two to one match is the
bioscience Fund so for every
hundred thousand we put in
investor puts in two hundred
thousand this no this is
different this it allows
investors to come in with
different ratios and they may be
higher they may be lower but not
the exact match and so again we
want that
this this this scope of
potential investors and their
different approaches to putting
money in.
Okay it also.
Removes a requirement that.
NMFA obtain a Bonner breakers
von for their employees.
Would you like to address that
Mr Senator Mr Chairman were
covered under the tort claim act
so our understanding is that
that is not a necessary piece
and and so it's a it's an
unnecessary expense.
In other words the state itself
is the bond company that bonding
our employees.
Mr Chairman correct under the
tort claim act yes.
Okay.
Hi.
Earlier the very first thing
that I heard.
Senator Mister chairman Senator
he was talking about.
We put in a hundred thousand and
get a million back.
That's not a contract to build
that choose to.
We're going to buy and at if if
they're not putting in anything
and we're putting in a hundred
percent.
There but then something in work
but then ten percent.
It very you said it varies
according to each deal what's
the least amassed.
The least for what is the
greatest percentage that we're
going to invest in these
companies ninety percent.
What is that persistent chairman
the the statue which we're not
changing would be fifty one
percent so no greater than fifty
one percent ownership in any
company.
Which again Mr chairman we don't
anticipate but for those
specific industries.
That would like to be able to
serve we think this needs to be
changed.
This this almost says like one
of those.
Your TV storage.
No more questions.
Thank you I do have a couple
questions in that and this is
from NMFA.
In in they have some it's in the
F. I. R..
It says may constrain capital
deployment and impede ability in
it if PED the ability of
animator raise additional
capital in the fund to support
early stage New Mexico
businesses.
Where those NMFA's those are
interface comments correct Mr
chairman that's correct so we're
putting at risk other capital
funds when you have to do
matches with banks or tax
credits.
I'm sorry Mr chairman the for
putting at risk I don't what
fund that is additional capital
in the fund.
To support early stage New
Mexico businesses makes as a
main PJ this is here no right
right Mr chairman we we were
speaking to whether or not we
could attract enough investors
for all of our industry again
we're looking for diversified
mix of businesses and industry
so for certain industries this
may impede our ability to
actually serve them to get
enough accredited investors as
described in the act to
participate in any particular
fund.
And and then I I know you're
covered on the tort claims act
but why would we release them
under the tort claims act when
they have a blanket bond that
would cover that liability and
not have to use a tort claim act
compared to general fund if
there is a tort claim in the.
Mr Chairman we're certainly
happy to keep that and again we
we believed it was additional
expense to be borne by the funds
that was not necessary but if
you would like to keep that in
that's we certainly wouldn't
object about this point I mean I
I I think that.
I mean we've after bond stuff
all the time right Imani
depending on the amount of the
borrower to mount that is used
is not really expensive compared
to the coverage that you get and
if something happens under the
tort claims act and the savings
on the bond is to be ten times
what the what the tort claim
could be for GSD.
Yes these claims went from
twenty million two hundred
thirty million dollars in the
last couple here that that kind
of bothers me those two issues
so.
Senator Padilla had a do pass
motion.
I think there was a second
second by Senator Steinborn.
Call the roll Senator pope Nexen
and we're gonna go the for.
We are going to hear the joint
resolution sometime today.
Senator Burt.
Jennifer no more content yes
Campos yes Senator Diamond
excuse Senator Gonzales yes
there Gonzales yes there
Hemphill excuse.
there Padilla.
Yes.
Senator share.
Senator share no Senator
Steinborn
Jeff Steinborn yes there would.
Senator Woods no Sir Rodriguez
yes Senator Rodriguez yes Mr
Chairman no Mr chairman Donald
yes yes yes.
Five to four to pass.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
Mr pope.
We were going to go to the floor
right after this but we're we
are going to have that joint
resolution in a hearing either
this afternoon or tomorrow we
need to hear that joint
resolutions of.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members I will be brief.
Senate bill three sixty seven
school attendance changes this
is an amendment to the
attendance for success act
reducing administrative burden
creating attendance for success
fund an annual report
schoolbased opportunities to
catch up with course work and
communicate that with the
parents and also prevention
strategies have an expert here
from PED a ani and with that we
are ready for questions or
comments from the committee
anybody in the audience and
support.
State and show stand around and
support you want to speak.
And also the single support
anybody on zoom.
No one funds in anybody in
opposition.
I see none questions from
committee members.
The question of the department
or a request for
the show question no not
questioned his motion for do
pass second by Senator Padilla
we call the roll we need to do
one more bill I forgot that for
ninety one for that fund will go
broke.
Call the roll Senator.
Yes there from this office yes
Diamond excuse there is
consolidation is all is yes
there Hemphill.
Kids excuse their Padilla yes
Sir do a test centre share their
share yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods yes and Rodriguez
yes Rodriguez yes Mr chairman
yes yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all the down there shortly the
town that I Senate bill four
ninety one members can do from
right here
in the legislation last year
there was a transfer that got
removed and so this transfers of
money back to the law
enforcement retention I.
And it's a statutory requirement
some some place last year in law
enforcement protection fund I
think that that.
In that building so we need to
make this transfer every year.
Anybody in the audience and
support anybody in opposition
anybody on.
The question from committee
members.
In production chairman second
real quickly Mr chair ownership
this monies in the budget
yes and for everything that was
an annual transfer that happens
every single year I don't
remember the bill from last year
with the transfer got deleted.
And now for the transfer of
that.
Thank you for the motion by
Senator Campos second by Senator
Rodriguez.
And call the roll real quick
Senator Padilla first.
