Go ahead and introduce yourself
for the record.
Yes.
That.
Committee.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Simon Miller I'm an analyst
at DFA
normally LFC kicks the these
things off but do my best to to
fill in.
Okay should we not but start
okay
so I'm joined by the leadership
at the public school insurance
authority
to give a quick overview of the
operating budget the executive
recommendation provides about a
ten million dollar increase for
health and risk claims expenses
while the LFC recommendation
provides about the thirty
million dollar increase for
health and risk claims
these budgets don't have any
effect on the premium rates that
the agency charges the premium
rates are determined by the PSI
a board that'll be probably
sometime next month or the month
after so the the operating
budget is it really sort of a a
projection of claims expenses
both on the risk side and for
health benefits
In FY twenty four so with that I
will turn it over to director
Santa thank you.
Wrecker thank you Mr Miller
thank you Mr one of the.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee we do have a short
presentation for you today but
first I would like to start by
acknowledging some of the staff
we have we have miss Martha can
Tana who serves as our deputy
director and miss Lisa Jennings
who serves as our CFO.
Turning over to page two to
start with the presentation.
NMPSIA consists of eighty eight
school districts one hundred
charter schools and twenty six
other educational entities we
serve over seventy five thousand
employees and dependents forty
four thousand four hundred
members under medical fifty one
thousand five hundred under
dental forty five thousand under
vision twelve thousand five
hundred under long term
disability and eighteen thousand
five hundred under additional
life.
We have a staff of eleven FTE
and are managed by a board of
directors composed of governor
appointees that's below the P.
E. C. N. E. A. A. F. T.
superintendents association
educational entities at large
and the New Mexico school board
association.
Turning over to page four slide
three.
Looking at the authorities FY
twenty four appropriation
request and Ms your revenues are
derived from other state funds
which are funded through the
state equalization guarantee
appropriation to schools.
The impact on schools for budget
is nine point nine million and
for risk five point three
million.
The authority is also asking for
an addition of one F. T. E. in
the form of an executive
assistant to assist executive
staff with administrative duties
the executive assistant position
position that the agency had was
converted to a budget
coordinators the benefits
coordinator was necessary to
help coordinate benefits and
wellness initiatives the
position will also attract
various statistics for all
benefit lines of business so the
authority can be proactive in
identifying trends and put
measures in place to help curb
costs.
Turning to slide four.
This slide represents our COVID
nineteen costs from FY twenty
two FY twenty two so far NMPSIA
has incurred over forty million
in expenses the authority did
receive a fifteen million
dollars appropriation in the FY
twenty two legislative session I
will be asking for two more
appropriations this upcoming
session.
One appropriation for twelve
million sixty seven thousand one
hundred and sixty three dollars
to reimburse costs prior to
March third of twenty twenty one
in general fund and one for
twelve million nine hundred
eighty six thousand seven
hundred and thirty five dollars
in either general fund or are
both funds to reimburse cost
after March third of twenty
twenty one.
Turning to page five.
Slide five displays are medical
and prescription costs spending
before tween FY twenty one in FY
twenty two we have a data
warehouse containing eight years
of data with our budget
consultant with the ability to
drill down on the metrics for
the subset of the NMPSIA
population that we want to look
at such as analyzing information
by plan region condition and
cost.
Approximately eighty five
percent of Nancy members reside
in rural communities outside of
Albuquerque which offers last
provider and hospital
competition and higher costs to
recruit and retain health care
professionals.
Providers also attempt to make
up for lower Medicare and
Medicaid reimbursement rates.
Behavioral health apps and
virtual video visits.
With the behavioral we do have a
selection of behavioral health
apps and virtual video visits
with our health care providers.
The interactive video lessons.
One on one coaching for
depression and anxiety to name a
few these services are offered
through talkspace with
Presbyterian ever I I with Blue
Cross blue shield and ginger
with cigna.
BlueCross BlueShield has also
made ever I a level to all
students and educational staff
free of charge.
Turning to slide six.
Looking at some benefit cost
saving measures.
Madam chair has implemented a
next generation transform
diabetes care and hypertension
program through CVS for all of
our members which enables them
access to remote engagement
digital and virtual visits and
certified diabetes care nurses
to help manage their conditions
before they worsen.
In the near future name so we'll
be looking at offering a
muscular skeletal solution to
help members cope with knee hip
shoulder and other joint
injuries.
The goal of trying to procure
bundled payment arrangements for
surgical services.
Is to ensure a high level of
member engagement using
different tools to support
surgery selection member
satisfaction care coordination
and scheduling through the
selection of center of
excellence networks that will be
easily accessible to members.
Staff will also be monitoring
and reporting.
On the services which will allow
you to.
The reporting of utilization
engagement and cost.
Another cost saving solution the
board and staff are looking at
in conjunction with our budget
consultant is a clinic clinic
feasibility study for our
members.
The goal is to issue a request
for information and evaluate the
types of services that are
available.
Such as actual clinics and
virtual options cost saving
opportunities and types of
services that can be provided
and the transition to
establishing to a primary care
provider.
After gathering the information
requested the goal is to go out
to R. F. P. if cost saving and
other member improved health
outcome opportunities are
realised.
Turning to page seven or slide
seven.
The risk program consists of
property liability and workers
compensation.
The authority issues approx
insurers approximately twenty
nine billion in assets forty
four thousand employees one
point eight billion in payroll
three hundred and twenty five
thousand students forty four
thousand athletic school
participants and over ten
thousand vehicles including
buses.
Turning to slide eight.
Slide eight displays the
authorities property liability
and workers compensation costs
from FY eighteen through FY
twenty two with the FY twenty
three in FY twenty four
projected from our actuarial
analysis performed by our
actuaries.
Turning over to page nine.
The authority offers robust loss
prevention programs free of
charge to our members through a
contract with poms and
associates programs such as
ergonomics threat assessment
employment policy and consulting
on site school facility this
active shooter arm school
employees and identifying a
predator training are offered.
Over the last two years the
authority has been concentrating
on sexual abuse and molestation
prevention and threat
assessment.
Going to slide ten.
Name is focusing on risk
mitigation measures such as
working with the attorney
general's office to emphasize
training on sexual abuse and
molestation the attorney
general's office already creates
training for students and
communities and will now how
focus on sexual abuse and
molestation.
M. C. also dished also issued an
RFP to procure an anonymous
reporting system for all member
schools.
Name shows working in
collaboration with PED.
Poms and associates will begin
auditing schools for compliance
with house bill one twenty eight
so which started now in January.
The recommendation was to audit
the top ten schools using claims
data over the last twenty years.
Pods continues to work with
vector solutions to see what
districts have not completed
their online training if
districts prefer in person
training pods does provide
training on grooming and
identifying a predator for all
levels of staff and volunteers.
Name chair general counsel is
also helping by providing
training for athletic directors
and coaches upon request.
Slide eleven.
The New Mexico school boards
association move to make school
safety a priority for the
upcoming year.
Poms and associates presented
school safety issues at all and
MSBA regional meetings
concerning perimeter and
interior fencing improve
communication systems secondary
imprimatur doors visitor
management systems interior and
exterior windows and interior
door locks some of the fixes
require minimal expense however
most fixes require significant
funding such as repairs or new
purchases of communication
systems.
Tom has also presented at
meetings with legislators and
representatives of southeast
regional schools to discuss
district needs.
And that concludes our
presentation Mr chairman members
of the committee a very well up
hello people are are coming so a
little shorter.
In all fairness into the time of
day discontented to another day.
No Sir just to to Mr chair and
members of the.
So Mister chairman I'm sorry
apologies I was watching the
house and and and and for I need
to be here so I apologize for
being late I really did Mr
Miller cover the agencies
operating budget.
Bring lunch tomorrow I.
So I'm Mr Mr chairman I would
just point to the different
sheet in your in your packet so
the house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill two includes the LFC
recommendation which as you can
see here is slightly below the
executive recommendation for the
agency I will note that this
agency is not directly funded
from the general fund it we you
all approve expenditure
authority for the agency the
agency does retain a budget
adjustment authority to to
budget additional dollars for
claims if if they need to pull
money out of fund balance for to
pay for those claims
on the program support side very
quickly Mr chairman of the
agency did request one
additional FTE which both the
LFC and executive recommendation
included so those
recommendations were exactly the
same and with that Mr chairman
I'll stand for questions.
Hey this point no members.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
guys for the presentation as I
look over here under risk
insurance it says that the
authorities paid over thirty
three million dollars related to
hundred forty one sexual abuse
and molestation came claims
twelve of those claims were by a
single individual you mentioned
increased training R. I wonder
we also during their enough
background checks that seems
like a very high number of.
Molestation claims what are we
doing to not just such as the
cost of financial cost but but
that's a social cost our
children what are we doing to to
address that high number of
sexual abuse mostly Smith
Milly's station.
Mr chair Senator Diamond so that
falls under house bill one
twenty eight which was passed a
couple of years ago so what
house bill one twenty eight did
is it make sure that everyone
did have background checks and
then it also increase it also
assessed how schools were
actually doing their hiring
practices so.
I believe the bill made it to
where.
If someone does a background
check on an employee full
disclosure on that background
check needs to be given so you
really can't hold anything back
on the background checks
anymore.
And we are starting to complete
audits on school districts on
house bill one twenty eight to
see if they're doing thorough
background checks on the
employees they're hiring.
Thank you Mr chairman if you're
confident in the background
checks what are we doing to
address that high number that.
Well we've Mister chairman
Senator Diamond that's where
we've come in with we've been
presenting to the New Mexico
school board association twelve
the school board members letting
them know about sexual
molestation and how it affects
us how it affects the agency the
cost to the agency how it
affects our students so we've
been doing a lot of training
around sexual molestation we
also have deprivations solutions
which we have put in place which
is a did digital solution which
focuses on micro learning
courses on sexual molestation
and grooming and of that is also
something that needs to be
completed per house bill one
twenty eight by all staff and
all volunteers so we're making
sure that all school districts
are actually completing those
trains thank you Mr chair I'd
rather see a greater emphasis on
those in the classroom your
school board members are in the
school.
And and so I I certainly hope
that that training is available
to those that are in the schools
thank you guys.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the presentation and
Senator Diamond for bringing
that up we discussed this and
the LESC meeting and my concern
was when you're providing the
training to staff I guarantee
you that whoever is harassing
female students especially that
male students certainly can be
victims of this those adults now
they know that what they're
doing is wrong and providing the
training on to the staff who are
who may be predator is not going
to
discourage them from harassing
or molesting a student and so I
would really like to see the
training put toward the students
so they're aware of
inappropriate behavior and they
can label at ten they know what
to look like and who to go to if
they feel like they are being
victimized at there's a safe
person there in the school that
they can reach out to so are
there any plans for providing
that type of education to our
students are especially are
vulnerable students students
with disabilities and
particularly for at risk
students Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair Senator
Hemphill that's where we're
starting to work with the
attorney general's office so
they can start find some
providing some of that training
not only to students but to the
community as well.
That's right and Mr chairman I
think that in the community we
should have a lot of outreach
for children specifically and
families so they know how to
handle these situations because
a lot of times they're just
they're silenced and they don't
know where to go into school
that state for they're not going
to work receive some type of
retribution so I think that it
would be better to invest that
those resources and providing
the training to the students so
so they know what to do in those
situations and they can identify
inappropriate behavior thank you
Mr chairman.
Well thank you.
Thank
you all for being here today
just a few questions you know
just picking up on this topic
just another reason I think to
invest in school based health
centers so there are social
workers and all of our schools
and advocates for the kids and
help out the kids feel like they
have some.
Some say could also taken reach
out to presenting funky going on
few questions just for LFC
reflect in the analysis to send
a message to in losing members
as health benefits have
increased now if you're part of
a health.
Benefits program with your
school you automatically into
this New Mexico members Mr.
So Mr chairman and and Senator
no you have to enroll in one of
the health well.
Sorry let me let me back up a
little bit so there are some
benefits that are provided to
all public school employees but
in particular for the health
benefits you have to enroll in a
plan and not all school
employees are enrolled in a plan
and what you saying analysis is
that we're actually losing
members so you're saying a
decrease in enrollment is that
the case is so Mister chairman
and senator I think so there two
issues with the look the decline
in members the the first is is a
lower number of people in the
school
opting in a second trend is the
Authority which has the ability
to provide benefits to other
public entities like notably
Santa Fe community college and
the center New Mexico college
we're at one point receiving
their benefits during this year
those plans left and went and
got other benefits and that
because the number of
participants to drop so both
people not enrolling in plans at
the schools and some of those
other large employers pulling
out of the plan.
All right
My second question Mr chair is
is a hundred million the the the
executive proposal to cover a
hundred percent of the the
insurance costs for employees
what the hell Center doing with
that and house bill two.
So Mr chairman and senator the
the hot house bill two as it's
being heard on the house floor
now does not include the hundred
million it does include thirty
two million for to align the
Nipsey plans with what the state
is currently paying.
So Mr chairman and senator
the the right now the current
legal anymore for the public
school insurance authority as
well below what the state pays
for its employees what's
included in house bill two would
would increase the minimum for
the employers to match that of
the state level.
Six.
Okay and that's it Mr that's if
they take advantage of it right
in a row Mister Mister Mister
chairman Senator yes that's
correct.
How many Mr chair I mean how
many school employees do we
think artist don't have
insurance at all because the
cost of into a.
So Mr chairman and senator I but
we look at that in a in the
analysis on house bill one of
two which is the governor's bill
addressing that I don't know if
Mr Miller remembers that off the
top of his head I can look that
up and get that back to you but
we we had an estimate.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
The the percentage of employees
that are eligible that actually
have health insurance through
PSA is fifty four percent right
now.
So Mr chair so we're hopeful
that by increasing.
The.
The the match or whatever that
we'll see more people insured
on.
Mr chair Senator.
Yes when when something becomes
cheaper I'd imagine a few more
people sign up to get that okay
as I have thanks Mister thanks
you.
Very well.
I just have one Mr scent of one.
All you mentioned I know.
Anyway you mentioned the.
You're going to be looking at
twenty year data.
And then the and then what
happens with the.
Thank you Mr chair so we're
gonna look at the twenty year
data over twenty years for
sexual abuse and molestation
claims that we have on file and
then where we're ever those
schools rank in the top twenty
top thirty that's where we're
gonna start doing our audits for
house bill one twenty eight we
wanted to start looking at the
first ten years of data but the
first ten years didn't really
give us to too much to work with
but when we went out to twenty
that's when we were able to get
more of the probe programmatic
districts into the data so that
we could star on eighteen them
first.
But with that this sample on
does that bring like.
Unitive to those districts on.
Higher rate or something are.
Mr chair what we do is we do an
allocation every year risk
allocation and depending on the
exposure of the district claims
are adjusted the premiums are
adjusted off of their claims so
sometimes their premiums go up
but it's not per se like if
someone commits an infraction
their premiums go up by a
certain amount it's more by a
percentage.
Well it's still hard because.
You know as of twelve.
The premiums but up.
And they don't have enough
sufficient funding.
Then they just come back to us.
very well.
Well we want to thank you for
your presentation.
Thank you very much thank you
thank you.
We'll go now to.
Of the public school facility.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
so you live in the public
schools analyst for LFC and I'm
joined today by Simon Miller
from DFA and the director of the
public school facilities
authority my ticket to see us
and our CFO Brad Matthews Justin
overall summary of the
differences there are none there
is a one hundred dollar error in
the LC recommendation due to
rounding system error in our
budget.
Platform but otherwise the
recommendations both support the
agency's recommendation for six
point nine million from the
public school capital outlay
fund for agency operations in
fiscal year twenty four I'll
turn it over to Mr Miller if he
has any comments.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes the executive was
a much more fiscally
conservative with a one hundred
dollar.
Difference in the operating
budget
So with that I will turn it over
to director K. S. thanks.
Mr chair members thank you for
having us here today and giving
us this opportunity to present
to you and talk a little bit
about our agency so that you can
understand the reason for our
request
again my name is Roy take a and
I'm here with the Representative
Matthews is CFO as many of you
may know our mission at peace if
they is to fund and build
schools we are staff to the PSC
OC who gives us guidance and
we're we're there staff
we're very small but efficient
agency the work that we do could
not the completed without the
smart staff that we have on
board and in order to achieve
our mission we do a lot of
outreach to school districts to
get input on how we're working
and what we need to improve and
just to make sure that we're
meeting the needs of the school
districts or state with that
opening statement Mr chair
members I'd like to turn the
page two of your presentation
and this is a fruit of the
labors of the state this is Judy
middle school which was that was
state funding into that nice
photograph there.
Currently the PSUC if you turn
to page three has several
different funding programs right
now there are seven of them.
We do standards base with her
new schools renovations and
additions systems base which
HVAC roofing fire alarm systems
except a we do broadband
deficiencies corrections we do
pre kindergarten facilities
a facilities master plans leases
systems and teacher house.
Pages four and five Mr chair and
members are a lot of what you've
heard this morning it's about
Senate bill one thirty one and
the reduction in state local
match as well as funding put
aside for career technical
education and security so I
won't go through those in detail
because I know that you did hear
it this morning but again I'll
stand for questions when you're
ready.
I do want to mention
so I I we are getting ready for
what we hope are a lot of
applications with this reduction
so we're going to have the P. S.
C. O. C. is going to receive
request on a monthly basis for a
warrant is set of quarterly we
have are going to have online
applications we have which we
have already and we're gonna
have templates for the
construction people and the
design professionals and the
districts to use for agreements
request proposals proposals and
multi use agreements.
And if you turn to slide six
just a little bit of what we're
doing right now we have two
hundred twenty two act this is
the funded projects can you see
the break down there.
And then page seven again just
list those same projects along
with the amounts of the boards
of the council has made annual
note that.
In FY twenty two we had no pre
K. kindergarten awards however
before the council currently it
is there's six we can point that
they're looking at for
Farmington def gaming and gaps
in.
Page eight Mr chair and members
is just a summary of the total
dollars awarded since the
beginning of the public school
facilities authority and it's
approximately two point six
billion annual note with the
heat that which districts have
received the most and which have
yet to receive any PSCS the
funding.
And then you'll see on page nine
our budget request is just kind
of a breakdown of all of the
different markets that we need
the money for and I would like
to point out that last year our
vacancy rate was twenty seven
percent and this year it's at
five percent.
Mr chair members the last page
pays ten just more wonderful
tools of the schools that have
built been built around the
state of New Mexico with the
PSUC and the task force funding
is going Hopson Roswell
Farmington as well as one in
Gallup.
With that brief presentation Mr
chairman members I stand for any
questions that you might have.
Seven.
Miss Mister chairman members
thank you for the opportunity to
be here and percent.
Very well the members wrote
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Stewart presented her bill SB
one thirty one it passes
committee unanimously we spoke
about that a little bit this
morning the importance we
recognize the importance of
doing that I'm glad you just
kind of re iterated that before
us today welcome and Brad we
went to high school together so
this current government class
apparently did have a pretty
good impact on.
I hope you doing well.
Is that what he did want to say
anything.
Was that it Senator.
Senator chairman the want to
read each other out.
To.
we're looking at the long term
viability pieces in the next
couple years see where yes she
is on the border of not.
Mr chair members I didn't quite
understand the question
additional.
Making is.
Senate Mr cherry referring to
offsets is that correct yes that
is correct Mr chair members this
this Senate bill one thirty one
removes the offsets.
And.
The fund balance.
The point of course.
Mr chair your friend to the
current balances within the
public school capital if and we
are seeing a growing
and so the proposal for Senate
bill one thirty one is to
increase participation so that
balance goes down and we see
more schools are leveraging the
state funds.
Hello of a lot of good question
Hello renewable energy on your
facilities director what has
that factor into your.
Analysis and cost savings and we
heard from the General Services
Department of the state that
does all the state buildings on
how much they say I think a
million dollars a year this year
alone on their facilities here
in Santa Fe.
So is that part of your planning
can you talk to us about that
Mr chair members Senator
Steinborn.
Currently when we design and
build two schools we look at
energy efficiencies we look at
some of the lead provisions that
provide energy efficiency we
also have done geo thermal in
the past and have no issue or or
welcome solar as well but we
haven't done a
Financial analysis.
Mr chair of pop.
Representative I would of course
occurs at I mean you know we're
dealing in time of climate
change these are schools after
all.
And we need to be leaders we
need to model modeled the
biggest public policy challenges
facing us particularly in
schools where you have just
abundant opportunities for
development so I can live stream
but over schools over parking
lots and I I would just
encourage you to reach out maybe
to the General Services
Department and learn.
Or whoever your staff is learn
about
You know the.
The agreement sorry I'm
forgetting what they're called
but the agreements where you
basically work with industry and
they can help even finance
finance and it does a lot of
federal grants out right how to
do this type of stuff so then I
know we have a colleague in the
Senate is introduced a bill
saying that only schools will be
built with that but there are
upfront costs I just think we
need to become leaders in this
field and.
Of the efficiency is great but
you know so that sounds like a
reasonable deal going on.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn
certainly does that right on
that thank you have a receptive
legislature to help.
Help us look at some of those up
front costs to help you thank
you Mr I.
Very well anyone else I just
have a couple of quick ones some
success on page three.
the number seven if you tell us
a little bit more.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales
certainly so teacher housing
currently or for the past couple
of years it's a PSUC gives a
school award the school can also
have teacher housing as part of
that school board but this year
the council has decided to have
you could have teacher housing
award if there's no housing in
your rural community so you
don't necessarily have to.
Have a school attached to your
board
Mr chair Senator Gonzales so set
part of teacher ridge
Mr chair Senator Gonzales yes it
is a teacher to teacher housing.
Okay.
So also again with the.
The presentation from Senator
Stewart this morning that that
reduction also would allow.
You know on the change in that
percentage.
On the match for the that's a
need for teachers so maybe we'll
see more more activity on that
now.
Of the next question I was going
to ask you is
number six on the lease
assistance.
Has grown or is it the same
more.
Mr chair
Senator Gonzales it has grown
over the years I believe it's
been in place over twenty years
and I believe this year we are
leases systems was about
eighteen point six am I correct.
So it has steadily grown every
year.
Thank you so.
Is that good or bad.
Mister chair Mister Gonzalez it
helps the charter schools
basically to lease their
facilities.
So Mister chair Mister Gonzales
it's it's it's for the students
I I couldn't say if it's good if
it's bad.
The if I understand correctly
numbers and what happens is so.
You have the lease assistance.
But then the money goes to that
district.
Right.
Mr chair members if this charter
school is leasing from the
school district then it goes to
the district.
All right.
All right well thank you.
Anyone else thank you very much
thank you Mr chair members.
We got our last one with the.
Head.
George.
Part of the flight.
That.
Go ahead and start.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Serra homes
I'm an analyst with the LFC and
I'm here presenting on the
operating budget for the public
education department as an
agency
it's this packet here.
That's helpful for anyone
I am here with Simon Miller the
DFA analyst and interim
secretary much Marianna Padilla
of PED I'll start with an
overview and then pass it over
to Simon are Mr Miller
the of C. recommendation for
general fund for the Public
Education Department provided an
eight percent increase from the
prior year for a total of twenty
two point five nine million and
the executive recommendation
provides a sixteen percent
increase which would total
twenty four point three four
million
some of the differences here the
LFC.
Recommendation fully funded the
agency requests for two hundred
fifty six million R. two hundred
fifty six thousand apologies and
that two hundred category for
personal services employee
benefits the executive
recommendation exceeded that
that agency request and provides
a one point seven four million
increase which is one point four
eight million higher than LFC is
recommendation the LFC
recommendation would provide two
point six additional full time
equivalent employees whereas
that executive recommendation
would fund sixteen additional
full time equivalent employees
and both of the LFC and
Executive recommendations are
relatively similar and the
contractual services category
the executive recommendation is
slightly higher at two point
seven six million and the LESC
recommendation is at two point
three seven million the supports
agency requests for technology
I. T. agreements subscriptions
ongoing contracts
there are some additional
details under highlights but I
will leave it there and toss it
over to Mr Miller.
K. to.
Mr chair members of the
committee
as Serra said the it the
difference here is about one
point eight million in general
fund with the executive being
one point eight million higher
and really that can just be
broken down into two things so
first this person the executives
about one point five million
dollars higher as as Serra
already told you
So the difference there would be
about fifteen funded F. T. E. at
the department.
The second difference is for I.
T. expenses which is the other
about two hundred eighty
thousand dollar difference and
PED is at.
On its way to finishing I see
two projects by the end of this
year so those are five big I. T.
projects that were appropriated
by the legislature in past years
once those projects for the
systems come online they have
recurring maintenance stand
support expenses and so the
executive is
Two hundred eighty thousand
dollars higher for that purpose
and so with that I will turn it
over to you Secretary pedia
thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee
Again my name is muddy ana
Padilla on the interim cabinet
secretary of the Public
Education Department
I want to first just thank you
all for your time today I I'll
be as brief as I can I'll
shorten my remarks
being that I know that we
started late I would like to
also think it Simon Miller and
the Serra homes as well as
setting Lou and the rest of the
LFC staff for their work as
we've all collaborated together
to work on our agency budget
I also would like to just
quickly introduce of that's okay
Mister chair the staff that I
have here with the public at
Department we have with this
great frustrated he's our
director of of policy and
legislative affairs we have no
W. secretary Jacquelyn because
Seles we have shown a funding
issues are managing director we
have Merion right now she's are
HSD director and we have Antonio
Ortiz are director of finance
and we also have merry Montoya
is our CIO we have Scott right
so just wanted to recognize them
as well as the rest of the very
dedicated hard working staff at
the public and Department they
take their job I'm incredibly
seriously and are very
passionate about education and
this and the students around the
state of New Mexico.
I'm so.
I just want to start by saying
that I know that we all agree
that where New Mexico lands in
terms of national school over
ranking is not acceptable to any
of us and that our kids deserve
a system of education that
unlocks more for them what I
think we can also agree on is
that we must continue to build
upon the investments that we.
That will deliver higher quality
education for students and
expand the number of educators
statewide that help students
discover their talents and
support their learning journey
from cradle to career early
childhood education and care
department is unlike any other
in the nation and with this bold
investment that you all have
made our youngest learners will
support with that support will
carry them through their
educational years and I really
feel like that will deliver on a
big time investment for K.
twelve system.
We've made historic investments
in teacher pay that have helped
us retain excellent teachers and
clothes are hiring gap by thirty
four percent with our investment
in the health care coverage the
session that Senator Steinborn
mentioned earlier and house bill
one of two we're going to
continue to make the New Mexico
an excellent state for
educators.
Yes.
Just need to make an
announcement that the
discussion with the paid family
medical leave panel that has
been it's going to be
rescheduled so that will be
happening today so hard.
Anyone in the audience that is
here for that you know that will
not happen to.
Okay so.
Right thank you Mr chairman I
also just want to point out that
the nation has watched
Mississippi climbed the ranks
and literacy and this is due to
investments that they made and
structured literacy about a
decade ago we have brought that
same structure literacy the
science of reading to New Mexico
classrooms and we know that we
will soon see those same gains
in literacy that were realized
in Mississippi.
These are just a few of the big
structural investments in our
education system that we believe
will bear out these investments
are creating environments for
both our students and our
teachers can thrive and where we
will see exponential success
over time efforts this big can
take time to fully materialize
but we're committed to seeing it
through working together with
your support to build a world
class education system for New
Mexico students so I'd like to
start first with this document
that you all have it's it says
Public Education Department
highlights and accomplishments
I'm not going to go through the
entire document but I really
just want to highlight for you
some of the investments.
and priorities that we have
focused on together over the
last four years.
The first is that we've seen at
thirty five percent reduction in
our teacher vacancies this is
huge in this is been
accomplished through things like
our salary increases increasing
our salary tier schedules for
educators we've made a big push
in this is resulting in issuing
more educator licenses we've
also seen an increase in our
substitute teacher licenses are
efforts to develop the micro
provincial courses which is
really an alternative to the
educator dossier system we have
six hundred and eighty one
teachers in the first cohort
that are going through this
micro credentialing process that
allows them to continue their
education as educators and also
and and and and move through
their various levels as an
educator which also results in
increasing their pay.
we're also investing in our
educators at reserves pursue
national board certification and
we know research shows that this
demonstrates positive in
outcomes for students in the
classroom and also allows an
opportunity to increase their
salary through that effort we've
supported three hundred and
fifty nine teacher residencies
disabilities teacher residents
banded a full school year
teaching alongside a master
teacher really improving their
craft as an educator.
We're also
helping provide stipends to
students teachers who spend a
year in the classroom as they
continue to improve as as pre
service educators.
We've invested like I mentioned
earlier in our structured
literacy program we're in year
three of that program and we are
training our educators in a two
year training program on the
science of reading.
we've also expanded our career
technical education programs
throughout the state.
we've invested into training
programs
for our students.
Last year we passed legislation
that
increase the salary of five
twenty certificate holder
educators these are our native
American language educators
we've increased really tripled
our funding for the Indian
education fund.
we've invested in our financial
transparency dashboards this
allows us to see how schools are
spending the money that we
provide to them we're expanding
our community schools and help
to our add to that expansion
with next year's fiscal budget.
along with our schools have
invested in are socially
emotional supports our
behavioral health supports as a
whole really investing in
expanding our behavioral health
workforce within schools.
part of this is an effort that
the public it department has
done with the Human Services
department to ensure that we can
utilize Medicaid funding in
schools to support all students
who are Medicaid eligible so
that they're able to receive
behavioral health supports by
providers on screen as well as
other house supports.
So all and there in terms of the
accomplishments and will ship
now to the power point that you
all have to go through this
quickly being that Serra and
some individuals of over hewing
the differences between the LFC
and the agency budget.
so there is a seven percent
difference between the LFC and
executive recommendation as
Simon said the majority of that
is in salaries it's also a two
hundred and eighty thousand
dollars for maintenance costs to
continue I really important I T.
projects that the department has
been working on and is on
schedule to complete those IT
projects include our
longitudinal data system for
students which will create feed
into our our larger longitudinal
data system that's going to
connect students prenatal
through to career our educator
prep system which allows us to
collect data of pre service
educators while their Indian
universities helps us to
identify what sort of
disciplines are being completed
and allowing us to connect them
with schools are grants
management system so that we can
quickly and efficiently get
funding after schools opened
books as I had meant mentioned
is our financial transparency
websites.
Next line.
I want to highlight for you our
total positions at the public
gets apartment.
And how many are actually funded
so to the right you can see that
the LFC recommended two hundred
and eighty six.
Funded FTE and the executive
requested three hundred and one.
We currently have three hundred
and fifty four positions of
which two hundred and eighty
five are funded.
Two hundred and seventy four are
filled and so we only have
eleven they can seize funded
vacancies at the department to
currently.
Next slide.
I want to just highlight for you
what it means what these
positions mean for the
department and how critical it
is that we we get those funded
FTE these positions do
everything from
and maintain our data systems so
that we can collected data more
quickly and surely Act accuracy
of that data make it accessible
to the public make it accessible
to you on our legislative body
as well as make sure that we're
attending to our federal
reporting requirements
these positions will also help
support schools and through our
our health and safety schools
bureau to make sure that we're
providing those the student
wellness and social emotional
support this team also responds
to any sort of tragedies that
happen within our schools go in
and help provide support to
staff and students.
our fiscal team as I had
mentioned before is really
important it's a priority for us
to improve the efficiency of our
of our ability to get funding
out to schools and then also
this funding allows this with
our retention efforts of staff
so that we can reclassify
positions increase their pay and
better compete with other
employers.
The next slide just demonstrates
the difference between the
amount of funding that the
department and ministers and get
sent to our schools verses what
our agency budget actually
entail so the department
moves over five billion dollars
agent annually out to schools
that's forty five percent of our
state budget however our agency
budget has stayed relatively
flat just around twenty million
and in order for us to really be
effective at that moving this
money and supporting schools we
really need the staff that
allows us to do that.
And then my last slide
I know we're not talking about
the public schools support
budget but I just want to
quickly use this as an
opportunity to highlight some of
the differences
in the LFC budget verses the
executive budget.
So just quickly two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars for the
software that supports our
education plans these are
statutorily required these are
the plans that we receive
annually from charter schools
and and school districts to
identify their plan and their
thinking and their vision around
education.
three million dollars for the
can this system this system is
really important it's a
platformer professional
development for educators occur
educate our educator evaluation
system
a new report a recent report
from the LFC recommended that we
continue to invest in the system
it's a really important system
and without the three million
dollars that was requested that
system will go away.
a million dollars for our
Michael micro credential system
this this funding will pays for
the mentor coaches that help
educators as they move through
those courses.
that's an incredibly successful
and very popular program among
educators around the state.
also missing is three million
dollars for the native American
language
five twenty certificate holders
this is legislation that just
passed last year was really a
priority for our tribal
education departments are tribal
leaders and the executive and I
was just in a meeting earlier
today with tribal education
directors from around the state
and they're really concerned
about about this funding and
really stress the importance of
of funding and supporting their
native language educators.
also want to point out of the
funding for feminine hygiene
products we know that these are
really critical to ensuring that
our students attend school
research shows that oftentimes
students miss school because of
the lack of access to these
products.
I'm we have half the funding for
our standards based assessments
these are assessments that have
to happen in schools every
single year we're required to do
it and it's really critical that
we fund the the full amount this
is the actual amount of funding
that it costs to could to
conduct these assessments
we also are missing for a
seventeen million dollars for
attendance and interventions
this is a tied tied to
legislation that's currently
running the session which amends
the attendance for success act
really strengthens the
interventions that are happening
in schools the support that that
students are are receiving to
make sure that they're engage
that were removing barriers that
they're facing that are
preventing them from being in
school also thirty three point
six five million for special
education supports
as well as twenty two point five
million for the universal high
quality meals.
And as mentioned earlier with a
Senator Steinborn we're missing
sixty point three four million
for health care insurance for
all schools person now and with
that I can and didn't take any
questions that you have.
Very well before to the
questions just very L. quit from
the LFC started thing that you
would want to respond to the.
Senator members of the committee
up.
We are happy to answer questions
and of course sunny is here as
well as you all know
House Bill to has moved forward
so we're able to see to review
some of what's move toward in
house bill two and PSS and that
way
we're also here to answer any
questions focusing specifically
on agency budget and that's
that's more so what we're here
today to present on but we can
definitely answer questions on
anything that comes up.
I don't have any specific
comment I thought we need to
provide at this time thank you.
I think more why I ask this
because the some of these are
quite a bit.
So I need to come up with that
kind of funding.
You know in our part to know
it's going to be.
Response and Senator members of
the committee I might see if
Mister Liu wants to add
anything.
He said that.
No he's he's that you're on your
own.
Janet happy to answer any
questions you might have just so
you're aware there is a.
In the.
House Bill to substitute that
the house just passed there is
one million dollars for the
feminine hygiene products that
the.
Acting secretary you mentioned
earlier and there is also a.
Requirements are a in statute
currently for the salary parity
for native language teachers so
those things are going to be
four in that budget
recommendations as for the other
I. T. systems typically LFC
looks at what comes to the C. to
process which is the agency's
way of requesting IT through the
projects certification
committee.
these are outside of that
process and so they came in at
the end of December and we were
unable to include those in our
recommendation at that time.
Thank you have a good answer.
The we'll go with the Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that presentation
Interim secretary I was
wondering about the adobe
project specifically for rural
schools a lot of the students
are really dependent upon
that for letter for digital
literacy they don't have access
I live in a real high poverty
area in southern southwestern
New Mexico like the coporate
consolidated school district
where a lot of those students
don't have devices at home and
Adobe project has been really
helpful and motivating them to
stay in school to get their work
done and production of
absenteeism and I know that it's
fairly affordable the program
like one point forty four to
million dollars per year is PED
going to continue to fund that
are what is your plan to
assistance schools across New
Mexico to continue
the adobe project.
Our program yeah project.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill I am
not sure what the the funding
mechanism is for the adobe
project currently I'm not sure
if any other staff.
Would you like to answer is that
okay.
Okay thank you.
Mr chairman and Senator Hemphill
I'm great process from the
public education department and
that that was not part of the
public schools support packages
it was last year and so
currently there and there is no
funding in the budget to to
continue to support that project
this year.
Districts okay right right so it
was funded this past year at a
statewide level across the state
however the.
There is money in instructional
materials for a school district
to be able to fund that adobe
software suite if they if
they're interested in doing that
at the local level and that was
the decision that was made was
that we wouldn't do it statewide
but would make sure that
districts have funding to be
able to do that at their level
if they're interested I see
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that response because I
think in rural communities it's
especially important to and can
you madam secretary can you give
me an update on the outdoor
learning program what that
funding is and if there's a
request I thought that there is
a an executive request for one
point two million and I've heard
a little bit of confusion about
what
went into a house bill to do
have an update on that.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill I'm
not sure we made it in the in
the GFC budget can you tell us
Simon Mr chair members of the
committee
I believe that that was funded
at five hundred thousand for the
current year and then the
executive recommendation kept it
flat at five hundred thousand
the LFC recommendation was a two
hundred fifty thousand I believe
and that's what went through in
the HFC budget is the the two
hundred fifty thousand and sunny
please correct me if I'm wrong
chairman that's correct.
Thanks Mr Chairman and sunny do
you know if there's currently
five hundred thousand in
reserves for that program that
that wasn't spent for.
It was what's been utilized out
of that five hundred thousand Mr
chairman we can get you more
specific numbers but the current
budget for this year is five
hundred thousand for outdoor
learning initiatives and we can
follow up and let you know how
much has been spent thank you
and Mr chairman and just madam
secretary interim secretary what
what funding is required for the
special education ombudsman
office and are you requesting
any
revenue for that.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill so for
the special education office I'm
are you talking about you're
talking about the office over
the DDC so that funding comes is
is in their budget and not in
the public education department
I see okay thank you for that
clarification Mr chairman that
that's all I have thank you.
What else.
I don't know any question if
you.
Come on tell me about the
electric buses.
Mr chair Senator.
W. secretary said she had some
information for you regarding
outdoor classroom expenditures
and we can give that to you now
or after afterwards whatever you
prefer because when we need it
by Monday I meditate.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill the
money that is in the current
fiscal year budget is on target
to be spent that money was used
as advised by the committee for
two FTE which are now in place
and they're working in outdoor
learning in the area of language
arts integration and the other
one is working in the area of
system integration and the
majority of that allocation went
out in many grants to districts
up for start up in outdoor
learning programs.
And Mr Chairman thank you for
that update is that money
recurring the five hundred
thousand the do you have the
funds and PED to continue those
FTEs I think that we actually we
asked for a
slight increase in the executive
budget and then I think what
went through the LFC budget was
a little bit less so our hope
would have been to bring I've
more start up schools into many
requests and to continue the
support that we provide with the
professional development and
technical assistance with those
two people that are on board if
this
if that does not occur which
there is just there is a small
about right now in the house
bill
but if that doesn't occur than
those FTE will go away our hope
is to keep them and keep that
program of running an integrated
in our stem programming thank
you Mr chairman thank you that's
my priority as well.
What else.
Well I just one small part and
miss podium at the very
beginning.
you mentioned the.
When we were opening he said
this is not acceptable.
And I think one of the things
set up has really opened my eyes
more than anything else his from
the one of the last
presentations that we had at the
LFC when the two districts that
were presented to us.
And to see the high number of
absentee.
And the if we have that.
You know I think that everything
else so we do.
You know I still go back to or
it is the law that children
students are supposed to be in
school.
But the other part is so.
If they don't want to be in
school.
You know I think that's
something that we really have to
work on the end of two.
It can make what changes can we
do and what can we make to the
for they want to be in school.
You know but all that high
absentee you know will come.
Always be bringing this down.
Mr chair I I absolutely agree
with you and and I'll say
there's various ways that we are
supporting students to make sure
that they show up the seventeen
million dollars that I mentioned
for attendance intervention is
really about working with
students that have chronic and
excessive absentee issues within
schools and it's really about
ensuring that we have attendance
interventionists that are able
to work with the student and
their families oftentimes they
have other barriers that are
preventing them from being at
school and that may be that an
older sibling is caring for
younger siblings there may be
transportation or housing issues
other sort of issues within the
home that are are very years it
could also be you know really
working with our family so that
they understand the significance
of being at school every day all
day that really makes a profound
difference in their student
learning as you mentioned Mr
chair but there's other things
that we do to support students
to make sure that they feel good
about being at school that's
part of our our social emotional
learning efforts making sure
that they're we're addressing
things like bowling and schools
our efforts around community
schools is also an effort to
make sure that we're supporting
students and families so that
they are showing up to school
every single day we want every
student to to feel good about
being at school to feel like
they can be successful and that
they're supportive and so
there's multiple ways of doing
that but I just really want to
to emphasize my agreement with
you Senator it's really
important that we make every
effort that we can that to
support students to show up
every day to school.
And they have to feel safe
that's right Mr chair.
Okay anything else.
If not we want to thank you for
being here and that concludes
our agenda for today so.
