Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
everyone joining us this
afternoon I'm Senator Siah
Correa himself from Silvercity I
represent Senate district twenty
eight which includes Grant
County catching County and most
district court County thank you
so much Mr chairman.
Areas Senator Woods and Senator
Diamond.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee members
of the public and those joining
us on the webcast.
Senator Jacob in the lobby and I
represent Senate district twenty
six which includes of the old
school part of the west side of
Albuquerque as well as the
communities of Pat Hurley at the
school and all it five points
thank you Mr president.
Chairman Pat Woods Senate
district seven we're
experiencing rolling blackouts
over my district so I hope so
much to stick to what you're
able to get in.
It's a co worker thank you.
Your chairman crystal diamond
Senate district thirty five
which is Hidalgo Luna Sierra and
Dona Ana County.
Senator Diamond I'm just looking
Senator shares not here and
senator birch not here server
are you here.
So I guess what we'll do
Senator Johnson I guess you'll
be first up Ellen do you want to
start us off.
Yes please thank you Mr chair
good afternoon Mister chairman
versus committee I'm L. and ray
ban LFC fiscal analyst and I'm
joined this afternoon by
secretary Tim Johnson of the
department of public safety and
by Diego Jimenez executive
budget analyst and for your
reference the department of
public safety is agency number
seven nine zero.
I'll be briefly going over some
of the biggest differences
between the two recommendations
if I have ever to DO and a
secretary for their comments but
I just like to note for that
committee that agency hasn't yet
heard or taken any action of
these recommendations.
I'm mostly be referring to the
high level that's on page three
of your packets but I'd like to
point you for more information
on the legislative
recommendation to pages sixty
one three sixty eight of LFC is
volume one.
Three ten to three sixteen the
volume to.
And sixty two to sixty four a
volume three.
Overall the executive and
legislative recommendations for
revenues to DPS are the same and
general fund revenue was flat
with the FY twenty one operating
budget recommendations do differ
significantly in their
recommended uses of these funds.
So if the law enforcement
program the executive
recommendation is flat with FY
twenty one and the legislative
recommendation is very slightly
higher but it's basically flat.
Recommendations identified about
three point two million dollars
in vacancy savings that they
reallocate towards other
personnel costs no see this
includes over time which is in
line twelve a high level on page
three.
As well as maintaining state
police officer increases salary
increases on line twenty one
adding salary increases for
transportation inspectors and
dispatchers online twenty two.
And staff costs to support a
second state police recruit
school in FY twenty two which is
included in the amount in our
lives twenty three.
But you'll also see in line
eleven the legislative
recommendation actually
identifies over two million
dollars more in additional
vacancy savings it realizes to
support recurring vehicle
replacement costs and you'll see
that online twenty four.
And increased training and best
practices for state police
officers in line twenty.
The committee the DPS is most
recent state police force
strength production anticipated
average of six hundred and
seventy force mission state
police officers in FY twenty one
but if only one recruit school
is held in both FY twenty one in
FY twenty two that average will
drop to six hundred and thirty
five in FY twenty two.
No recruit school next year will
increase the average but it's
still likely that the department
will see a manpower reduction in
the state police force.
In the statewide law enforcement
support program provided
recommendations for general fund
revenue is a hundred and sixty
eight point eight thousand
dollars more than the executive
recommendation and it's of one
point four percent higher than
FY twenty one.
This is mostly because
legislative recommendation
reallocate and increases funding
to support an additional three
hundred fifty thousand dollars
and I FTE which are dedicated to
Law Enforcement Academy board
you'll see this reflected
alligned forty two.
The more developed the standards
and training that's required of
police officers in New Mexico
all officers and it's
responsible for granting denying
suspending or revoking offices
certification.
Even what is established as an
independent entity it doesn't
have its own budget and its
staff for all employees of the
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy which is part of DPS.
This may create a conflict of
interest concerns I'm a lot of
other states have police
officers standards and training
boards that operate
independently from law
enforcement agencies.
Legislative recommendation also
includes two hundred thousand
dollars to support best
practices training through the
law enforcement academy line
forty three.
Both recommendations for
statewide law enforcement
support include funding for
three percent pay raises for
forensic scientists and
technicians see that's reflected
in like forty four.
In program support the executive
recommendation is two hundred
and ten point six thousand
dollars higher than provided for
general fund revenue provided
recommendations for general fund
matches the agency's FY twenty
two request which is a five
percent decrease compared with
the programs FY twenty one
operating budget.
I'll now turn it over to Diego
for any of his comments before
the secretaries.
Thank you Mr chair I don't have
any further.
Thank you Mr secretary.
Johnson you want to go and
start.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chairman of
the committee as always all
start with a joke and those will
be sprinkled throughout here
because that might be the only
thing that I'm really good at
but do you know if Senator share
would be supporting our budget
or against because we can help
them get to where he's going or
not depending on that answer so
if you can answer that senator
Munoz and we'll figure out if we
get in there quickly leave
inside on the side of the road
on it.
But but we do appreciate it I
would like to obviously say
hello to everyone and welcome
welcome the new members Senator
Diamond congradulations Senator
Hemphill congratulations I
believe Senator Steinborn is new
to this but she I do believe he
understands what DPS is about
what state police is about and I
would offer up to Senator
Diamond and Senator Hemphill
any form of communication they
would so choose if they're
interested in learning more
about about our about our agency
I would also like of trying not
to get emotional here but.
share our preseason to us
senator Munoz and in this group
for being flexible the last
couple of weeks.
Well while we don't with a
critical incident
I know you all have a job to do
have families to get to of a we
did we do understand that you
move some stuff around of for us
us so that we don't have to
present the last two weeks so I
I do appreciate that and I I
can't tell you enough of what
that meant to us to allow us to
prepare on get over the grieving
and allow us to prepare for this
page I hope that shows today
well also on the call I would
like to mention some of the
Senator folks of that part of
the PS that they work very hard
and that are on this call who
are no doubt the brains behind
this and if any questions get of
that require you know a higher
level of intelligence I will
likely be sending it to them but
also on the call as chief Robert
Gordon of you know him.
acting deputy cabinet secretary
Troy we Sir we have deputy
director Herman of auto LED
director Kelly also Harner of
our budget bureau chief of
Louise ruby and our CFO Jessica
Liu Cerro and I'll for those
that don't know me Senator
Hemphill indictment of I'm Tim
Johnson.
The also more than honored to
have the opportunity to present
the budget for the DPS on behalf
of the twelve hundred or so
outstanding employees that make
up this organization
you know about those folks so
it's it's a collective group of
people that have a daily goal of
making the state a little bit
safer for everybody that lives
and lives in it and I I I'm I'm
I'm not asking for sensitivity
of or any of your sympathy but
it is also a collective group of
folks that have probably injured
maybe the worst ten months.
This agency has ever felt you
know due to comment and I and
some police reform issues that
are coming around but I can
assure you all those people out
here working working the road
since last for the last forty
eight hours to try to keep
people safe was one of the jobs
to do but I can assure you
they've.
In in the face of of what we
under the last ten months.
Every single one of them still
shows up to work every day again
to try to make this place a
little bit safer and
I hope I hope you'll see that as
well.
So getting onto of the
presentation from we can go to
slide one Jessica please.
And I'll try not to be long
winded for you all right you get
two questions
so I you have this all you can
read this at your leisure of
things were proud of things that
we live by
let you look at those if you if
we can get to the next slide
please.
And you know of a presentation
that was about twenty five
slides Senator moon yo's of
requests that they're only seven
so we made the print very very
small so I apologize for that
but just a few accomplishments
of the the DPS always proud over
the last you know three hundred
sixty five days a last year of
that that I think you're that
are noteworthy you know we
created a community engagement
team of you know for pre COVID
was doing a lot of good work in
the communities
you know to try to prevent crime
and and have better
relationships between the
citizens of our state and the
police officers policing it so
you can see there they did a
they had done a hundred twenty
five events throughout the state
and since COVID of those are the
folks that you see on Twitter
and Instagram of that the whole
various you know homeless
shelters and food pantries of
passing out masks and hand
sanitizer to folks to folks that
have been in need of since COVID
broke in March
We we were not one of the
agencies that we're fighting the
body camera up policy or laws
that there were went to session
last year well I think we were
somewhat ahead of that and and
and do the funding that you'll
find us which we appreciate of
phase one of that was done in
June of twenty twenty so every
single every single one of our
officers are sworn personnel
from the chief down has a body
camera with a policy on on when
those are to be used which are
in line with the Senator boxes
Bill.
we've also graduated sixty six
recruits this that was a little
bit more difficult during the
COVID because we don't allow
them to go all but we made it
work and and those poor folks
stayed in the dorms for fourteen
straight weeks without seeing
their families but they made it
through and they graduated and
and we're lucky to have them and
they're on the streets as we
speak so that was great another
highlight is a you know you see
in the news about homicide
levels of clearance rates some
of our metropolitan areas
We don't beat our chests on on
this topic but last year we had
a one hundred percent clearance
rate which I think is excellent
on our L. E. A. side.
Two hundred ninety three law
enforcement officers and seventy
five dispatchers are graduated
we recently reorganize or were
approved to re organize and re
reclassify of the folks that
work at the law enforcement
academy so we're we're in the
process of hiring those people
now
This is far as discipline cases
I know that's been a huge topic
of since the George George Floyd
incident and and many of the
discussions around police reform
you know one of the issues that
brought up and and and was true
because of the process for
discipline and and what that
look like and I could tell you
that director all the heart of
has done has done a has done a
really good job to try to make
sure all those cases are
initiated as they as you know
they they may not have been
before and so we're not I would
say up to date but there's not
necessarily a backlog at this
time which was there was before.
on some of the civilian side of
the of our of of DPS of the labs
in Santa Fe increases
you know the deal with eighteen
thousand pieces of evidence a
year from a hundred and forty
different agencies other
turnaround times on sexual
assault kids or with within the
law
continue to have the highest a
lab accreditation
and another notice grants
management was able to of find
six million dollars in comment
funding to various agencies
which we can talk about if you'd
like
Working on a state of the art of
evidence management system our
our M. S. for for headquarters
are for state police and we also
implement a statewide tracking
website
You know in light of the last
ten years of of some issues
around sexual assault kits on
the next slide please.
Can't talk about a law
enforcement organization without
understanding this about our
state which we none of us should
be proud of but but they are
facts so we're still.
Second.
In both violent crime and
property crime
and as I think we've been there
for the last several years.
Your seem to figure out a way to
get ourselves out of that but I
do believe with your help and
some of the things that are
coming to the legislature we
might be able to get a grip on
some of these things but like I
said we can't talk about law
enforcement out talking about
what battles we have in the
state right now
so a few things that we're doing
to try to reduce of being number
two in property crime and
violent crime.
Is.
You know.
Utilizing technology and
transparency of to make sure
we're in the right places at the
right times insuring that we're
training best practices which
there's a lot of bills floating
to the legislature right now
discussing that and and innocent
super important that we attempt
to reduce our vacancy rate in
our crime lab here in Santa Fe
with and also our dispatchers
and transportation sectors which
we'll talk about later in slide.
We can go to next slide please
Jessica.
So
You know in accordance with the
budget guidelines.
You know last year was weird
until Oct said this to the for
LFC hearing I think we had and
October September but.
I walked out of the last session
this time last year thinking I
was probably the greatest chief
that this department ever had of
the the the budgets were fat I
think we got every single thing
that we ask for solves you know
pretty proud of it but we got
humbled very quickly about two
months later when COVID hit all
and I I see that to introduce
the next slide is that it's kind
of been a walkie of two thousand
and twenty in that you know with
pay raises and comment hazard
pay and a bunch of other things
that that we'll get into later
in the presentation but it kind
of kind of created some issues
well with our budget that that
we're still seeing and and we'll
talk about but no you know even
with that we're able to offer
our officers hazard pay
for the job that they're doing.
You know police officers did not
have the opportunity to telework
some of you may know that some
of you may not but they did not
have the opportunity to lower us
those folks were out there every
day doing the same job that they
were per per prior to comment on
so we kind of got a bit of a
situation where we had the pace
of COVID Lee
at the expense of our budget and
we all were also able in
December or January a to offer
the pay raise that y'all
provided that this this
committee in the Legislature
provided last year would which
will get into the details of in
a in another slide.
So.
Again again we we appreciate the
efforts that you all have made
for us over the years and
Hope that we still have your
support moving forward to being
better so if we go on the next
slide just go.
So when I discuss
we're we're credit is deserved
for the pay of New Mexico state
police officers it that I
believe that credit goes to this
committee and the folks in the
in the in the round house
your willingness to work towards
paying in my opinion the best
law enforcement agency in the
state your willingness to pay
them for being the best with the
best salary all we are very
appreciative and grateful we
have been over the years however
I do believe they're still there
still some work to do.
and as you can see there of the
efforts we've made up I believe.
Five or six years ago we are the
seven or eight slot
as far as ours is our pay goes
and now now we're inching our
way up there
into those into those oil fields
agencies was I hope we can
surpass one of these days
but you can kind of see there
yeah we're our folks are at home
where I would like them to be
which is at the top of both of
those charts.
it I mentioned it's in in in
December with the appropriation
L. provided.
we're still able to provide
raises even though I think a lot
of other state agencies work and
so I very much appreciate that
of both the executive and LFC
for for for allowing that on
hopefully supporting that moving
forward and and I know that our
person.
Did appreciate that and you can
reach of the the also the right
kind of how we distributed that
money of a vast majority of it
as you can see went to the a
patrolman or the lower range of
folks that that deserve it the
most
thank you Doug we could talk
about.
let's go the next slide.
So you're you're you're efforts
once again we were able to sure
to find a six percent pay
increase to these two categories
of folks within our organization
one is the transportation sector
which many of you know our at
our ports of entry and then we
also have our dispatchers on and
and so again I do appreciate the
efforts that you all are maybe
Mr made up with the slide it is
frankly disgusting to me and
it's very frustrating to me that
of the folks that we're looking
at on the transportation specter
side we're you know we're at the
bottom of both of those lists
and
In even on the dispatcher side
which is as all of you know a
very stressful job.
At the bottom of most of those
as well so I would very much
appreciate being able to work
with you on the future trying to
get some pay study or salary
study for these two groups of
folks to get them competitive
the TI side it has been.
Particularly stressful in that
we've lost several employees of
the department of transportation
a within the same port of entry
of the took a different job
classification with the
department transportation and
received a significant raise so
we've been losing some folks
there I've been in communication
with split the state personnel
office and the secretary Santa
Fe D. O. T. to try to figure out
some creative ways to make sure
the other pages kind of equal in
in those buildings and we're
working on that and I would
apiece I'm certain that we're
gonna need your assistance with
that moving forward.
we can kind of go the next slide
which is our last two
but just kind of discussing what
mystery been.
You know talked about some of
the things.
You know the recommendations we
agree we agree with some of them
we don't necessarily know how
that math worked out in the
we're we're we constantly work
with the LFC and miss raven
about.
Those issues so I don't know
that this is the the venue to to
have those arguments but we are
constantly working with them
to to get that fixed to make
sure that the numbers the
numbers jive but we do we do
appreciate the both executive
and Ellen you know pretty much
put us a flat to where we were
last year I don't know that any
of us would have expected that
on in June or July of last year
so we do appreciate the efforts
on.
You know as you can see
is one of the particular
interest is the five point five
million dollars in person or
salary savings.
We can't seem to get to that
number and that number is
important because that also ties
into how many vehicles were
gonna be able to buy
so without that number if that
number isn't correct
we would have a deficiency in
vehicles which again we're we're
working with them and we have
our budget folks on here should
you have particular questions
about that.
And the second piece of good
that we
have some concerns about the
dollar figures would be the one
of the probation that we're
asking for regarding the P. R.
A. for our merger employees
which I think was kind of
discussed yesterday and I I
understand that this is not
likely the committee or the
hearing to discuss that but we
you know we had asked for right
around six million to bring some
folks into the proper retirement
and
It was supported by the
executive and DFA obviously of
the LFC came with a number of
two point six million and we've
had meetings with them on that
and I think it was a maybe a
misconception that we agree with
the two point six million dollar
number
which.
We under basically what we said
is we understood how it got to
that number but we still believe
from working with P. R. a
retiree health that number is
still in the six million dollar
range and so there's currently a
bill on the Senate side by
Senator Munoz
Trying to trying to fix that
retirement piece of yet and also
trying to fix that money piece
that we think we're off on a
between the executive and LFC
We can go to the next slide
please.
So if you if you look here and I
can let our our budget folks
kind of discuss this both the
executive and the LESC obviously
you Sir remained flat with some
differences our main concern is
of lower funding levels for
personal services and law
enforcement I think we took that
was you know some type of
average of where they got those
salary savings from we can't
seem to find that same number so
that that would be important to
kind of kind of.
Discuss and try to work out with
the LFC if possible on in that
you know.
Senator Munoz only allowed seven
slide so that's it for
our talking points I do you have
specific questions as I
mentioned a lot of our us more
people on the call other than
me.
Thank you Mr secretary I'm
looking to see if anyone has
their hand raised.
Hand raised.
I guess let me ask you some
questions and.
How much federal funds did you
get for COVID.
DPS.
Our homeland security funds if
you got any at I don't know the
answer the question.
Yes Sir let me let me get to
that of.
In my speech seventeen inch
binder here up so I do know of
COVID wise.
So.
From March from March to June we
got three point one million
dollars to pay hazard pay to our
person
and then there was also the and
again I don't know this
perfectly but there was also
that nineteen million.
Dollars that they paid for
salary and benefits of a
reimbursed that
and then.
A separate peace there was some
Jack funding that I think they
caught somewhat call comment
funding of that we had to apply
for we are we've got two million
from that in the rest of that I
believe was distributed to other
law enforcement agencies and
tribal entities throughout the
state and and am I correct on
that see a full zero.
Yes you are correct Mr
Secretary.
The nineteen million.
That was just an additional rate
in their in their pay or what is
that a replacement for salaries
and then business are you want
to answer that are missing.
Mr chairman members of the
committee to answer that
question we it was to pay
regular payroll costs of the
nineteen million and essentially
increased our reversion back to
the general fund as directed by
DFA.
Offsetting number just revert to
the general fund in the nineteen
correct that's Mr chairman
members of the committee yes
that is correct.
Okay.
Mr secretary or maybe missing
issue no action what what was
the department's total cost to
do the COVID enforcement all
over the state.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we would have to get
back that those figures to you
specifically we did have
questions that did run out of R.
jag funding as well as the pay
will cost expenditures and some
the costs associated with the
Gallup lockdown orders so we
would have to get that analysis
for you Sir.
Senator Diamond Mr Thatcher and
raised.
Thank you Secretary thank you Mr
chairman thank you Secretary
Johnson for your presentation I
can tell you just looking to
this as legislators one of the
challenges that we take this to
address how we are going to
tackle the high crime rate in
New Mexico it seems very
apparent that one of the ways is
to to address the low pay scale
that we pay our law enforcement
really really are true heroes in
New Mexico and so I want to I
want to thank you for your
service and in the service of
everyone in your department I
feel like in my short time in
the legislature I've seen
several legislation brought
before me that was what I would
term it is disrespectful to law
enforcement I will tell you I
was disheartened to see some of
that before and in the wake of
the loss of officer Jarrett from
my district in the boot of New
Mexico at this point I'm I'm
offended by some of that and so
I want to tell you I am nothing
more then a messenger for
Hidalgo and Mona and C. R. and
Joni at and the message is very
loud that we support our law
enforcement and you can count on
me and I assure you that that I
speak on behalf of all my
constituents and thank you for
your service.
Your us your time and thank
thank you so much for that and
now I will I am I am not one of
those police executives that
will sit here and tell you that
there are issues in law
enforcement the need to be
addressed that reforms are not
necessary I'm I'm not that
person there's some things we do
need to fix of a I agree with
you I I do believe that takes a
collaborative effort with the
folks sitting in your building.
And and and the police
executives and and folks in that
are working in the field of to
try to get some of those issues
addressed but I I do appreciate
your comments and we we very
much appreciate your support
ma'am it was very nice of you
say thank you thanks for
service.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
secretary good afternoon good to
see you again Sir.
First of all I just want to
thank you as well for your
service and that of the state
police over this last year and
the department of public safety
I know it's been a tough year
Particularly with COVID and
what's been asked of you and as
you said at the beginning your
presentation you all didn't get
to take time off in fact you had
to be on the front line item in
for some pretty tough orders.
and maintain public order.
And I just thank you for that
because you know COVID been a
tough deal with their their you
know it's it's not like anybody.
Came out good from COVID or or
was an easy thing for anybody to
grapple with the you all really
on a business and of of public
safety and I know that that put
your officers in some tough
situations but I just thank you
for your departments
professionalism
and also of course is a Los
crucis in in just a New Mexican
my my condolences as well for
the office a loss of officer
drive and it just you know it
reminds you want something like
that happens and how tough your
jobs are in that you know the
risk you take in just not
knowing what's going to happen
when you wake up in the morning
and I I really respect that and
and I am appreciate the work
what you do for the for the
citizens of the state so with
that I just want to ask you a
question about your budget and
You know I I I it looks like it
looks like the person and you're
kind of holding.
How can I say this.
You're retaining our officer
corps pretty well and you're
trying to get the salaries up
which which are good and the
difference between what the.
The difference I guess in the
extra money the additional money
you would like is a really to
continue to keep those salaries
competitive is that the main the
main support you would like from
us.
So we would like I would like
your support on every single one
of those Mr Steinborn and I
apologize Mr chair but let me
first by saying like thank thank
you for for saying the things
you did I appreciate that I do
believe the the you
Representative for the last
couple of weeks I was talking to
some folks with crucis PDS this
today and the high to director
An unusual amount of violence
for southern New Mexico has
occurred in the last two weeks
and I don't know what is causing
that
I believe crucis PED is in in
three critical situations
obviously we we had officer
Jarrett
I mean I would imagine has some
to do with some substance abuse
issues but
there's some going on down there
that we we should all be keeping
an eye on because I don't know
there's going to get better
without us but
so so yeah I mean I I to answer
quick question Mr chair Senator
Steinborn we're always trying to
we're always trying to stay
competitive no I've I've told
the previous committees you'll
not find a more loyal
organization or people of that
are that that that work for an
organization and you will for
the state police Sir I don't
know how long you've been in
that building there in Santa Fe
but if you look back many years
ago the rate was awful on it we
didn't have a lot of folks
leaving the doors up so you know
what you have in these and our
personnel are are very very
loyal but as I mentioned the
passes you know I six Bucks an
hour that loyalty begins to
erode very quickly and so
you know like I said I do
appreciate the efforts all of
maybe working with us over the
last several years but I but I
do believe with that we still
have work to do Mr Senator
Steinborn it and I would
appreciate your help I would
appreciate your help helping us
get there Sir secretary thank
you let me just ask you this Mr
Chairman secretary I saw
comparison to Colorado they seem
to be paying officers a lot more
and how much are are we losing
officers to other states as
compared to just lose amendment
to local jurisdictions that are
paying more.
I would have I can ask chief for
in that I I don't know that
we've lost a lot to other
agencies it's not a mass exodus
we've had the late we've had a
lot of retirements of folks
folks you know you're leaving
but do are you aware of any
chief of we will not.
I'm not aware of any that left
for other departments other
states I think from July until
the current again lost about
twenty five officers and that's
due to retirements resignations
you terminations and so forth
but unlike the secretary
explained well pretty loyal
Department and for the most part
of our officers of even more for
that of non APD or any other
people departments within the
state.
Okay thank you and the reason
I'm asking chief for Mister
secretary is just kind that
would just want to make sure
we're paying attention to the
right things as we try to make
sure your your salaries are
competitive and enabling you to
be successful so.
Probably a lot more challenges
just competing with local law
enforcement and like you said
there's a lot of esprit de corps
within the state police and it
does make me feel good chief and
secretary when I pull into the
capital and I see you guys I
mean it it up I'm always
thankful and I mean that so I'll
just leave it right there thank
you Mr chairman execs are.
Senator Steinborn.
I don't see anybody else on the
on the list.
Mr secretary have one.
Senator Hemphill I think Mr
chair is almost Senator Hemphill
go ahead I'm sorry I didn't
hear.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Secretary for your
presentation and your service
and I also want to extend my
condolences
and she's just gratitude for the
work that you do and for keeping
the capital safe this
legislative session I'm other
than raising salaries what are
some of the initiatives we can
take to start to address the
higher crime rate that we see in
New Mexico than the national
trends thank you Mr chairman and
Mr Secretary.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill said
again thank you thank you for
your kind words of some of the
things and I believe L.
Miss raven from LFC has
attempted to kind of push the
money towards those efforts but
a lot a lot of things you see
around the country when it when
we discuss
the relationship between law
enforcement and the communities
we serve we like just like I
told you earlier I would never
be one of the executives that
tells you that we don't have
things we need to fix because we
do and and so I think you know
number one would be
Figuring out creative ways to to
have better relationships with
those communities of the the
that that may not trust us so
that we can you know hopefully
prevent crime and and and and
solve it if it does happen on
some of the other things that
and I know of of the last
several years this body is try
to this body has tried to to
address some of these but.
It I don't know that we have
enough resources when it comes
to mental health or substance
abuse.
for our citizens
and and I know you know I won't
get too philosophical on you
know what some of the bill's
going to the to the roundhouse
right now regarding police
reform of the in in my in my
humble opinion I think a lot of
those are the consequences of
some of the other things that
every road in our society on but
you're to answer your question
simply as possible I I think
obviously we need to need.
More police officers we need
better training we need better
relationships with the community
and we need those resources for
those folks with mental health
issues and substance abuse
issues the that one it
and and I would say that would
be a pretty darn good start
ma'am.
Thank you Mr chairman and Mr
secretary for your thoughtful
answer as a school psychologist
I really agree that we need to
have that connection
regardless of what our
occupation is connect working on
developing those relationships
and in our community and with
each other is really important
to and focusing on mental health
and a dressing the root causes
of of substance abuse thank you
for your response I appreciate
it thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you so.
Scroll through here real quick
to make sure I don't miss
anybody.
Mr secretary.
What is the current Beth Bennett
for an officer right now.
Mr.
That question what is the
current death benefit.
There is two fifty two hundred
fifty.
Two hundred and fifty thousand
We may.
I love your way for an answer.
Mr chair there's a few other
factors in there as well like P.
R. A. and and and those things I
can get you in an exact number
of your FIR rectal secretary
you're correct to fifty as the
basic for the insurance and then
some additional things that come
into play as far salaries the
salary of the officer that these
the spouse or the next you can
get paid out but to fifties the
insurance benefit for an officer
doesn't want to do the.
I'm actually thinking about
raising that.
You know what you're going
through but to have a father.
With three kids and kids are
very expensive to raise and and
they deserve the best.
He did something for our state
and for his community that is
very important to me and to
every member so I think I want
to talk with you maybe if you
gather that information and
maybe talk about increasing that
that benefit.
How it steps up if there's a
family involved how that works.
I think that's important.
I also you know.
I don't like what's going on.
It's a political mantra and away
and but they don't realize what
you guys go through.
And what happens every day and
officer's life and I think
people need to realize when they
pick up the phone and they want
to talk to someone and nine one
one and want to see an officer
that you guys make that happen.
In rural New Mexico because.
If they're on the Navajo
reservation a Navajo officer
usually two hours away and
either the Here or the state
police response.
Select think that's very.
Critical that people understand
what actually happens in rural
parts of the New Mexico or even
on I. forty one there's a wreck
and the amount of people that
are involved in and how you have
to coordinate that so.
Want to visit with you guys and
chief and and Mr secretary about
the death benefit offline
I want to talk to you a little
bit more about your nineteen
million that that got sent back
to the general fund and how we
Some of your problems and maybe
talk about at a rate increases
and see if we can get there but
I think those are important
issues for me I think the
important issues for Amanda can
sell I will circle back around
with you the next there to have
that conversation.
I don't see anybody else on our
list this double checking some.
Thank you guys we appreciate you
I think all the state appreciate
your I really want to say that
hello.
Can't
appreciate you because during
our lockdown which we thought
was going to be helpful.
Turned out to be people can go
over the hill and through the
woods.
Nobody can catch in the state
those guys in cars and it's just
the make sure and make sure and
it is what it is but we
appreciate you guys that thank
you for what you do.
Thank you Mr secretary.
Committee thank thank you so
much for your time as you can
see we we less Senator share
through he joined the meeting
just in time for me to make a
motion of for all of us to vote
on all the stuff we need in our
budget.
Well Mister pass.
Mr secretary make a motion but I
don't know what will happen
thank you for your time.
Thank you Sir thank you
Representative Chandler I see
you sitting there patiently any
We're gonna do house bill eleven
that.
Wonderful.
Thank you Mr chair I'm looking
to see if my team is here John
W..
John Clark the secretary keys I
hope this year and mark Roper I
see so it looks like the team is
here thank you so much Mr chair
and very nice to see the
committee and meets meet the new
Senate members and I'm looking
forward to working with you over
the course of this this year and
next so again here we are here
to talk about house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House Bill eleven.
Representative are you you know
we have some amendments right
yes Sir yes and how would you
like to handle that Mr chair I I
think introduce your bill and
then we'll go to the amendments
one by one and and.
You can tell us what you like or
don't like great that would be
that's perfect so again thank
you we're talking about has
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for House Bill Levin.
This is an important bill
intended to support and advance
the our state's economy
as all of you know that he the
pandemic has had a devastating
effect on our businesses in the
state particularly small and mid
size businesses.
Over the past year the state and
federal government has invested
over three point two billion
dollars in economic assistance
but many businesses are still
struggling this house bill
eleven provides additional
assistance to these businesses
it provides two hundred million
dollars to support them those
that need it the most through
rent and mortgage assistance and
it also encourages those
businesses to re hire workers
and create jobs something I
think we all agree is needed
desperately Mr chair in addition
to providing this essential
pandemic relief The bill creates
an innovative tool through the
local economic development act.
The bill allows the reinvestment
of part of construction G. R. T.
generated through very large
leader projects to be reinvested
in the project and it also
provides that those that some
portion of those monies will
remain in the leaders this fund
to support other projects
throughout the state and with
that I'd like to hand off the
presentation to I think
Secretary keys I think she's
next in our lineup Mr chair if
that's okay with you.
That's fine secretary and then a
good and just one John yes.
Okay.
Thank.
Secretary keys.
For John if you want to.
I was just on the phone just had
to.
Jump off for a second so thank
you thank you Mr chair members
of the committee so I'm just
gonna tell you basically what
the bill does there are two
components here that both expand
how we can use lead us to help
businesses and create jobs but
the two parts are completely
separate the first provides
immediate economic assistance in
the way of requests for
thousands of small and mid sized
businesses to use for mortgages
rent or lease a basement so they
can re hire workers or new
employees and speaking with
business recently this is the
actual number one concern is the
debt that they have incurred
because of their rents.
So as all of you know Lena is a
job creation funds and so the
businesses that accept this
money have to commit to hiring
or bringing back a specific
number of workers and EDD will
monitor these benchmarks as we
do for all other lead
investments.
We would utilize the NMFA
application process now in place
and the money would be paid out
through EDD's Leda funds which
permits assistance for buildings
including mortgage rent and
lease payments so the second
part of this bill provides as a
tool to be able to incentivize
larger companies like big
pharmaceutical companies or
manufacturers to come to New
Mexico by providing partial
sharing a G. R. T. revenues
during construction at the
approval of the selected county
and municipality so these larger
companies would not be eligible
for the recovery requests I just
mentioned this additional
funding will make our state more
competitive for big job creators
it will also ensure funds are
available with great
opportunities arise the
recapture of G. R. T. is limited
to the construction phase of the
project into a portion of G. R.
T. revenues for projects over
three hundred and fifty million
dollars so projects like this do
not come around very often in
New Mexico but they really do
bring long term economic games
games to a community and we
definitely want to be
competitive in trying to get
these projects here to New
Mexico.
So some questions have come up
about your to sherry why can it
be used for smaller developments
so we have lead a balances for
those smaller projects which we
struggle with what we really
struggle with is winning these
bigger deals so the goal of this
changes to maintain a
sustainable lead a balance so we
can move forward with
investments all around the state
so really we think of this is
like big projects on little
projects but by not depleting
lead for big projects like
Facebook or other very large
projects we can say yes to look
upon us or C. farms or high
plains processing and so many
other projects smaller projects
are community around the state
I'm and this provision also uses
some of the new revenues these
bigger deals generate to help us
with the smaller projects so we
really need to do it all and
this bill gives us a tool to do
that I'm gonna go ahead and pass
it over to W. secretary John
Clark to expand a little bit
more on the constitutionality of
this bill and why we're using
lead as a mechanism and also to
talk a little bit more about the
process of using G. R. T. and
how counties and municipalities
will have the ultimate decision
as to whether they participate
so secretary deputy secretary.
Thank you Secretary and thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee of the bill addresses
a key question that might be
raised about the issue of
constitutionality and that's the
inner donation Clause Leda is
granted an exception to the anti
donation clause of the state
constitution as long as job
creation is involved so that's
what we're going through the
legal process but also why the
bill requires job creation for
typically to deals you will find
a portion of the leader money up
front and then companies have to
meet certain milestones there
certainly contract receive
additional tranches of money.
This bill continues that same
framework by providing one of
the four quarterly payments up
front and then requiring
companies to meet hiring
requirements receive all or a
portion of the additional
quarterly payments additionally
the constitution requires that
leader funds be used for land
building and infrastructure this
can include mortgage rent and
lease payments which we know is
a significant concern for
businesses across the state.
I also want to talk about that
your teacher and portion of the
bill this allows us to decide
together EDD the county and
municipality if we need to use
this mechanism to attract really
big deals that we couldn't land
otherwise all three have to
agree or there's no deal so it's
optional for the local
governments this takes a little
more than half of the New Jersey
revenues generated during the
construction and allows that to
flow back to the project through
the normally to process in
addition a little bit extra from
the state's portion for a total
of seventy five percent will
remain in the lead to fund using
some of these new revenues
generated by this company to
attract other projects will help
local expansions they're still
allows a quarter of the new
revenues generated to flow to
the state's general fund and
nearly half of the new local
revenues that are generated to
stay with those local
governments so this is a win in
terms of jobs and investment but
it's also to win in terms of
revenues this is for occasional
really big projects that we
can't land otherwise and just as
a quick example look at the jobs
investment and economic activity
that lost blue is seen because
of Facebook what if we didn't
have enough uncommitted leader
dollars to compete for that
project if we could win that
dealing other way we could have
all agreed to use this it's just
a way to make sure the big deals
don't pass a spot Mr chair
without having to answer any
questions.
Thank you John and madam
secretary
Yes.
Representative Chandler
you what we're gonna go through
the amendments and and Senator
Candelaria has amendment but I
think you've seen in center
catalytic you want to explain
your amendment.
And we need to move them and so
I can have a motion chair Mister
chairman I'll go ahead and move
Senate finance committee
amendment number one to Senate
our to House tax revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill eleven for purposes of
discussion.
Thank you have a second thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Campos of
center Candelaria going to
explain amendment so Mr chairman
representative thank you this
amendment first let me give you
let me just give a committee
some quick background in twenty
seventeen the Legislature
unanimously approved an
amendment to the leaders statute
that I was proud enough to
sponsor which basically allows
for local governments to ensure
into leader green men's to build
telecommunication network
facilities to deploy broadband
across New Mexico now I'm I'm
concerned in a little
disheartened that you know
despite all of the claims of how
important broadband is we have
not seen local governments or
the state for that matter I
think but their money where
their mouth is when it comes to
this so so since this
legislation is opening up Lida
and and the definition section
and we know there's a lot of
broadband conversation I wanted
to propose this amendment to the
committee because I think it's
important that we put some
guardrails around the use of
public money for broadband
development.
the first part of the amendment
on page two money to wipe of
twelve of the bill strikes the
word anymore and inserts and Lou
there of baseline under current
law if a government entity
enters into an agreement with a
private entity for broadband
under Lida the broadband network
must meet FCC minimum standards
we're gonna raise the stakes
instead of the base minimum
scraping the bottom of the
barrel we're going to require
that the agreements actually
need the FCC baseline which is a
faster capacity of connectivity.
our second part of the amendment
on page six betweens line five
and six insert the following new
subparagraph the placement of
new broadband to mimic
telecommunication network
facilities again something is
already authorized under Lida
provided that the facility shall
not serve a public facility or
location that already meets
federal communication commission
baseline speed standards so this
is designed Mr chairman to
ensure that if our state is
going to be investing public
money in broadband
infrastructure that that money
is spent in the areas where it's
actually needed where there is
no connectivity or very weak
connective itty we do not want
the proliferation or building
network on top of network using
state money just to give
somebody an unfair competitive
advantage we really want to make
sure dollars actually go where
they're needed and then of
course parts three letters the
succeeding paragraph supporting.
so that is the amendment Mr
chairman I believe that a
session where we are all talking
about broadband puts some
necessary parameters on the use
of Leda funds for broadband
networks.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Chandler and comments on the
amendment.
Mr chair thank you it is a
friendly amendment I very much
appreciate the suggestion and
I'm and one of those individuals
in the legislature has been
working very hard on some
broadband initiatives and look
forward to having that
conversation with you at a later
date so yes with that as a
friendly amendment.
Thank you any questions from
committee members on the
amendment.
So can I have a motion on the
amendment hello Mr chairman for
pro of the amendment and your
entry.
I second.
So is moved by Senator Rodriguez
and was at center Hemphill that
second.
Yes Mister chairman.
Thank you for the
secretary one of color all the
men.
Yes Mister chairman Senator Burt
yes.
Yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Campos yes Senator Candelaria
yes.
Yes Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share.
Yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods.
Senator what's not there.
The staff Senator Woods are
we're voting on the amendment.
Absolutely yes.
Woods yes Senator Rodriguez.
Yes madam chairman Mr chairman.
Directory assistance Senator
menu.
Yes.
Two two newest test that
amendment number one carries.
Representative Chandler using
the second amendment correct yes
Mr chair we have and so I can
have a motion for a discussion
purposes for the second
amendment some of Mr chairman.
Thank you so we have a motion
and a second for discussion
purposes in mainly this is a lot
of cleanup with inside the bill
that of we found some issues
with and requesting some
reporting from that from the
agency in the department can
anyone explain this amendment so
that way we get it everybody
gets it right.
Mr Chairman so the first item on
the I'm in the is on page eight
of twenty six line for we would
insert a new requirement the the
within thirty days after
execution of a project our
system patient agreement with a
qualifying in fifty.
The department shall issue a
report to the department of
finance and administration and
the legislative finance
committee shall identify the
qualifying against intended to
receive the public support yes
this is related to the
construction.
Project.
And the location of the project
and the amount of public support
pledged by the department in
each local government for the
project
Because these are very major
projects that it was important
to give the members of the
legislature local government
division the FAA and the public
information about the so that
they can have an understanding
of of what's going on
It's likely to for free has this
new agreement.
And then the other two
amendments are really just
have to do with the.
Clarifying the timing of the
grant program
on page twenty six line twenty
one was a requirement that the
New Mexico finance authority had
to have tax documents for years
twenty twenty three twenty
twenty two and we felt that that
would expand the.
Our ability for them to give
grants out in a quicker fashion
act of action and so we said
that they needed for your twenty
twenty and of subsequent
accessible years in which the
risk of re invest your flies for
a grant that's just to try and
Shorten the time period a little
long getting that grant money
out and as well as the second
amendment which is on page
twenty seven line one.
the way the bill is.
Worded if.
it implied that there would be
like one curious.
For people to apply for the
grants.
And in talking to the New Mexico
finance authority they agreed
that we could use of similar
process was done in and bill
three.
and do a couple application
period and so the first one
would they could designate one
or more application areas and
you applications we see.
the first one would be no later
than June thirtieth.
Twenty twenty one so that
hopefully they can start getting
money out the door at least by.
The first part of next fiscal
year and then there would be
another one
December thirty one twenty
twenty one and the reason for
that changes because they will
rely on getting the income tax
returns for these businesses
have
Support have put in and so the
June thirtieth twenty twenty one
would allow people who file on
time to get that application in
December one would allow people
who take a federal extensions
extension to get their
applications in and then the
last part of that is that
there is a provision in the bill
now where.
portion of the money is set
aside for
a later.
Review by for it businesses that
are still under the public
health order.
Not been able to re open and so
find
in that case the apple cation
period for those some of those
funds set aside percent
subsection.
I'll be no later than June
thirtieth twenty twenty two.
And.
Of us.
Yes.
Questions Representative
Chandler you have any questions
on the amendment Mr chair no we
think they're helpful amendments
anything that adds to
transparency and reporting we're
we're very much in support of
them we appreciate the technical
changes and and the clean up so
these are friendly amendments Mr
chair.
On the amendment.
We do have Mr.
Will the amendment anyway
president thank you Mr chairman.
Senator Rodriguez made a motion
second by Senator Campos any
objection and on the second call
below Mr Chairman.
Yes I'm one if I could just make
a comment I I just want to
thank.
Janitor the staff for whoever
crafted the amendment because I
think it's up it's really
important to apply good
government principles on these
economic development program so
good catch good effort and I
just really appreciate CNN and
and thanks to the sponsor for
racing into thank you Mr moto
at.
Thank you.
We call the roll.
Yes yes Mr chair Senator Burt
yes Senator ES Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes.
On the lady a test Senator
Diamond yes diamond you Senator
Gonzales yes.
You're Gonzales yes Senator have
helped yes.
Your Hemphill yes Senator share
yes.
Mr chair yes Senator Steinborn
yes.
Thank you Senator Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator menu LCS the motion
carries.
Past thank you we're back on the
bills Senator Candelaria and
leave your first.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the and thank you
representative.
have some questions about I
think some concerns I have with
how this program is intended to
operate I also have some
concerns about the sort of level
of discretion that is provided
to the Economic Development
Department and the lack of
legislative oversight so address
the first issues first regarding
the structure of the bill Mr
Chairman representative Chandler
in the legislation as I
understand it.
a business would become eligible
for essentially a second
quarter.
Of funding or third quarter of
funding were fourth quarter of
funding.
If they can demonstrate that
they have new FTEs.
Is that correct.
If they hired a new employee in
the presiding quarter.
Mr chair and senator I believe
that's correct but I believe
there would be other
requirements which I would defer
to Mr Clarke to answer if if you
request additional information
Mr chair and senator shar said
Sir Mr Clarke am I correct in my
understanding of how the bill
would currently work.
Yes Mister and senator in
addition to just demonstrating
that they have used the funding
they received to make mortgage
rent or lease payments the other
requirement would be that they
should that they have.
hired FTE in the prior quarter.
Mr chairman I I think that's my
first concern is as written.
The legislation makes a business
eligible if it adds a new FTE.
So Mr chairman and and
Representative and Mr Clarke my
concern is the legislation does
not require that the absolute
number of employees from quarter
to quarter main risk remained
the same or they actually
increase and so I'm thinking
about firms that have large
rates of turnover rate that you
have a firm when quarter one
applies in order to demonstrates
well we hired three people last
quarter even though we let go of
ten.
Under the under the under the
language of this bill that firm
could still gatt assistance in a
grant under this legislation
even if their total number of
employees decreased correct.
Mr chair and senator I would say
no that's not the intent of the
bill and we know that will need
to issue a rule to clarify some
of the process report regarding
documentation requirements and
that would be one of the things
we would clarify we don't
currently consider Mr Truman
over to be part of the meeting
leader job creation requirements
so we would consider the job
creation requirements here to be
similar to those of our existing
leader projects where we look at
the total net number at the time
of of the milestone.
Mr chairman I think that that
needs to be spelled out in the
bill that Mr Chairman because I
think what we have here is an
intense by and and and executive
agency to do something and while
I have all confidence in the
world my job as a legislator I
feel as much like my job as a
lawyer which is to trust but
verify and I think that you know
as written there is no guarantee
and and and there's no guard
rail in place to ensure that the
program actually work the way
that I think the intent is which
I agree with the.
But as written this legislation
would basically allow money to
flow to firms that actually have
a decrease in the total number
of employment as long as they
can show delta for one quarter
to the next so I.
You know let me preface I'm not
sure gonna vote for this bill
I'm not sure gonna vote for this
bill unless some of these issues
are taken care of so I and maybe
other people don't share and I'm
alone but I think they're pretty
serious Mr chairman next I want
to ask Mr Chairman about.
Another point of the
qualifications Mr chairman and
I'll direct this to
Representative Chandler and and
letter to and she must answer Mr
Clark but Representative
In order to qualify for grant
funding under this bill the
small business would needs to
demonstration.
A decline in.
Revenue from two thousand
nineteen to two thousand twenty
and that decline would be
evidenced using the business's
income tax filings in my
correct.
Mr chair we're senator I believe
that's correct but if Mr Clark
would like to supplement my
answer be happy if it's at your
discretion that would I would
ask them to do some.
You Mr Senator Representative as
correct.
So Mr chairman senator I think
again here we need another
amendment so here's my concern
so.
You know I want to refer the
committee to the way that the
federal government structured
the PPP loan version to.
So in order to qualify for PPP
version to you you have to
demonstrate that you lost
revenue in one quarter of twenty
twenty relative to twenty
nineteen.
under this bill the way it works
is here my twenty nineteen tax
returns here my twenty twenty
tax returns so Mr Chairman what
about businesses that started
business meeting year end twenty
nineteen or in the final quarter
of twenty nineteen.
And this is my point if we use
just an annual data point you
necessarily exclude.
a lot of businesses that
started.
I went into business in twenty
nineteen right let's assume they
were only open for two quarters
so don't half a year of business
well even though they have had
an opportunity cost and their
economic situation has been
harmed by the pandemic they're
not gonna be able to show a
revenue decline because of their
doing business the full year
twenty twenty.
Right that number is going to be
more.
One would just reasonably assume
that one quarter had they just
been doing business in twenty
nineteen and I raise this issue
Mr Chairman because that I'm not
going to provide for this at all
but if it does pass but you know
my law firm went into business
in twenty nineteen in the last
quarter right well I just
assumed my law firm was a
mechanic shop that went into
business in the last quarter of
twenty nineteen because we're
looking at an annual comparison
I think it's it's going to
exclude a lot of folks so you
know I would hope that.
And it's it's challenging that
that were the last committee on
this bill of course because I
know people want things to move
but I really I really think that
that that that that the time we
look at to measure revenue
decline needs to be changed and
I would Mr Chairman is from
Representative Chandler the
department if they have any any
thoughts on that approach.
Mr chair finance W. secretary
Spahn.
Thank you Mr chair and senator a
couple of comments in regard to
that
you're the first is that
unfortunately no matter how well
we try to design and build a
businesses
it's just proving impossible to
design one that is able to help
every single business that we
want to help this is designed to
will differently than the
federal aid packages it's
designed a little differently
then for example House Bill
three sorry simple three page
your sponsoring
I think one of the benefits of
this building designed a little
bit differently is that this
will pick up some of the
businesses that get lost in some
of the other aid packages the
other eight packages can pick up
some of the ones that get lost
here but also the issue with
trying to design this so that
we're looking at quarterly
losses instead of annual is
partly an issue of speed and
then power the federal
government has a much much
larger staff of people able to
review those documents we are
relying on an automated system
put in place to NMFA and few
staffers and trying to get the
money out as fast as possible
one of the.
One of the concerns that was.
Heard very loudly from
businesses across the state with
the federal aid packages was
when they were started up it
took businesses a long time to
get there are funding and we
don't want this money to sit
there we want to get out the
door to businesses we want to
make it as quick and easy for us
to administer as possible so
that we can get that money out
to the out the door and get it
to work.
Mr chair I think we're gonna
respect we agree to disagree
because I don't think that
simply changing the period of
time where you're doing the the
revenue dropped comparison
creates all that much more work
instead of looking at an annual
tax return you could look at
their G. R. T. violence for one
quarter right so I'm gonna push
back that it's going to be such
a tremendous burden and again Mr
Chairman I I just think this is
such low hanging fruit and
common sense here that it's it's
sort of it's sort of frustrating
that that that that just you
know for the sake of not taking
NMAA
you know what not but I guess my
but will be were my vote is that
the next issue is there any
money under the bill Mr chairman
to basically cover New Mexico
finance authority's
administrative costs associated
with either technology if they
have to do any upgrades or or
install new tax check or IT
systems and then for that man
power just NMFA get any money
under this for administering at.
All Mr chair and senator finance
John.
W. secretary Clark to address
that I know he's been working
with NMFA on this point.
Yes of course Mr got thank you
Mr Senator yes we would
reimburse them for actual costs
we would enter into an in my way
and that would.
You know it and outlined the
costs that were to be incurred
they only have the systems in
place they probably don't need
significant additional I. T.
systems developed because they
already develop the systems last
year for the grant and recovery
loan programs but they would
need some additional staffing
adjusted review the volume of
documents and we would cover
those actual costs.
Is that spelled out in the
legislation that the fees are
capped at actual costs to
administer.
Mr chair and senator it's not
spelled out in the bill but the
redefine gives us the authority
to use of leader funds for
actual administrative costs are
and so we would use these in
that way.
So again Mr chairman I think
this is another area that
actions to be explained in the
bill.
the second areas of concern that
I have our with.
The G. R. T. sharing.
Mr chairman members of the
committee am I correct that once
a either the Economic
development department or local
government enters into an
agreement to divert gross
receipts taxes to this to the
lead a fund that the legislature
has no role in are reviewing or
approving that agreement.
Mr chair I I think that's
correct but I will defer to W.
secretary Clark.
Mr chair and senator I would
actually like to defer to our
division director mark Roper to
handle that he oversees our
leader program within the
department of course.
Mr Roper share Mr chair Senator
Candelaria members of the the
committee under the proposal.
This would follow the same
pattern as a traditional leader
program we would have a local
ordinance is adopted that would
encapsulation of.
Project participation agreement
and their governmental the
program and as well as a
security agreement so that that
would then trigger the G. R. T.
D. that would be diverted and
shared in the project would be
exclusive to the construction of
the project it would not have
any ongoing G. R. T. sharing of
any business that would go
beyond the construction of the
project.
So Mr Mr Chairman and Spencer
and senator I I you know I think
this is one of those
fundamental there's there's
there's there's larger issues
implicated by this bill the than
simply the issue in front of us
I would submit to this
committee.
Which is a you know I feel
altogether uncomfortable
basically granting the
executive.
Unfettered authority to enter
into these agreements and defer
gross receipts tax.
I think it it is it is a it is
an exception to the normal
appropriating process.
I'm gonna cut the Legislature
completely out and it robs us of
our appropriating authority and
as the Senate finance committee
at I tend to think our role is
in part to jealously protect the
constitutional role of this
legislature to appropriate funds
in the regular course of our
process ease and so you know all
say in its current form I can't
support the bill I can't support
granting the executive this sort
of carte Blanche authority am I
think it would be appropriate Mr
Chairman if for example at the
very least the executive had to
obtain approval of the New
Mexico finance oversight
oversight committee that is a
requirement we put in with the
kids system so at the very least
there is an the legislative
approval that has to come into
play so that all of us on a
bipartisan basis are informed
about what's going on again this
is not in any way critical of
any person present this isn't in
any way critical or suspicious
of anyone's motives but I
believe our job Mr chairman Mr
create systems and law that that
have to deal with bigger
principles and so I would hope
that there's some openness to
discussing some of the
amendments I've gone over today
and will we'll leave it at that
I would just encourage this
committee I think we've always
been.
Very good about protecting our
own jurisdiction and this is
basically giving the executive a
blank check.
And if we're okay with that
that's fine but let's understand
that's what we're doing thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Thank you Senator Candelaria
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chair so that thank
you so this bill is a big bill
and it
Definitely triggers a lot of
thoughts for me
First of all Mr chair Madam with
a two hundred million dollar
grant program this seems like a
perfect.
Program allotment that we ought
to be looking at the federal
money coming our way for you
know given its cares related.
You know losses that that this
might be a good kind of swap
opportunity
for federal money that might be
coming down the pike intended
for this purpose so that's just
one thought about that I like
the idea of helping businesses I
mean we know New Mexico
businesses need the aid and
that's extraordinarily popular
as it would should be with them
I'm just curious why
Mr chairman and John and and
Representative Chandler why
would we not wholly have that
administered by NMFA as opposed
to.
You know kind of re invent the
wheel little bit by getting EDD
involved in that grant program.
Mr Chairman center I'll give you
my take on that and and I'm sure
can be just as I can get some
assistance from Mr Clark but
This is a legal bill and this is
a on a project this isn't a
proposal that relies on leader
and an M. D. D. D. is the entity
that is has the expertise to be
able to administer lead and and
programs such as that but I will
ask
W. secretary Clark to respond as
well if that's alright Mr chair
and senator.
Thank you representative Mr
chair and senator so NMFA would
be administering this program
you know from from the viewpoint
of the public from the viewpoint
of businesses that would be
applying for this they would be
going to NMFA for the
application process to be
submitting all the documentation
to NMFA.
And NMFA will be sent to them
providing them with the payments
but because this is.
Do we were able to do this is by
using leader and the department
has the authority to use leader
funds in the Fe on its own does
not to all rolling this is just
to ensure that we're meeting the
leader requirements and that's
the job creation requirements
and that is being used for
mortgage rent and lease that's
really our only role is that and
that's that's why we will then
be working on a rule to
establish very clearly the
procedures for that
documentation and then NMFA will
be working on everything else I
got to and Mr chairman John that
makes sense so from a lead of
legal standpoint to not violate
anti donation everything else
the leaders kind of the the
vehicle to be able to provide
those requests and the way to
structure that but it's good to
hear that that that NMFA.
All the pain they've gone
through to figure out how to do
this already that we're going to
base leverage at system and and
they also know who's got money
already and I think there's
people who didn't get money by
the way I don't know how we I'll
give an example I have a food
truck in my district small
operation absolutely decimated
by COVID did not get there were
one of the fifty percent of
businesses you didn't get the
last you know hundred million in
grants we gave out don't know
why.
but they were definitely
deserving so I would I would
hope that NMFA would look at
those that didn't get money that
suffered losses so that we try
to spread that around I don't
know what we can do about that
but I'll just throw that out
there maybe that's a.
Part of a package of amendments
or something but that anyway I
don't want to shift the other
part of the bill though which is
really even more interesting and
that is the the redistribution.
Lida
the the revenue opportunity
it kind of almost feels to me
John you'll appreciate this like
a reverse Ted in a way it's
Yeah that's what is triggered
thoughts of course the ticket
you create commercial activity
and then the taxes generated by
the commercial activity stay in
the local stay in the local
round work or stay in the the
ten region what we're proposing
here is that we use revenue from
project a big project we
actually kick some of that money
to a specific state program.
Which is interesting and I think
the questions raised by Senator
Candelaria are good questions
It raises lots of questions
actually but.
It's an interesting way to raise
money for the program but it
also creates a perverse
incentive in a way forgive me
for using those terms but it
probate a virtuous cycle of then
giving out a lot of money to
then raise a lot of money in it
creates the opportunity for
unique kinds of deals okay let's
put it that way and
One of the reasons why I pushed
hard for I've got one particular
transparency bill to disclose
the roll of different players
involvement legislation is
always makes you wonder kind of
what's behind a bill or whatever
I just want to ask a question if
I can
Mr Chairman representative would
Los Alamos benefit from this
because of all the construction
they're going to do.
they be qualified chair and and
the Senator not that I'm aware
of the construction and I know
of is a Nash at is at the
national lab and that is I think
both totally and almost
completely federally funded so
unless Mr Clark at some know
something I don't know I have no
sense that this will benefit
anything that's going on
currently or in the future at
Los Alamos.
Mr chair senator no this this
has to be for new projects only.
The reason why part of the
reason why local governments are
involved in this as well is did
they are helping to create a but
for test for this program we
have two ways of limiting this
the first is just that simple
dollar cut off a single project
has to be at least three hundred
fifty million dollars in
construction infrastructure
expenses to even begin to
qualify beyond that you still
have all of the existing
traditional leader requirements
it has to be creating economic
based jobs as difficult
everything else that we have to
do with all of ordered projects
with them also we now have this
but for test for the system
where the local governments have
to say yes this makes sense to
us to do this the only way that
they would do that is if this
was a new project if it's a new
project that they can't win
otherwise then they're using a
portion of revenues that they're
not seen currently that
otherwise they wouldn't get to
help with the deal if it's a
construction project that was
almost is doing that everyone
knows is already going to happen
there's no way that the local
government would agree because
they already know they're going
to get it why would the giveaway
revenues they're counting on for
their budget.
Well I mean because it's money
and
You know money money makes the
world go round and so
It's just because they can but
and and you know that's where we
get back to the tech
conversation it's really just
fascinating you know we have a
Ted being proposed in Los crucis
right now Jon Stewart the whole
but forecast where local
governments have to.
Through that but not for that
something would happen is very
dicey and.
You know it sounds good and I
appreciate that standard but
it's just not a it's just
something that's not always
proven you know really you know
but let me ask you this since
we're since we're talking about
a scheme where we would use some
of the money.
From generated from construction
and then shipped some of it
would ship around.
Does it reduce the amount of
local G. R. T. that would
otherwise go to the local
government from that
construction does it reduce the
state G. R. T. that would
otherwise go to the state how
does it change that normal
distribution I realize we're
giving part of it to lead up how
would it affect the local in the
state government.
Mr Chairman center LS John to
answer that question Mr Senator
all let me make a brief comment
about the analogy to tents and
I'll turn it over to Mr Roper so
it is a good question of you
know why do we need this in
addition to the existing trip
mechanism and frankly the answer
is simple kids are designed well
for long term developments not a
particular project so tents have
to go through a very lengthy
process in order to get a
portion of the state G. R. T. in
command there are only two
points during the year which you
can make an application to the
state board of finance that
application process takes months
I know because I've been on that
side of things doing the
analysis and then even after
that even after the board of
finance says yes then the
legislature has to pass a bill
saying yes the entire process
typically takes years that's
following for developers were
planning these massive projects
they would have residential
components commercial components
industrial components in this
case we're we're trying to
attract one particular client
and we're competing with other
states we often need to give the
client an answer within the
space of a couple or few months
as to what sort of deal we can
craft for them if it's June and
they need an answer by August of
what the state is going to be
able to find and we don't have
enough uncommitted leader
dollars we simply can't compete
for that project the process
takes far too long the next
legislative session isn't for
another six months and it would
take months after that for the
session to occur for bills to
get signed things like that so
this is designed for us to be
able to go after these big
projects and compete with them
up because of the very time
sensitive business nature of the
deals with that Mr referral
alternative were you for
additional comments about how
the G. R. T. sharing.
Mechanism works.
Thank you W. secretary Clark
Representative Jan Chandler the
chairman Senator Steinborn and
members of the committee of the
mechanism here it is.
Is to actually pre-filled
because all local governments
involved as well as the state
have to agree on this the G. R.
T. share of four project would
be seventy five percent of the
gross receipts tax generated
specifically from the
construction of this particular
project from the state chair of
the G. R. T. it would also be
seventy five percent of this
sorry mark can you clarify what
you just said I I didn't
understand what you just so you
said seventy five percent of the
stage seventy five percent of
the G. R. T. generated from the
construction of this project
would be placed and the the lead
to fund the other twenty five
percent would flow naturally to
the general fund of the state of
New Mexico at the local level
what the city and county level.
The six point two five percent
of their local share would also
flow into the lead to fund.
Up to I should say up to fifty
six point two five percent
then the money that would be
dedicated to the project would
be up to fifty six point two
five percent of the all of the
money's the remainder of the
night nearly twenty percent out
of the state G. R. T. share
could be held into the lead a
fund for other projects around
the state.
Okay.
And then if if all just that's
the mechanism it and I'll if
I'll just add.
Up the the one we continually
point to is kind of the poster
child of this idea is the
Facebook project in that project
the state of New Mexico
committed to traditional leader
resources ten million dollars
the village of Los let us
because they did not have
general fund revenue sufficient
general fund revenues to be able
to
project any to the project they
agreed to seventy five percent
of the gross receipts tax
generated by the construction
project to go back into this
construction project through the
needs of the American.
This is envisioning that same
type of idea except you in the
state portion of the G. R. T.
isn't sure also okay so just
some follow up so that's helpful
and I can I can see how this
would be a creative way to
finance a big lead a deal where
we say Hey we're going to
leverage the G. R. T. from the
project itself and use that as a
leader.
A cash flow that seems like kind
of a cool idea
However so what you describe
mark is that so fifty percent of
the local G. R. T. that they
would normally get their
agreeing to give up.
For for the lead at.
Now is the is the the the
duration of that is that just
for the kids can find activity
of the construction itself is
that all the extent of what
they're giving up in the next
stand of the centre here.
Yes missed Mr chair Senators
Steinborn yes that is it is only
for the duration of the
construction of the project and
it will be to provide up before
we take up an additionally which
what's really nice about this is
unlike the other leader projects
that we do sometimes we we are
putting state funds general fund
monies sometimes capital outlay
monies into a project before we
receive any benefit that in this
case we've already received the
budget before we put it in the
project is truly is a post
performance situation.
Yup so
Okay so now is food in so it's
just limited for the duration of
for the construction which is
good it's not in perpetuity Gail
is far as the state portion.
What percentage of the I mean I
realize of the state money that
what what how much general fund
as a percentage are you losing
on that.
Can you speak to that.
They realize it's going to lead
to but what as far as the state
portion of our taxes that would
otherwise flow to the general
fund to the state in New Mexico
what kind of a lost any suffer
that kind of a deal.
But I would argue the losses
zero of the your your your are
your it's it's a case of if we
don't do this we wouldn't get
the project and there will be
no.
In the we do this so we have the
product that you're actually
having a twenty five percent
gains which you know a twenty
five percent gain of three
hundred fifty million dollar G.
R. T. of three point nine
percent this way greater than a
hundred percent of zero up so
right yes I don't I don't
disagree with you I don't
disagree that it's a great point
I think that's where the but for
standard becomes really crucial
is it really about four
situation are you just giving
away money so it is the but for
is this a new standard that
we're putting into law in this
bill that I could look at.
this Senator Steinborn I I think
it's self evident in the fact
that the city and the county
have to sign off on it too if
it's a if it's a project within
a municipality the county would
have to sign on off on it
because I have been personally a
locally elected official there's
no way I'm given of G. R. T. on
something that would happen
anyway I would only agree to
this year too sure if it was
truly something that wouldn't
happen but for not this.
So the specific language but for
no but I think in all reality it
is but for test.
Well I hear yeah I hear you no I
think it would be stronger would
be stronger if that were in
there for what it's worth and I
mean we we kind of use that as
as a good government kind of
standard that the money will
only be given out on but for
kind of the basis and that I
think prevents prevents just
giveaways that are unnecessary
so
what I like some of the concepts
I'm gonna throw that out there
is a suggestion to consider.
So and then
finally.
What might finally in making my
but for argument I got
distracted John and I lost my
finally point I may come back to
my finally because I remember
that it was really important it
just just let me at the moment
so that's all I have right now
Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you.
Center Senator Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thanks for the presentation it
interesting concept and I just
wanted to clarify point if I
could for Mr Roper
you.
If I get from the the portion of
the G. R. T. from the from the
individual communities is that
what you said.
The.
Mr chairman senator Wirth
members of the committee the
questions from the communities
would be fifty six point two
five percent of their G. R. T.
sure and this would only I I
might add this would only be on
their generate their jet their
typical general fund it wouldn't
it wouldn't include any specials
of their G. R. T. that they are
talking about only only the
general fund G. R. T. on the
local level but it would be
fifty six point two five percent
up and I know that sounds like a
non number but it is seventy
five percent of seventy five
percent is so we came up with a
fifty six point two five.
Okay and and Mister chairman so
Again just for clarification are
that communities on board with
this so they comply with this
and we talked a minute municipal
league or or
you know what what is the stand
with the communities.
It.
Mr chairman senator Byrd and in
all reality this is such a small
portion of projects it'll
happen.
That with the three hundred and
fifty million dollars special
the municipally is aware of that
and they've been used to
to to the bill because they do
understand that it might happen
once every two or three years
and most likely happen in very
large areas
of
it it is of their choice and so
that does that if they don't
like the idea they don't sign
off on the deal doesn't happen
including the state share and
also in and also it's it's worth
noting that this is up to if the
state of New Mexico and the
local governments feel that we
can win this deal with a lesser
share than the full fifty six
point two five percent of the
local level then we can do so it
is a maximum that is that is
would be placed against the
committees would be a fifty six
point two five.
Okay and Mr chairman and and
mark thank you for that I I just
want to make sure that that
You know we're not show up movie
shows around and when he coming
out this part that pot in the
and it it's money that earmarked
for a municipality or maybe even
I guess municipality not
accounting but
that that it's money that they
are aware they'll have the final
say on yes I'm saying so they
can choose to participate or not
participate the should they
choose okay I think that's all I
have right now thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman so I just
got to make sure I got that I
understood all this so there's
two parts of it one is to
requests for mortgages and rents
and whatever so let me go
through that real quickly so
there are there are some people
that have pretty significant
rent or mortgage depending on
the size there the building
others are small.
but if I've got how many months
with with this cover just one
month for a year's worth of rent
what how many months is.
Mr chair if Mister Clark could
answer that.
Yes Mr chair and senator it
doesn't specify year moms it
just has to be used to make
mortgage rent or lease payments
that that's qualifies under
leader so if if you because of
the pandemic if you
a year or sixteen months back
rent you can use this for all of
that if if you have that level
of of obligation it is up to a
hundred thousand dollars per
business
and it's disbursement is four
quarterly payments it's up to
the business to.
Figure out how best to use that
for mortgage interest payments
but they can use it in within
that parameter they can use that
the way they see fit.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair Mister Clark
so so if I owe a hundred
thousand dollars in rent so it's
ten thousand dollars a month for
ten months and that's not
unusual mortgage or rent first
for a lot of businesses.
All I have to do is hire
somebody for minimum wage and I
get a hundred thousand dollars
as a grant.
Mr chair and senator know what
they're going to be more precise
said job creation requirements
and the bill directs us to do
two things when looking at the
job creation requirements one is
to look at the wages that are
paid to the employees and the
second is to look at how hard
that business was hit by the
COVID pandemic looking at the
decline in tax revenues from our
start with decline in business
revenues from twenty nineteen to
twenty twenty but there will be
a set dollar amount per employee
that is either hired or rehired.
Okay so so I'm thinking of a
particular business and in far
construct.
that was that was devastated I I
think their rent payment was in
the neighborhood of twenty five
thousand dollars a month it was
it was large or the mortgage
because it was a.
Multi million dollar loan that
that they took.
So twenty five thousand dollars
a month if in their opinion
there.
They're close I think they would
like to reopen I know it lacks
reopen if if if we're ever
allowed to function as normal
human beings again.
So in this particular case if it
was just four months of being
close that's the hundred
thousand dollars.
In the higher back then
executive chef who's worth a lot
more money than the minimum wage
of bus of buster.
that still seems a little out of
balance to me if all you're
doing is hiring one person for
for four hundred thousand dollar
grant.
is so that I know of Senator
Candelaria was was trying to
narrow things down for a cell
and say Hey you know this this
ought to be in lost somehow in
in I agree because this just
seems like this is too open
ended especially if just hiring
one person gets me a hundred
thousand dollars because I had
to close it's not my restaurant
but because I had to close the
the restaurant for four months.
That that just looks like it's
it's not tied together very
well.
In our with these requests be
taxable with the state and come
back and say Hey we need to four
point nine or other things pass
eight point whatever it is of.
Percent tax back on that.
Mr chair center I do not know
the answer to that and I will
ask the clerk to on.
Mr chair and senator I'm not
sure of any way that we can
avoid this building taxable
income.
Okay.
All right
so Mr chair so the second part
of this is really a
a lead a funding mechanism in
perpetuity is that.
Is that a good way to describe
that Mr Chairman Mr Clarke
Representative.
Mr chair and senator.
Circuit can you hear me saying
that I muted I can hear you okay
thank you Mr chair and senator I
I assume you're referring back
to the G. R. T. sharing portion
yes and I was a test in New
Mexico the prove that provision
would be in perpetuity but the
Chair to chair and for
particular projects would not be
very for a maximum of ten years
and is only applicable to the
receipts during the construction
phase.
So.
Mr chair you may have confused
me more here.
So we build something for three
hundred fifty million dollars
that get it let me back up with
that is that is that the minimum
threshold.
Okay so so we build something
for three hundred and in fifty
million dollars and of course is
going to be gross receipts tax
on all of that.
so twenty five percent of that
gross receipts.
Tax goes to the state seventy
five percent goes into the
leader I.
Okay.
That lead to fund can continue
to grow as long as we're
building something year after
year right so at the end of the
ten years then does whatever's
left in that leader fund go to
the general funders are going to
stay in the lead to fund
invested so it continues to grow
forever.
Mr chair and senator the amount
of the come into the we to fund
would be then used in the
traditional leader process of
helping existing local companies
expand or helping other projects
come to this.
So you would never come back to
the legislature and say we need
more money for a new project.
Mr chair and senator.
This is not intended to so we
Fund dental the leader fund as
Mr Representative this is for
very occasional projects maybe
we would see one every year to
possibly one in every three
years.
If we if you do the math on it
it's this isn't going to so we
fund our leader fund it's going
to help with that and it's going
to help some of these larger
projects he for some smaller
projects around the state.
Okay so I know that the in
casual conversation that I've
had with other other people Mr
chair Mister Clark we've had up
to talk about.
There's there's certainly
federal money heading headed
this way.
The COVID money will hopefully
doesn't have COVID maybe just
money for.
Comment relief that's better
Why would we use that as the
seed money for this as opposed
to the G. R. T..
Mr chair and senator.
Without knowing exactly what the
the money the feds are going to
give us what parameters are
going to put on it
we we don't know whether we
could use that for the recovery
grants portion of the bill but
as for the G. R. T. shirt
portion of the bill we don't
want any money that the state
has to sit there and wait for
one of these projects to come
along because these are
occasional very competitive
projects and we want to make
sure that our money is going to
work and so we don't want to
hold on to enough money to be
able to win one of these big
projects with that the hope that
maybe this year is going to be
the year that we're going to be
able land we don't want to hold
on to it and and not have that
money used for the year so
that's what we like this year G.
sure mechanism because you know
hopefully we do get one each
year but if we don't we're not
holding on to that money and not
using when it could be better
spent.
Okay so Mr chair representative
so we have
Senate bill three which which I
know you touched on somebody
touched on a minute ago so
Senator Candelaria of the try to
set up this things that you have
five hundred million dollars out
there that could be loaned to
someone.
Does that would that make with
that meet our standards here to.
To try to attract new business.
Because it's a one one percent
want to have president Donald
Senator Candelaria maybe I'll
answer but it's pretty pretty
low interest loan whatever it
is.
Mr chair and senator I believe
the requirements in that bill of
words the company has to have
already been based in New Mexico
so we wouldn't be able to use
that to recruit new projects and
as well the limitations on the
dollar amounts wouldn't allow us
to use that to compete for
larger projects.
Okay.
So and and finally Mr chair I
know you've heard this and miss
Clark for this.
Tax reform is how we get new
businesses here.
Well as long as our taxes are so
confusing that businesses can't
figure out what they would if
they came here.
Of the apparently the only way
we can get in here spike that.
and even then we're not sure
they're going to come
tax reform simple.
Simple I'm not calling for tax
breaks for everybody all this is
a pretty big break for somebody.
In fact I'm in favor of
eliminating tax breaks for
everybody in getting that G. R.
T. down as low as we possibly
can I think that's what brings
business here.
things like this yep.
They'll they'll will be
attractive to somebody.
But not attractive to a whole
new industries that will
actually help New Mexico in the
long run.
So again Mr chair I know that
some of y'all are tired of
hearing about it but but simple
taxes that raise enough money
and are still attractive to new
industry or what we need.
Not not whatever this scheme is
so thank you Mr.
Thank you senator share Senator
Steinborn for second time thank
you Mr right of course soon as I
yielded the Mike I remembered
what that big point I was going
to make west.
I I like the idea I like the
pieces of the bill I I needed to
talk through it to understand
what we're doing here.
I think New Mexico businesses
need the assistance.
And that that part of the bill
is is very timely and and I
appreciate it the the other part
of.
Using this creative way to see
leader deals I like that as well
I I have one.
Constructive suggestions for us
to look at which is the part
that funds Lida.
Beyond which were funding deals
I think it's something we need
to look at just because we are
asking local governments to give
up G. R. T. help fund deals and
and I think that's appropriate
to deal with to have that money
then also go to another fund
it's not contributing to do all
and I'm just understanding that
John.
Mr chair and senator to the
local portion would only flow to
that local project there would
be no local money still be
trapped in the state we need to
fund it would only be this
additional small portion that
would otherwise flow to the
general fund they would say
early to fund we would not hold
on to locally to money local
revenues and use it for any
other project it would just be
for this one project in the area
I see well that's really good to
clarify that
And as far as the state money
what we're suggesting is that
we're kind of changing the mix
of where the state.
G. R. T. for the project some of
it would flow into Lita.
We follow the lead okay which I
still think it's something work
with us looking at but
but otherwise you know in the
back for thing also I think it's
a good suggestions but otherwise
I think it's a it's a bill that
will really help New Mexico out
so so thank you and thank you
for the good discussion today
thank you Mr.
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr chairman
I have read about this bill with
interest and certainly a lot to
it but I think that and I want
to think before I go on
Representative Chandler and and
and Representative Egolf for
speaker for putting this
together you know while there
are some questions that I think
are very legitimate and that
possibly could be we could use
some clarity on several of these
provisions I think that the date
the real big picture that we're
facing today and need to look at
with our sincere lenses here is
this pandemic that we're facing
and because we are in this
pandemic and we do we have had
to do things differently and we
continue to do things
differently sometimes taken a
little more risk than what we
need to take or what we should
take in other circumstances.
We have to stick our neck out a
little bit more during this
pandemic to to help people in
that are so much in need and to
help us or workforce in the same
time rental assistance in
mortgage assistance and so on to
be able to help our small
businesses
this to me seems like a
partnership if the partnership
that is being established
between the state local and
municipal governments are for
governments it would be for
certain projects of course that
that would benefit their areas
specifically projects over three
hundred and fifty million
dollars is it's been indicated
in in this mechanism they would
share the you know a portion of
their gross receipts tax.
With the state also but I guess
when I look at this whole thing
I was writing notes here you
know just seventy five percent
of the gross receipts go to lead
that band in twenty five percent
go to the general fund the
seventy five percent of the of
the gross receipts tax that are
going to go back into the lead
of funding finder stand
correctly director John Clark
December on then out of that
seventy five percent when you
look at all the way this is the
plan to the whole lead a fund
that we have for continued
economic development it doesn't
fact create partly a revolving
fund for these funds to continue
to augment the balances in the
lead a fund so that we can in
turn use this money to land out
or grant out however the
legislature decide for the
future but it is building up the
lead to fund and so.
I think that with the with the
thought of increasing the lead
to fund and continuing our
economic development ventures
and continue our commitment
specifically now in this
pandemic that we're facing you
know this is something that is
not only creative but I think
it's doable I'm.
I would suggest Mr chairman that
there are quite a few
suggestions that were made today
and I know Senator Candelaria
had a few suggestions that would
clarify some things in the bill
for example when he mentioned
and correct me if I'm going if
I'm wrong but when he mentioned
that we need to clarify for
example that the NMFA has a
party unity in getting the
administration administrative
funds and so on to administer it
and and those things that and
other things that you mentioned
that they certainly have some
credence in his concerns but I
think that in them working with
the sponsors you know for such a
big bill like this that that
Sanchez to work so hard for a
long time I think working
together with them to try and
find some palatable provisions
in the bill that would address
the concerns but at the same
time not not annihilate the
intent of the of the of the bill
here would be a good thing so
you know I'm going to support
the bill Mr chairman because I
want to look at the at the need
of this state so maybe right now
and the fact that we need to do
as much as we can in the short
term here to try and bring the
economy back in and get people
back to work and businesses back
into contract and so on
You know I think the the funding
is is there now to do this and
and now is when they need exits
the greatest and so I'm going to
do that but I I would be also
very interested in seeing the
amendments that I would foresee
kind of the Senate chamber and
hopefully it would be work
together with the Sanchez for a
for a consensus and agreement
and that's all I have to say for
now Mr chairman thank you for.
Thank you Senator Rodriguez
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
this bill forward and thank you
to your plus sponsor
Representative Egolf for his
time and consideration also
it obviously you've got a lot of
thought and care into this bill
to help to support our local
economic development and I know
that my community would greatly
appreciate your efforts and one
of the things that I've learned
here in the short amount of time
that I spent in the Senate is
just how hard everyone is
working whether it's our our
other senators and
representatives but also the
staff in the short amount of
time that we have during the
legislative session people
really go with very little sleep
to to do what's best for our
communities and so I appreciate
your efforts and I look forward
to supporting your bill thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Janet one and
something about yes Mister
chairman I just want to clarify
his I'm a little concerned the
local government shares what we
know in the bill is that there
are a little bit of a
discrepancy on the fifty six
point two five percent so on
page eighty
two.
nine one it says that they can
contribute up to fifty six point
twenty five hundred percent to
the project.
Online twenty.
On page twenty four.
Line.
Fifteen fourteen fifteen it says
they shall dedicate if the six
point two five that doesn't say
up to fifty six point two five.
Which leads us to think that
somebody might stay in the fund
the health fund other projects
Mr Clark said that's not the
case so maybe we need to.
Just decide if it's up to or if
it's equal to.
My concern.
John Clark you have a response
to that are in black and white
so.
Mr chair so that was the way
that I Council Service deemed
that language should be written
for the two different sections.
but all of the other sections
the talk about how the money is
to be calculated and distributed
do you say in that exactly fifty
six and a quarter percent.
Exactly.
Yes it's just want to Mr chair
yes as far as I'm aware it's
just that one instance on line
one of the twenty two that says
up to again I'm I'm not sure why
but that was council services.
determination that that needed
to that language need to be
different for that section of
the bill.
Thank you Janet I don't see
anyone else on the list.
Senator Diamond.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Clark I have just a couple
questions what I'm looking for
someone looking over there is
report was heard in House
Appropriations when it came over
from the house.
Mr chair Representative no it
was not heard and House
Appropriations that referral was
removed by the speaker.
Okay thank you for that I have a
couple questions that would
relate to a district like mine
under the current health orders
we have this red green status so
and sometimes they change on a
weekly basis so so let me ask
you what this means that some of
my businesses would lose
eligibility yes under the health
orders they were to shift to a
different status and therefore
weren't able not not for their
own doing but because the public
health order to import the same
amount of employees and that
continues to fluctuate during
health order.
Impact that Mr chair I'll defer
to Mr Clarke.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
so the bill actually
contemplates that businesses may
not be able to make progress
every quarter that they might
yes through no fault of their
own you know they have have
setbacks along the way which is
why we don't require that the
our quarterly payments occur
within exactly the twelve month
period so it if they qualify
originally but then you know
something outside their control
occurs where they have a real
setback or where they're just
not able to move forward as
quickly as they thought they
don't lose out on the the the
ability to get those additional
quarterly payments they can just
come back a little bit later
when they are in a position to
qualify for this initial
quarterly payments so if if that
takes you know three more months
or six more months for them to
qualify for for example there
Sir quarterly payment because
something happened after they
got their second one then that's
fine they can do that at that's
part of the reason why this is a
two year program the intent is
to roll out the funds as quickly
as possible get businesses
qualified start getting the
money out the door but
recognizing the businesses might
not all be able to move forward
every quarter.
Thank you for that exclamation
then as a follow up Mr chairman
David if I missed out on a
quarter to M. I. then still
eligible for to receive payments
in quarter three and quarter
four.
Mr chair and senator you would
still be eligible for the
quarter to payment as well each
businesses timetable is going to
be its own there there wouldn't
be a set timetable that
universally applies to all
businesses recognizing that that
so many of our businesses under
very descended from
circumstances.
Thank you for that.
Mr chairman again again for
Representative perhaps Mr Clarke
the the axe is that if the
public health order continues to
mandate that certain businesses
stay closed then the funds can
be set aside to use being used
at the discretion of the
department and that's a little
concerning because it's not in
it for still we this public
health orders been going on for
now a year and so that seems
like we're just really giving
them an open checkbook are we
are we then really saying that
that those funds that are in use
can be set aside at the
discretion of the department of
my understanding that correctly.
Mr chair and senator should know
that the bill actually lays out
very clear directions for the
department and the authority to
calculate how that's to happen
we're to look at the public
health order to look at and then
estimate the number of
businesses that are impacted
that are required to remain
closed and then estimate the
number of employees that are
impacted by that as well and
based on those estimations set
aside a proportional amount of
the funds up to a maximum of
twenty percent to be used for
those businesses once they're
able to apply for them once
they're able to be eligible so
for example right now bars are
intelligible to be open we don't
want to cut them out of the
process so that they aren't able
to use the funds so you know
bars and other high contacted of
businesses would still be
eligible but at the point where
they are able to re open.
Okay thank you for that
but again Mr chairman if I may
this legislation seems to
prohibit the disclosure of
recipients to the Republic wrote
recovery program is that is is
that case is that the case is
that.
Correct.
Mr Clark and.
Mr chair and senator soon the
reporting requirements we
actually took from the recovery
loan act was passed last year
then added additional reporting
requirements but that was what
we used as a starting point was
what the legislature deemed
appropriate for the recovery one
act last year and then we added
some additional information that
we thought were the legislature
the public would be interested
in.
Thank you so with that said
though one difference between
that is that is that that
program the small business
recovery program was was
transparent and who receive
those funds why is this one not
why are we not going to disclose
the recipients of this.
Mr chair and senator my
understanding was that this
language exactly mirrored that
language that was passed in the
small business recovery loan act
last year if there's a
difference I'd be happy to work
with you to sort out exactly
where that's occurred okay so
because this one if I'm reading
this correctly this legislation
prohibits the disclosure.
Of of recipients where the small
business recovery long didn't
didn't prohibit the disclosure.
The
chair and senator I do have to
work with you on that and work
with the council service to it
and I.
You know where
where that language came in that
sounds like wasn't part of that
original small business recovery
mode Act the intent here was to
perfectly nearer the reporting
requirements that were in that
L..
Okay so that is one different
let me ask you just before I
concluded funding Mr chairman.
How many projects as the state
had in its history that would
meet these requirements.
Mr chair senator you are you
referring to the juror to
sharing component yes act.
I would defer to Mister Roper to
give his best estimate.
Mr Chairman Senator members of
the committee in in Monday
decades of with the department
we have had exactly two projects
that would have qualified for
this.
To projects.
To to projects to projects that
that is that that would have
qualified for the G. R. T. share
and the total anti in excess of
three hundred fifty million
dollars in construction spend.
Okay well thank you I appreciate
your time Mr chairman I don't
have any more questions after
that thank you.
Thank you Senator Diamond.
I don't see anybody else on the
list.
But I'm glad you guys are
hearing the issues and I guess.
This is kind of what happens
when bills were heard and all
committees
Mr over is to stay on top of
what Senator Diamond started
with.
Three hundred fifty million
dollar project what would that
be the equal dollar amounts are.
If we did the G. R. T..
Three hundred fifty million
dollar construction costs what
it what is the full dollar
amount G. R. T..
Hello G. R. T. between the local
and state would be approximately
seventeen million dollars.
And seventeen million in lead I
think you currently have a
balance of roughly seventeen
million right now we wanted to
do the project you can do the
project.
lead has been cut
let's turn on the sprinkler and
give everybody a little bit of
money and try to make things
grow but it's not a strategy and
that's what it started out with
when we did the first fifty
million in the.
Are any of these intended for
any film projects and madam
secretary maybe you can answer
that question for me.
None of them yes Mr chair and
members of the committee no not
currently they're not intended
for film but in terms of the
lead investments yes it that
seventeen million would take us
down to a zero balance so we had
a big pharmaceutical company
come in and want to be in New
Mexico that we could do no other
leader deals outside of that.
In that spike I just currently
said is leader started out of
fifteen million and reread
clinician.
pretty close every year twenty
five to thirty million and then
it goes back down and and we
never see those big projects get
off me ask your question madam
secretary on the total package
for Netflix in Albuquerque what
if they get and from the city
Albuquerque.
Mr Chairman have to defer to
mark I can't remember the exact
amount with both expansion deals
just you address your previous
question now I do believe that
the deals we have been doing
with Lita has been very
effective especially when you
consider we just did a deal in
Roswell with the setting the
ation and that's three hundred
fifty jobs in Roswell and so I
would say that that's very
significant marked you know with
the finals work for the Netflix
deal.
Okay between the.
The.
Mr chairman members of the
committee committee between the
two separate Netflix a deal in
which the committed to two
billion dollars and and spend
and a hundred and fifty million
dollars and additional capital
investment over and above issued
by the studios the City of
Albuquerque I came in with nine
million dollars total in either
cash or in kind services
including a proportion of that
repeat that.
Sorry Markey said a portion of
their what.
J.
just messages also is it is in a
kid and a tear District of there
were there were considerations
by both of which.
There was considerations on the
bed in the chairs under the op
Arby's in which the our bees up
portion was make sure that the
ticket in the budget for capital
as part of the I. R. B.
discussions with the City of
Albuquerque.
You don't have any value for the
Arby's for the ticket.
And I'm not picking a Netflix.
You know I I I can't I can't
quote that that value of.
What what that total value what
I don't know that off the top of
my head Mr Chairman.
Does anybody know what they
received in film tax credits
this year.
Madam secretary yes we do all
have to get that for you Mr
chair on go ahead and call our
director right now.
Okay.
And so it in the G. R. T. in the
lead to money they're still
eligible to get a I Arby's
correct.
Yes the other again Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Just just with any other
development.
It the local community just
determined that the IRB's were
beneficial eligible yes.
So then they could come back for
kids in the total package I'm
just trying to figure out what
we're going to.
Kids kids kids are completely
different animals that would if
they if they were in an area
that was already acted and or
APS there would have to be
negotiations and the I. R. B.
package because typically kids
and pets are exempt from IRB's
meaning that you cannot exempt
that portion.
in that area if it's a tutor of
did only the questions not
affected by the better the
chance could be under the I RB
Act that's typically how would
be but as far as if it's an
honor to be in a non tutor
Pandaria
it would be highly unlikely that
a leader project but then
somehow morphed into a need it
later.
I think Senator Diamond ****
questions and maybe you had to
projects.
That would meet the threshold of
three hundred fifty million.
And so what is the Amazon
plant do up on sale well come on
and Bex that we give them
anything.
Mr chair members of the
committee of that is a district
that is wholly and solely a
distribution center and it
represents the activities of the
economy it would not be
considered economic based
community the entity and most
likely would not meet the
qualifying entities threshold of
of Lita that is strictly saying
that there's enough economy in
New Mexico that it needed to be
placed there so we gave no money
to Amazon order they were
questioning.
And neither one of those
requests any are any in the
state health.
No no state help.
Thank.
I mean you've heard the problems
of the G. R. T. and and I think
some number or wronged in John
so I wanted on page six
starting in line eighteen.
so they can guarantee you this
money from Lida against alone
correct.
Mr chair Senators dress correct
but this is all existing
language in statute in this is
just clean up the council
services doing in relocating
definitions.
Essentially the first nineteen
pages is just clean up the
council service was doing we
needed to define it more
specifically what public support
was and so this is just Council
Service moving definitions
around but that didn't change
all this languages in in is in
place right now.
They struck and I'm page three
and put them back in on page six
I just don't know a lawyer and I
Matt that works with the quick
enough.
Figure out if there was a change
in that language or there wasn't
a change so I'm just asking you
to verify that.
And so let me run through a
scenario if a company did come
and build the building and
they're gonna start and.
COVID shut him down.
Are we on the hook for those
loans if we're guaranteeing up
against the the.
G. R. T..
Mr chair sender to.
A lot of what you're seeing here
in this language is actually of
what local governments are
allowed to do there are much
stricter requirements for the
state's lead to do some of that
is showing up in this bill some
of it is not because we're not
touching those those portions of
the local economic development
act but we do we can do loan
guarantees for projects and that
is a possibility to my knowledge
we only did one before the onset
of the pandemic but we are able
to do that and structure those
in a way to help the business
but that's not typically what we
do
you know almost without
exception we do grants in return
for investment in infrastructure
and job creation.
But I'm asking the question I
mean it if if they go consists.
Secure a loan against the G. R.
T. right thank you say you're
going to give a million which is
seventeen million dollars and
and they fall for whatever
reason I think just shut solar
kind of pops in my head and
engage P. they pulled and
disappear.
Are those counties and cities
are are liable for that long.
Mr Senator noted that company
would not be able to do.
Loan guaranteeing that portion
of the G. R. T. revenues they
would only get reimbursement for
actual costs they incurred
retrospectively after we receive
the revenues of the bill is
really clear on how that portion
of that this works the state has
to receive those revenues from
the construction first and then
and only then can that money
flow back out to the projects
this year teacher.
Then where is the municipal
league your your twenty cents
balance there that you're
holding back to Leah and how our
small communities going about
our large communities you will
get a project like this in
requests or Gallup because they
won't have the seventeen million
to give up and G. R. T. can do
that and so what are the larger
community saying about you
funding projects in other
communities.
With your twenty percent all
back.
Mr chair we had representatives
from small and large communities
in other hearings testified on
behalf of the bill and say that
they're in favor of it.
Albuquerque economic development
has had representatives.
in other committees the state
testified that they're in favor
of the bill primarily because of
the Jersey Shore component where
you know they could see
themselves benefiting from a
very large project we've also
had testimonials from smaller
communities where they're very
appreciative of the fact that
there's there is this you're
almost twenty percent of the
state's portion that stays the
leader funds to go and and Fund
in a small rural rural projects.
Yeah and and as secretary Keyes
mentioned it's essentially in a
big projects helping fund local
projects across the state and so
that's the way for communities
of all sizes across the state to
benefit when we when one of
these larger deals.
So on the twenty percent that
they're comfortable with that.
The funding lead over time so if
we get one of these and you say
three hundred fifty million
dollar project is is roughly
about seventeen million and so
twenty and that twenty percent
and that'll be held back.
So roughly two million dollars
not.
If you work in shovel snow for
living like everybody in the
state of New Mexico did today
then it is a lot of money but it
two million dollars doesn't help
me a lot with that twenty
percent so why would you want to
keep that small amount of money.
Mr chair we receive feedback
very early on from a lot of
people representing smaller
communities one thing that was
really important to them was
that if we were going to do this
to help these larger projects
that there be a way that we are
also using this mechanism to
help smaller projects across the
state so that's a big part of
why that's in there I I know
that yeah if we have a project
that just crosses that's Richard
fifty million threshold it would
be you know to point something
million dollars they would stay
in the lead to fund that's not a
big amount for recruiting
another big project to the state
but that's a huge amount for us
to be able to help local
companies across the state
expand.
I learned a little too much and
LESC John and in the way you
crafted this and and I'm not
happy with the G. R. T. but I
understand the process and in
the long portion.
I just hope that.
What happens every single time
with almost every economic
development secretary sometimes
rural is passed over and in Lima
and projects and they fund their
own.
Friendly
businesses that they live and
it's happened to every economic
development director since I've
been there and I was on their
boards that begin.
Twenty years ago and so I I hate
to see that happen because I
think there's a good projects
that sometimes don't get the
life that they need.
I want to go to the loan
program.
But I also want to bring I mean.
To like that that quarters
because I don't see if the
business is shut down and let's
just use Gallup for example.
In the county we're going to
struggle to get out of out of
red.
And so if someone applies and
you never get out of the red.
In the entire six months
whatever would power the long
health order is I think I read
somewhere where it can be
helpful December
how are they ever going to
succeed.
How are they ever gonna regain
that and say okay well I had a
chance to get up to a hundred
thousand my quarter to match
that how are you ever gonna
allow those businesses to
succeed in a grant program and
the money will probably be gone
and they'll never be able to get
that I would like to sing some
regional split up like us we did
prior you know forty percent
rural or rural.
Forty percent.
Cities and split it up
So how do you how you enroll
making.
And I think market is on the
call.
How we can handle that means you
got to be fair to everyone and
if we're going to be fair in
this program.
Then we need to know what what
the rules are
you know I will K. I applied for
the the MF NMFA loan I did get
it I don't know how I got it.
I just had my account in my
bookkeeper do the work at the
office and said these are funds
are available and I will pay the
money did make we did hire a lot
of people and and we are not
eligible for the second EP
because our gross receipts were
up and so it did work.
But how we can help those
communities that can't vote for
me Turner said one may be in
that in that red zone to just
the nature of what it is so how
and marketing you may answer
this how we gonna hold money for
for counties and communities
are.
John you want to start secretary
want to start.
Mr chair all defer to Marquita
for additional comment but this
bill requires us to estimate
the portion of businesses and
affected employees where they
are eligible to re open at this
point and set that money aside
up to twenty percent and your
movie provides clarity on the
timing for that so it provides
clarity that we need to get a
funding cycle out right away for
the businesses that are able to
re open but then for the
businesses that are to be able
to because they aren't yet
eligible to reopen they have
until June thirtieth twenty
twenty two so we would wait
until the public health order is
rescinded or changed in a way
that allows all of the
businesses to qualify and at
that point those businesses that
previously had been in eligible
because they could be open would
be allowed into the application
process with that remaining part
of funds.
And that would only be forty
million dollars a twenty
percent.
Unit spent a hundred sixty seven
and one of some of those hotels
with restaurants or any one of
the numbers higher than than
that and and you've already
funded that I mean.
Let's try to figure out how to
be fair to everybody and and
we'll probably try to get
something on the floor but I
just think that in those cities
in those counties where there's
something if a small business
owner as for COVID cases in and
they're shut down for two weeks
and they don't meet their
metrics on the quarter then it
kind of changes after they got
the first so.
I don't know how much the ones a
lot about that when in this bill
I don't think there was a lot of
policy and process that needed
to go into the bill.
So.
I just.
Heartburn and I think that other
members and and people you're
hearing the heartburn I think I
try to four warn some of that
are burned in trying to make it
better but it is what it is
today and so.
That.
We need to be very careful as we
move forward and Senate finance
of process I understand the
recovery portion businesses need
requests right now.
I understand that's a priority I
completely get that
right my restaurant owners in
Gallup are just devastated you
know Senator Steinborn said he
had a trucks service food
service guy who's ever stated
but.
We need to get the money out
into the economy and make sure
New Mexico gets back open if the
governor can help us give back
open.
People are willing to work and
and this is just to help them
get back on their feet.
I don't see any other questions
or Senator Candelaria C. chair
and raised on video Mr Chairman
I would will be temporarily well
this bill to provide the members
of this committee time to
actually work.
and to address amendments
necessary we are not even at the
thirty day of session there's
more than enough time to make
sure that whatever version is
endorsed by this bill.
At the very least addresses some
of the serious issues raised by
our staff I agree with you I I
fully want this twenty million
dollars to go out but we've also
got to be the adults in the room
and be the last line of defense
to ensure that money is spent
responsibly so I think this
committee needs to take some
time with this bill and so I
moved to temporally table.
I would second that Mr chair.
And senator Munoz here muted
our.
I'm sorry that we call the roll
and yes we haven't really motion
and is not debatable Senator
Candelaria made a motion
seconded by Senator share and so
we called all yes Sir I have
that Senator Burt.
Yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Campos yes Senator Candelaria
yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
senator Graham Gonzalez yes.
Yes Senator Hemphill yes.
Bill yes Senator share yes.
Sure yes Senator Steinborn.
Yes.
Yes Senator what yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez.
I'm going to vote yes but I like
to explain my go.
K. Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
one else.
No.
Senator Rodriguez to explain
your vote yes thank you very
much Mr chairman as I indicated
earlier in my comments I think
that there is room for a
consensus with some amendments
to make the bill more clear
clarify more make a better and
in hopes that it is in this
committee that we work together
through Senator Candelaria and
others to be able to find the
the consensus is needed then I'm
gonna vote yes for that
temporary table and then
hopefully move it on to the
floor.
Thank you for.
Representative Chandler.
You're still with us correct I
am for sure yes yes chair.
So Representative a.
We got some issues and and so I
think we need to that maybe
we're doing a little bit
I thought we can get thrown in
and maybe work on them on the
floor and get some of these
resolved but it didn't work that
way
so why don't we circle back
around you and I in the center
Candelaria and I don't know who
else needs to reach out to you.
And figure out where we need to
go and then once we have those
will bring it back up right and
immediately.
Thank you Mr chair.
You want Paul J. as in line yes
just.
Representative Chandler.
For no public comment and we're
gonna come back to it I just I'm
sorry I the table emotion I was
gonna go to the public comment I
guess that's my mistake I'm
sorry I didn't do that but we
will have another opportunity
Senator work I think you're next
for Senate bill eight.
Great thank you Mr chair and
also I believe Senator Lopez is
on I see her as well
so we I just want to give the
committee a heads up on Senate
bill eight
this is a bill dealing with
stringency allowing the state to
set air and hazardous waste
regulations more stringent than
the federal law
this morning Senator Candelaria
did bring up some questions
about possible guard rails this
is a big bill and very important
bill and some legitimate issues
and so in visiting with
secretary Cheney Department of
Environment what I would like to
do Mr chair if I could is a role
this bill over to give secretary
Kenny a chance to work with
Senator Candelaria I'd like him
to do that kind of task Kim to
the extent I can do that but
also just to just see if we
can't put some guardrails on
that will address the concerns
of and raise I think they were
good suggestions also if I could
Mr chair what I'd like to do is
roll this over and then when we
come up with the right language
will package it up into a Senate
finance substitute because
there's been enough changes
along the line I think we can
clean this up and that way and
at that point we should do the
full hearing I don't have to do
this twice I know we got lots of
people on for and against on
this bill so if it's okay with
you that's how I would like to
proceed on Senate bill eight
sure I I I think that clarifies
the process and in people get
time and then what you get is
this what want to make sure that
the public gets to see it
and they get their input on it
and so that be fine.
I just wanted Mr chairman and I
just thank the Majority Leader
in the cabinet secretary I think
this is exactly our process
should work as a movie or
leaders that we had important
issues and look forward to
working collectively with them
and the cabinet secretary I
think we have an issue of legal
issues more so than a than a
difference in values or policies
so I'm hopeful that this can be
resolved thank you Mr Majority
Leader work I appreciate that
center Candelaria and I and I do
I think you know there's no
fiscal impact center share asked
that this bill come to finance I
agree to it so we could look at
whether there was an agency
fiscal impact there is not so
that issues not there but I want
to get this right it's an
important one in center
Candelaria is raised a good
issue so let's it I'm good with
that approach Mr Chairman
Preciado you.
Letting us do that.
Let us know when you're out
having some ready to go back on
the schedule we may leave it
laying there until you are you
come back into this for
reporting perfect thank you for
your.
Senator o'neill thank you Mr
Chairman representative your.
What.
There there you go so okay here
we go I have my experts.
Workforce solutions cabinet
secretary bill mccamley and I
will be very quick with this
I will begin by saying you're
during the Great Recession
Mexico along with other states
passed a law allowing for
extended unemployment benefits
program for the long term
unemployed over about the
regular twenty six weeks for the
regular program that the federal
government helps pay for as of
this time state law still has
the states and the department of
labor has said in order for them
to keep paying for the plan they
need to we need we need to
update the law so with that
we can't Mr mccamley secretary
macam I will add up mort detect
thank you Senator thank you Mr
chairman the rest of the
committee center and you'll got
all right this is simply
updating dates to allow us to
continue a program and while
it's a simple fix the department
of labor will require it we
currently as of today have
twenty three thousand and six
New Mexicans on this plan
receiving federal funding and if
we don't update the dates on
this that funding could be in
jeopardy with that I would you
know need to pass this bill and
stand for any questions.
thank you Mr chair we're ready.
Thank you senator.
Tourism operator do we have any
of public comment.
At Mr chair members of the
committee we do have.
One member of the public we had
no opposition indicated we do
have one member of the public on
to
signaled her support that is
Jackie Cooper with a a RP The
New Mexico Jackie you go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman Jackie
Cooper with a a RP I'm a
volunteer with the health care
and we stand in support of this
particular bill and the
clarification of the language in
updating thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee that is it for public
comment on this bill.
Questions from committee members
Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I
know that
This this whole program is in
in.
Jeopardy at the moment because
of the amount of money were put
out.
this is have any effect on
employers employer rates will
happen there.
Yes Mr Senator I it does not in
fact this program itself does
not have any effect on the
unemployment trust fund at all
because right now it's being
currently fully funded by the
federal government at least
through the middle of March it
is also part of the next bill as
we have seen language that they
would continue this program
through the end of August so
just updating this language will
continue having these New
Mexicans on federal dollars
instead of date state dollars so
it actually helps us.
Okay.
All right thank you Mr chair
thank you cabinet secretary.
Thank you senator center what.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Senator o'neill.
cabinet secretary.
So you're saying that the state
will be allowable for additional
benefits with this prestige.
Mr chair Senator only over yes.
center Matt answer that.
Yes Mr Senator so the way this
works is that this extension was
putting and during the Great
Recession so that people who
lost their twenty six weeks of
unemployment benefits could
continue to receive some
benefits in at the time it was
jointly funded by the state and
the federal government the
federal government decided
earlier on in the cares Act to
fully fund this program and they
have extended again through the
continuing assistance act that
was just passed at the end of
last year there's a proposal in
the next bill to extend it yet
again and so right now this
allows New Mexicans to stay on
budget through an additional
extension program with no cost
to say employers what's where.
Okay so the the federal.
Mr Chairman the federal.
Monies come in to play this all
together this extra seven weeks.
Mr chair senator Azam now yes
they are and that the proposal
is to continue that for the
foreseeable future.
There is Mr Chairman there is
statutory language that says
that.
Will be done by the federal
rules and not by the state and
if something happens.
After.
The next.
The next year analysts that we
here is going to be passed.
After that.
When we sixty in this seven
weeks.
If it's not within the next day
Miller secretary that are the
next one that that.
What would be lab in some day
for this Mr Mr center and that
that is a possibility the way
that works is there's a trigger
I think it's seven percent so as
soon as we had over seven
percent employment unemployment
this kicks in what I will say is
that the folks that are eligible
for this specific program have
to have very specific
qualifications so they have to
work I think twenty consecutive
weeks and I've actually got it
right in front of me.
they have to have twenty more
than twenty have to work more
than twenty hours a week for at
least twenty weeks and they have
to make a significantly higher
threshold for their wages so
this program is actually set up
for the long term unemployed a
lot of folks on unemployment
will work for three four months
at a time go on unemployment
three months four months at a
time that is not this program
this programs for people that
work at a very long time for
more than twenty hours a week
and have a set amount of wages
so the amount of people
hopefully if the next bill is
passed in Congress that would be
on this I would be minimal
number one because hopefully we
get below seven percent
unemployment and number two even
if we were over that trigger
that allowed us to keep going
the the amount of people that
are on it tends to be much more
limited and the folks on
unemployment as a whole.
Okay.
I'm good question that's a
little all from your bill.
But I think it's very pertinent
question because then you
haven't been tested lately Mr
secretary.
Mr Chairman.
What plan does that our men have
for repairing the state's
unemployment insurance fund.
Yeah Mr Mr Senator I'm actually
gonna be addressing that on
Friday when I come before you
to to talk about our our budget
if you want to talk about that
and then
okay.
I don't have a problem with that
whatsoever okay I I I I would
assume those marked remarks
would be adequate at that time
okay
Mr chairman I have no other
questions thank you very much.
Thank you Senator Woods I don't
see anybody else on the list for
questions.
So can I have a motion.
Two passed Mr chairman.
Have a motion for new passed by
Senator Campos and a second by
second all well second Senator
Steinborn
that we call the real quick.
Yes as Mr chairman Senator Burt
yes Senator Burt yes Senator
Campos yes here Campos yes
Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
A yes Senator Diamond yes.
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill.
Yes.
Yes your share yes.
Here yes Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator with yes Senator
Rodriguez yeah Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz.
Yes.
Okay you got me right work yes
thank goodness.
Thank you senator you have in
the past thank you senator thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much for your time thanks okay
thank you.
Senator Stewart are you there.
And if you want to do a.
Senate bill fifty nine.
Thank you Mr chairman I am here
my expert witnesses Dawn
Iglesias or she's not for the
bill are against it but
I believe she is online so
Senate bill fifty nine makes two
changes to our reserve funds.
Currently we have an eight
percent cap on what we call our
operating research this bill
would raise that to fifteen
percent and that fifteen percent
of the prior year we are
recurring general fund
appropriations.
This cap has not been changed
since we put in place the tax
stabilization Act in twenty
seventeen this bill doesn't
change the provisions of that
act that requires of both bodies
to vote to use that research by
two thirds and a declaration
from the governor it doesn't
change that it doesn't change
the excess oil and gas school
tax revenues that would go to
the early childhood trust fund
if the reserve balances exceed
twenty five percent of recurring
general fund it keeps all of
that in place and so it does two
things it raises the operating
cap from eight percent to
fifteen percent and it changes
the excess extraction taxes
being transferred to the
operating reserve instead of the
tax stabilization reserve so
basically what this does is it
gives us a little bit more
flexibility in the use of some
of our research right now with
our two point six billion in
research one point six billion
of that is from the tax
stabilization Act
so that's the last three years
no eight teams from FY eighteen
FY twenty one point six billion.
Came into research from the tax
stabilization service so that's
that's what it does this quite
simple we're trying to keep the
good tax stabilization reserve a
give a little bit more
flexibility to our reserves and
Mr chairman if Dawn Iglesias is
on I want to say anything more I
am happy to yield to her.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you Senator Stewart I would just
refer you to the pages in the
fiscal impact report that on
eight this details out exactly
what this bill does and how it
functions to be clear the the
operating reserve cap is a
currently set at eight percent
and what that means is if the
balance of the operating reserve
exceed eight percent of the
prior years probation and
anything in excess of that would
be transferred over to the tax
stabilization reserve.
On page two of your fiscal
impact report.
That I'm the majority of the
distributions to the tax
stabilization reserve in most
recent years have been due to
transfers in excess of that
eight percent cap where revenues
came in much stronger than
expected due to the oil and gas
boom and those revenues on that
were unspent appropriations were
transferred over to the tax
stabilization reserve and you
can see on the chart on page two
that the taxi was Asian reserve
has received distributions from
the oil and gas school tax
access but it has been only
about fifteen percent or so of
the distributions to that was
there so we in the tax
stabilization reserve was
transformed into a working rainy
day fund the operating reserve
cap was not addressed at that
time and what this means in
practice is that to the extent
that the legislature has a
target reserve level then the
operating excuse me then as the
tax stabilization reserve grows
it's sort of growth at the
expense of the more liquid.
Reading research and by
increasing the cap to the
operating reserve it does not
change any of the balances
currently in either of the funds
but what it does mean is that
if.
Did revenues come in and are put
into the operating reserve then
there is there would now be
under a fifteen percent cap a
higher threshold at which those
balances which transfer into the
tax stabilization reserve.
This.
Point out is that it is still
possible under this bill.
Revenues from the access school
attacks distributions to fall
into the tax stabilization
reserve.
What this means is because it
would first transfer into the
operating reserve it would go
there as the first stop however
if the in that position all
school tax transfer then sent
the operating reserve balance
fifteen percent threshold then
anything above that threshold
would still go into the tax
stabilization reserve in but it
does say that higher threshold
for the operating reserve the
current revenue estimate expects
the excess school tax
distributions to be about forty
nine million in FY twenty two
now if the revenue estimates
changed those estimates would be
a little different
but that would be the current
revenue estimate for how much
would well first to the
operating reserve before then
being transferred into the tax
stabilization reserve I'm and
then just again ask Senator
Stuart mentioned I'm not here in
support or opposition of this
bill but simply to describe how
it functions and and happy to
answer any questions on how the
bill works.
Our reserve funds work and with
that I will conclude.
Thank you we don't have any
public comment on this bill.
And so questions from committee
members.
I don't see any questions.
And trace.
With that.
Yes.
Chairman.
I'm sorry Senator Woods.
And must have been delayed by
the snow.
Senator what is your.
Mr chair.
Can you hear me now.
We can hear you all right.
What was the what was the reason
we get to start with what what
we have added eight percent
instead of fifteen percent to
start with what was the regional
logic that.
If don could answer that please.
Absolutely Mr chair senator was
eight percent cap was set a very
long time ago I want to say at
least two decades ago I think
when this was first established
it was set as a way to transfer
funds into the tax stabilization
reserve however the time the tax
stabilization reserve was not a
functioning rainy day fund it
also had a cap where if it were
exceeded it would flow into a
different fund that would then
be reimbursed to taxpayers that
that tax payer dividend fund was
deleted in the twenty seventeen
legislation and the tax
stabilization reserve was made
into a working rainy day fund
the time the the eight percent
cap was not revisited so the way
that I understand this cap to of
what was to be a mechanism to
transfer unexpected access
revenues into that fund by the
time there was no target reserve
level and now functioning rainy
day fund so any limitations are
eight percent cap or not
considered when the twenty
seventeen legislation was
enacted.
Okay I understand maybe that
point when you say a true rainy
day fund Mr Chairman explained
that terminology to me.
Hello Mr chair senator was well
I mean what I say is true rainy
day fund is I need a fund that
can actually grow in size and
receives distributions that can
then be utilized when there are
budget down falls or if there is
overwhelming support for use of
that fund
how.
Previously the tax stabilization
reserve could not go above a
certain amount very small
limited amount I'd have to look
back at the statute but it
couldn't grow very large and the
largest it has ever grown prior
to the twenty seventeen
legislation was about a hundred
and forty five million dollars
which was indeed in the twenty
sixteen session when the budget
shortfalls occurred in during
that time so when I say ensure
king rainy day fund I mean a
fund that can grow in size has
limited access to regular.
Creations by a simple majority
therefore it sort of a savings
account if you will that is has
harder turns to access and can
grow in size.
Okay Mr chairman and and done I
think I understand you to say
that we include that ordered
forty five million dollars out.
When we had a shortfall.
Is that did I miss that orders
that were you Sir.
Senator was that's exactly what
I said you can actually see that
on page two of your FIR in the
chart there's a chart that shows
the FY fifteen ending balance
was a hundred forty seven point
five million dollars and then FY
sixteen and FY seventeen that
balance was zero so in the FY
are excuse me in the twenty
sixteen special sessions in
order to meet the budget down
files for that year the the full
balance of the tax stabilization
reserve was used.
Okay in the the results of of
this legislation is passed.
Would keep that balance smaller.
From now is that we understand
it Mr chairman and have Mr
chairman and senator Munoz it
would not change the balance of
the reserve fund it all the
amount that is in it would say
there it would make a a harder
threshold for balances to be
transferred from the operating
reserve to the tax stabilization
reserve.
So we can still receive funding
but it will be some that
at a higher trigger for what the
operating reserve cap is a for
that money is transferred into
the tax stabilization reserve.
Having a little trouble
following that.
I can see it right now okay for.
It seems as though.
In the past we have needed.
Their bit of the money in this.
To get us through some hard
times.
And it seems that we're going to
be able to divert more this
money easier not the two thirds
vote.
Mr Chairman.
That Mr Chairman.
Senator Mr Chairman
representative would we're not
changing that it's still a two
thirds vote of both houses
and a declaration from the
governor none of that changes
the excess over twenty five
percent still goes to the early
childhood fund we're not really
changing the parameters of the
tax stabilization reserve the
only thing we're doing is
increasing the amount that can
be in the operating reserve the
operating reserve is easier to
spend it's still in the research
and would still need
appropriation but that this came
about several years ago when I
asked the new a DFA secretary if
we were putting too much into
the tax stabilization Act
because at that time and it
still is the case is that the
majority of the money in our
reserves is and the tax
stabilization Act all right now
it's one point six billion
dollars so that that remains she
admitted to me that she thought
maybe we had taken a little bit
too much to put into the tax
stabilization reserve this
doesn't really change that with
the exception of having
operating reserves have a higher
cap before you moved into the
tax stabilization if you look at
your FIR it shows you that for
twenty two forty nine million
dollars will be in the general
fund operating reserves and not
in the tax stabilization
research so forty nine million
is not much considering you've
got two point six billion in
reserves and all of that one
point six billion is in the tax
stabilization Act this bill does
not change that.
At.
Okay I will take further study
Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Senator a in Dallas.
Thank you all Mr chairman of.
And the thank you to all our
sponsor of Senator Stewart and
to don.
how long will a little bit on
the line of Senator would but
the question I have this so.
So how do we come up that it's
fifteen percent.
So Mr chairman I I've been
trying to work on this for
several years I had a bill last
year I could not explain the
bill twenty one so I basically
let it sit on the table so I
worked this past year with both
Dawn Iglesias and David Abbey
telling them what I wanted to do
and they finally gave me a memo
outlining some different things
that would make it be easier to
access our researchers not
really change the tax
stabilization Act but have a
little more fluidity and
flexibility so they came up with
four different options and I
can't one of those options I at
first wanted to take away the
two thirds that seemed like
people would not like that that
the people wanted to remove may
have that a rainy day fund as
don said truly be a rainy day
fund so I kept those structures
around the rainy day fund so the
suggestion was well if we just
had a little bit fire of the cap
on the operating reserves that
would give more flexibility and
fluidity so that's the option I
chose in there for option
minimal.
Okay thank you all Mr chairman
thank you senator strict
borough.
That response at all let me just
go probably don this question.
So well.
Another reason is that you
mentioned that we had been at a
present for a long time.
So while.
Would it help we would not help.
Say that if we say that we did
go to fifteen percent let's say
that we would come back and
build.
Basically like a sunset in five
years.
And then at that point we could
see if you needed to go higher
to go lower.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales I
would say that that would be an
option to the the legislature if
you would want to I I don't know
that it's necessarily something
that would want to be revisited
regularly only sort of as needed
a sense on that if not addressed
at the time could significantly
we structure how the reserve
fund works so the legislature
would want to keep in mind that
that if that wasn't addressed
but had a sense that then the
reserve fund structure structure
would would vary pretty greatly
Act you know as an analyst for
this I would say that the
legislature would do you know
obviously as it pleases but I I
don't know that hi as an analyst
would recommend a sunset date.
Okay very well thank you for
that.
Thank you senator stirred thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you Senator Gonzales
center Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Senator Stewart so I'm trying to
make this simple for me.
Right now eighth so eight
percent I don't know that that
has to be changed a percent of
of one dollar is you know eight
but eighty percent of a million
dollars so the ratio is the same
so just because we had changed
and I don't think that's a
reason to change it.
if it was a fixed dollar amount
certainly inflation has an
effect on that but but let me
just see if I understand exactly
what we're doing so right now.
We get to spend.
Keep the space in our checking
account eight percent gets the
stay in our checking account the
rest whatever the extra is goes
into the savings account and
what we want to do now is say
fifteen percent stays in the
checking account and the rest
goes into the savings account is
that good I break that down
close enough for my simple mind.
Well.
The bigger picture is you you
have to remember that we're
dealing with one point six
billion that's in the tax
stabilization reserves.
And what we want to do is have
about forty nine million more
stay in the operating research
so right now we only keep eight
percent of the prior year
general fund appropriations in
the operating research so we're
trying to say let's keep a
little bit more in the operating
researchers we still it's still
not available to spend it still
not recurring dollars it's still
not new money it's just in that
part of the research that it's
easier for you all to
appropriate you're going to be
appropriating a fair number of
things out of our reserves this
year because they've grown so
much in because we have these
needs this gives you a little
bit more that you could
appropriate I can't appropriate
at so it's just kind of right
sizing straight now the reason
our reserves are so high in
large part it's because of the
tax stabilisation reserves now
that's a good thing with the
volatility of our economy but it
doesn't give us much a liquidity
and flexibility for you all and
that's the purpose of this.
Senator Stewart by May sort of
add on to your question Senator
share our.
It would it would allow the
operating reserve to grow up to
fifteen percent it would
automatically make the operating
reserve be fifteen percent so
what I mean by that is.
Wait both the executive and LFC
recommendations pretty much use
the amount that's in the
operating reserve for the FY
twenty one budget.
And under this legislation it's
not going to in and of itself
transportation dollars to the
operating reserve outside of the
excess school tax which is that
that forty nine million however
if you did happen to come in
more than were projected then
and those additional revenues
get transferred into the
operating reserve at the end of
every fiscal year.
And this would say if that
transfer curves.
Then the operating reserve could
now go to potentially fifteen
percent appropriation rather
than only up to eight percent
but in itself changing the
reserve cap doesn't
automatically make the operating
reserve fifteen percent of
appropriations it just means
that it can go up to that level
and I I just wanted to clarify
that I hope that that was
helpful.
Mr chair and senator I I I think
I understood that it just it
just increases I know it doesn't
change what we have at the
moment but in the future if it
changes how much we get to spend
or potentially can spend versus
how much we keep in the savings
account that's what I was
talking about with checking and
savings so less now goes to the
savings under this in more goes
to the checking even though we
don't have to spend everything
in the checking account.
It might be my closer.
Thank don is done shaking her
head it's not it's not really
that's not really exact but it's
one way to look at it I I don't
look at it like that you can.
Mr Chairman representative my
my.
part of the thinking about this
as well as given the revenue
volatility that the state now
has with its reliance on oil and
gas what we've just seen
throwing COVID on top of that.
Basically because of those
volatile revenues don't have
enough money in the checking
account on a regular basis
because it's all getting
transferred into the the savings
account which.
You know like Senator Stewart
said makes the checking account
less liquid and limits your
ability to deal with revenue
shortfalls quickly
and so we've been noticing this
imbalance over the past couple
of years and that's why the bill
is before you today.
Okay okay so so Mr chair senator
Charles on rules one stances so.
So are savings accounts.
Is is being and I get that thank
you oil and gas I think
everybody ought to think whether
guests were all in the oil and
gas business with the one you're
not.
but source savings account we
can't get to it quick enough.
To to pay the bills that are due
now with our checking account is
that.
Is that accurate.
That's the situation that you're
in last summer.
Where you have to tap the tax
stabilization reserve yet to use
seven hundred fifty million of
federal funds in order to try to
balance the budget versus just
being able to make an adjustment
to House Bill to that's just
You know the volatility of this
you know goes from.
Roughly six hundred million
being available in the checking
account to a little over a
billion.
Doesn't mean you spend all of
that you still have a lot of
other parameters around that and
it also means it doesn't
actually grow to that amount
because.
It only lets the cap before
money would still I think of it
as a series of buckets and when
one bucket fills up then it the
excess amount flows into the
next budget.
There's no change in how much
water is in each bucket
according to this bill it just
changes like you said for the
future.
Yes.
Okay well.
So when we came in in in June
so that when we really withdrew
money from the savings account
put it in the checking account
along with some other money in
in paid our bills what's what's
wrong with that because what my
fear is here is that if the
money's in the checking account
we will spend.
That's normal for Americans
that's not just state government
if you've got money in your
checking account you're going to
spend it if you're an American.
which is why part of the my
financial literacy thing is put
money in savings right off the
bat.
So so if it's in our checking
account will provide a way to
spend it is this
is the two thirds that Senator
Stewart was talking about.
Two thirds of vote meaning that
if we can't go into that part of
the checking account unless two
thirds of each chamber agrees is
that is that what with that part
of it was.
So Mr chairman that part is for
the tax stabilisation reserves
which right now is at one point
six billion.
So this.
If you if you raise the
operating reserve cap it's not
like it goes into your checking
it's still in your savings these
are still reserve fund there's
still in research you look at
your FIR the the forty nine
million is in the general fund
operating reserves that's what I
I don't think of that is a
checking account.
instead of being in the tax
stabilization reserve with the
other one point six billion
dollars in there now that
requires two thirds of each
houses and the governor's
proclamation unless everything
goes to hell like excuse my
French like it did in the summer
and we had to and then we could
spend.
So it's just a little bit more
liquidity and flexibility it's
really not very much.
Okay.
Share it if I might add to that
just briefly what it does make
while the operating reserve is
more liquid all the legislature
and the executive have set
reserve targets in the last few
years in order to maintain
certain reserve balances so as
long as both the legislature and
the executive seek to
keep those targets then
presumably the amount in
reserves would still be around
what those reserve targets which
have been about twenty to twenty
five percent depending on the
year
what this does is it when you
find yourself with thirty five
percent reserves in such a case
for us this year we're trying
and the legislature is trying to
find ways to provide relief to
I'm many New Mexicans who need
it this would.
Provide flexibility in terms of
that operating reserve
but to the extent the
legislature still has a reserve
target then it wouldn't
necessarily need that those
reserves would would go away any
quicker.
So Mr Chairman I understand that
so but reserve target is not law
so my wife and I can agree that
we want to you know save money
for new carpet but then when the
plumbing breaks we spend that
money even though we had a
targets of saving some money
for particular things so we're
going to spend the money anyway.
because something will happen.
so just as it had a curiosity
can anybody tell me when the
school emergency tax the oil and
gas school emergency tax came
into being.
I can't Mr chairman thank you to
oil and gas for helping us fund
our public schools.
It was actually nineteen thirty
six I believe so thank you when
we gonna stop having an
emergency.
Because that's that's really
long part but that's an
editorial comment thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator us Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator Stewart for bringing
this bill forward and John for
your helpful explanations so one
question I have is what is our
permanent land grants fund
currently apps right now.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill it is
currently at about twenty one
and a half billion dollars.
Thank you Mr chair and John how
does that compare to other
states in the country.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill that
permanent fund is around the
third largest in the country.
Thank you for that response so
the tax stabilization Act would
essentially allow us more
flexibility to invest in our
children are changing that
percentage that ratio would
allow us a little more
flexibility to invest in the
people of New Mexico is that
what I'm hearing you say don.
I'm.
Senator Hemphill changing the
reserve caps only deal with the
reserves and would increase the
liquidity of being able to
utilize those specific reserve
funds I will note that the tax
excuse me the land grant
permanent fund is not considered
a reserve fund of the state is
constitutionally protected and
so it has much more stringent
requirements in terms of being
able to access it at risk
requires a constitutional
amendment so I I think the
answer to your question is yes
but I I do want to be clear that
the land grant permanent fund is
not part of the reserves right
thank you for that clarification
What other states have this tax
stabilization acts.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill on any
of the other states have
provisions that are similar they
may not call it the same thing
but a variety of states have
budget stabilization reserves
that function and similar
mechanisms for example North
Dakota has a very similar one
day as you know are also very
dependent on oil and gas
revenues and they receive a
significant portion of their oil
and gas revenues into these
types of reserve funds in order
into budget stabilization funds
that they're then able to
utilize in terms of down also
they allow those funds to grow
in there are is booming
production and then utilize
those budget stabilization funds
when that production experience
as a shock as the oil and gas
industry tends to do and this
fund is is functions in a very
similar way it is designed to
capture revenue windfalls and
then can be accessed in periods
of Revenue downfalls.
Thank you Mr chairman and John
for that explanation
so I know that during the last
recession there was a lot of
drastic cuts in social programs
that resulted in the destruction
of a lot of the mental health
infrastructure and we we heard a
presentation this afternoon from
the public safety departments
and they talked about how we've
experienced a higher crime rates
due to
that the difficulties with
accessing mental health care is
by increasing this ratio from
eight percent to fifteen percent
would that prevent possibly
prevent having those cuts to
mental health care and other
social programs in the event
that we experienced
Less than what we were expecting
and with our budget.
Thank you Mr chairman the to
question makes sense done.
Thank you Mr chair senator have
hello to to the extent that
increasing the reserve camp
allows for more liquidity within
that fund that more liquid fund
could then be access to address
revenue shortfalls without
necessarily having to tap into
the tax stabilization reserve so
I would say I'm eating itself
this provision sort of allows
the fund but doesn't require it
or do it on its own
Hi Charles may want to add to
that but it does provide or
could provide more liquidity
into that easier to access fund.
Example is we left last session
within the financial projections
showing that we have a hundred
eighty four million dollars in
the operating reserve.
And.
One point.
Four billion dollars in the tax
stabilization reserve.
You know that kind of imbalance
is concerning to us for your for
you all to be able to quickly
tackle revenue shortfalls going
into that operating reserve and
so it it appears that the tax
stabilization reserve has grown
to a sufficient size to be on
its own it doesn't necessarily
need to continue to grow in size
given all of the the competing
needs that you have with
balancing the budget.
That makes sense thank you Mr
chairman and thank you Senator
and John and Charles for your
answers.
Health centers provide more you
Mr chairman saying no other
Andrey said like to make a
motion for to pass.
Thank you Senator Steinborn and
us we have a motion by Senator
Steinborn and a second by
Senator Hemphill
I just want to say you know
after you build a certain amount
of capacity in one fund and we
don't know what the federal
restrictions are going to do our
on permitting we need the
flexibility in our budget to to
make operational money be put in
place in and this is just
one of those methods so.
I I can agree with that so Pat
we you call the roll please.
Yes Mister chairman Senator Burt
no.
Senator Burt no Senator Campos
yes.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria yes Senator Diamond
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes.
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share no.
Senator sure no Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods nope.
Senator Rodriguez Senator Woods
no Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes Senator
manuals.
Yes.
As a secretary then yes yes the
vote is eight yes three no.
This motion passes thank you
Senator Stewart Avenue past and.
I think you're on to the floor
thank you thank you.
Are they should be easy.
And that.
Which one I was going to try to
get one senator Morris.
This is this is Senate bill one
thirty one it's too technical
changes to our Senate bill nine
we made these changes last year
and the bill that I sponsored in
the Senate bill that was passed
was Representative Chatfield two
fifty four we had to repeal that
in the special session so we've
just got incorrect language in
the half bill frontier of this
bill would correct it so the
current language says that the
calculation this is the two mill
levy this is Senate bill nine
this is what most districts do
they can raise two mills for six
years Hey for technology some
maintenance and operation so the
current language says
calculation based on the average
prior year told program units on
second and third reporting dates
we don't use those to calculate
this a correction is.
There it should read prior year
final program units we made that
change for five years ago so
that districts would know what
funding they were going to get
so this just corrects that and
additionally it excludes
discretionary program units so
that there's more stability in
this money for this comes out of
our public school capital outlay
fund.
Morton that we keep that fund
for its original purpose which
was the Zuni lawsuit so that's
all this does Mr chairman.
I don't think we have any public
comment I according to this
operator and so questions from
committee members.
Mr Chairman.
Senator sure has a question and
we have a motion by Senator
Campos Senator no I was just
going to move to passed all
second now.
We have a new path motion by
Senator Campos a second by
Senator share and that we cover
all.
Members of the committee that
committee secretary kept away
for a brief moment you should be
right back.
Senator.
It rolled through this.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Woods.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator.
Steinborn yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Yes folks yes in one.
I vote yes.
Senator Burt.
Yes I think that's everybody
then and so.
Senator Hemphill looks Senate
Bill.
The low.
Yes this is Pat I apologize he
just stepped away for a moment
it was a passed bill but I do
have everyone's vote a note
noted that all voted yes.
That was that was that a yes I
just want to verify that for.
You may share the secretary
said.
I have a blank piece of paper
that and I'm trying to Gallup
eleven on.
Thank you senator thank you
thank you very much the hard
working finance committee.
Thank you Senator Campos you
want your bill next.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee in this is Senate bill
one forty four amends the
definition of educational
technology infrastructure in the
public school capital outlay at.
To include the physical hardware
and educational resources
necessary to establish broadband
connectivity among students and
teachers and schools and during
the remote learning.
A couple of things regarding
this particular measure this is
brought forth again by the LFC
and that is in response to what
we've been going through during
this last year with COVID we
still have at least four or five
areas I understand that are in
dire need of ensuring that they
do have the connectivity in
their area by making the changes
within the
the public school capital outlay
council working directly with
the public school facilities
authority we would design the
guidelines through the PSSA in
order to utilize ten million
dollars that each year
continues to be set aside for
infrastructure improvements
again what this does is expands
the use of those resources
in order for us to continue to
deal directly with the broadband
issues that affect New Mexico.
Also with me are Mr chair are
to.
Most.
Senator couples I'm sorry yes
well that that that's fine with
me is also setting with the LFC
and also
McAllister chair with the LFC
and were available for questions
thank you Mr thank you Senator
Campos we're just verifying some
folks
Study or you have anything that
I there's no public comment
according to the zoom operator
and so any questions from
committee members.
Thank you Mr chair no I don't
have anything additional had but
have to answer any questions on
the bill.
Senator sure you have a question
and then center what's.
Thank you Mr chair so.
What this really does it.
It moves money into a broadband
services but at the same time it
removes removes money from other
school projects potentially.
So if you got a school roof that
needs to be done.
We're gonna then balance between
do they need broadband or do
they need a roof.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course Senator share.
No it doesn't mean that we're
gonna be moving money from one
of the priorities to another in
essence what it refers to is it
expands the definition in order
for us to be able to utilize
those resources for some of the
dire need projects regarding
broadband and the extension if
you will of the connectivity
within the state so it's a.
Working on the guidelines and
the definitions in order to
provide those resources
currently out of the ten million
we've utilized two million
dollars at the state level so
there definitely is capacity in
order to address the needs of
some of the school districts are
still have some serious issues
when it comes to broadband.
Thank you so.
Mr chair and senator I.
I get that but I think I think
about central consolidated
school districts as an example
that's their next door to me
there I don't actually represent
them but but they have all kinds
of infrastructure issues.
Out there.
Been being one of the so how do
you get to online learning when
people are living twenty or
thirty miles away
from from anything even a road
paved road anyway.
so I can see how that that
infrastructure needs to happen
but at the same time the schools
themselves are in terrible
trouble.
And so that's why I think or so
expanded yes to it just gives us
the opportunity to say okay
broadband is more important and
roof but there's still only a
limited pot of money right this
is this doesn't increase the the
amount of money does it thank
you very much Mr chair course
Senator sure no it does not and
increase the amount of money of
the ten million dollars of
course is the appropriation and
that's what's available but
again of those resources are not
to totally Tara and what the
staff does at this time
especially as we continue to go
and see the dire need for
technology improvements it it
does expand that language to
address this is one of the
priorities along with the issues
as we move forward with the
connectivity in some of these
more rural areas.
Okay so Mr chair and senator do
we have any any
ideas on the technology
certainly if you're gonna run
wire to hold on the reason
there's not water hold on now is
because it's a really long run
to get something out there.
In a building in would cost
millions of dollars to.
To do of the relatively small
group of people.
But there's other technologies
out there I don't remember which
which guy it is at the moment is
that maybe too long must
remember said he's put up
thousands of satellites in there
so that he can get.
Connectivity to to every nook
and cranny on the planet but I
also know there's another
technology and I'm not sure
what.
It involves I'm gonna call
blimps for lack of anything else
but they're getting ready to do
that well over Navajo Nation
right now.
with that include these kind of
things.
So Mr Chairman representative
as these particular areas so
would be Representative or
presented by let's say for
example the school district is
after public school apple outlay
in PSSA had developed the
guidelines and resources were
available the course these type
of projects could be considered
but there's a lot of other
things you could develop the hot
spots you in the continue to
include in the increase of
wireless so they're they're
they're quite a quite a few
opportunities particularly for
these areas of that right now do
not have the services at the
same time it would also help us
we are
purchased Chromebooks and help
young people with transportation
when their being bused to school
and so this gives us another
opportunity to assist young
people particularly those that
don't have
any level of technology that
they can rely on at this time
thank you Mr so Mr chair and
senator that leads me to to to
questions they have before so
one can we use capital outlay
money public school capital
outlay money to a buy
Chromebooks.
B. provide transportation of
that seems outside the realm of
capital outlay but also more
importantly is could this money
be used for services of.
So we we.
would we pay the guys that the
own the blimps to have access
where do we even need to do that
as a as a as a school district
with the state do that or how
would that I'm not sure again
the public cap public school
capital outlay money seems to me
that it's got to be something
that's attached to the earth as
opposed to fly above the earth
in shooting beams down at the
earth just as a as a rule real
estate is attached to the earth
and that's what capital outlays
for so thank you very much Mr
chairman for Senator share the
bottom line with this is the
resources would be used after
the guidelines are developed in
staff alleged by the SFA.
to those specifically to
assisting with the.
Issues that are needed in order
to provide technology in areas
where those services are not
available now along with some of
the hardware that some of our
schools don't have access to so
in reality these resources would
go to the hardware and if I
could but I'd like to do is to
defer for a moment to
either Mr chair or if you will
Mr lewd to store their
elaborate in terms of how these
resources could be used but
again conceptually not until the
guidelines are established if I
may do that Mr chair.
Mr Mr chair and members of the
committee I do want to add on to
Center accomplices comments that
the bill requires once again the
council NPS evaded determine
what's necessary for education
in determining what is what this
call hardware needs to be
provided to connect students and
teachers and so they would be
creating those guidelines in
determining what is necessary
And if that in the case that you
mention if it's something other
than fiber optic oral outward
devices than the council could
make determinations for that I
will say that.
In addition the.
New federal aid that is coming
to the state is pretty
significant and my understanding
is that they recently approved.
And the kids can you can correct
me if I'm wrong on this about
forty million for the Navajo
Nation to connect their
homelands to.
I brought that through E. rate
funding so there's a lot of
additional funding the bill
simply just expands the
definition of what the council's
able to support as far as
internet connectivity for
physical hardware specifically.
That's right and then I'll also
add on that the bill is for is
still for equipment and so even
even if it's home home
connectivity equipment like a
hot spot so in the case of you
know future high speed satellite
internet they'd still need to be
some sort of receiver at the
home where the resident to
receive that internet signal and
and this bill might help
offset the cost of that for
students.
Asked.
So.
Mr Chairman.
So now you know you're making it
harder for me I like the idea of
connectivity here.
But if we put something in
somebody's home then we've got
it and an anti donation problem
not only do we have not real
estate but it's but it's also an
anti donation problem I want to
make sure that what we're doing.
did we change to madam Charles
said I want to make sure that
what we're doing.
Works I don't want to get hung
up too much on any particular of
a technology because the
technology that's going to be
deployed tomorrow none of us
even think about today
But somebody's thinking about it
we just don't know about it
So I don't want to get too hung
up on on on any technology.
But I also want to make sure
that we're doing something that
a we legally can and and the
they any donation Clause might
get in the in the way but also
just the concept of capital
outlay going to something that's
not real estate or at least tat
you know attached somehow to to
some real property
Concerns me I like the idea I'm
just wanna make sure we're doing
it right thank you of Mr chair
and Senator Campos.
Thank you senator share we have
three are speakers we have
senator I don't know what order
they came in but I'm gonna read
of the order of the participants
and that is Senator alright Pat
Woods is next Senator then we
have been.
Chris this two youngest madam
chair would be the better way.
Thank you
okay we're gonna have Senator
Pat Woods you're great.
Chairman after all the yeah
right well let me tell you all.
Senator Campos thank you for
allowing me to comment on your
bill.
My I've been reading some.
Yes see comments.
On your bill.
And it talks about the federal
money that's coming in.
And it talks about three point
two billion dollar procreation.
Are funding Federal
Communications program for
broadband access for low income
families.
And it will provide fifty
dollars a month to subsidize low
income how so Senator are you
subsidized homes on tribal
lands.
And this the program would
provide one hundred dollars for
also to burdens purchased
internet backs capable device
use western with.
What is your bill going to do on
top of that.
Thank you very much madam chair
and of course Senator Woods what
this does to the public school
capital outlay through the
public school facilities
authority to develop the
guidelines and the structure in
terms of how we can expand the
use of the ten million dollars
that we already use so on top of
that in essence it helps to
establish guidelines and that's
the purpose of this particular
measure thank you Mr.
Establish guidelines madam chair
established guidelines on how
we're going to use the ten
million dollars but because that
these requests and and comment
money coming in.
So it is standard issues new
guidelines because we want we
on the way we've been using it
because we have this federal
money coming in is that is that
what we're talking about senator
the.
Thank you very much Jim thank
you very much madam chair
Senator Woods.
The definitions that would be
applied would be applied to the
ten million dollars not to the
federal aid that would be coming
and that would have other
specific guidelines for the use
of the resources so this is to
apply directly to the guidelines
for the use of the ten million
dollars that is currently
available to public school
capital outlay and the
guidelines would be established
by the public schools of
civility Authority.
For the expenditure in the use
their
Of up to the ten million dollars
that we currently appropriate
for the use of the public school
capital outlay council.
Okay.
madam chairman thank you thanks
Senator for that Madam.
Madam chairman I think that I
found the spot in some this.
paperwork I have here that may
explain it to me this word and
you can tell me if this is.
Your understood if I'm on the
right that.
It says the the BDC the falls
under an exception from the
public school capital outlay act
that allows dollars from the
appropriate school capital
outlay fund to be used to make
non capital expenditures.
That some of what we're talking
about Madam chairman and
senator.
Chair Senators you're correct
and and again within that it's
to assist us in those areas
where there is a need to ensure
that they we have broadband and
the is there a of the hardware
to provide the online education
to our students.
Thank you Sir thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative would
have about Senator Neville work
your next Senator thank you
madam chair and destined for
thank you for the bill.
I am a big fan of trying to
continue to get Mexico wired and
so
This is intriguing to me
and and you mentioned Senator
that this basically by by
hardware I mean it it it as
expenditures for hardware is
that correct but you also
mention developing some
guidelines with this money help.
This these guidelines so it to
use this equipment.
Thank you very much madam chair
and of course senator Byrd
that's a very good point because
in some of the analysis that has
been provided to us it has been
indicated that in the future yes
there is going to be the
additional use of the maximum
use of the ten million dollars
that is available there may be
the need for additional as TV's
but right now the public school
capital outlay the sun would be
use yes the guideline if this
bill passes in the guidelines
are established to expand those
deadlines to use the resources
for broadband and other
hardware.
Connectivity within areas where
right now it's not available.
Okay it and madam chair and
senator.
Do we know when we are going to
get some kind of guidance from
the federal government on the
this huge amount of money
they're going to send to New
Mexico to wire rural New Mexico
do we know when we'll get those
guidelines so that we can look
him over and and and make sure
what we're doing on a statewide
basis is going to correlate with
the money and efforts that the
federal government would like to
do here in the state thank you
madam chair and of course the
senator Byrd and like to
discourage this time to either
Mr chair Mister little I know
that they're keeping up with the
the federal guidelines and when
resources would be available
then that's a very good point a
line not only the federal
requirements but align those
the state requirements as well
so maybe they can they can
assist us with when that time
line would be put into place
sure
thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Campos so there's
there's no Senator Burt.
Several different pots of
federal money that have already
come into the state are going to
come into the state in the near
future the the.
Less your future.
So.
Three point two billion that
Believe Senator Woods reference
to help with subsidizing
internet access fees FCC is
currently doing a rulemaking to
figure out how to deploy that
it'll go to internet service
providers will then pass on that
savings to their customers you
know we we back of the napkin
just you know gas that based on
how much New Mexico tends to get
of federal pots of money that we
get about sixteen million
dollars of that you know we hope
it would come sooner rather than
later
the schools have already gotten
a lot of federal stimulus
they've got about a hundred and
eight million dollars that they
can spend freely on things
including student connectivity
they're about ready to get
another.
Are they sorry they've gotten
over half a billion in there
about ready to get another
billion probably just spring for
the same purposes.
So a lot of money coming in
we're not exactly sure how it's
all going to get deployed or
what kind of gaps is going to
leave its weight and you know
the the thing about this bill
that makes it nice is it it
gives PS FAB ability to help
fill in those gaps with this ten
up to ten million dollars it
doesn't obligate them to spend
any money on it but it gives
them the option to for any place
where you know we we still have
gaps in connectivity that would
help with remote learning.
Okay in in in thank you for
answer and and I guess.
Madam chair and senator to
that's I guess the point I'm I'm
working which is
I I think New Mexico in the Tory
is for having a lot of great
people in organizations that
want to do good for whatever
subject we have where the
education with their child care
whatever the case may be but we
have the stove pipes the goal so
we hello money needs one
additional pipes and everyone of
those individual organizations
do whatever they can do with
that amount of money I just
don't think that's sufficient
use the money so purpose my
question was to find out if if
there was a way that Senator the
your money the ten million can.
Be applied if we get federal
guidelines on how they are going
to suggest we spend this money
then just like Micaela mention
we can use this money to kind of
fill in the gaps and and and
connect what the federal
government and what we are
packed ready done in the state
with the federal or or state
monies if we can use this money
to pull this together so we can
efficiently and effectively use
taxpayer dollars
to to connect to New Mexico.
That would be I think all of our
preference and I'm just hoping
that we kind of keep that in
mind is as we move this bill
forward and and get this money
in the pot to be used that we
continue to look at the the
federal guidelines that money
and see how we connect those
just from an efficiency
standpoint and really maximize
the amount of money that we have
and how this point in the state
of New Mexico so I hope that we
keep that in mind and and
certainly do it and those who
will be intimately involved in
applying this money both state
and federal.
We'll we'll try and coordinate
that as best as possible and I
hope Senator I know it's true
close to it to and I know others
so the.
Michael Padilla for example this
is family involved in all the
staff and I hope that we is the
state and certainly this
legislature will somehow have
some input into making sure that
we your very best use that money
efficient so thank you senator
and the good luck with the bill
I will be supporting it and
thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Burt and we're gonna
move onto Center crystal diamond
your next.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Campos I appreciate any
effort here to bring technology
infrastructure to our schools
specifically for districts like
yours and mine who were probably
disproportionately impacted when
schools shut down for the last
year in these remote areas I
really just have in fact I could
say that maybe this is almost
too little too late so thank you
for the efforts now students I
really just have a question for
clarity while I well I support
the investment of like
infrastructure so lines hard
infrastructure consider capital
outlay I just want to make sure
that we're not we defining what
capital outlay is are we to
include wifi hot spots personal
devices.
What it is that are we are we do
just like kind of redefining
what we're calling capital
outlay not that I'm saying we
shouldn't purchases for schools
but.
It is the definition of having
trouble with.
So thank you madam chair thank
you very much Senator Diamond
it's not to redefine it's in
essence to ensure that those
definitions will be within the
language because right now we're
not able to public school
capital outlay PSSA to utilize
those resources for those
specific.
Is that we're talking about
regarding broadband connectivity
so what we do is we will align
those definitions in order to do
that the we in concert will be
aligned but it's not to redefine
the use of public school capital
outlay resources with new
definitions in the area of
technology or she will broadband
usage.
Okay thank you and when you're
talking about the guidelines I
just want to make sure that that
I'm correct on this issue they
are specifically addressing our
rural concerns by making sure
that those that money is spent
in areas that otherwise does not
currently have connectivity
correct madam chair Senator
Diamond you're correct it's to
ensure that those areas that
right now don't have that
connectivity for these resources
can be used.
However again just like the
procedures of public school
capital outlay there would have
to be the proposals that would
have to be the needs brought
forward and then again via wants
to guidelines are established
then those resources could be
approved by a public school
capital outlay in the course.
Established by NPS and setting
okay I understand thank you
thank you Senator Campos I
appreciate his efforts thank you
madam chairman thank you senator
yes okay do we have anyone from
the public to comment on this
for the bill.
Or against the bill.
Senator Rodriguez there was no
public comment and think when it
gets built thank you our.
We want to committee members any
further questions and if not I
don't see any more hands here if
not what are the wishes of the
committee can we have a motion
in the past madam chair the
Senators time more thank you
senator I want to do have been
sentenced.
Second two seconds okay Senator
Burt there we go he did right
you seconded the motion on favor
signify by saying aye those roll
call right in this one so okay
let's go ahead and call the
rope.
This madam chair Senator Burt
yes.
Senator yes Senator Campos it's.
Campos yes Senator Candelaria
this.
The lady yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Gonzales
yes Senator Hemphill yes.
Well yes Senator share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
what yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez and senator
and house.
Yes.
Eleven yes yes pass.
The past senator Campos thank
you very much madam chair
members the Senate finance
committee.
We move on Senate bill one
thirty seven and that is NMSA
water projects.
Senator run tests
Representative Dow are you here
Senator.
Senator I can present the bill
madam chair all right did now
thank you that's okay I
appreciate the offer their
Sierra Lotta jump right in there
madam chair you're ready to go
yes right ago Senator thank you
madam chair madam chair of
center kind of leading chairs
the mineral New Mexico finances
Authority oversight committee
every year this committee and
our legislative body approves
certain projects that are funded
from the water project fund this
year the bill before you is
Senate bill one thirty seven
proposes loans are requests for
thirty seven projects to be
funded by the water trust board
the money for these projects
comes from an annual annual
distribution of a the senior
severance tax on capacity and
then an annual distribution from
the water trust fund about four
million dollars so of this year
for twenty twenty two fiscal
year we have about fifty two
point five million dollars up
forty eight point five from that
severance tax capacity then four
million arsenal water trust fund
to fund these projects some of
that by statute goes to the
state engineer and to the courts
for adjudication of water
projects and otherwise the
funding is available for a
number of projects that are all
specified in the bill these
projects have all been very
thoroughly evaluated before they
come to the legislature to
assure that their shovel ready
and the and the projects are
about good and best use of our
funds I believe Marquita Russel
should be ideally on the call
Marquita as you all know it's
been administering the project
fund for a number of years and I
think even Leasure ThinkCentre
got a lot it was actually a
sponsor of this bill so I've
curated some years experience
some years and we asked the
committee to consider favorable
and I don't know again if if you
confirm is Russell in community
college not all of your
questions of the committee thank
you Mr chair I am here.
Thank you.
What is going to interrupt you
for just one second madam chair
of rules agencies are still with
us we're just gonna wrap this up
after after this bill in in so
we'll be back in touch with you
and reschedule your percent
finance.
Centers of honest does want to
pass over time and so I will let
you guys go and madam chair go
and proceed.
Thank you well wait a minute
wait a minute.
What was that about over what.
Rather that you can press say
there's other agencies that we
have on the agenda of organ and
after your presentation we're
going to reschedule as with
everyone else so I was just
teasing your German not I think
if there if we.
Not wanting to deal with that
I've been listening to all
afternoon and I I I do have
although I appreciate the the
knowledge and experience of my
colleague center got a lot of I
think earlier in the day that we
have to be the adults in the
room I want him to know that the
that's some of us in the other
committees try to be the adults
in the room sometimes to the you
may have some adults on some of
the other committees there
Senate finance committee members
I just want you know you're not
in the well.
Thank you senator this is
anybody have a tabling motion
for this bill.
Are with a good bill with an
annual bill we all recognize.
Okay so do passed Mr chairman I
wanted to move the table but I I
changed my mind is a click to
commute so move on to that thank
you chairman and there's a
motion to thank you for
discussion only because we
didn't ask and I want to make
sure that for every bill that we
have we ask for anyone from the
public to weigh in if there was
any we have anybody on the list
that Nathan.
Senator there's nobody on the
list okay good that we proceed
so as a motion and a second and
we have a roll call please.
Yes madam chair Senator Burt yes
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Candelaria.
Yes.
Senator Candelaria yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond DS
Senator Gonzalez yes.
Thomas yes Senator Hemphill yes
Senator Hemphill yes Senator
share yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes senator
one yes Senator Woods yes
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator manuals.
Yes.
Yes.
Thanks committee passed senator.
Okay we don't have any other
items on the agenda for today
other than the ones we're going
to reschedule and so we're will
be adjourned and we'll see.
Just one thing we will have new
revenue estimates tomorrow I
don't know how long we're going
to be on the floor but I'd like
to get those you know right
after the for free come often
get those revenue estimates so
we know where we're at also on
Thursday the sub committee that
was appointed for the junior
bill we should have some of that
gathered up and so if we just
wait till after Committee stand
let those subcommittees meet on
zoom.
That would be very helpful.
Mr chair this committee which
works without your this is the
subcommittee on the on the
junior bill at its Center
combos.
And Senator Candelaria am I
correct in center Burt and
Senator share and Senator Woods
I I don't remember the on our
side just in case yes the center
Senator Woods and senator Byrd
Mr.
Okay yeah we just meet after a
Senate finances you most of the
vote we can start going through
some that that your money and
get that bill rolling.
Yep thank you all right do you
have anything else.
The winning lottery numbers but
nobody wants to.
I don't think so maybe now is
the weather like this I don't
know okay well take care have a
good night were adjourned.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
