Knows that all presentations
should be electronic, so we can
have them up on the screen.
Hmm.
Going forward.
We probably printed your
presentation, but so you can
spread the wrong room in the
cabinet. I mean, please send us
an electronic version so we can
put up on the screen sometimes
helps us. We're gonna buy
technology Might as well use
technology.
Who's gonna start us off, which
Secretaries to me or the
secretaries.
Good morning, Mr Chair members
of the Committee. Thank you very
much for giving us the
opportunity to be here today to
talk with you guys. I'm really
excited about the future of C Y
F D. I know that sounds a little
scary to people because mostly
we're talking about the state of
disrepair in the changes that
need to be made, But that is not
the only thing that we're
focusing on at C Y F D. We
really are looking at, you know,
making changes to address the
needs of families across the
state.
And I think that every single
family in the state of New
Mexico deserves a government who
is willing to be there to
support them not to just be
there to be punitive and say you
did this wrong and you failed as
a parent, and now we're going to
take intervention measures to
make sure that you know we do
things better. They deserve an
opportunity from the very moment
they have that child.
To receive the support of the
people in this state.
Who are their and their main
focus is to support individuals
And so I'm excited also about
the team that we've put
together. I couldn't sit here
and say that you could get
people who care more about the
well being of the individuals
that we serve, and that goes
from birth from prenatal all the
way through our aging
department.
We really do have a cradle to
Past career, um, mentality and
how we serve individuals and we
work incredibly well together,
um, to be able to do that, and
so I think the presentation
before you, um You know, I can
start off with what we're doing,
um, specifically at C Y F, D and
so on Slide three. You'll really
see where our focus has been in
setting up our family services
division.
So I just want to say that's not
to say that we're not really
looking at protective services
in juvenile justice. Those are
incredibly important areas for
us at the department.
But it's really about supporting
our families, and that's what
our family services division
does. Um, I know that there's
been comment or concern about
the fact that we're setting up a
new division or new programs
While we're still trying to fix
old programs and you know other
parts of the agency that is
absolutely not true. All of
these programs that are moving
into family services are
existing programs within C Y F
D. We just don't hear much about
them.
Because they are down within
protective services or within
our juvenile justice.
Um, you know, some are
In behavioral health, So we're
taking a look at what is really
geared towards prevention and
intervention and moving that
into one unit for family
services so that we have
dedicated staff that can focus
on those and it's not just a one
off when somebody is in trouble
or in crisis, and then we're
like, Well, you know, go do this
parenting class or go do this.
It's really giving us that
opportunity to do outreach and
build that with the families.
Have that connection with them
build outreach with our
community providers. And with
our um sister agencies so that
we are collaboratively looking
at how do we support families
and lift them up so that they
have opportunity to be
successful so that they get
services that they need early
on, and we're not waiting for
them to be in crisis and be
reactionary, which is typically
how we're operating that
department right now, so
I'm really excited to be here
with them today to talk about
that and answer questions that
you have, um, the next slide
shows. You know a lot of the
things that we're doing within
family services. Um, one thing
that has come out of the
Children's Cabinet. Um, has been
our family resource centers and
those are currently in
development. We're working
really closely with E. C. C, D
and other departments to get
those stood up. We've identified
a couple of locations across the
state.
And this is really exciting
because it gives people an
opportunity. Kind of like a one
stop to come in and received the
resources and the services that
they need so state agencies will
be co located in these
facilities along with our
providers in those communities,
so it will offer up space for
providers we can do, um
You know, parenting classes we
can do have domestic violence
forums there. We can do a whole
array of services under one roof
for people in that community,
um, so that they have
opportunity to come and join in
with others and not feel
isolated, not feel like the
services that they're asking for
our unique to them. They can
build their own.
Community within their community
for services and supports, um,
providers in that community will
be there to provide services to
them. We can schedule that. Um,
you know, we can do outreach for
grandparents raising
grandchildren. All of those can
be there and we can identify
specific to that community. What
those needs are and what they
need.
To help their families to be
successful. So the family
resource centers and I'm sure
Elizabeth will talk more about
that. But we're super excited
about having them and getting
those up and running. Um and
identifying those in
communities.
There are a lot of other areas
that we're working on. And I've
got my new, UM, Deputy secretary
overseas family services Kathy
Phoenix Doyle here. She's
available. Also for questions
either today or if anybody wants
to schedule time with her after
this to talk about you know what
we're doing in C Y f D to move
things forward and support our
families.
The next slide that I want to
really speak to is our Kira
program, and I know that there's
been a lot of talk and a lot of
concern about Kara. I share that
concern with each and every one
of you. The program has not been
established. We've all
Determined that it wasn't
established the way it needed to
be from the onset. So we're
working at really looking at
what that needs to be. I know
there's been consideration. I
believe that there was a
recommendation to fund that in
hs D and transfer that program
to HST. They, however, are not a
direct service agency. They
don't provide those direct
services.
And so transferring Cara to H S
D would simply be contracting
with RM. C. O s to provide the
services that we're asking to be
done.
Hold on one second. We gotta
Turn on our television, okay?
Mhm.
Is the same height that we used
to have to buy him a stick. This
is the only hand out that turned
on something else That's missing
the chairman. Right. Sorry.
Okay. Okay. Thank you. Thank
you. Hmm.
Yeah.
Absolutely
okay. Go ahead interruption. So
as I was saying, moving Keira
over to the healthcare authority
would require them to then
contract out with the MacOS to
run that program.
And as I've said in the past
that doesn't give C y f d, um
you know any authority or any
opportunity to engage with these
individuals who desperately
needs services.
So moving it to, um see why of D
enables us to set up a program
and we've kind of mapped out
what that looks like here. So,
um, as I mentioned earlier, it
would move under the family
services it would be directly
under Kathy Phoenix. Doyle. Um,
I'm super excited to announce
that we have made an offer and
it's been accepted by Scott
Paterson.
As our director of family
services. He is coming to us
from the courts, where he has
been in charge over the last
several years of setting up
behavioral health systems
through our court system, so he
has an extensive background. He
I think is going to be a
tremendous asset to the
department and will be
responsible with making sure
that we're implementing this in
a manner that
Um, that RM CEOs can adhere to
and that our staff can get out
and create that outreach. So
what it does is it engages our
staff our navigators from the
onset when child is born,
substance exposed. We're
exploring with Department of
Health. Um
Making mandatory screenings for
all newborn so that we are not
picking and choosing who were
going to screen to see if child
is substance exposed and that
will eliminate any bias or any
sort of, um
Prejudice in those screenings.
And so that's something that
we're exploring, and then it
would give us opportunity
immediately to know those
infants and those families that
we need to engage with our
navigators. It sets up systems
internally, um for a better
screening process and better
training of the navigators and
the care coordinators at the M.
C. O s
But it gives us eyes on that
child so that we can engage with
that family and be involved and
make sure that there if they
haven't they've elected to
participate in a treatment that
they're following through, and
they're actually working that
plan, and it gives us eyes on
that if they have elected not to
where we're more involved in the
family, and it gives us
opportunity to remove a child
sooner if we see concerns or
areas where that child is not
getting the care of the services
that they need.
Um, one of the trigger points
will be for us medical
appointments to make sure that
they're engaged in those so that
Isar on that child, and if not,
then we will do an immediate
referral to our investigators
for medical neglect. Um, so it
gives us more opportunity to be
involved. It takes that burden
off of our investigators and
puts it on our family services.
But still gives us that
opportunity to report in through
sky when we do see an issue or a
concern, and I truly believe
that given the opportunity to
set this up and utilize our
staff to do that will give us a
better opportunity and better
outcomes for these individuals.
So, um
I know we're short on time.
Those are kind of some of the
important things that we're
working on at the department. Um
and I want to turn it over to
Elizabeth so she can talk a
little bit about what we're
doing at SEC to support our
families.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Secretary Cassatt owes and I
just want to build on what she
was at What? We She was just
presenting in terms of this
comprehensive collaborative
approach to supporting families,
so you'll see. The first bullet
on my slide is our agency thanks
to funding through the Hilton
Foundation. We have been able to
bring in staff to help
coordinate in partnership with
Mariana Padilla, the governor's
Children's Cabinet director,
Thriving families Prenatal to
Age three prevention plan.
All these agencies and many more
have been part of this effort
over the last couple of years
and part what came out of that
was very data driven. We were
looking at child abuse and
neglect data. We were looking at
use of services and that's how
we came to the idea that in
these three key counties we
needed to develop these family
resource centers. That's
Valencia, Dona Ana and Rio
Arriba.
So we've got two of those
underway but there is so much
more in this plan and we're just
finalizing our updates to it,
and we'll be able to present
that here to this committee and
two other legislators to show
how this administration like I
don't think any other
administration I've worked in a
lot of different governments
prioritizes. First of all, a
family centered approach to the
work we do, and also that she,
the governor expects us to
collaborate.
So this is what we do here.
We're doing it every day, making
sure that we're putting forward
the best policies the best plans
and that we're tracking that. So
in this thriving families
prevention plan, you'll see our
measures of success. You'll see
the strategies that we're
working on across the Cabinet,
The agency itself has a five
year strategic plan 22 to 27 in
there. We have six very bold but
achievable goals. The first one,
of course, is school readiness,
and that means that we have to
make sure that all families in
New Mexico have access.
The high quality childcare.
Evidence based home visiting pre
K and early intervention and
preschool, special education as
well.
Yep. Secretary. We're trying to
fall along on slides. Next
slide. Sorry. Next slide, Okay.
You might have to tell him that
until we next
Yeah. Thank you, Mr Chair and
thank you for holding this
hearing on early childhood day,
So we have the whole rotunda all
day long, and hopefully you'll
get a chance to be down there
and meeting some of the partners
who are part of helping us
implement this five year
strategic plan.
By big goals, family and
community government to
government organizational
excellence and data, actionable
data and also our ecosystem
alignment, and I think that's
what Secretary Cassano's is
talking about is it's not one
agency that's going to work in
silo and help solve the very
long standing challenges that
families in our state face all
over, so it's really about
Thinking about what is that
ecosystem? When we put families
at the center, they're working
with health practitioners
Visitors school people, so we're
working to make that more
aligned and more seamless for
families.
Again. Our programs administered
The programs we administer
ranged from all promotion
prevention all the way across
the continuum that we know are
critical to addressing issues of
child abuse and neglect, school
readiness and overall well being
of Children and families.
We have, As you know, we acted
to create local early childhood
system building coalitions. We
are now have them in 12 of our
12 of our counties, but there's
15 coalitions were just received
a grant from the Pritzker
Children's Foundation, and we're
going to be able to start
coalitions in Chavez County and
because again data driven we
were looking. What are the needs
of families across our state?
And where are they? Most?
Especially in this prenatal 23.
and we saw there is great need
for families in Chavez and then
The county. Uh, that red tone
lets Colfax thank. You know,
they're both C. Cummings. Thank
you, secretary. Uh And so Colfax
and Chavez will be two counties
where we will start again more
local system building because at
the state level, we have good
ideas and we have the funding,
but we know at the local level
we need to individualize. We
need to customize, so we have
one and it's county. We have
three in vernal Leo County.
We have them all over Grant
County, Dona Ana. We have two so
this is an opportunity for us to
build together a stronger system
at both the local and the state
level. As you know, we're
implementing new evidence based
home visiting models. These are
to address the unique needs of
families, Families, experience,
substance use and mental health
needs.
We have to work better, And you
all have heard this many times
that the lfc if you're members
of that about getting the
Medicaid home, visiting and
Secretary Armijo has been a
tremendous partner in this and
we know we have to do better at
E. C. C D. And we're very
focused on this for 24 and
beyond.
And again, it's our workforce
where advancing a diverse and
well compensated workforce were
leading the nation in early
childhood. In terms of how we
are thinking holistically about
families and the people who care
for and serve their Children
every day. So without a good
workforce, without people who
are well paid, who will show up
every day and do the very
relationship intensive work.
We won't be able to get the
outcome so with the free college
with opportunity, scholarship
and with the support that we
provided the department for Wage
supplement, and just generally,
the Legislature funding us at
the level that we can actually
pay providers the rates to serve
the Children that allowed them
to pay their staff wages that
they could then support their
families.
So overall, we're, um we're
streamlining the process for
families to apply for our
services again. This is an area
that we do need to improve on.
But with that I'm going to turn
it over to my colleague at next
slide. Health Department of
Health Secretary Alan Thank you,
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health.
Um, what you see on the slide in
front of you is a little bit of
a summary of what we do in this
space around programs for for
Children, Families and youth.
I'm not going to go through each
and every bullet here, but the
general theme is that we use a
little bit of State General fund
and a lot of a lot of federal
funds that come in discrete
grant grant streams to do a
variety of things that
The support kids and families
and that we work to integrate
those and coordinate those
services across the different
agencies that you see here and
others to be able to deliver
those services down the left
hand side under programs and
services. We've called out a
number. There's some really
important areas like care for
Children and youth with special
health care needs through our
Children's medical services
that's delivered through our
local public health offices,
Vaccines for kids.
Um, home visits to support new
nursing mothers and for families
with new babies about you'll see
it on that left hand side. There
are kind of four footnotes that
are called out and on the right
hand side. We've provided a
little bit of data to go with
those. Um, the first footnote
has to do with suicide
prevention. We've been able to
make a significant increase in
the number
Of people trained in evidence
based suicide prevention
programs. I think we've still
got a lot of work that we can do
and more expansion that we can
do in those trainings, but it's
an important tool to be able to
to help meet needs in that
space school based health
centers is the second footnote
and and we've now really kind of
recovered. I think in terms of
unique patients from
From the dip that was caused by
the by the pandemic and a
variety of impacts there. We
still haven't gotten our total
visits back up, and we're trying
to understand exactly what's
driving that that number but
we've had significant increases
across the board, both in
patients and patients and visits
You're all I know familiar with
the national, uh, with the New
Mexico Dance Institute.
Um, program that that you all
helped fund to provide. Um uh,
culturally relevant experience
that has to do with kids Fitness
and well being, Um, we've
identified the number of schools
that are involved there. And
then the fourth footnote really
talks about Wick and you can see
the This is 100% federally
funded program.
Um, but it overwhelmingly cues
used obviously towards kids.
infants, people who are
postpartum, breastfeeding and or
are pregnant to assure that the
nutrition component of um of
early childhood as well as
pregnancy is dealt with from a
nutritional standpoint.
Um, and that's a quick run
through of some of the data that
we have in the services that we
develop, would like to go ahead
and turn it over to Secretary
Armijo. Uh, good morning, Mr
Chair and members of the
Committee carry Armijo. Oh,
sorry. Go to the next slide,
please. Lawson Final, um, carry
Armijo, secretary designate for
the Human Services Department
soon to be the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority, and I'm
going to talk a little bit this
morning about
The initiatives that our agency
is doing to support early
childhood and well being and how
we're kind of things that are
happening now and things that
are on the horizon very sooner,
imminently through the Medicaid
program. Um, I do want to just
acknowledge the cross agency
partnership. I think what you
see in front of you as a panel
of problem solvers. Really
creative people have been just
Ah, really in awe of some of the
ideas that have been put forth
by this team of leaders really
all in the best interest of
serving New Mexico's Children
and families. Um, I want to
start by talking a little bit
about our Medicaid waiver. That
is an approval that is partially
a negotiation but partially
federally approved with the
federal government for our
Medicaid program.
Um, a big announcement that I
wanted to make. I think most of
you have probably heard this,
but I wanted to reiterate that
we in January have launched
continuous eligibility for
Children on the Medicaid
In New Mexico and this will
affect 92,000 Children here in
our state. It really takes the
burden those Medicaid
eligibility fluctuations during
early childhood off of the
family so they can really focus
on just getting that kid the
immunizations at early childhood
checkups that they need to live
a healthy life and also keeping
Mom's healthy as well.
We are also proud to announce
the launch of four new models
for home visiting services
really trying to expand the
scope and coverage reach more
moms through that service to
provide those early childhood
supports as well.
And then we're still in
negotiation with the federal
government over this one, but
hoping to get approval soon to
be able to offer home delivered
meals to pregnant women with
gestational diabetes during
their pregnancy through the
Medicaid program, Um we are also
working on a number of changes
through what is going to be
called turquoise care. That's
today are managed care program
for Medicaid is called
Centennial Care, But in July,
we'll be launching our new
turquoise care program and we've
been working on a number of
improvements. Um, and
expectations of our management.
Their partners.
It's really make sure that we
are doing a better job of
delivering care to kids and
families in particular, so I'm
effective July 1st. All pregnant
members are going to be
automatically enrolled in level
one care coordination. But this
means is that every pregnant
woman will be eligible for an in
home assessment. Obviously, they
provide the, um
Uh, authorization for that We
don't go to anyone's home who
doesn't want us there, But we do
offer that in home assessment
that also includes value added
services. In many cases are
managed care partners are
covering car seats and diapers
for families
to cover those costs of early
childhood care, offering
behavioral health services again
with home visiting and then also
addressing those social
determinants of health like food
transportation, housing, making
sure that families are really
safe.
Um, and that that includes that
level of care coordination
includes regular touchpoints
throughout the pregnancy with
that care coordinator
coordinator. We are also going
to be launching a fully
delegated care coordination
model for pre peri Needle
members. Um, that means that
their community based
organization who they may feel
more comfortable with rather
than the managed care company or
the provider.
Um, there are actual provider
can do that care coordination if
the mom prefers
Um, I also wanted to mention
that the Kara care coordinators
are now we're sort of launching
a new program pilot to put those
kara care coordinators in
hospitals there really boots on
the ground right now, um,
meeting with moms as they're
giving birth, making sure that
they are really providing that
kara support. Um, and
navigation.
And we are also going to be
ensuring that hospitals can be
reimbursed for that plan of
care. So we're seeking federal
approval for that, but making
sure that we're paying hospitals
and tracking that plan of care
assessment? Um and then every
managed care organization will
be required to contact every
single pregnant member within
two months of a positive
pregnancy test.
To make sure that they're
getting the services they need.
And then I wanted to remind the
committee and thank you for the
legislative support to provide
12 months of postpartum
coverage. We launched that in
April of 2022 been very
successful in keeping Mom's
covered through that first year
postpartum so they can get the
services they need. And lastly,
I do want to just mention a
couple more things. Um, I wanted
to make a pitch for our budget
we have in our executive request
the additional support to go up
to 150.
Percent of Medicare for maternal
and child health services
through the Medicaid
reimbursement system. Really,
um, want to advocate for that
support so that we can build out
our provider network and access
to care here in New Mexico?
And I want to thank the
legislative for its support of
adding doulas and lactation
consultants to the benefit
package as well as offering
human donor milk through the
Medicaid program. And then
lastly, I just wanted to mention
that food is a major indicator
of food. Security is a very
important indicator of
childhood. Well being. We will
be launching this summer MBT
program, which provides
groceries to Children, low
income Children during the
summer months when they're not
able to get those free meals
through school.
Um and I also wanted to call
your attention to our
performance on prenatal care. So
on the in the table on the
right, you can see that our
prenatal care performance about
79.8% of women are getting those
prenatal care visits in the
Medicaid program today. Um, that
is below the national average,
but it is pretty closely aligned
with the regional average.
Um and we definitely know we
have work to do so we have a
number of initiatives,
incentives and, uh,
Incentives and delivery system
expectations of our co partners
in the delivery of management of
prenatal care that all all rest,
Madam Chair next slide.
In this life. We're done with
the slides. Yes. Thank you very
much. Alrighty. Um, I want to
thank each and every one of you
for your work and your
presentations here trying to be
as transparent and as clear as
possible for us. Thank you so
much. Considering your load and
and the type of work that you
have to do, and so on. No, that
I appreciate it very much.
In your staffs. Of course we
wouldn't do it without you.
Thanks to everyone, And now
we're gonna move on to Senator
Diamond. Brantly. You have some
questions? Thank you, Madam
Chairman. Thank you guys for
presenting Secretary Alan very
quickly on your on your side.
You mentioned the value of
school based health centers.
What they bring it looks like
we've had over 41,000 visits
offline. Could you send me some
Additional information. How
many how many students
throughout the region or
service. What kind of services
are provided, Especially in
areas where there's many areas
where we have a rule belt based
health center, and it is the
only health center and I'll give
you two Twitter consequences,
For example, that provides any
services for young people. Could
you kind of? I think I visited
with you last year.
But if you could get me some
additional information over the
last year on the value of the
school based health centers are
bringing to New Mexico.
And then Secretary Cassano's. I
had a several questions as we go
in. We know that C y f D reform
and addressing
You know how we come in and care
for our most vulnerable Children
that are already under state
control, how we come in and kind
of address this crisis.
We know that the governor
created the policy Advisory
Council last year in February.
The intention of that was to
create this policy advisory
council that would then bring
recommendations to the
legislator to address policy.
That's now about a year.
A year ago, which that executive
order was was mandated. When can
we expect to see a plan or
recommendations from that
council?
Madam Chair, Senator Bradley.
Um, that council has been mostly
focusing on kind of the
reorganization we meet monthly.
There's been a couple of months
that we've rescheduled, Um
But it hasn't really been
focused on specific issues more
on the reorganization and a
report out to say here's kind of
what we're working on in the
direction that we're going.
We're looking at redefining what
their roles are and creating
subcommittees to be focused on
specific areas such as you Know,
office days or child well being,
or, um, different issues that
we're facing with. That's the
way of D so that they can put
together subcommittees.
That would have individuals from
the communities to, um, discuss
specific concerns in their
community and come back with
solutions. So to date right now,
they have had some separate
meetings to address issues, but
nothing that would put together
a comprehensive report on advice
or suggestions that they have
for changing that. So, as I
said, we were down to members,
we've just appointed one more.
We're vetting the third of the
second.
Um and then we're going to break
out into subcommittees. And I
would say probably within the
next quarter will have a report
with recommendations that we
will be ready to present to this
body. Thank you, madam chair to
clarify. That's his seven. I
think by executive order that
was the seven person board how
many people are sitting on it
Right now? There are five. We've
just We're in the process of
appointing the sixth and vetting
the seventh.
Okay. So in one year, a policy
advisory council that was
mandated by executive order to
come in and address the crisis.
This is now going into the
second legislative session has
not produced a report to
legislators to address policy
and has been over a year not
even appointed the board, which
seems quite concerning Madam
Chair, Senator Bradley, We did
have a full board. Um
Justice vehicle resigned in
October. I believe October
timeframe. Um and we have this
sense appointed the person that
was sitting on that, um, seat
and we're looking for the last
member. Yes, but there was
somebody in it. They just have
resigned. We did have a full
board at once. I was actually
unaware that that board wasn't
fully functioning. I was just
waiting for the report. So
actually an update that we don't
even have leadership on that
board is even more concerning
than than I initially thought. I
were still as legislators
waiting for
Report, obviously, from advice
from a policy council and what
sort of policy needs to be
adopted. We are pressed for
time, but of course we want to
talk about Keira briefly on your
slide. You did mention that
you'd be mandating screening.
But I guess my question then
because charas is such a racket
is And then what are you
suggesting then? Because we know
that Kira is a voluntary program
and lfc In the interim. They
reported to us that in fact,
over 43% of of mothers who are
sent home on a program care
program didn't even know they
were on a care program. I think
that we've had so many
discussions over the interim
that a baby that is born drug
and substance exposed at birth
is our first red flag for us to
come in and intervene, and yet
it is completely
Elective When you say you're a
mandating screenings is the
agency also
Asking for policy from this
legislator to require
Require mandate a carer program
for drug exposed babies.
Madam Chair, Senator Bradley. We
are not asking that it be
mandated for a voluntary program
the way the legislation is set
up. Currently, it is a voluntary
program. However, the federal
guidelines allow that they shall
engage in a care of plan. So we
are taking that language. We're
hopeful that we can get a
universal screening. We're
working with Department of
Health.
To determine if, in fact that is
a screening that we can require
of all infants born in the state
of Mexico, regardless of if it's
in a hospital or other
circumstances, um
Adapt point. We are using the
language shall to say that they
shall engage in a plan of care
that will be handled by our
navigators in our family
Services department under Keira
to engage with them at the
hospital or other location where
the child is born to actually
complete care of plants were
changing What that looks like,
because currently
They can engage in services that
you know, I think there are 14
different services that they can
engage in. One of them is they
can just elect to receive
services such as you know, in,
um, information on early
childhood or information on WIC
benefits or snap benefits were
making those they can ask for
those benefits. But that will
not be part of their care of
planet actually has to be
something substantive address
the issue or the concern that we
have with the substance exposed
infant. Thank you. My
HM? Chairman And I think the
pushback isn't on the plant
legislators if he's as you've
heard all interim supported of
the Cara program itself.
What's happening is because it's
voluntary. It's not being used,
especially to the babies that
are most in need. Not only not
only would that allow when we
mandate that this plan be
implemented, but it also
provides services outside
services to make sure that food
insecurity, housing insecurity.
It is our first opportunity to
come in and follow to make sure
not just the baby, but the
family are getting the resources
that they need. That is clearly
a failing program.
It's concerning that then you
want to see why FD to take over
it now you mentioned and it's
throughout the slides quite
often. In here. You mentioned
the navigator, the carrot
navigators. It's clear that
between all three departments
what we've been presented
through lfc and in some of it's
just a basic online search of
open positions.
Between three agencies. You only
have one employed Karen
Navigator. Can you confirm that?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Bradley
at C Y F D. Yes, that is
accurate. Um, none of the work
prior to an investigation was
conducted at C Y f D. So when
Keira Information entered into
our department, it was through
an investigation and it was
handled through our protective
services department. This model
that we're looking at changes
that to actually hire navigators
that do the outreach um, and
that are more preventative and
intervention work, as opposed to
how it was currently set up.
Um, where we are just doing
investigations of individuals
who have been reported in
through sky. Okay, So, Madam
chair you're asking for C Y f D
then to house all of those
navigators right now you have
one.
It also looks like from a scan
of just open positions that's
available online and see why F D
has had that navigator, the
supervisor position vacant for
over 16 months and I'm only
making these points because you
haven't filled the positions
that you have within Keira. We
understand that there's a crisis
going in, you're going to have
to make up much greater sales
pitches. Why the legislator
would then take the entire
program and turn it over to see
why FD when they haven't
Properly implemented the
program.
And your authority to do so now.
Madam Chair, Senator Bradley. I
appreciate that feedback. Um, I
don't know that. I mean, we are
moving forward on, um, hiring
positions. We did get approval
through HST to use some of our
10 the 10 of funding temporarily
to fill positions for Kara.
Those have been now posted
supervisor. Positions have been
posted and we received a list in
are conducting interviews to
start filling those posts. Those
positions could I add a little
bit of that, Madam chair,
Senator, I think I think we've
kind of all been taught.
Housing around the phrase care
program.
A little bit a little bit
loosely, and I think part of
what we have found and what the
LFC report confirms is that
there have been a collection of
Keira activities across a
variety of agencies, and we've
worked to try to coordinate
those, but what they're really
hasn't been as a program with an
agency responsible for that
program and with the resources
to be able to administer it, and
I think that's what's in the
governor's legislative proposal
is to assign responsibility for
the program.
To see why Fdn incorporated as
part of the creation of their
family supports bureau and
provide resources to actually do
that. We've been trying to
cobble together resources across
different agencies to do that
work and and you know, we agree
with you that that that's been
that that that's not been
successful and that what we
really need is the ability to
have a program in a way that we
have not so far.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think the point of the
legislators, though, is that
there was legislation that was
championed by Senator Gay Kernan
last year, the regardless of
what the program offers is that
it's not mandatory and that the
people who need it most,
Regardless of whatever we invest
in this program, it's still a
voluntary
Program.
And it's not getting out to the
people who it shouldn't be
voluntary to mandatory. You've
had a drug addicted baby, and
now the state government's going
to come in to do their part to
make sure that that baby is safe
once it leaves the hospital. And
so there's legislation that was
championed by gay Kernan last
year that passed with unanimous
support of the Senate.
There's a mirror legislation
that's been introduced this year
on both sides of the aisle,
hoping that the governor would
give a call, not because it
matters where the program it is
or what services is because it's
still remains a voluntary
position, and it's not being
implemented by the mothers for
the babies that need it most,
and that needs to be done
through statute. We have an
opportunity in this 30 Day
session to make that happen so
that we don't have one more
further year.
Of that program and not being
implemented by my families that
need it. Most.
You know another another, Uh,
suggestion is legislative
session. The most talked about C
Y f D reform is actually a
constitutional amendment. That
is, uh, proposed by Senator RTZ
Pinot.
His quote when he introduced
that was only a serious
rethinking of accountability and
transport transparency. It's C Y
F D is capable of pulling the
department out of this tailspin.
That proposal was actually
endorsed by C. C. J Committee in
the last interim and been talked
about throughout the interim.
That is a very aggressive change
in leadership is to remove that
out to provide really some
oversight. But the reality is
the only oversight of C Y F D is
ultimately this committee.
That's it.
There were there were other
proposals that have been
introduced in champion to the
past in which we put we produce
oversight committee that existed
elsewhere, the A G said he'd
take it. There was a number of
different suggestions on how we
come in, and we provide
oversight or broken agency not
to push the blame because the
reality is Madam secretary. You
inherited this mess.
And and to be very clear. So did
the governor.
It has been exacerbated, but
this is a mess that continues to
get to go ignored when we
propose outside Oversight
council this is this
constitutional amendment is
drastic. And yet the agency and
the executive didn't support any
sort of oversight suggestions in
any other fashion. And so I
think that's why this legislator
is getting desperate and saying
C Y F D you cannot fix yourself.
You and the governor not
supportive in the legislator,
creating oversight councils, and
at this point we're going to
have to take the issue to the
voters of New Mexico.
Just step in. That's drastic.
That's a drastic suggestion.
This come forward.
I would I would ask you then.
It's not that you don't support
that. And I assume you don't
because we didn't support
oversight.
Proposals in the past.
What legislation
From the agency. Have you
proposed in the ascent in the
interim? What specific fields is
the agency running? Madam Chair,
Senator Bradley. The agency is
not proposing any bills this
legislative session and you
know, I'm not opposed to
oversight. I think I've said
that on many occasions. I do
believe the agency does have
oversight at this point in time
that is external and is outside
of this governing body.
Um, you know, we do get federal
reviews consistently throughout
the year by our federal partners
to look at what we're doing.
There is the Substitute Care
Advisory Council whose sole
mission is oversight and working
with C Y F D to identify and
help to fix problems within the
agency. We have the Kevin s
settlement where we have co
neutrals that are reviewing the
work that is done at C Y F, D
and H S D on an ongoing basis,
We have an all parties meeting
this afternoon.
Noon to discuss progress, and so
That oversight continues. Um,
constantly, Um, they write
reports. They share those
reports. They give
recommendations. We report out
to them on how we're doing, And
there's data to show you know
the progress that we're making.
The LFC comes in and does their
report card and looks at the
progress that we're making, and
that report is submitted to this
body.
So I don't believe that there is
not oversight of C Y F D, um it
may not be the oversight that
we're looking for, but you know
that can be amended through what
we do through Substitute care
Advisory Council, um, whose role
that is.
But we've been open and as
transparent as we possibly can.
There is nothing in the
transformation of this agency
that we are trying to exclude
from any person. If at any point
in time, I'm happy to sit down
and have a conversation about.
You know what we're doing. What
our challenges are because there
are challenges. Definitely in
the work that we do every day
for me for my leadership team
and for the staff that are
trying to
To carry out the mission of this
agency. So, um, like I said, I'm
not opposed to transparency. I
just have asked the governor
that this legislative session if
we can refrain from submitting
legislation to give us an
opportunity to truly determine
what is needed at that agency,
much of the work that we do can
be done through policy or
through rulemaking through
holding our staff accountable.
It's not work that has to be, um
done through legislation.
And let's get the agency to a
point where we know exactly what
we need to fix it and how we
need to function and if
something then needs to be
codified through legislation.
I'm happy to have those
conversations in the interim so
that we can do that. I don't
want to do look at this and
approach it the same way we do
in the reactionary fashion of
how we're running. C Y F D right
now. I think it needs to be very
focused. Very thought out and
look at what we can fix right
now. Without that legislation,
Um and get that fixed, Collect.
Actively and I welcome the input
of any individual who has
insight to share.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
that when we say there is
necessary legislation, we were
just talking about Karen, and
it's still a voluntary position
so that the families and the
babies that need it most. It's
going to take legislation to fix
that. You mentioned the Kevin s
lawsuit and attorneys on both
sides of that lawsuit will tell
you the state continues to
violate the rulings of that
lawsuit daily. We're still not
abiding by what came out of
that. Kevin s lawsuit.
Um and then to go back and say,
Well, we have policy advisory
councils. We just started this
conversation with an update that
in a year we don't have a
report. We don't even have a
full board.
It's it's a dysfunctional from
start to finish and the
solutions that are proposed, are
have had a history of failing
these Children again. The
governor's laid out her
priorities for public safety,
and a lot of those are gun bills
proposed.
You know what would require a
call from the governor to
address during a 30 Day session
because it's such a crisis. I
want to point out to new
Mexicans that more Children have
died in the last year under C Y
F D Care Care why F D oversight.
More Children have died under C
Y F D that have died by gun
violence.
And we're willing to address
Gun bills, But we continue to
say that we to to accept from an
agency that you don't have one
proposed bill to kick the can
From the last 60 Day session for
another 60. It would take us two
years then to come back for a
policy legislative session to
address some of this new
Mexicans or intolerant of this.
I hope you understand the
frustration from legislators in
the last year.
That there have been no
No suggestions from C Y F D on
how to fix it, and so so this is
why we have constitutional
amendments and proposals that
are drastic is because we cannot
trust the agency to to fix
itself and again. I want to
close with this. That is not a
reflection on you, Madam
Secretary. This is a failing
agency that if there were anyone
who could come in and fix it, I
honestly believed it could be
you. It is an unfixable agency.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Teresa. Did
you briefly want to respond to
that? So? Yes, I do just
briefly, so I would love to sit
down and have that conversation
because this is the second time
that I've heard that more babies
have died in C Y f d care or
custody than we've had. On
average. I went back and looked
at those numbers. And in the
last calendar year we had two so
I'd love to sit down and have
that conversation of how we're
calculating that number And what
that looks like, Um, I know that
we've had many deaths of, you
know infants over the last year,
a large majority of those
Due to safe sleep issues, which
is not anything that we ever
talked about as being a crisis.
More individuals die from safe
sleep than they do from being
drug exposed. And so I think you
know when we're really looking
at the causes and trying to
figure out how we address it, we
really need to know what that
situation is in those numbers,
So I'd love Senator Bentley to
sit down and discuss with you.
Um you know where those numbers
are that you're coming from, And
with that concern is discussed
with you. Your president
proposed legislation so that
more Children don't die in the
interim. Thank you. Thank you
very much for that. And if I may
interject for just a minute to
To indicate that you do have the
discussion here has
His circled around no
legislation, but I think you do
have the family services
Division. Its legislation you're
trying to get across to be able
to establish the division kind
of combined as much as you can
to to be able to track things
better to coordinate and
streamline services better, and
so there are several pieces of
legislation that we can call
legislation because when you
come to request funding
Um, that can be, you know
legislation and your division
that you're looking about.
You're looking at now that we
talked about and so on, but I
know that we can continue to
talk about this for all day and
night if we if we had time, but
I'm gonna move on to Senator
Woods, who has been waiting
patiently. Thank you, Senator.
You can proceed.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um
You know, we're the budget
committee.
And our Finance committee.
So I'm gonna talk a little bit
about finance.
Because
Some of you guys are overgrown
your bank accounts pretty bad.
Any concerns me, but I never
know in this complicated thing.
How much is federal funds that
are about to be
Returned or such things, so I'm
I'm be happy if you couldn't
light me. Let's start with early
childhood. First. It shows, uh
Child care payments.
Having overdraft about $16
million
In November.
23
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Woods.
I, um
Okay. It's a cold deal to you,
and I understand that hearing
with you on Monday, though, um
so we can Okay for you on
Monday. I might know someone is
taking notes somewhere. Yes. So
Under early childhood.
We got federal
Child cure food, which is
overdrawn 13 million. We've got
Private pre k overdrawn by $19
million.
We've got public pre clay that
is overdrawn. A $38 million
So it's it's it's concerning
When this happens and I see it.
I never know how much better
money is fixing to come back in.
And so these May zero out, they
may do a lot of things. I try to
check against the budget that
you're requesting from the
executive budget and it it truly
The increases your asking, Don't
cover what's outstanding.
So
Next. Let's go to the Department
of Health.
The Department of Health General
Operating Fund is overdraft by
100 and 34,000,576. And again I
never know how much federal
money is yet to come in to fill
this, but this was as of
November
23
So
Any comments or if not, if it's
too cold will will pass on it.
Senator, if I may interject for
just a moment so we can make
sure we get the answers to each
one of your questions, and we
don't slip by some of those
things. Secretary Ellen, Would
you like to respond to that
briefly? Can we make the
responses brief? If you can,
please thank you, and we'll make
our questions. More ability.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator.
I'm I'm not familiar with
exactly what number you're
looking at.
I can be prepared again. We also
have our hearing with you next
week, and I can be prepared to
that hearing to be able to speak
to that. Okay, Just just so you
know, it's fun number.
0610
Yeah. I don't get the same book.
You do so I will will need to
make sure that we're talking
about the same number but will
prepare for that understood.
Uh huh.
Ahead.
Somewhere. I had another one.
But you see how it's it's
concerning.
When we don't get the full
picture sometimes, and I
apologize for putting you guys
on the spot like that.
But we go over here to the, uh
People that look and see if how
well you're doing your job.
And and and we see a few of the
Red figures.
Uh, as a rating.
Um
Early childhood.
On the home visiting program.
Word showed only 7% of the
families completed the program.
You know, it's very concerning,
if if we're going to fund the
program
It's concerning.
It sounds like we start
something and nothing happens
and
Uh, I know that some of that
stuff is out of your hands.
Um
I noticed that
We're going to
Uh,
For childcare assistance.
eligibility income. We're going
to increase
To a 400% federal poverty level
level.
And all.
Cool payments will be waived.
And if you want to comment on
that, Madam secretary, the
question I guess would be
Ah!
We have considerable increases.
Of those enrolled. How? How
successful. Do you think the
Childcare Assistant Income
eligibility program. Yes.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods. It
is very successful and the
reason that we know that is that
in New Mexico, we have a 10%
higher maternal labor force
participation than the national
average. And that's because more
women can afford to go to work
because we're helping pay for
their child care. We also know
that for many single parents
without access to that child
care, their ability to either go
to school.
Go to work and improve the
overall well being of their
family is significantly limited.
So I think we can all feel very
good about the investments that
both the Legislature have made
and the federal government has
made and 70% of the voters of
New Mexico said We need to
increase investments in early
childhood, and so I think we
have public and Prem
legislative. We're really in a
good place because we're aligned
on investments in early
childhood in Madam Secretary, if
you would I don't mean to cut
you off.
Madam chair does get tested
times so
Can you tell me?
What would be 400%.
Federal poverty level for a
family of four.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods that
would be around 120,000
annually gross income.
See why f d, uh, have a couple
of questions there.
We have quite a few red bullets
here.
And I know we have a well just
take for one.
Ah!
The turnover rate for youth care
specialist.
We have
Very high turnover rate it says
42%.
How much training do we put into
these? I'm told constantly like
a schoolteacher that we need
more training before they go
into the classroom. Uh, they
think that they they knew more
about what the job is going to
get into. They would stay long.
Is it the same case here?
Or what is the particulars on
that turnover rate, Madam Chair
Senator Woods. We do have a very
high turnover rate. We're
evaluating the training that we
do. The training is significant.
It's six weeks of new employee
training when they come on
board. Um we're really looking
at whether or not those
individuals should do some on
the job training before they go
to the new employee training so
that they have an actual, um
Idea. They have a mentor that
they're working with. To see
exactly what that is, so that
when they go to new employee
training, it's more relevant and
they have a better understanding
of what that entails. Because
we're not seeing, um we are
seeing quite a few employees
leave very early on in the
department, and that's
concerning to us. And so it's
something that we are
addressing.
Okay, well, I know it's hard.
It's hard to keep people
employed by the state.
Especially some jobs.
And that's why I wonder
sometimes if we wouldn't be
better off
To try to go to the private
sector on more and more things.
Uh and I know
Hammer you guys all time when
your contractors
Hmm. What the heck you
contractors are doing what
you're doing, Uh, what those
different
Because I want to know.
If they're doing a better job.
For you. Then your then your
own. Uh, you can't employ employ
enough people to do the work.
So our contractors is necessary.
I understand that, but I would
like very much.
Um
To have
A list of contractors on a thumb
drive.
So that
Maybe I can kinda sort of thing.
Uh, I've got a I've got a
gentleman.
Uh, from Los Alamos. That told
me that he could help me kind of
sort All this stuff out because,
as you know, I get the vast for
these contractors before.
I get her papers like that.
Enough. Get my kids or tail of
it. Uh, you respond to me Great.
But I can't figure it out.
Mr Chairman, Senator Woods. We'd
be happy to provide that. And if
we could, um, receive a copy of
the report if he can help you
sort through all of those
contractors. I would love to see
that as well. Um, it's part of
what we've done in streamlining
our administrative services
division, so we are having an
opportunity to have a better
look of all of the contracts
that reside within C Y F D. I
could ask each one of sorry to
cut you off.
Mr Chair if I could ask for the
contractors on a C s V fall.
Almost some dry.
I would appreciate it.
Uh, I'm not gonna take any more
time. Madam Chair, the
Department of Health has got a
considerable
Number of red bullets.
But is is alarming also, but
I've had my turn. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Yes.
Thank you, Senator Woods one
more on the list. And that is
Senator Stein born and then I
just have a quick question. I
don't have anyone else.
Secretary designate. Um I just
want to make a comment just kind
of an editorial comment on the
idea that we always need a piece
of legislation to fix an issue.
You know, and my 15th Europe
here.
What you come to find is what
you really need is leadership
leadership to fix issues. Um,
bills bills don't
Bills sometimes can be a
convenient
Thing that you think will fix an
issue or to try to force
somebody who's not doing an
effective job to fix an issue,
but in reality
If you have
Results oriented leaders who are
fixated and determine and settle
for no less than success to
solve a problem.
That solves problems, and we as
a legislature certainly have to
fund it and be a partner. We are
a partner, in fact, the LFC and
helping to identify
What are those? Um, benchmarks.
We also need to be managing
performance, too. But, um, in
this particular case, it's it's
uh, you know, I've heard
multiple presentations from you.
Secretary designate.
I think you're bringing a tour
de force which is needed, um
And, uh, it's a little
refreshing and you know, we
always try to hit the reset
button and be helpful.
But, um, I'm not sure you know
the ideas I've heard about from
constitutional amendments. I
think, in fact would be another
type of kick the can. In a way.
Um
But in fact it it's just it's
hollow without leadership. So so
we need you to definitely
Demand and strive for those
results and and be as granular
as you need to be in your your
ship to
Fight for that for our kids. So
anyway, that's all. I just
wanted to make a little comment
because I fight the same battles
and other areas of state
government and, uh, you can pass
bills all day long. Sometimes
they don't get followed.
Sometimes you have ineffectively
ders to say, Well, I can't do
this because I don't have a
statute. You try to find a
statute and then they fight you
on that, So it's just it's a
circular. Ah thing. It feels
like you're beating your head
against the wall. All comes down
to leadership. So I wish you
well.
And I think hopefully you're on
the right path and challenged
Senator Simon. Thank you. Thank
you, Manager,
Senator Bert.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I will
try and be very, uh to a F d
Madam Secretary. Um
Your agency. Uh, you know you're
you
I have many, many problems.
And they're complicated and
I think all of us up here. In
fact, everybody and Legislature
wish you all the best and we'll
keep you in our prayers because
you have a real challenge ahead
of you.
But that said, um and and this
comes from
Want to hear my area and from
constituents and so and so
forth.
Um, home, visiting and and
having enough people to do that.
We always seem. What I hear is
we're always behind me never
have enough people to get into
homes. We, uh So with your
staffing, and I know we're
talking a bit about turnover and
and all of that, um
How
What? What do you need to do to
hire enough people to to get to
a level of, uh, visitation and
identification of problems so
that we don't run into child? Uh
Child being harmed in any way,
shape or form means a touchy
subject and it's it's hard to
address but can you just don't?
I don't need down in the weeds,
but I need to sneak. Can you
give me a kind of a thumbnail
sketch of what your plan is to
really meet that need? Because I
think bottom line is that's
where the rubber meets the road
is getting people who know how
to deal with these issues in the
home.
To work on these issues. Um,
Madam Chair, Senator Bert,
You're right. It is. I mean,
it's a really difficult area to
fill. Um, you know, we have a
rapid higher going on today in
Roswell. We're hoping to fill
the nine vacant positions that
we have there. Um, but, you
know, I took my leadership team
on the road the week the first
week of January, we visited
several of our offices. I
believe nine of them.
Um across the state, you know,
from farming tonight through
Roswell down to Las Cruces and
back, Um, we heard consistently
from staff members that it's
difficult for them even to try
to recruit because nobody wants
those jobs. They take them.
They're incredibly difficult
Jobs. Um, we are desperate for
people to come on board and I
think we
Rushed to give them work that
they're not yet suited to take
on and it becomes overwhelming
for them, and they don't stay
often. So we're really looking
at changing what our training is
like for retention of staff. Um,
but we also really need to work
on what that images in the
media. I think there's a lot of
conversation that happens. Um,
that is one sided and not
necessarily accurate.
And trying to constantly defend
that is very difficult, but it's
also difficult for the staff
that are doing those jobs
because in their community when
the newspaper and the radio and
the TV and the public or all
seen what a horrible job they
do, we have staff that say, We
never say we work for 50.
And that's just unfair for them.
I mean, I signed up for this to
be up here and take those hard
questions in the media hits,
They don't and it's It's really
a difficult thing for us to try
to recruit into the agency,
While all that outside chatter
is happening, and so we're
really working on, you know,
transparency. So when something
happens, we say something
happens.
When something in his inaccurate
we're working on correcting that
inaccuracy and hopefully we can
start to build that in the
communities, um, so that people
are not embarrassed or afraid to
actually take on responsibility
as C Y F D.
And Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary, I. I appreciate that.
I think it is and I think this
goes back to things like
reporting. I mean, the last
thing you want to do it, you're
trying to accomplish a job that
you have steep hill decline
and we're asking for
justification and reporting on
how you're progressing and
what's going on. But I do think
that that reporting is very
important because it can be
turned into
Um, hopefully glimmers of hope
in certain areas that we can
report to the public to better
your particular situation. So I
think, um and being able to
inform us and being able to
report those statistics, good or
bad is only going to help you as
you go down the road.
Um so I would hope that you
would take that seriously and
and move forward on that and I
will move on. I got one quick
question. Um, Secretary Alan
rule. Um, Doctor, we have a
problem with docks all over the
state hiring docks. We have
people doctor retiring. Um, and
what I hear a lot of is the time
it takes to credential a doctor
in the state.
Um, can you give me an idea how
long it takes
To get credentials for a doctor
coming out of the state.
And number two. Is there any way
to expedite that process?
Thanks, Madam Chair, Senator.
Actually, the Department of
Health doesn't doesn't do any of
that. Any of that work that's
through the the Medical
Licensing board and the and R l
D. We're happy to get you some
information about. You know what
that turnaround time? Looks
like but but we don't do the
credentialing of healthcare
professionals in the state.
Alright, but I just didn't know
if you had input into that, or
or there was some involvement in
that whatsoever that the need
for doctors all over the state.
No is is quite frankly
desperate, not just
You know it's a need. It's it's
quite desperate and anything
that we can do from the eight
DHS or any agency to expedite.
this would be greatly
appreciated home a want to
manage Speaker Mr Terror Senator
Bert Just a little bit of
feedback. We do hear this a lot
from providers just that
administrative burden we are
working on addressing
That through the Medicaid
program, we are going to have a
single credentialing. So today,
each managed care organization
has a separate credentialing
process. That is very
frustrating, frustrating for
providers. We are moving towards
a single credentialing, so they
will all be using that
uniformity will provide you with
some time frames in terms of the
credentialing process, But I
believe on average about 90 to
120 days.
So we'll provide you with that
data, at least for the Medicaid
program. Mr. Chair. Appreciate
that very much is
Is 1920 days average for most
states, or do we take a little
bit longer than other states? Or
can you give me a some kind of
perspective on that Mr Chair,
Senator Byrd. I can't answer
that question about look into it
and see if we can pull some of
that data would appreciate that.
Anything we can do to expedite
that.
I think if it's like most most
categories, anyone who is
licensed professional coming to
the state that has a good
reputation from where they're
coming from, certainly ought to
be able to move that forward in
some way, shape or form. So
anything that we gonna can be
done would be appreciated. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Um, we gotta be
somewhere at 1030 so center
Hemphill and
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'll just
be really brief. Thank you all
for your leadership really
important positions protecting
the health and well being of our
families and Children here in
New Mexico and your
responsiveness. You all have
been very responsive When I've
reached out to you and secretary
designee, designee, get those.
Um, thank you for working with
me on some legislation, whether
it goes anywhere this session or
not, I just for the record just
wanted to
Say that you're
Work with me and your
willingness to listen has been
really helpful, and I'll be
introducing some legislation.
First of all, to provide funding
for trauma, informed training
for every staff member in C Y F
D and Foster families as well.
And, um
Uh, plan for recruiting and
supporting foster families and
showing just highlighting the
important work that they're
doing and making sure they have
to support and resources they
need.
And then well being support for
the staff to I know it's a very
difficult job, too.
Address these really terrible
situations that we've had across
the state and I want to make
sure that the staff and
employees there at C Y F D you
have somebody who they can
debrief with, but also just
taking the time throughout their
week whether it's an hour where
they can go and
For a walk or go and work out or
do some meditation where we
really recognize that these are
human beings dealing with really
traumatic situations, and we're
all susceptible to that. So
thank you for your willingness
to provide that support to your
staff and, um, work with me on
on those issues. Um, just one
quick question. What is the
screening tool used for the the
infants. Um, during if there
If you suspect that they've been
born exposed to some substance
do you have like an evidence
based screening tool?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator him
feel there is a tool that is
currently used at the hospital.
C Y F D does not do the
screening for the infants. And
so, um, I think that Secretary
Alan is better prepared to speak
to what? That tool is a little
bit. Yes, Mr Chair, Senator,
There is a standardized
screening tool that's used and
we can share that tool with the
committee. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Just to go to that point center
him pill. Remember that that
with there's nobody reports
those Children
Two d O H, though, because there
is no reporting once that child
screen by the doctor, the
hospital this goes to how do we
capture those? We heard this
during the lfc that you know,
Every child is not
The O. H is not notified in that
there's a gap between who is
notified and not notified.
Cambodia your next real quick,
Mr Chair if I could just jump in
on that, I think we may be
talking about two somewhat
different things. There's
participation in the car program
and plans of care and follow
through on the plans of care
that's completely separate than
reporting kids at risk into the
portal. And that can that
happens.
Regardless of what's happening
on the on the car side, or it
should be happening regardless
of what's happening on the car
side, and I think in the main it
is it is happening and and those
reports happen. C o f D gets
those reports follows up on them
as appropriate. So those are two
somewhat different, somewhat
different things, but not at
birth.
Yes, at birth.
Well, that's I don't think our
LFC report recognized that or
something. So there is some
disconnect Look at the LFC
staffers to see if I'm right or
wrong, but we're trying to
enter. Russia will figure that
out center Padilla
Thank you Chair. I'll just be
super quick, and it was along
the lines of what you just
commented on with Secretary Alan
Cumming. There. There are two
things going on there. So I just
want to you know, those are two
very different things. In my
opinion, At least I just want to
thank Secretary Designate
Cassano's and and really the
four of you for Chip, Mr
Chairman.
I think that these departments
have all talk to each other. But
you've been running so fast and
trying to build planes while
you're flying them in this and
that, So thank you for spending
that much, You know, energy to
put all this together and end to
end solution is exactly how
we're gonna catch Children that
could be falling through the net
And we've got to catch them and
also want to just, you know, a
compliment the secretary
designate on the team that she's
building
But I've had an opportunity to
talk to many of them now and get
to know them better. So please
keep doing that and do more of
it. So so I really, really do
appreciate that. And I don't
know if Marianna Perea is still
here.
In the room, but just also want
to complement the work that
she's doing to tie all of you
together. Please do more of
that. I think that's going to be
much better outcomes along the
way, so I didn't really have a
question other than that, that
first dialogue that was
happening there, But just want
to compliment you all for really
being interlocked on on what
you're up to. So thank you.
Thank you, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you. Mr Chairman and I
will be quick. I know we're
running out of time. Thank you
again for your presentations.
Just quickly. Carrie. I'm going
to go straight to you. How's
that is as we continue to
recognize the shortage and
provider shortage that we have
a new Mexico. Um, I couldn't
help but wonder for increasing
the provider rates or at least
requesting that they be
increased to 150% of the
Medicare rates to see last year
or the year before we increased
him to 120%. But we knew that
wasn't enough.
Wow.
And so we're trying to increase
them to 150% that being said, My
question is. How does this work
Because Medicare does not pay if
we're emulating those rates,
they don't always pay 100%. So
if they pay ever gonna is this
to increase them to the Medicare
rate that they pay, which could
be 80%, or is it 100% that you
have all the time? Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Mr Chair, Senator Rodriguez, So
Medicare does pay rate for those
maternal child health and
primary care codes. But part of
the strategy for that increase
up to 150% is a recognition that
those rates are low that does
maternal child health. That's
not really a Medicare
population, and so their rates
are not prioritizing that
population. And so that is one
of the reasons that we have
proposed going above that
Medicare rate. Um, where there
is not a mess.
Daycare equivalent code, those
codes would receive a uniform
percentage increase. So as you
know, and thank you for funding
that increase up to 120% that
was just implemented. We really
feel like we need to keep going
in order to really build up the
network because those rates are
Lower than what they what they
should be really. And so that's
where we landed on that 150%.
Yes, thank you. Thank you very
much for that. But let me get a
little more clarification in
this triggered when you
mentioned that the early
childhood is not the population
within explain that to me again
because it seems like it would
be an all comprehensive system
providers.
Um, impact everything else we
have. So what did you mean by
that? Tell me. Kerry Terror
Senator Rodriguez. Medicare
typically covers older adults,
And so there that population for
rate setting just isn't they
don't focus as much on network
adequacy for maternal child
health because that's not their
covered population. And thank
you for that. And yes, that's
certainly is the case. You know
you don't
Qualify for Medicare until
you're 65 as we know, but if
we're using the Medicare rates
to increase our provider rates,
and there's a correlation
between the two in the question
that I had was if medic if we're
using those rights, forget what
they're called Medicare for now,
Um, if we're using those rates,
is that going to be 100% of the
You said it was a uniform rates
So we're gonna we can know that
we can count on providers
getting 100% of the
150% rate that we're increasing
it too. Is that
My making myself clear. I think
so. Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez. I think what you're
asking is if the legislative
supports going up to that 150%
of Medicare. Will the providers
get that is that is my
understanding The question
correctly get the up to the 100%
of what? We're what we're, um
providing or we are proposing,
which would be if it's if they
get
Uh, whatever the amount would be
now we're going to increase it
to 150%. Are they going to get
the full 150% or up to 150%? Mr.
Chair, Senator Rodriguez. They
would get that 150% if that's a
code that is for maternal child
health, behavioral, health or
primary care. Other codes would
be set at that 100% of
threshold. But those are the
code specifically that we want
to take to 150 so it would be a
provider that's delivering those
kinds of services.
I will say about 70% of services
in the Medicaid program include
a primary care code, so those
office visits for specialists
include primary care code,
typically as part of the visit.
Um so you're really kind of
Also sort of achieving growth
for almost all providers in the
state. Thank you very much for
explaining that Kerry, that's
all I have. Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Um
You know, this is probably the
most important issues. We move
forward health care whether it's
Children or child. Well being
right. And how do we we started
early childhood education. So
how do we really grab ahold
right at birth, right?
I see. There's a in the
presentation reach SD. Uh mm.
Shells are contract every
pregnant member with two or
months with two within two
months of positive test in
tribal communities. You're not
gonna get that information
because that's an I H s hospital
and that might be the greatest
need of where they need to go in
Gallup. We don't have any
birthing sitting there, so I
mean grants would be your point
of contact and
So we're probably gonna have
this hearing and preparing you a
couple of times during the
session.
Because we move along. I mean,
we need to make sure you're not
smiling. They're not smiling in
in. See what See Why FD Nobody's
siloed as we reach out to these
kids, right or and from birth to
whatever age we need to have our
hands on them or have contact
with them. Um, I think that's
very important as we move
forward.
Um, we see that lfc reports and
center Woods made some comments
about H s D and in the red
Um
We just need you to know as a
legislature and Senator Stein
born may have it right to is, we
may not need any laws. We just
need you guys to do your job.
You know, And I think the press
for the C Y F D employees.
Yeah, and hopefully they're
listening.
That that you know, sometimes
employee is not the point of
contact or that that should not
be the
The new scene is employee.
Now if there's other problems
behind the scenes with
employees, that's up to the
secretary, and that's that's a
human resource services
condition that she should
handle. But as a state employee
They should not be placed in the
media in that predicament.
Okay in such a volatile arena.
Agree, because tempers and so my
messages oppresses, you know,
let the let the employees do
their job. They gotta go home at
night. They don't need to get
beat up in Walmart in the in the
grocery store and and and that
is they do their job because it
just turns them away from the
place where we really need them.
And so I just We don't have
enough time because the
committee has decided we're
going to do something together
And and so we'll probably gonna
hear you hear you guys back
again and think about that and
think about if there's places
where we can help you.
Our job is to help.
Hmm. And to help secretaries,
but
If we hear a silo in it, it's
gonna turn the light off. Switch
off and then we're going to be
really aggravated intent.
Thank you guys. Thank you for
presentation.
