Experts
The woods
Let's become a problem this
chair, would you mind if I
just glance at it a minute
before we vote on it. No, sir.
No issue. We're just, uh, you
wanna look at it.
You want to explain some of the
more of it.
If you could
mis chair and, and, and senator.
How does this change existing
law, I guess that's what I want
to know. If we're gonna change
existing law and you want me to
vote on it. How does it change
existing law as to what's going
on right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator
Woods, so in the juvenile, uh,
In the children's code, there's
a definition of youthful
offender.
Which means a delinquent child
could be subject to adult.
Sanctions or or juvenile or
harsher juvenile sanctions, we
added the crime of voluntary
manslaughter to that list. You
have to be convicted of these
crimes.
To, to get stiffer penalties
either in the children's system
or the adult system. So we added
the crime of voluntary
manslaughter. So under current
law, if you commit the crime of
voluntary manslaughter, you stay
strictly under the Children's
code with this bill, uh, you
could potentially
Get um moved to the the adult
system and so that's number 1.
Number 2 is the sentencing right
now judges are restricted.
The only, they only can sentence
A or B. A is 9 months jail, 90
days probation.
Or B 21 months jail, 90 days
probation, that's it.
What we do is we do up to 9
months up to 21 months with 6
months probation, so the judges
have a whole array of sentencing
options in front of them instead
of just A or B.
But more importantly, Mr.
Chairman, is the uh the access
to the fund.
What's currently called the
juvenile Community Corrections
grant fund.
The money's not being allocated
because it can only be used to
Uh, adjudicated delinquents,
those children that are found
guilty in the children's court.
But there's a lot of juveniles
that are arrested, referred,
diverted out, you know, you
don't need to convict him to.
Make him go to this, that or the
other program. So for, for the,
for the juveniles that do not go
to jail, they uh, they go to
this, that or the other program,
but the $5.5 million is not
being.
Spent because you have all this
youth that need services, but
only a handful of youth, uh,
are, are adjudicated
delinquents.
What I have a problem and you
saw it on the news just a couple
of days ago.
The juveniles are.
Essentially think all this is
It's just uh uh fun and games,
there's no, there's no.
Capacity in their head that
they're going to hurt someone or
kill someone or even if they do,
there's no capacity in their
head to think that there's a
punishment they deserve.
And so there's no deterrent, so
tell me how this is going to be
a deterrent. How are we going to
change the attitude out there,
Mr. Mr. Chair.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman
Senator Woods.
Well, voluntary manslaughter is
now potential adult system
crime. It'll put you in the
adult system.
More importantly, right now, if
a juvenile doesn't deserve 9
months jail, he gets 0.
This under this bill, a
delinquent could get 0 to 9
months. In other words, they can
do a month, 2 months, 3 months.
If, if a youth to say deserving
of a month jail.
Under today's law, he gets 0.
The choice is 0 or 9 months.
Now, if he deserves 6 or 7 or 8
months, then give them the 9.
But now the judge has the full
array just like an adult court
judge to sentence on any to
sentence them anywhere in
between.
So there is this ensures swift
and certain justice in the court
system as well as uh uh bring up
this money.
Uh, when they get put on
probation and you have to do
counseling or community service
or this, this, this or that or
the other.
This frees up the money so that
those nonprofits can
Can do their programs working
with you.
So
Under.
Under voluntary manslaughter.
They can be sentenced as an
adult, no matter what age they
are.
Mr.
Chairman Senator Woods
correct if under today's law if.
A child under the age of 18
commits the crime of voluntary
manslaughter, they will stay in
the children's system.
But under this wall, this
change.
They will go into the
Adult system.
Under voluntary, they will be
sentenced under the.
The
they would take them out of the
children's code, Mister, Mister
Chairman Senator was, well,
that's up to the local DA, but
yes, the answer is yes.
So the low even with this law,
the local DA would have options,
but he doesn't have to do that.
Why, why wouldn't, why would,
and I, I'm a nonlawyer. They no
use explaining that.
I'm trying my best to get this
in my head.
Because I am a.
non-attorney
And yeah.
The, the local police tell me
the juvenile crime.
Is the main contributor to our
future crime.
These young people start in a
life of crime if we don't.
Get a hold of them early.
And, and try to convince them
that
But this is not the life you
want to lead or, or, or
Have,
have some repercussion for their
actions.
That we can't change anything,
our, our society is just on a
downward spiral.
Do this.
So I'm trying to figure out.
What you're telling me is.
This is better than what we
have.
Mr. Turmanener was absolutely,
this, this is one of the better
pub public safety bills we have.
To answer your question as a
lawyer, I have to say it's up to
the DA.
Because it's always up to the
DA.
Even on a first degree murder,
it's always up to the DA, but
If I were to take my lawyer hat
off, the answer to your question
is yes, they will be in the
system.
Because like you, like you said,
why would a DA not do that?
But once again, per law under
all the crimes of children, it's
up to the DA.
But it, it says something about
CYFD in here also.
And so
I was under the impression that
under the juvenile code.
CYFD had a major play in the
sentencing or the determination
of, of the, of the crime, the
punishment for the crime.
Does this change anything there?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Woods. So when we think of CWFD,
we think of uh
We think of all the children
that are being cared for by the
department, but it has a second
component which is the juvenile
justice system.
So all of the probation
officers, the, the department
that seeks warrants, the
department that orders.
Uh, that works with the district
court, the department that um.
That deals with the sentencing
aspect of these young people,
uh, that's that's CYFD and that
frankly, that part of CFD
actually works pretty good, so
they, um, but the key is this
funding, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Woods, right now there's
over $5 million just sitting
there.
Because under current law, it
has to be used on adjudicated
delinquents under this bill, it
can be used on any young person.
We need to put that $5 million
in the community because number
one, this bill holds people
accountable on the front end.
But also creates more
Uh, proven, uh, programs that
work on, on the back. So this,
uh, Mr. Chair, this $5 million
will go to the program.
It's what it will go to
providers, what will the $5
million go to that you're
talking about. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, uh, Senator
Wood. So it goes to, we actually
put it in the bill. We actually
put the programming in the bill.
As to what the nonprofits need
to be doing to acquire the.
to acquire the money, and so
it's on page 20 Mr. Chairman.
At page 2, starting on line 11,
uh, Senator Woods.
That the grants from the fund
will be awarded to programs
focused on decreasing violence,
gun violence.
Alcohol and substance abuse,
gang activity, criminal
mentality, trauma, anger
management and improving mental
health.
In addition to education,
literacy, financial literacy,
job training, apprenticeships,
food.
Uh, food services and housing.
Uh
And then uh also programs uh
that deal in arts, performing
arts, music.
sports debate and leadership,
but the priority is, is those
programs that are proven to work
with, with youth uh to get them
out of a we're, we're going to
Are there providers out there,
Mr. chair? Are there providers
out there doing this work and
we're just not funding them
correct, Mr. Chairman Senator
was that would be my opinion.
There are some fantastic, uh
fantastic leaders out in the
community doing work with youth,
uh, they just need a little more
resources.
And we've got the 5 million
available with this repurposing
it. Exactly, Mr. Chamier was,
it's just sitting there. We're
doing a uh a, a definition
change which will allow the
money to thank you for your time
to explain this to me.
I understand it made just a
little better. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Centered to buy some your next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Senator. So did I hear you
right when you said you're gonna
drive these youth into more
programs like CYFD.
Is that
Mr. Tim
Tobias.
Not quite, not quite.
Uh, when a youth gets sentenced.
For a crime
They, uh, they can get
probation, they can get jail and
then probation. This bill
would extend probation from 90
days to 6 months. So any
anything the judge orders for
the youth to do in those days.
have to do it for those 6
months.
The money, however, of the
chairman Senator Tobias and the,
the money that's just sitting
there in the uh corrections fund
uh.
would go to the
would go to the nonprofits doing
this uh this violence and gun
violence and, and, and anti-gang
activity work.
OK, and Mr. Chair, Senator, is
this the same bill that I think
you just said that you were
changing the name of it for the
heck of it, for the fun of it.
Is this the one that had the
$2000 a month scholarship for
juveniles till they hit 26 or
27. Is this the same bill? Thank
you for asking that question,
Mr. Chairman Senator Tobiasson.
The bill as introduced.
That I signed on to.
Uh, and it was written by the
sentencing commission did not
have the stipends.
Uh, the house put the stipends
in the bill, section 12.
That section 12 was removed here
in the Senate. So this bill did
not start with stipends and
currently does not contain
stipends.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, but this
is that same bill and it had a
different name at some point if
you.
Unfortunately, yeah, this was
the same bill section 12 entered
the bill and Section 12 left the
bill, but it was never the
intent of the bill.
But it was
You know, as, as you know, every
single bill we present is uh
Is eligible for uh amendment or
substitution.
So Mr. Chair, I get worried when
I hear anyone say that they're
um going to point juveniles,
more juveniles towards CYFD
programs, um, CYFD taking care
of our children because quite
honestly, right now, there's a
lot of children that are not
being well served in our state
by CYFD. So
In here, I see CYFD.
Mentioned, I see there's a brief
analysis which I haven't had
time to read all of this, but
what additional work will CYFB
CYFD be doing if this bill
passes, and Mr. Chair, our
juveniles under CYFD's rules are
you a juvenile if you're between
the ages of 18 and 21.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Tobiasson, the last
question first, you are a child
if you're under 18.
You're an adult. If you're 18 or
older.
Um, that's, that's the law. So
there is no CYFD program.
Uh, CYFFD.
Is the department in charge of a
juvenile justice. You have the
courts.
Uh, if you're on probation
officer that deals with
juvenile, juvenile, uh,
juveniles, then you're an
employee of CYFD but it's not a
CYFD program. This is a fund.
That is not being utilized
because of the definition of
adjudicated delinquent, the
funds would go to proven, uh,
data-driven best practice
programs that are actually
working in the community.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I'm
gonna give you a, a
circumstance. There was, I
think, an 11 year old boy that
ran over a cyclist who was a
Sandia scientist. That's all
over the news currently. Um, so
that young man, if he gets
convicted,
By what you've explained is, is
he only going to serve 2 months
and then 90 days probation.
By what you've just explained to
Senator Woods.
That Mr. Chairman sent to buy
someone, that's, that's not in
the bill and even if it was, it
wouldn't, this bill wouldn't
affect that person cause you
can't do retroactive laws in,
in, in, in criminal law.
Um
But currently, if you are not in
the adult system.
Uh, the judge only has two
choices, that, you know, choice
A, 9 months jail, 3 months
probation or
Or B 21 months jail, 9 months
probation.
This bill will give the judge
full flexibility on 27 months.
Of jail and probation.
OK, Mr. Chair, so a juvenile 11
year old.
Um
Murder someone, gets convicted
right now, the only choice a
judge has is to give that child
either.
99 months or 20 months.
With 390 days probation either
way when they get out.
And then
During that 90 day probation
currently under law, that
juvenile because an 11 year old
in 20 months is not gonna be 18,
so that juvenile would then be
under probation for 90 days and
be ordered to do some specific
things during those 90 days. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Bai,
you're giving me like a.
It's not a hypothetical cause I
Heard something about that, but
uh if you want to talk about the
current juvenile system, we
could do that all day. Um, this
may improves the juvenile
justice system. This, this gives
more uh flexibility and
And strength to judges
discretion.
And uh
And makes a statutory fix to to
best utilize the uh.
The corrections granted fun.
Thank you, Senator, and Mr.
Chair, the reason why I'm asking
about current laws because I'm
not an attorney, I am not in law
enforcement. So this is new to
me and obviously this has just
been plunked in front of us. So
I'm asking specific questions so
I know where we're moving from,
right? So,
In this case, hypothetically, an
11 year old murders an adult.
And they get convicted.
The best we could hope for is 2
months in jail, 90 days
probation because the child's 11
years old or maybe they're 13
now. I don't know how old they,
this young man is
hypothetically, but with this
bill, then hypothetically,
That judge has a choice to give
that child less than 2 months or
less than 9 months. Is that
correct?
Thank you Mr. Chairman, uh,
Senator Tobiasson.
Nobody, when the Children's code
was written, I don't think
anybody contemplated an 11 year
old being involved in something
that horrific.
I don't believe any state in the
country uh throws 11 year olds
into the adult system.
You're in New Mexico, you can,
we can put 1516, and 17 year
olds into the adult system.
Or a 114 year old who's
convicted of first degree
murder.
Um
But judicial discretion is a
principle of criminal law that
That is been around for
centuries and this would give
the judge more tools in the
toolbox with regards to any
juvenile that's before that
judge.
Mr. Terry, just, I'm concerned,
um, because I don't know, I'm
not convinced that every judge
that we have here in the state
of New Mexico would look at a
situation with a juvenile who
was a murderer.
I believe in 2023 we had 63
people murdered by juveniles of
all different ages. I think the
youngest was 12.
So my concern is
Are we opening up a situation
instead of getting tougher in
the juvenile code, potentially
we're becoming more lax. Well,
if you, you know, threw some
paint on a wall, um, maybe you
don't deserve 9 months in jail
as a juvenile, and then there's
that flexibility, but the way
this is written and the way I'm
understanding it, Mr. Chair, is
that flexibility is a is offered
to this judge whether the 11
year old threw a
can of paint on a wall or ran
down a man on his bicycle
purposefully and videotaped it.
So I'm concerned that this
isn't.
Overall helping because we have
an epidemic of violent crime and
murders being done by really
young children.
I mean, an 11 year old killing
someone, a 12 year old, a
thirteen-year-old, multiple 15
year olds. There's so many of
them.
What is gonna happen in our
current judicial system around
this state, if we give judges
the option to give juvenile
murderers less time in jail, and
that's what I'm concerned about,
Mr. Chair.
What, what, what, how do we know
if we vote this bill through,
how do we know that we're not
allowing judges to give juvenile
murderers less time in jail.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator
Tobiasson. Well, if you vote
this bill through, you'll be
assured that those who are
convicted of voluntary
manslaughter based.
Face consequences in the adult
system. #1. 2 is that
I think it's gonna work the way
I described. I think, I think
every single juvenile in front
of those judges will get there,
we'll get their just desserts.
This will ensure swift and
certain justice with regards to
every single juvenile
delinquent, every single
adjudicated delinquent, uh, not
just the horrific ones that you
described. The
To have someone under the age of
14 commit a homicide, that's,
that's.
That's
Unbelievably unusual,
unbelievably off the wall in
Mexico.
No, I believe it's the only one
I've ever heard of in my entire
life.
My entire life. So anyway, but
to, to make a long story short,
not there, I don't believe
there's a state in this country
that would put an 11 year old in
the, in the adult system. I'm
not saying yes, no, maybe good,
bad or indifferent. I'm just
telling you straight up.
If you are 1415, 16, or 17, and
you commit a homicide under this
bill, you will be in the adult
system. If you do not pass this
bill, if you're 1415, 16 or 17,
and you commit a voluntary
manslaughter crime, you kill
someone, you will stay in the
children's system.
Senator and Senator, let's go
through the chair.
Mr. Chair,
Senator.
I understand the adult side of
it.
But we do have children.
Senator Maestas in this state.
On an annual basis, who are
under 15 years old who cold
blood murdering other people.
Innocent citizens.
And I'm concerned that the
younger spectrum that it opens
up the ability for a judge,
Mister Chair.
To give that juvenile up too,
meaning more flexibility and
leniency in time.
And I can guarantee you if I
called the widow of the
bicyclist that was a scientist
at Sandia, Mr. Chair, that she
would say up to 20 months in
jail was not appropriate.
For her husband losing his life
and her children losing their
father.
So, I'm just concerned that
while it might seem
Mr. Chair, like, this works in
one scenario or some scenarios
that it opens up Pandora's box
and others where we're going to
see a situation where people are
not feeling that justice is
served.
So I am concerned, Mister Chair.
And Mr. Chair, I do see that
there's some law enforcement in
the back of the room. I'm
curious if they have any comment
at all on this topic because I
am not in law enforcement and
I'm not an attorney, but I'm a
citizen who's really concerned
that Mr. Chair, I don't believe
that we have appropriately
addressed the juvenile violent
crime epidemic that we have in
the state, in this legislation
or any other legislation that
I've seen in the last almost 60
days, Mr. Chair.
So could we ask if there is
someone with law enforcement,
Mr. Chair, that would like to
speak on this?
And Senator, I mean, we would
need it probably need a judge,
right? Not in law enforcement
because they're the the resting.
Yeah
Mr. Turen didn't ask a question,
but if I could respond to her
comment. Well, she asked me a
question first, if we want
someone in the room.
Uh, I'm looking at the state
police, guys.
I don't see anybody shaking up.
Here comes truck.
And then you can respond to your
question.
You might just sit there Troy,
it might be easier on you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Senator
Tobiasson.
Um
I, I don't know all the ins and
outs of this particular bill.
But what I will say generally
speaking, um,
This session, we were.
Very supportive of some changes
to the juvenile code in some
other bills. Uh, those bills did
not come to fruition, um.
But what I will generally say is
that any bill that allows
Uh, law enforcement.
Mm
I shouldn't say law enforcement,
the district attorney's office
or the judge's uh an increased
ability.
To sentence juveniles as an
adult when there's a death of an
individual, uh, I believe would
be beneficial.
I know that's not exactly what
you asked, but I mean, that's
kind of
And Mr. Chair, um,
Sir,
what do you think about the
underage, I mean, under the age
of 15, I think it was or 14, the
younger.
Children that
It this potentially opens up.
An opportunity
To give that child up to 9
months or up to 20 months, which
is the current code.
Not a definitive of 9 or 20
months. So, are we opening up a
situation where an 11 year old
murderer is going to get less
than what they would in the
current.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Tobiasson.
I, I can't speak to what judges
may, may or may not do, I mean.
Mm
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, did you have the response?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator Tobiasson. We,
everyone shares your concern.
Everyone in this room, everyone
in the states, so I wanna thank
you for, for bringing that
forward. This modernizes the
children's code more in line
with our adult code. This is the
first of many steps.
That we as a state will take to,
to improve our children's code.
This was, this was brought to us
by the Sentencing commission and
was then the language change and
the suggestions were brought to
us by people in these systems
that do this work.
Judges want more discretion,
more tools, and a longer
jurisdiction to deal with every
single delinquent before them,
and this will allow them to do
just that.
Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Senator,
how are you?
Um, like Tobias said I'm not a
lawyer by any means, and I can
tell there's some parts of this
bill that I really do like.
And, and I think you described
the, the age thing for me. That
was one of them.
What, what's the point of
renaming it?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator
Lanier, uh,
There is none, um, I thought
that was just kind of a quirky
thing and I didn't really push
back on the sentencing
commission.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I
I appreciate that answer, to be
honest with you.
Because sometimes we get
When things and can you assure
me, Mr. Chair, that the
That the $2000.
That one that it was striking
first, if you can assure me of
that because I couldn't find it
in the mail and I apologize. I
haven't had time to to really go
through this because you know
how things are at the end of the
session.
But the
Is that a, a pilot program
because I, I see that in a
couple of places in the bill
where it talks about a pilot
program.
And I hope I'm not crossing 22
questions there. I feel like
they might be the same, but I'm,
I'm not sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator
Lanier, thank you so much for
asking this question. I've been
waiting a month to say this.
The stipends are no longer in
the bill. So last night, uh
Senate Judiciary Committee
convened. We had a full-fledged
hearing on House Bill 255, the
Senate Judiciary Committee, uh.
Uh, adopted, uh.
The amendment, um, and, and the
amendment was adopted, it should
be online right now and it says
the magic words on pages 31 to
33, strike section 12.
So the stipends are not
contained in this bill, nor were
they in the original bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Don't you love when
somebody hijacks you, you know,
I'm, I'm sorry, I shouldn't say
that, but I do.
Um
And let's see I had some other
questions. Can, can you touch on
that, the pilot program part of
it is.
Is that just that part or is
there other things in here that
It is a program. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator. So the pilot
program was section 12. I can't
really touch on it because
You know, I'm not familiar with
what.
Let me stop you for one.
Do you have a copy of the
amended bill because we're
trying, I'm trying to track it
and we don't have a copy, it's
not online.
Let us make a copy they handed
us out.
You're seeing it struck and I
don't see where it's struck. We
don't have a copy of the
amendments.
Somebody went to bed last night,
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that.
So, so the pilot project is out.
I can't really comment on that.
But let me just kind of back up.
So there's a, there's a grant
fund in state statute called the
Juvenal Corrections Grant Fund.
And um
It's managed by the department,
and it goes to uh programs
working with
Adjudicated youth. Well, to be
an adjudicated delinquent rather
adjudicated delinquent, you have
to be found guilty in a
children's court setting.
Well, there's a lot of
Youth that are diverted out or
may not get convicted or or
whatever. And so what this does
on page 17.
His strikes the word a strikes
the words adjudicated
delinquents.
And inserts
In lie thereof delinquent
children or youthful offenders.
Subject to juvenile sanctions or
Children or youth referred by
the department, so
All of our youth that are.
Going through trauma, whether
they're
Criminal element, a victim of
crime or whatnot are eligible to
receive these programs. There's
a lot of fantastic.
Program statewide working with
uh teenagers and and youth that
have gone through tremendous
trauma.
And this outlines of.
The priorities that the
department will utilize in
allocating these grants.
OK, thank you.
And Mr. Chair and senator, so
So the judge places them in
those programs or is that
something they would apply? Mr.
Chairman Senator, that the
department will, will, it will
dole out the grant money.
And uh
And so they'll be just in the
community for anyone to to
utilize the core.
Can get creative in its
sentencing and order a whole
host of things, including
Complete this program or or
successfully complete that
program and things like that.
OK.
And Mr. Chair, if, and Senator,
if you look on page 2 and I hope
it's, I think it's the same.
The same page, uh.
Line 9
Application for funding shall be
given priority based upon
subject matter.
What
What is that talking about? Is
that like?
The crime, is that the subject
matter?
Or is it
They need education.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Lanier. The subject
matter would be
Uh, the application.
The application of the grant.
What, what, uh, programs or.
Or activities does that, let's
just for, for example, say a
nonprofit.
If if the nonprofit focuses on
gun violence, alcohol and
substance abuse, gang violence.
Uh, then they would be in the
top tier to receive those
grants. So the subject matter is
the subject of the programs for
these traumatized youth. OK. And
Mr. Chair and and senator, so
being an ex-teacher.
Is there gonna be a mental
health section in there too. And
And I mental health a word
that's very loosely used, if you
ask, if you ask me.
But, you know, some teenagers
They haven't learned how to
control their anger, for
example. So is that kind of part
of it like an anger management
program. I mean, we all know
about alcohol, drugs, you know,
we understand.
Um, that part of it. But what
about like the anger part of it
or
Um
You know, just, you, you know
what I mean. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chairman Senator Lenier,
you, you just captured it. Now
what was
When we were younger, it was
anger management. Now it's much
more sophisticated, much more
proven, uh, if I could direct
your attention to lines 11 and
12 programs focused on
decreasing violence.
As Mr. Chairman, as, as
Senator Tobiasson pointed out.
At some point, these youths are
getting out.
And so we need solid
programming, focusing on
decreasing violence.
Which essentially is anger
management.
In a much more sophisticated and
uh and uh and overwhelming way.
OK.
Thank you. And I do appreciate
your answers. I really do. Uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, if we go to page.
25
Um, line 2.
No, I'm sorry.
I missed my mark.
Page 24, line 22.
At his sentencing hearing if a
judge of the court, their
jurisdiction.
When it's talking about their
jurisdiction, is that mean?
Like what district they are they
in or is that a CO CYFD
jurisdiction.
Or
Thank you Mr. Chairman Senator
Lin. So we use that term
competent jurisdiction. So
instead of saying Metro court
District Court, Magistrate
Court, federal court, and having
to change the statute over time,
we just say competent
jurisdiction. In this situation,
the Children's Court are
district court judges. OK.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, um, on
the next page, 25 2. The judge
shall consider whether the
available services for program
participation will support the
child during probation. And I, I
think you might have already
answered that, but that's, that
part's unclear to me.
Is that where it falls back into
those other programs we
previously talked about.
Yes, Mr. Chairman Senator
Lanier. So under current law,
they're only on 90 days
probation.
This bill would place them on 6
months' probation, and we just
kind of added, added kind of a
little bit of direction for the
court that the judge may order
services or program
participation as a condition of
probation.
If such an odor is likely to
reduce recidivism, so we kind of
guide the court in, in the
direction we want it to go. OK,
and thank you and Mr. Chair and,
and Senator, that
That's what this is all about,
right? That's what this is all
about to stop it. Well, I
I may vote no today just because
I haven't got to to fine tooth
comb it yet, but um, I just, I
wanna tell you that I, I'm gonna
keep an open mind for when this
gets to the floor and I may have
some more questions for you
there, but um I think you're
trying to do the right thing
here, so I appreciate it. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
You.
See any other in print.
Sorry Miss Chairman, Senator,
um,
Like the
We
Divorce enough on
Mm
The last section struck, I will
tell you when I heard about this
bill.
In its original form. I was
pretty appalled.
Um
Mr. Chairman Senator, it was not
in the original bill, sir.
was was something that was added
in.
But
Anyway, just hearing about that
being added in, I was pretty
appalled.
Um, which makes this a very
difficult bill for me to vote
for ever.
Because as you know, up here,
you know, sometimes a bill gets
assigned a number.
You never want to get that bill
number ever in the future.
I remember, you know, house
bills, uh, I think it was '77.
gun bill when I was up here.
13 years ago, I would never
carry a bill if they gave me
number 77, because it still has
a stigma to it to this day.
That's how bad that one was.
And that's where this was
heading.
With that, I mean, literally, at
some point in this bill was put
to pay child murderers $2000 a
month.
Insanity.
You know, we literally
yesterday.
I do
11 year old, 13-year-old, and
15-year-old arrested for murder.
In Albuquerque, they
Ran over someone.
On purpose.
In a car
The person was on a bicycle.
That.
I
What are we gonna do about that
in our culture?
Or
When when our culture when that
is happening.
Constantly.
I mean, I'd like to see the
statistics at some point. It
seems like our juvenile crime
has skyrocketed when it gets
into violent crime.
adult violent crime is either
become fairly steady or gone
down, I'm not sure.
Be interesting to look at,
wouldn't it?
It's pretty disappointing that
we get to the end of the session
where we came in talking about
how we're going to deal with
Prime
And one of the problems that we
have is the juvenile system.
This is what we're left with.
It's really disappointing.
The only thing we're left with
is some minor changes.
Adding
You know, manslaughter.
That's about it.
Lowering the age a little bit.
It is out of control.
In our state and in our country,
I'm just gonna stay in our
state.
It's become a nationwide
problem.
Senator
Um, I, I've been texting back
and forth with some people and.
bill and getting some answers on
this bill.
And
I still know that I'm ready to
support it.
I think I'm gonna have to be
like.
My partner over here, Steve and
and I'm sorry, Senator Lanier.
And so I'm gonna think about it
to the floor and do some more
research cause I
It's it's really disappointing
to me. It's just all we could
come up with.
session that we are supposed to
be dealing with.
Right
problem.
In our state.
This is our answer.
I don't know when the public's
gonna start holding people
accountable up here.
Maybe never.
Maybe I'm jaded cause I've been
here way too freaking long.
And I'm not even one of the
longest folks.
Maybe I'm a little bit jaded.
We talked a lot.
We don't do a whole lot for the
citizens of New Mexico.
This is the best that we can do.
To deal with the crime epidemic
that our children are
prevailing upon us.
You know, there's a lot of
children that they have a lot of
trauma in their earlier life and
those things need to be helped,
and they need to be dealt with.
Right
When you give them the
assistance they need.
Sticking my home for 2 years
with no adult supervision didn't
help and in fact if they were in
abusive home, they got more
trauma.
We did nothing
And then we've got a system.
That when it's found out they're
being beat at home.
We bring them into the system
and leave them in.
Office where they get raped, and
a great system.
We're supposed to be protecting
these children.
Children
Yesterday.
He murdered someone for the fun
of it.
How did we get here?
And what are we gonna do about
it as legislators, and this
can't be the answer.
This term, I'm sorry, I guess I
didn't have any questions.
I'll save me for.
Sinner to bison for a 2nd time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And
Senator, I'm asking all these
questions because as we've all
stated, this just got plunked on
our laps, and we know it in its
last form, which was a
scholarship for juvenile
murderers until they're about 26
or 27. So I'm looking in, what
am I in volume 3. I'm in volume
2, if anyone on the committee
wants to look on page 350, and
at one point we had 500
juveniles in a jail.
Incarcerated in New Mexico and
by 2023, it plummeted down to
80.
And now we've seen a slight
uptick to I think about 100.
And I think the way we got here,
there's a lot of things that we
can talk about, but clearly the
data is showing that as we
started releasing children, we
have more and more violent
children and not holding them
accountable. So I like the fact
that you're saying this actually
adds something, Senator, um, Mr.
Chair, and the fact that I, did
you say, Senator, that it's 14
or 15 when they go into the
adult system.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator
Tobiasson so current under
current law, which this statute
has not been touched since 1993.
So this is the first improvement
since 1993, under current law,
if you're 1516, or 17, and you
commit one of the crimes.
Under the definition of.
Youthful offender, then you
could be uh.
You could be, um,
Moved into the adult system. If
you're 14,
And you commit the crime of
first degree murder, you could,
you will be a serious youthful
offender.
And put into the adult system.
So you have to be 14 to be put
into the adult system in New
Mexico, and that's
Pretty much standard. OK. And
Mr. Chair, Senator, so the
scholarship was not part of the
original bill, it was amended,
which means you had to have
At some point agreed that it was
a friendly amendment or you just
got over.
There was an override and over.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Senator,
I was not involved in any
amendments on the House side.
OK, I learned about them after
the fact.
And, and if you think Senator
Brant was upset?
How do you think I felt?
OK.
And Mr. Chair, I'm just, I'm
curious because I agree with
you, we have
An unusual amount of youth in
the state of New Mexico that
have gone through
Unreal trauma in their very
short lives.
I appreciate that you're
extending probation to
potentially 6 months, but I'm
thinking of, let's say we've got
this 1112, 13 year old that's
murdered someone in cold blood.
I don't think that 6 months
probation is enough for a child
who not only has gone through
the trauma that got them to the
place, Mr. Chair, that they've
murdered someone, but
Even the trauma of going through
the fact.
Holding
For the rest of their life that
they have taken someone's life.
Hopefully at some point that's
sunken in for that individual,
but that's rum in itself, having
committed the trauma in the
murder on another person, right?
So 6 months.
I.
I don't know how anyone.
Overcomes whatever trauma got
them to the point to murder and
then the trauma of murdering in
6 months. So,
Is there room for us to discuss
here before this potentially, if
it gets to the floor that
Something is amended that it's
Up to 12 months up to
2 years, I mean, letting an
1112, 13 year old child out of
the juvenile detention system,
Mr. Chair, after a murder insane
6 months is all that child needs
to make them whole and a
productive member of society, I
think is
Unthinkable.
And I share, Mr. Chair, the
other senators remarks. I just,
I'm really concerned of
I don't know exactly how we got
here, but we're all here. I
appreciate that you're making
some sounds like positive
changes to the code, but
If we've got this.
You didn't have control over
what they did in the house, but
we all have a say here what it
happens, what happens in the
Senate.
And if this is the last stop
before it potentially hits the
floor. I think this deserves,
Mr. Chair, a little bit more
thought and discussion of how
can we strengthen this.
For youth
For their final outcomes and how
can we strengthen this for the
state of New Mexico.
And all the victims that are now
dead, Mr. Chair, at the hands of
An unreal amount of juvenile.
Violent offenders.
I think this is important to
pause and say what.
What can we do right now?
That's all I have, Mr. Chair,
and if, if you have remarks on
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Tobiasson. This was a very good
bill written by the Sentencing
Commission voted on unanimously
by prosecutors, police, judges,
lawyers.
Uh, they asked me to carry it.
I wanted to have the final
words, so we ran it through the
house. It has become a political
football x 10, and I would
prefer no amendments at this
point, so we can improve the
criminal justice system and move
it forward and continue this
conversation.
Mr. Chair, thank you, and based
on that, I'm not gonna be able
to vote for it in today's
committee.
Like the other senators, I'm
gonna do a deep dive, um, if
this passes, I will say I would
love to know the names of all of
those people that helped you put
this together and voted on on it
unanimously because quite
frankly, Mr. Chair, this is
still a disappointment for the
citizens and all the victims in
our state. And actually it's a
long-term disappointment for our
violent youth that I, they need
more than 6 months of probation
if we're talking about you that
have actually murdered people in
cold blood.
Um, they're gonna need a lot
more help to become full
functioning adults in society.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, um.
You know,
I don't know how close you know
that story hits to home.
You know how close it's to here.
You, you know that was in
accomplices' assistant, that was
her dad that got killed.
I mean this hits close to home
in the cabin.
I, I, I agree, 6 months.
For murder, it is not what we
should be seeing, cause the kid
gets out in 6 months.
And what's he gonna do? Only
went, got 6 months or a year.
That's nothing for murder.
It's nothing for not having a
father the rest of your life.
Having to, I mean.
They
They may be on drugs, they
didn't have the right parents,
whatever happened in their life,
right?
You you try to rehabilitate
people, but
6 months
Is not a message you want to
send to him for murder.
It it's just hard to.
But think about if it was your
family member, you.
You want blood and to get even
action of people in there.
Something happens to him
intentionally, accidentally is
completely different, but
intentionally doing that.
All that video's been all over
the news.
In 6 months.
Doesn't work.
Why did they determine to come
back at 6 months? What, what was
the?
What was the
The theory behind that, the
study that says you can
rehabilitate someone that.
through the house and killed
somebody or intentionally drove
down the street and ran over a
guy with
High school, what was the
thought process in the sensing
commission for that.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Minos.
First of all,
Delinquents who murder go to the
adult system.
It's just never
Unless you're 1312, or 11, which
two weeks ago would have been
unheard of.
The Sentencing commission
actually didn't touch that
section of law.
The sensing mission merely
wanted to craft a bill to change
the definition of adjudicated
delinquent to you to free up
this $5.5 million
made, um.
The House added the vehicular
manslaughter, the house.
Added the 6 months probation.
Um, and the house added the.
stipends. So I decided to keep
The, the, the bump in the
probationary period.
Keep the voluntary manslaughter.
And strike out the stipends.
I mean
pretty hard for me to vote for a
bill.
When 6 months enough.
And and for them to just try to
get to the $5 million.
That doesn't satisfy anything.
Sure it's gonna give may not get
to a few, but the clear
messaging that it's not working
is.
Go and murder somebody, no
matter if you're under a youth.
And you can get less than a
year.
I mean, that's what I'm reading
in here, Mr. Chairman, thank you
for that. If you, if you're, uh,
if you're a murderer, you get
put into the adult system. If by
some craziness years 1312, or
11, you would do 21 months jail,
90 days probation, if, if you
vote no on this bill, you're
voting for 90 days probation. If
you vote yes on this bill,
you're voting for 6 months
probation, but the 21 months
jail.
is been is current law has been
on the books for over 30 years.
I mean
We didn't who never thought 11
year old, right? I mean, 673.
Like
And got caught up in something
he probably shouldn't got caught
up in.
In the heat of the moment.
ruined a lot of people's lives,
including a lot of people's
lives.
It's tough. I mean, and the
problem is we don't have the
right build to track, but
Then we hear all the amendments
of the house. I guarantee you if
it was a legislator's son or
family that got killed, there
would be a lot stiffer penalty.
And we got to think of it in
that tender.
Go in there and they see how you
treat me.
And then they treat you that
way, that's the way they're
gonna treat. This is serious.
I mean, this may be one of the
most serious bills why we get
these in finance
because we have problems in
other committees is why we're
getting them.
What were the comments in
judiciary about the 6 months and
you the 6 months probation
afterwards despite the pain that
that stipend provision brought
to people, it was a blessing in
disguise because it brought us
here.
I really appreciate this
conversation because this
section of law.
This section of large Children's
code, which has not been amended
since 1993.
Has to change
It has to change.
My bill brought in this section
of life. Fortunately or
unfortunately, because when you
read this section of law,
Every paragraph you want to
change, and it, and, and so
there was tremendous changes to
this original build.
My goal wasn't to change the
children's code, all the other
bills that tried to change the
children's code.
Didn't succeed.
And so those persons, those.
Colleagues that didn't succeed
in their endeavors, latched on
to this section of law in my
bill.
And, and I, I, I, and it turns
out that that was a blessing
cause we're enlightening us.
As, as in regards to current
law.
But the, the language in this
bill improves the children's
code.
In addition to doing the intent
of the sentencing commission.
And so I urged support.
Then tell me what section 10 on
page 25 does cause I just don't
get that section.
Page 25, section 10, you may, if
you have them in Section 10 and
Chairman, this is the point that
Senator Lanier made.
Section 10 for the folks
listening at home is uh.
is a Tort Claims Act.
And apparently the magic words
juvenile Community Act.
is in the Tort Claims Act.
So my friends who drafted this
bill.
I thought it was cool to, to.
To change it to uh juvenile
connections Act and so that's
why Section 10 is in the bill on
page 27, lines 8 and 9.
It changes juvenile community
corrections Act.
The juvenile community
connections Act, which is
Which is something that I found
peculiar, but I didn't.
Push back on the sentencing
omission because
OK. It, yeah, I don't know.
Uh, and then why is there
notwithstanding, I just don't
understand that in law, why
there's notwithstanding several
places. I tried to go back and
look for it but I can't
remember. There's
notwithstanding language.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. We use
um.
Now we use words like uh.
Accept or.
But in the 90s, there's a bunch
of notwithstanding, that was the
word.
In statutory construction in the
90s. So yeah, there's a lot of
notwithstanding, in other words,
Notwithstanding, you can do
whatever you want.
Notwithstanding, they can change
it's unless it's covered in
other sections of the, yeah.
But it's still, it's good, it's
a good, I mean, it's
It's just a word that's used in
statutory construction.
But that word means a lot,
notwithstanding, you can.
And notwithstanding your
sentence to 6 months to 12
months. I mean, I don't remember
why I, I thought I folded the
page, but.
Notwithstanding in the law,
you're telling us it's just a
word, it's a word that means a
lot.
Uh, I don't have a, I can't word
search in language there, so I,
I guess.
This is a tough one for me. I
mean, if we're going to send a
message to juvenile.
There's dummy bells out there,
Mr. Chairman.
We can amend this back to your
original bill. Would you like us
to do that?
I think it's better now. There's
been more uh
More of folks at the table,
Mister Chairman, um.
It's not what we want, it's not
what we need.
But I would ask that
My, my bill be judged on what's
in it instead of what's not in
it.
Well, that's what we're looking
at. We're judging what's in it.
What's in it's good, Mr.
Chairman.
What's in it's good.
I is is it good for the?
The daughters and
Mothers that lost their father.
It is because that
it is Mr. Chairman because if,
if, if we, if, uh
After this bill goes into
effect, if a child is
Charged and convicted of
voluntary manslaughter, they can
be put into the adult system.
Whereas today they cannot and
and.
And a lot of times the 2nd
degree murderers led down to
voluntary manslaughter.
This is, this is a move forward.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Emotion probably do pass by
Senator Steinborn.
You know, the second leg senator
Treil.
Caro.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes no. Senator,
Senator Campos votes yes,
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes no, Senator
Padilla.
Yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborne votes yes,
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Tobiasson votes no,
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woos both no Senator
Sendo
votes yes.
Senator Padilla.
I'll vote yes and explain my
vote.
In Padilla Bosas, Senator Munoz.
No.
Senator Munoz votes no, we have
a due past 6 in the affirmative,
5 in the negative.
OK send her trail to explain
your vote.
Thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward. This is like
emotional to like even have the
conversation. Um, the reason I
voted yes is because I hear what
you're saying that we've got to
do something, but my fear in
voting, yes.
is that it will lull us to sleep
for another 30 years, and we
won't do justice for our
children that have really
suffered, and I'm, I'm not
saying that I agree that they
should be locked up for the rest
of their lives. That's not what
I'm saying. What I am saying is,
is that what we're doing right
now is not providing them enough
time or enough services to
overcome the trauma that has
brought them to the places that
they're in. And for that reason,
it makes me very nervous to vote
yes on this because they don't
want us to go back to sleep.
This is an important subject
that we need to have more
conversation about.
Thank you, chair, and I'll be
very brief. I, you know, I did
vote yes and uh first time in 13
years I've ever said this. I've
heard other legislators say this
in meetings. I don't know how
I'm going to vote on the floor,
and let me tell you why. I am
very concerned about page 31 and
Section 12. I don't think I've
ever seen anything like that
before. We have many other ways
to help individuals who are in
this condition, including the
Fostering Connections program
that I created and um I'm very
concerned about section 12, so I
hope that maybe you and I can
have an offline conversation on
this, and I, I want to talk more
to you.
about this, but I just don't
know how I'm gonna vote on the
floor. It's the first time in 13
years I've ever said that being
up here. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members. Thank you.
We're gonna get through some of
these easy bills real quick and
then I, I will be releasing some
bills. We're gonna stay here
till 6.
close.
Mm,
representative Pereira, I see
you sit in the front row with up
there.
Who's doing house 20.
Yeah.
We'll try to get representing
Herrera out of here.
Senator Stephonics or cave eros
here.
Represent her, go ahead.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee,
uh, House Bill 252 uh just
amends the aging and long-term
Services Department to create a
kinship caregiver, uh, support
program and uh we put this in
the Department of Aging, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, because, um, frankly
grandparents are kind of afraid
of CYFD. So we went where they,
there was trust buildup and, and
we did that.
And what we will do is hire
people within the Department of
Aging to really kind of do 4
things. And first of all, what
they'll help these grandparents
or kids or fictive kins which
might be a close family friend,
uh, who steps up and takes these
kids in, what will help them do
is navigate what's available to
these families at the federal,
the state, and the local level.
Number 2 will help them um
navigate through these systems
deciding whether or not
you want to go into uh full
custody arrangement or not,
we'll provide them with legal
services to help them understand
what the consequences of those
choices would be, uh, and we'll
provide monthly training
sessions for them and monthly
home visits with these uh uh
people in the Department of
Aging, and we'll create a
support group because how do we
all get through life? We have
friends and family members who
help us, so there'll be a
support group of of of 10 of
these peoples and then I've been
trying to
on this for 4 years, uh, Mr.
Chair, and I could never get
around the anti-donation clause.
So I've partnered with
foundations in the state of New
Mexico and what we're gonna try
and do is they will provide um a
monthly stipend of $500 for
these for these uh grandparents
or kids raising grandchildren,
uh, $500 a month for 3 years.
This is a pilot program, uh,
they will sign up for this and
we're trying to serve 5 to 7.
counties in the state.
And ultimately it's again a
small pilot program, we will be
serving 50 families in each
community. There's a lot more to
be served. You should know we
have about 10% of our school age
kids are living with
grandparents, uh, they don't get
any stipends or any money, they
just take this job on for
themselves, so we're trying to
do this pilot program and uh
we'll ultimately serve 250
families. We have a strong
evaluation component built in
and with that I'll I'll
Mr. Chairman, I'll move with you
pass. Uh let me go to the
audience real quick first.
We got the full story from the
representative she almost killed
her own bill.
I think we heard the whole bill.
Um, we'll go to the audience,
anybody and support.
Show 3 and support anybody on
Zoom.
Nobody on Zoom, anybody in
opposition.
questions from committee
members.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to
point out that there's already
$4 million in the budget to
cover the expenses for Brant has
a question before we pick up
that motion. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, uh,
so the idea behind this pilot.
is to have aging and long-term
care take care of the kids.
Um, no, that's, that's not how
it works at all. They provide
the services, they prefer the
staff that goes in and kind of
counsels uh people, but it will
be the foundation because you
know we can't give them money.
The foundations will, they'll do
a memorandum of understanding
with the Department of Aging,
and they will go out and they
will uh find the people in their
communities who need the most
help, and they'll bring them
into this pilot project and then
the Department of Aging will
require that the staffing and
the foundation.
will provide the money.
And that will be in addition to
What they're being provided from
COFD for being foster parents.
Oh, Mr. Chair, and, uh, uh,
Senator Brandt, uh, these people
are not in the CYFD system at
all. They're, they're when it,
it's kind of a catch 22 in our
system.
If you have an abused child and
CYFD says this child is in abuse
and you step up and you, and
you, um, um, you raise that
child or you foster that child,
then you get a stipend from the
state for that.
Federal law, we 3/4 of our money
comes from, uh, for fostering
kids come from the federal
government. So you have to
already be abused. What happens
really in the community is.
You know, we have drug we have a
lot of addiction problems, we
know that, and what happens is
CYFD comes to a parents.
This is it.
You know, if you don't find a
safe place for these kids
tomorrow. We're gonna come get
your kids. And sure enough, they
call their parents and sure
enough, these parents step
forward or a cousin or an older
brother or uh uh a family
friends and I'll I'll take him
just bring him over to you, then
they're not, then they haven't
been abused and they haven't
been abused, so they're not
eligible uh for CYFD funding at
that point. So they just do this
on their own and they raise
these kids at their own expense.
Thank you chair. I'm very
confused.
Senator Tobiasson, you have a
question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Don't look
so excited. Um, hi. So,
I actually have dear friends.
Several of them that were raised
by their grandparents because
their parents were drug
addicted.
Jailed
Murdered
Missing
I could go on actually.
So am I understanding, Mr.
Chair, that this pilot program
One of my best friends when her
grandparents took her in.
Because her parents were drug
addicted and not able to take
care of her instead of her being
put in the foster care system,
put in the hands of CYFD her
grandparents stepped forward.
They were and still are on a
fixed income.
That if this was the scenario,
they would be getting this $500
a month to help with the
expenses of raising her.
keeping her safe
and Senator, that's exactly what
this program that is exactly the
population that we are
targeting.
And Mr. Chair, I love the idea
of this so far because I'm, do
you even know the number of
grandparents? Do you have an
idea how many grandparents in
our state are taking care of
their grandchildren because of
those circumstances, uh, 35,000.
35,000, Mr. Chair, that's
unreal. So I am in full support
of this pilot program because it
certainly is better than putting
those children in the hands of
Who knows what or sleeping in an
office or
jail for Christmas. That's the
one I'm never gonna stop talking
about. Um, I would think that
unless there's something wrong
with those grandparents that
those children are in way
better.
Safety measures and conditions
then going with a stranger. So
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for clarifying that.
Thank you. How long is the pilot
gonna be?
Uh, thank you for that question,
Mr. Chair. It's 3 years, uh, and
we did it 3 years because, you
know, sometimes these
grandparents have gotten them,
you know, one month stipend,
it's not gonna change anything,
but if they get $500 a month,
$6000 more dollars a year. That,
I think that's a game changer
for a lot of these, uh,
grandparents.
And the do pass motion from
Senator Padilla second by center
trio. You call around.
Senator Brent.
Um
Senator Brandt votes no senator
Campos. Senator Compos votes,
yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Linier. Senator Lanier
votes, yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Padillaia, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes, yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes no, Senator
Sendo. Yes
Senators Senator Munoz.
Senator sports, yes, you have a
do pass 9 in the affirmative, 2
in the negative. We're going
back on the floor at 6:30. Thank
you. Thank you. We're gonna, I'm
gonna release a whole bunch of
bills on the floor tonight.
So be prepared and then uh I
don't know, we'll probably come
back tomorrow and do some catch
up clean up, and I'm gonna
release.
A whole bunch of, OK,
thank you. We're adjourned.
