The
The LFC report.
It indicated that.
If we use the formula that the
LFC use that fifteen million
dollars over the first fifteen
are we currently have fifteen
million dollars which is of
course what we ask for and and
what the fifteen million in our
money is going to be in house
bill two that if we did that we
would increase in the schools of
nursing could increase students
by about fifteen hundred.
That's not going to be enough
that's not even close to being
enough to get to sixty two
hundred shortage of violence
that we have so we're gonna need
this money and we're going to
need more money every year if
we're serious about addressing
the crisis in our state and
there's no other way to do it
there's no other way out of this
crisis other than growing our
own nurses.
Thousands of nurses are not
going to move to New Mexico.
It's just we we have our US
Census to look at we only
increase our population to just
above two point two million and
sixty two hundred nurses are not
coming here to practice.
So it is imperative that that we
grow our own and when we put
this young this proposal
together we talked with some of
the nursing programs about the
issues that they have and one of
the big issues is paying faculty
enough money if you are a
faculty member in in many places
you are making less than an are
and who's working at the
hospital and that that's absurd
so part of our proposal has to
be part of HPD's responsibility
has to be to raise from their
salaries through this grant
money of nurses we need to
create provide financial
incentives incentives for the
clinical faculty preceptors that
work in every hospital and help
train these nurses.
And we need to support the
students we we know that the
pipeline of students has has
declined and it's not because
people don't want to be nurses
it's because a lot of times they
are not prepared for the
academic rigors of going to
nursing school and so part of
this funding can be to help
programs to tutoring and
mentoring to to get students and
do some more recruitment to get
them ready to go to nursing
school and then to mentor and
tutor them to retain them.
In addition to the fifteen
million to and to expand allow
the schools of nursing to expand
we need to increase the
scholarship money.
I noticed that the governor's
budget has one point five
million higher request in the
initial LFC budget for
scholarships and loan repayment
and if we're going to get.
Thousands of more students over
the next few years into our
nursing programs we need to be
paying their tuition and we need
to create programs to for nurses
to serve and pay back their
money if they've graduated
before.
So are you all in my a summary
of whacked.
Was our proposal is and let our
actual schools of nursing talk
about what they're doing and how
they would utilize this money to
expand those numbers of students
again the bottom line is there's
really only one way to save this
to to to to address this crisis
of not enough nurses and that's
to educate them right here in
New Mexico.
And I do want to introduce a
couple of people Gloria Ann
Marie from
who works is San Juan regional
not San Juan regional Santa
regional who's the former
president New Mexico nurses
association and Michael Shannon
is the current.
President Sir you have a lot of
real nurses here in room thank
you Mr chair.
I guess the other.
Alex you wanted begin your
presentation.
Right well thank you
I thank you for us to from us
all to show my flights here and.
Just in case you can.
See that so my name's Alexis
Ohanian I am the director this
is the nursing New Mexico State
University I just and I just
want to thank everyone for
bringing this critical issue two
to our front to just
Attention to this problem and it
is obviously a very complex
problem conflicts problems where
multi level and multi.
Little solutions and.
Certainly we're here to talk
about.
Cation has been doing to try to
address workforce over many
years and you know what our
policy is part of the solution
so let's talk.
Of course the showing and so hi
drugs information ordered that I
know if you're familiar with
the slide Representative limited
to talk about them and however
you want to.
A little just briefly and have
like the fact that there's also
of course eighty.
Care providers.
just New Mexico state.
Hi.
Granted we granted practitioners
from changes that
are not
yet in the.
Level two.
So this is this is a critical
crisis on our and also need to
have attention on other
providers as well as registered
nurse nurses.
Thank.
Problems questions I'm also
going to talk about.
The nursing workforce shortage.
He is described by one of our
national organization
association colleges.
For many many years and the.
Sure being for most goals one of
the.
To be able to increase our.
Again it's not the only issue I
certainly.
Really what we're talking about
when we say this is not the
shortages that
we know that in nurses the
advantages one looking at a lot
of hi the average ages even
higher and so we're expecting to
see eighty.
Massive amount within the next
five years.
And we all started to happen
let's talk about the
compensation discrepancies
between what we can make a
clinical nurse leader remains
deeply and and why somebody
could earn at eight
the nurse educators contact
number with us three or eight.
And
the other the other aspect
issues aren't producing enough
master's and doctoral degree
students who have the
qualifications and then and the
expertise and experience to be
able to train are filling the
role as I do to train our our
students on different levels
there certainly is a light
issue.
Thinking about how we can
increase enrollment.
Foster's.
Asian program programs and
create
Mexico program.
Program really growing not just
remembers the program.
I need.
Over the education and New
Mexico state talk to you about
this percent of this before but
I just as a reminder we have a
concerns are growing
order to serve you.
And and you have a small
grants as well too these are all
boxers signings nurses can use
as an excuse and enhance our
this is part of our.
State has grown over thirty five
percent in the past few years it
is based on one kind of funding
through the university private
donor funding you were trying to
respond to that is critical
shortage that was present before
the pandemic and so
we.
The compelled to do what we
could do with what we had at the
time at this point we are really
at a point because the funding
to be able to just let alone
trying.
we did you get a little a little
bit extra funding a few years
ago and I just classroom.
Twenty two
is again cart part of the
message that I want to face that
we look at
the most programs at this point
need more I need more funding
because even the state.
more program makes no reference
stating that and the community
colleges as well as to our
studios rely Mexico
school
college students and I eight
percent saying Mexico that there
are.
Mexico and so you know all of
the businesses throwing our
arms.
And this is our overall growth
and I know that conversations
with the nursing
they are
program that costs reducing
graduating four hundred years
and here in New and total of us
to potentially possibly to
expand our enrollment we have
the strategic.
I do want to point out that it
has stayed for four hundred
years have more than twenty
faculty.
Our property had closed and how
many.
Hi I need to be able to
cover of course
so our faculty really work
overtime to refugees thanks.
On
the one from the New Mexico I
was from Mexico.
Forty percent for rural counties
because state places where
members can you come on the
state of Kentucky.
Your we have a professional
programs in an armored
prevention programs really
focuses on program.
With the Mexico across the state
really primary care and mental
health care to.
There's a program and a more
than double the table and in the
program.
Over the past couple years.
Still have capacity
It is for nurses to come back in
your meditation full time
program
they are it.
They have to earn
support themselves and so you'll
be able to get support for
students as well as.
This.
and then just to wrap up our
program overview of we have are
going to be launching leaders in
the program in Mexico state this
is to educate certified
registered nurse anesthetists
this is another area because
the.
Critical needs for any future
providers
just as a quick
when I learned about this is you
really was starting up the in
rural hospitals in New Mexico
there is easy all just providing
the services is also required.
So I I.
Of the providers in the critical
illness without of course is an
anti seizure.
On.
Services procedures and so this
is on this program for for the
house is here and we are on our
way to you undergoing creations.
Lunches program twenty three.
so and then this is just a
little bit of data you have.
That one is critical needs for
us
Mexico and I just you just you
Mexico hospital association has
this.
Well.
Thank you thank you thank you
for the opportunity to security.
The fifty million dollars
special session and we're really
looking at this these three five
million dollars for nursing
my mic this is one piece of it
but there's a lot of other
pieces that really need to
address those indications
certainly be able to hire a full
time faculty
salaries recruitment campaign
our expert.
Experts practitioners education
you know the.
It's not just about our
educators infrastructure program
can you have your program is is
here.
Wires a lot of.
Operational support
staff support computer systems
we have very strict twelve she
requirements on many different
levels and our partners a lot of
support which is to be able to
partition requirements wherever
there's a critical need in the
field of being able to have some
sort of bump.
Program launched a new program.
Transaction costs over a million
dollars.
For we actually tuition revenue.
Ortiz looking to for funding for
that and then of course.
Have more.
Facilities we do some of our
training and a lack of our
simulation and.
State and state is to be able
to.
So that for me.
Thank you for your.
Thank you Maxine you are next.
The morning Mr chair members the
committee thank you for having
us here today to speak on this
prices in New Mexico on charges
are seen
at community college we are
smaller program Arnold.
Cap right now is it twenty four
we have twenty four students in
on level two at eighty students
and for and the last meeting why
is there a difference well we do
lose students on the program for
several different reasons one a
day our successful academically
they have financial issues if
they're not able to continue in
the program because they need to
go back to work and so those are
some of the areas that we would
like to have that support and
one of the for is to help
students and support them so.
They come hop across crisis
we're on the not have finances
to continue that we would be
able to find some type of
scholarship for them also the
cost of the community schools
very high to start off with a
student was two thousand dollars
on looks and supplies at
supplemental resources to get
first master of the school
there's also the cost of going
to clinical setting because
we're all from you know cost
money we have clinicals in Santa
Fe we have
because of non.
More we may take our students
you know on field trips around
so.
There is you know support them
in that way as well.
our students also to have some
difficulty that we because of
the nursing programs are
rigorous the new Tate quite
active effort in order to be
successful and those supporting
students once on purpose in
order for us the previous model
that is supported by the support
staff one of student success
coaching others services
specialist
if you would.
Then maybe to hire more workers
to support students students
need we do this also
hi from the faculty workload you
know manager students we also
offer utilize tutors and
recently hired a R. N..
Nurses also just this is one of
our former graduates who wish to
give you back to the school and
Is.
Time twenty ounces we in order
to support students through the
program so that means that we
would want to I was elected to
on the other that we have some
issues with the students that
want to come into our program so
a lot of students have
difficulty mediation
requirements we do have
additional requirements that we
need to do so that incidents
Committee act prepare to enter
the program.
So for example last year we had
activity for students with the
tact but only twenty four
qualify.
The funding we could use to
support students in a pre teen.
So it get a little more
straining than either act.
Operation therefore qualify and
more successful.
the other top of course everyone
is talking about is the fact you
the crew and.
Of course we hate more so that.
The other piece that I found in
my story.
Actor is that when we hire I
team this.
Was from our local area that had
educated even have internet
politics are you today state
and.
Tested with the current monthly
in helping.
Page two of us three so the.
This for any structure to start
with a bachelor's degree and
five years of massive three
three line I do are currently
have obtained a master's degree
and
Hey in that program where
the address was paid for
they could work with us and then
they are located came back some
time for that assistance.
I'm.
Are you support to one of your
nurses and went on.
Other ideas that I have to use
to apply for this funny with the
high winds with the high schools
using our some of the current
clubs that are in high school or
health care three years and you
do need them with this is
current students in our program
to create and also to help.
Making decisions about our
in high school that.
Time to nurse program another
to have a summer nursing at
we're the faculty and students
with Sierra with students that
are interested in the high
school you need.
And we allow them to have some
time in the late last week.
on he are some knowledge
of the state.
Started out with Education
Committee and also.
Was true because it does take a
minute to.
Four hundred you come and stay
in the nursing field.
Of course
I do at the moment and it also.
we started.
This is for the fall that is one
more homeless prone to or
tradition and it's going to
be several also include work
experience at the student
internet.
Three small course that will is
there's a nursing school and so
it is it pros to allow for a
more holistic approach and the
students that not have been able
to ensure the program to now
program.
with limited by twenty five
percent for the fall of twenty
twenty three.
Thank you.
Thank you Terry you're next.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Terry
to attain the dean of.
Sciences health engineering and
math at Santa Fe community
college thank you for allowing
me to speak this morning.
I can repeat what everybody
said.
We lack all of the resources we
need in order to produce nursing
students.
But really what I wanted to
share with you this morning.
Is what it means to our
community to have nursing
students in our community.
So I'll share a couple of
anecdotes with you.
Our previous director of medical
simulation remark Jedi.
His mother became seriously ill
and needed to be admitted to the
local hospital here at Christus.
When the paramedics arrived at
her home.
They were our students that took
care of her.
When they entered the emergency
room.
There were paramedics students.
Nursing graduates who took care
of her when she was admitted to
the I see you there were
students that this man mentor.
And topped in our simulation
that.
All of those graduates took care
of his mother.
That is what we're here to do we
are woefully lacking in being
able to just immediately spend
that and be able to graduate
hundreds of more students.
Yes it does take resources lots
of resources.
It takes instructors it takes
equipment it takes time and
dedication.
And that is what we are
absolutely dedicated to doing.
We are dedicated to taking care
of our community.
We are dedicated to producing
those graduates that will take
care of our family members and
ourselves.
That is why we are here we
absolutely appreciate your
commitment to increasing.
Nursing graduates and the care
that we all receive in our
communities.
Our graduates stay in our
communities the take care of
each of us.
That I think is probably one of
the most important things to
take away from this while we're
yes I can talk to you about
simulation labs I can talk to
you about the cost of.
Trying to recruit faculty and
maintain student success
absolutely we want our local
graduates in our programs.
Really this is about caring for
one another in our communities.
This is about where we're at and
how we care for one another.
I think it's important to
remember that we are also
serving our students.
I cannot tell you how many
students I've had.
Education changes lives.
I think I'm nursing education
transforms communities.
So you have one nurse and I'll
give you an example there is a
school nurse in Berlin New
Mexico.
And there are
immunization rate and that.
And that town was very low.
They had all kinds of outbreaks.
She made it her mission to work
with the department of health.
To vaccinate.
Students and alumnae Mexico.
Within two years over ninety
five percent.
The students on the land.
Were vaccinated.
That doesn't just affect those
students that affects those
students families and it spreads
out into the communities.
That's what one nurse can do.
So when you're thinking about
increasing graduates and
producing graduates I really
also think that we are
increasing the care that
communities receive we are in
elevating the health of every
community in this state by
producing graduates.
By changing the lives of those
graduates so they can buy their
first homes.
So they can buy their first
cars.
So they can pay for college
education for their children.
And I know that because I was
one of those graduates.
I am a first generation college
graduate I am the statistics
that doctor doing was sharing
with you I graduated from
LONGIETTI high school.
I went to central New Mexico
community college it was TBI
back then.
But those things absolutely all
of those opportunities the
support we're looking for for
our faculty for students the
absolutely make a difference.
That is what we are asking for
today.
I can answer any question you
have about faculty retention
student support student
retention.
What we're looking for is to
support the health of our
communities and one another.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
So in.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Lillian
Montoya the president CEO
Christus St Vincent here in
Santa Fe.
We have twenty three hundred
people in our workforce so we're
a major economic driver for
community.
We're also major health care
driver for community so what I
want to share with you our three
things really for what this
pandemic journey has been like
not just for me but the other
hospitals in our state when I
share with you something you
already know and then talk a
little bit about what that has
meant for nursing workforce and
our health care workforce in
general and then too much like
everyone else here today
strongly support advocate for
both short and long term
solutions to addressing the
health care workforce shortage
most especially in nursing
today.
So you know when we
Went through the first year of
the of this pandemic that we're
continuing to experience the
challenges are really quite
different you think back now two
years ago for us for all of us
and those that were working in
health care there was a lot of
fear and the environment most
certainly because it was so much
that we didn't know pre vaccine
about the impacts to our
communities and to our health
systems with that came concerns
around PPE personal protective
equipment shortages and
challenges to the supply chain
and then most certainly we
experienced at the hospitals a
significant drop in volume as
patients and community members
were afraid to go to the
hospital they weren't sure where
they were get that they can
acquire the virus how to treat
the virus eccentricity were was
very much a different pandemic
in your one.
the other and one of the other
aspects of that was a ventilator
shorted so those are that's sort
of it taken in capsule your one
this year's been very different.
So for this year we were now
operating in a in a vaccine
world with the challenges for us
and others of ensuring that we
can vaccinate our community
including our workforce to
really reduce the risk of
exposure and minimize symptoms
to the virus but we're not
having a crisis of PP year
ventilators or even volumes
frankly right now the challenges
we're experiencing are our most
precious resource and that are
that is are humans we are in an
environment now where people are
returning to the hospitals to
get care because of the latest
for variety reasons or they're
experiencing a pandemic that's
having very different impacts on
them and their family members
and so the returning to the
hospitals and the clinics in
high numbers so this is a large
on COVID surge while also
managing a COVID population so
for example in our hospital we
have are General Hospital were
caring for a patient population
we're very often our capacities
are well exceeding a hundred
percent.
And we're also managing a COVID
patient population in a separate
unit and we're sitting at about
a hundred percent capacity and
then the third type of hospital
that we and others are also
managing our hospital to home
we're we're remote patient
monitoring individuals so that
they don't take up a bed that we
need for someone else that's far
more sick.
And we need nurses to remote
patient monitoring we need
nurses to care for patients in
the ICU for COVID patients in
our separate I see you for non
COVID patients so you're
beginning to see the challenger.
We and others have experienced a
special orders of nurses because
we started this pandemic already
in a national shortage.
And what this pandemic did was
reveal that we have so much more
to do in terms of aggressively
planning for workforce pipeline
both one that we grow locally
and when they were able to track
from out of state until we can
grow our own to get to that
place.
So for example the hospitals
were all trying to acquire
nurses from everywhere else in
the country including around the
state to help fill this void.
We have nurses that have chosen
to take on traveler
opportunities because the
financial opportunities are far
too great to pass up and if you
have a family that's on a
financial edge or you're trying
to buy that first house or that
first car paper those student
loans those cannot contract
opportunities are are too hard
to pass up so they're taking on
those opportunities we also have
a number of nurses who've chosen
to retire because they earned it
they were eligible for
retirement the entry pandemic
and if you have a choice of how
you want to spend the next part
of your life journey how do you
want to spend it so deep in that
shortage.
And then finally we do have
individuals that have chosen to
leave the community they had
impacts on their families that
required that they either a had
to spend more time at home home
schooling.
They had to move to another
location so they could take care
of family parents mostly elders
that they that we're also
suffering to the pandemic or
they have partners with job loss
a reduction in hours which
caused them to relocate to new
communities so we're feeling all
of that within our little
business if you will our our
hospital as are other businesses
in the state so our average
payroll as an example.
Typically every two weeks our
payrolls about seven point one
million dollars.
This last pay period.
My agency cost was one point six
million.
HSD cost so typically our
hospitals were paying for
contract labor between seventy I
would say sixty to ninety
dollars an hour during this
pandemic the range is far more
significant it's anywhere from
right now hundred ninety to two
hundred fifty depending upon the
specialty nursing that you need
in your hospital.
So think about this for most our
smallest hospitals in the state
this is an incredible challenge
they may not have the resources
to recruit nurses that they can
afford to pay at that level they
would agencies arrangement so
they're going to have to make
decisions about what services
they can offer in our most rural
communities hospitals like mine
serve as a hub Hospital we work
and coordinate with our spoke
hospitals are transfer rates are
at an all time high because we
want to make sure as a region.
That our patient population and
also all of north central New
Mexico this is the closest to
home we don't want to have to
fly a patient to Albuquerque or
Los crucis or Oklahoma to get
care right we want to be able to
care for those individuals here
but it's it's also taxing the
hub hospitals that service sort
of that central point for our
smallest hospitals we're feeling
that the strain of HSD
Nursing so that's the context of
the landscape for which were
sort of all operating within.
Right now the for Christus St
Vincent right now my nursing
workforce is about twenty five
to thirty percent contract
agency.
And I'll tell you you know a
number of them are coming from
communities all around the state
Serrato sharing our wonderful
precious nursing resource
because it's unstable
environment with opportunity for
them.
So.
Just to speak a little bit about
what we've done we've had a long
time relationship with our
community colleges on to help
grow the local pipeline
including your relationship with
our high schools where we can
introduce health care health
care opportunity nursing
eccentric at a very early age
and then we actually have
programs we run through students
through cohorts to get that
familiar do and hopefully enter
health care professions and come
back to our community to care
for for others but we also in
those community college
relationships are chief nurse
it's on two of the nursing
councils one at northern and one
at Santa Fe community college so
that we can actively provide
guidance and support for what
they're trying to do and create
within the community college
setting and then because of our
current
significant concerns about
having enough helping hands at
the budget eye toward nurses we
are right now working with Santa
Fe community college on a cohort
for certified nursing
assistants.
And I my I just my see any to
send me a little note because I
want to do to to hear real time
with this is looking like for us
In November we opened twenty
nursing assistant positions
within our hospital.
And with our goal to fill thirty
CNA positions that were in our
hospital alone so we work with
the committee called to set up a
nursing assistants course to
provide the education and
training to people that want to
enter health care for the first
time because we can't just rely
on a high school to to
relationship.
With the community college we
were able to use their setting
their simulation center at our
expense we're going to pay for
the instructors for this program
to do a ten week program which
is six weeks shorter than the
typical program.
To put students through the
experience and then the come
back to statements and get their
clinical hours in time we will
pay for them to take their test
for certification we will hire
all of them and then when they
pass their CNA test will give
them a raise in their wage and
put them in a new opportunity.
So for us it's not just about
creating a job it's creating
career so when you start as a
certified nursing as a nursing
assistant certified nursing
assistant it paves a pathway for
interest in becoming a
registered nurse.
C. R. N. A. that we heard about
earlier and possibly other
pathways but we are also
aggressive with our general
workforce I have individuals
that work in food nutrition
environmental services service
excellence I tease them I call
them I say look this is the
thing twenty five percent of
your teams are the form team for
the rest of the hospital if they
find they have an interest in
another health care job in the
organization we're going to
train them we're gonna provide
tuition assistance and then
we're gonna put them on a
pathway for taking on more
learning more and doing more to
care for our community.
I'm gonna I'm gonna stop there
because I just wanted to use
this as an opportunity to to
sure how critical it is that we
support the work of the
community colleges and helping
grow the pipeline the hospitals
around the state have a I have a
very important role in that
partnership because we service
that on site learning experience
quite frankly I consider an
opportunity to recruit and
retain them because I want to
keep in here you know I I'm I
too am a first time person to go
to college and when I see these
students come through the
pipeline and they're so eager to
learn and to contribute I want
to keep them all in this
community.
Seven a pas there see if you
have any questions for me or the
rest the team our land if you
want to wrap this up for us.
Representative ninety one of.
The questions thank you Mr chair
we really appreciate this
opportunity this is only the
beginning of the way to solve to
solve this nursing crisis that
we have in New Mexico and we're
grateful for the legislature for
your support in that with the
fifteen million thirty five
million for faculty endowments
through all of our colleges and
we don't want to be greedy but
we need more we're gonna have to
keep coming back for more
because this is just a start
thank you.
You're being did you have some
that because I got some other
members here Mister chairman I
don't want to jump in front of
anybody but I just want to let
me know we do have a Christine
Casper here who is the dean of
the UNM college of nursing I I
know she was not on the list of
presenters but I do know maybe
we could have a few words before
we go to questions how we want
to have a Mr chairman with your
permission I just want to let
folks know she's here in huge
program in the state don't know
you know if we could hear a few
words.
Want to add.
Need to come up to thank you Mr
chairman.
Chair Senators answered do you
thank you for our they brought
me up Christine Casper the dean
of the university of New Mexico
college of nursing.
And I'd like to thank all of you
for your continued generous
support of nursing in the state
and the university New Mexico
college
every dollar that you give us
goes directly to workforce
development in the area of
nursing.
And I'd also like to thank all
the other panels for nursing
across the state and the
hospital associations we're very
privileged in New Mexico to have
such good colleagues and able to
collaborate with all of our
colleagues across the state is
really unique in the state and I
really appreciate it
ninety three percent of our
graduates across all programs
undergraduate aware as well as
the advanced practice
nurses the educators and the
midwives all state in the state.
We currently have
Graduate we currently graduate
about on average four hundred
eighty nine students across all
programs that state most of the
state in the state and we have a
total currently of eleven
hundred students across all
programs.
our graduates in the
Education programs and the from
the graduate program do train
nurses across all programs
across all levels community
colleges through the other
universities.
And
I'm very happy to announce
because I think it hit the news
today that are graduate programs
we're just ranked by US news and
World Report yes the twentieth
in the entire nation.
So that's out of more than five
hundred schools of nursing.
So we're kind of really.
Happy about that so
we know there training
additional nurses is so
important because it will gases
just been stated nursing a such
a huge costs of the hospitals in
the state.
That more nurses will reduce
these costs for the travelling
nurses witcher.
Really excessive.
And
finally with the success of
these initiatives have been
presented today we will be
requesting a proportional share
based on graduations and the
number of graduates of the
fifteen million during the
special session and the proposed
thirty five million for the
faculty endowments and with that
money we project that we can
increase the undergraduate
graduations on enrollment by
ninety percent to allow us to go
from two four hundred eight
undergraduate graduates in a
year.
That would be it.
Thank you Senator Gonzales you
were first.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to to all of you.
I'm a very sincere note of this
is one of the best presentations
that we have for this year you
know so you too you know where
we are and what our needs are
you know as a state then all of
you were just excellent with
your comments.
And I just have a few things
that I just want to bring up
because you know I think we
pretty much all have all.
You know the same thoughts are
going through.
Of the state of grow your own
the the the low single you
brought this the I couldn't
agree more with you because so
that also with billion the you
know we do this then we'll have
this.
City that they'll stay within
our state.
And the this is one thought that
I thought of the I always go
back to a lot of the.
You know the discussions that I
used to have a with the.
Later the Representative Janet
Wallace and the she would always
say of.
You know one of the reasons our
school and our community does so
well is because we started a
very young age with everything.
And the what about if you
started the program like in the
ninth grade.
And and then I look at it as it
would be like that information
just showing a lot of
information about the program.
And then as you go on to a state
tenth eleventh grade you could
have a criteria program of the
classes that you're talking
about what it takes and just of
a pre production you know two
prerequisites to what is going
to be needed.
And then I would say like still
being in high school like the.
Good internship program where
they actually start getting a
little bit more into the field
and I think that if you have a.
You know something like that you
know it's not like I graduated
what do I do for you know coming
in later but I think proof we
have that the bill statewide to
that might be you know too many
other feels that you know can
you know go from there.
That's one part of the end of
the other part the caught my
attention to your presentations.
Is that of.
With the department of
transportation.
If there's something wrong with
our.
System with our highways with
our interstate.
It becomes a potential liable.
And and what caught my my
thought on this is like the I
think you just one of you
mentioned about having extra
bids the Tooting have the staff
you have the nurses to be there
to support it.
And I look at it is you have
that.
And if someone is really in
need.
Is there a potential liability
to the state.
That I would just more like
question.
And and if you can now you know
that it might be something that
can be researched.
Lenders may know the answer that
question.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales are
you talking about I think
there's public hospitals and
there's private hospitals and of
course the shortages across our
of them are you saying that that
that hospital might be liable if
they can't find the care because
they don't have a bed available
because they don't have nurses
or because they don't have the
surgeon available I mean there's
I mean there's liability for all
the things we do Senator I don't
think that would be
and usual.
Will I just see us you know Paul
was just give us it was
mentioned.
You know that you know all.
You know that you know someone
could come with will you can see
me and I really needed it you
know what happens to that.
the other one is so the the
program that started in tiles
for the U. N. M. tiles it's been
a really big success.
You know from all the
individuals that I'll finish the
program plus of the media of the
get hired you know which I
thought was very very good.
And the.
Will the last part that'll.
The I was going to bring into
well so.
I think that pretty much covers
that Mr Chairman will.
Again thank you for your
presentation and was very very
good of you know I hope that we
can do a lot to help you.
Thank you Senator Campos thank
you very much Mr chairman of
course than the thank you very
much for your work over the
years whenever it comes to not
only health care but working
with midwives and and the other
parts of of health care in our
society so with health care that
is definitely a priority and
we've talked about that over and
over so as we do move forward
the questioning that I would
like to at least present will be
directed towards the academic
rigor that our programs require
I know as we go forward we start
talking about our clinicals and
often times.
Clearly in small communities we
do not have adequate clinicals
so that's one issue as we move
forward and we deal with the and
collects the other aspect of it
is
the passage and and failure
rates and how are we going to go
ahead and work on the academic
pieces there so my first
question deals directly with
planning as we move forward
what is the instrumentation and
the planning schedule or at
least the platform so that we
can definitely become very
intricate and and how we're
gonna find the success because
that to me definitely and I
would always tell students to go
into nursing or health care of
what you want to do is to be on
top of your game and as precise
as possible because the last
thing you want to do is to make
a mistake that definitely could
cost the life of of an
individual so so with the
planning itself and I'm gonna be
very brief with these questions
so Mr chair with the planning
itself what is the plan maybe by
state board buyer nurses by
those that are at.
There in this field in order for
us to definitely percent if you
will our some solutions to the
problems that we do have before
us.
Mr chair Senator Campos are you
talking about the individual
schools planning are you talking
about H. E. D. how they're going
to get the money out how the
schools are going to apply that
that question so it's going to
be a holistic piece and the
issue is how do we translate how
do we make sure that all those
people who are in this
profession are going to be
participants and developing if
you will the strategic plan for
us to be successful.
We do have someone from eighty
five thank.
We do.
Because they told me there would
be someone here to talk about
the grant process you know what
we're Mr chair Senator Campos.
In during the governor
Richardson's time that's when
this whole idea of a program
enhancement fund was created in
the higher education department
we're still schools applied and
then receive this grant money
and then that money became part
of their line items in that
school so we know that AGD is
going to start working with the
schools of nursing as soon as
the bill is signed or maybe even
before once it passes to create
that process so that.
A local community can address
its own plan for how to expand
their number of students so it's
going to be
in some Rina the responsibility
of each school of nursing to
figure out
To get more money so that they
can keep doing that in the
future.
and I appreciate that because
working with the former governor
Richard send these are some of
the initiatives that we unveiled
and we applied these also if you
will at some of the high schools
within within the state and in
those type of programs
definitely to work with but the
key for me is going to go ahead
and be the academic rigor
because that's the piece when we
indicate we're gonna distribute
resources that definitely
services the evidence based
piece to to allow us to go ahead
and do that so so that's that's
one piece the other pieces with
the national accreditation
in the in the area of nursing
and I don't know if you have the
statistical information that
will definitely give us some
indication as to the success of
our schools of nursing with that
particularly accreditation and I
bring all these things out
because when when we're dealing
directly with accreditation it
does take time in order to go
ahead and be successful and and
in that when we don't have that
accreditation
we we do continue to sell
ourselves short and we want an
impeccable program a tough
program a program that is
definitely going to go ahead and
take care of the health care of
individuals and so so I bring
that forward because that to me
is is a strong indicator in
terms of how successful we can
be.
Chairman Senator Campos members
of the committee.
I want to reassure you about
nursing programs in the state of
New Mexico.
So the board of nursing The New
Mexico board of nursing requires
every.
Nursing program to be nationally
accredited every single
currently operating nursing
program in the state of New
Mexico is nationally accredited
so that is that is something
that is a requirement in order
to continue your accreditation.
I know that.
Santa Fe community college just
successfully completed a
continuing accreditation visit
in October I know that every
program here in New Mexico is
twelve.
Our.
Rigor has not shifted so I
wanting to increase graduates we
are not wanting to decrease the
level of academic rigor we are
not wanting to decrease.
The level of graduate we are
producing in any way and no way
that's why it is so expensive it
is not an expensive to
adequately prepare our graduates
so that's just something just to
be aware of and to be reassured
of all of our programs are
nationally accredited and you
are correct that is one huge way
of being able to evaluate a
program.
I I really wanted to be
reassured about the programs in
New Mexico every single one is
twelve.
They want to be allowed to
continue if they were not thank
you very much and just in the
essence of time and with the
number of questions that surface
because of
questions and programs like this
I would just say I'm very
supportive and I hope as we
continue to go forward that were
able to build that that rigor so
that we can help and the support
of course those people that
enter the field of nursing and
health care overall thank you Mr
chairman thank you Sir Campos we
do have the I think that W.
secretary that's right he's is
he on with this and got his hand
raised.
Very did you have something that
yes good morning Mister chairman
Senator Campos my name is Terry
around on another W. and then
the special financing
financially director I apologize
it took me awhile to get up from
the panelists like it's the if
you have any questions about how
we would just use the funds I
can certainly answer those
questions.
So Mr chairman if I may just
very quickly as we deal with it
and it's not to say it's merit
based but as we move forward in
issuing the funds what are some
of the requirements in order for
us to disperse those resources
to the programs that we do have
in the state.
Thank you Mr chairman it has
been you know over fourteen
years we've used program at all
and Hanson Fund I I think we
would have to consult with our
colleagues at the nurses
association institutions of
course of the the legislative
finance committee and the rest
of the rest of the legislature
as we created the R. P. we
really want to make this a
collaborative process we don't
want to be that the social and
while we are the custodian of
the funds until there's the
institution we really want to
have a panel of experts that can
help bring that you know the
valuation of recruit for the
program we want to make sure
that we understand the
difference is a recurring versus
nonrecurring costs that agencies
use candidate and so that we can
make the best use of those funds
but we certainly be a very
strong evaluation process thank
you I really appreciate that but
I'm gonna go back then to the
whole issue of planning and and
that's going to be a incumbent
upon all of us because that's
what I continue to hear from my
colleagues we want planning
whether the for broadband with
the for health care and I could
go on so I hope whenever that
process begins that we go in
work directly through our chair
there with the with the LFC and
at that time to go ahead and
roll out if you will with those
regulations and requirements are
going to be because that is
going to be the peace that
definitely will put people in
touch with those people that
that want to serve in want to
participate in this particular
field and it creates just a much
better work environment and more
jobs for for population thank
you Mr thank you for the thank
you Mr.
I.
Hi this is Alexa doing online
may I just want to the planet
question.
Sure.
Well thank you Senator Campos
and Mr chair members of the
committee the the nursing
institutions at in New Mexico
are very tightly connected to
have the New Mexico nursing
education consortium most of the
school schools and colleges of
nursing within the state along
to that so we do have network
already built up and then our
other schools were not part of
the consortium
you know we we stayed close to
have that many programs in the
state and so we are well
connected and
you know my my goal would be
that you know we really do come
together to increases synergy
around this funding and creation
called programs and possibly you
know share some resources across
programs and you know just to
give you an example New Mexico
state doesn't have and master's
degree in nursing education also
our our local nurses want to
become an educator go to Texas
order go to one of the more
national schools like economic
university and so we would we
would like to possibly create
partnerships with you in a very
strong program in this area
where our students could.
Forces and possibly either
clinical experiences with
thousand eight you know this
could work possibly in rural
communities to really think.
Recruiters so we we are already
well connected and and yours are
planning in stocks one or one of
our strengths and so
Be assured that we will we will
be organized as we move forward
with our.
Your Google sheet and in that
sense chair interpretive thank
you Mr chairman thank you to all
the presenters this was very
enlightening thank you I just
wanted to to ask a couple
questions again on the grow your
own efforts Planning I will beat
that anymore because it seems
like you know what we're pretty
clear on what the legislature's
expecting of of the work that's
being done here but on on the
grow your own myself and
Representative Garrett put
together the legislation to grow
your own teachers and when we
went through that process we
targeted which school personnel
and and my colleagues who helped
us get all this done which would
be available for the grow your
own program so I hope that
you're really thinking about
that because and it's certainly
sort of begins to develop a
career ladder for folks in the
healthcare profession so so
that's that's number one I'll
ask you to please target and
then learn from it and then make
changes because we we put the
dollars out to get into the grow
your own program and I think
they were gone in exactly
fifteen minutes and then the
next year we had to come back
and in H. E. was very very
helpful in putting all this
together by the way we task them
with doing that and and we had
to to to enhance the program a
little bit more later but is
there any actual a docu are
there any documents right now
the grow your own is there any
in terms of enhancements are
planning has that been put
together yet I'm not sure who
want to address that.
Millions.
Chairman Senator Padilla.
I want to.
What Santa Fe community college
has been doing and working with
local high schools on it now
right now currently capital high
school has a medical careers
pathway.
The have three faculty that have
been identified that teach the
medical careers courses that are
Sanchez for host.
David R. Sanchez for getting
their students and advising
their students into different
medical opportunities just
exposure this includes the
program at Christus hi Sir.
This does take than high school
students and.
They get to experience every
portion of that hospital they
get to be exposed to every piece
of that now what.
Really nice about what.
Capital high school is doing is
they are potentially exposing
their students to the culture of
health care.
It is a different world.
To serve other individuals in
that manner and they start that
exposure in ninth grade the
start that exposure the give
them guidance and they bring
them to us and have them join
into our programs we offer CNA's
we have an L. P. a high school
LPN program at capital high
school.
There are preparation of
students.
Really does get them on the
right path so absolutely now
that is also something Espanola
is looking at so F. Espanola is
just now starting to build the
medical careers pathway for
their own high school getting
their students into the classes
and exposed to the careers that
they could possibly work with
these are all things that are
happening currently.
Absolutely we would be
interested and increasing and
growing thank you Mr thanks for
coming Senate Mr chairman Mr
wrote a comment as well.
Mr chairman of the center for
the regard Mexico State
University but we also have
another model which is the early
high school early college high
school model for the the early
college high school is actually
on campus but they have two
tracks one isn't health and the
other track is an engineering
but that's another way to start
with the the grow your own and
it's a possibility that that
could also be used as a model to
move things forward as well
thank you thank you for your
comments and Mr chairman I
think's the portion about grow
your own through the high school
that's fantastic I think that is
a home run every and talk about
great salaries and and
everything for that young person
into their life but I'm also
does of a I'm commenting on the
grow your own for existing
health care professionals that
aren't at the salary level or at
the at the point in their career
where they would be get into the
nursing here does anybody want
to comment on that at all and
billion or Christine I don't
know.
Chairman Senator that is a very
The.
we have a million thank okay
thank.
So yes Mister chairman Senator
we actually actively do that at
Christus St Vincent we as I
mentioned earlier we really want
to focus on creating a career
not just a job for people so
that they they want to remain in
our workforce is so assured
early very at the very beginning
that we have twenty three
hundred people in our workforce
we employ more people that are
employed in our in Santa Fe
County or in Santa Fe city so
someone can start one place in
the organization and and up
anywhere else.
My favorite story to share is
our chief nurse Monica labor's
been with the hospital for forty
years and she's going to kill me
later for telling you that but
she started in on the tree line
in the cafeteria and through our
purpose of tuition assistance
and flexible hours and and
having a mentoring program we
have a development institute
within the hospital over the
many years she went everywhere
from the business office to
respiratory to inpatient rehab
and then it became the executive
director for nursing and then
Garcia any three years ago but
there are so many Monica's
across the same Vincent because
we do want to create
opportunities for people to
remain with the organization be
able to stay here with their
families are.
I would like to see that
statewide many organizations
can't do that specially are
smaller hospitals so efforts
such as what Linden the team are
sharing allow us to replicate
promising practices so that the
state benefits from that not
just locate is regional specific
areas.
How did you want to respond
Maxine Maxine.
I grow my own property that's
the piece that I wanted to speak
onerous unity graduate from our
programs that interest.
Ation and once they have a
couple of years experience that
is assisting the commission to
go
in and change our faxes access
to community choir and in that
process and we do have a place
in our you know all of the.
Place your internet access has
been doing that for a little
while.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
know Christine did you want to
comment on that at all I I
because you have such a large
organization that it seems like
there's a lot of opportunity for
other professions to grow into
the nursing profession because
there's so many different things
going on at that the health
sciences center.
Mr chair Senators Senator
Padilla yes the answer that we
do actively do that we try to
cast the widest net as possible
to move potential students from
high school through our
undergrad programs which is a
freshman direct entry the
traditional program which we
also use within and across the
state and we have in our to BSN
program we have the new second
degree program which should be I
think a good engine for
producing people twelve months
if you already have a bachelor
of science degree we're actively
moving in mentoring students
from undergrad into the grant
programs nursing education
nursing administration and the
ones in the a parent programs
and then casting a wider net.
To biology students at
university New Mexico and
pulling them all and as much as
possible we also work with the
CNO
the system to bring LPNs and
where possible.
Thank you very much and and I'll
just in on this Mr chairman I
mean the reason that the grow
your own teachers act as it's
been so successful is because a
lot of the profession the the
other professionals in the
school that are moving into the
grow your own teacher for they
have been inside the classroom
they've seen the dynamics of the
classroom so I hope that you
know these folks that are in
other roles within the
healthcare and you know
profession you know they've been
in the hospital they've been in
the who knows what they've
observed or whatever so they're
not going to go into the nursing
profession I want to leave
because they're gonna be very
well aware of it so thank you Mr
chairman Senator Padilla Sierra.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all for your presentation I
really appreciate you guys being
here if they are to professions
that we recognized during crisis
it's nursing and teaching and
those are also the professions
have really facing tremendous
challenges during these COVID
times and today so if you walk
away I just want you guys to
make sure the fulfill our
sincere gratitude for the
service it's an it's a
profession that usually attracts
people who have a really the
definition of a pot to public
service you know at the heart to
giving others and and we
appreciate all you guys have
done.
Not just in these tough
challenging times for for your
entire life my mom my entire
life has been a registered nurse
she retired just last year at
seventy three and so our entire
family grew up around her
schedule really you know in in
her commitment to helping other
people I remember when I was
little I'd wake up on her early
morning shift say wake up really
early so she could braid my hair
I can bring my own hair and it
was worth it because the
alternative was my dad was going
to do a vacuum cleaner ponytail.
Our entire day revolves around
really her commitment her hard
for other people our family did
and she was that she was a labor
and delivery nurse and when she
lost a baby are when she lost a
mother we felt it in our homes
and so I just want to thank you
guys for what you do for our
communities
it and really for giving rise to
the heroes right now we're
talking about the next
generation of heroes I had just
a couple questions here and I'm
going to refer back to my fellow
Aggie for couple questions from
her presentation first of all
I'm encouraged to see slide ten
here that says that
you were talking about what
we're recruiting or nursing
students at eighty percent of
your nursing students come from
New Mexico that's encouraging I
just wish that we could keep all
of them here in New Mexico when
they're done with the program I
did want to address I know when
I've been on campus at St there
seems to be some barriers in the
classroom and so how can we help
there I'd like to know if there
is a requirement for the student
teacher ratio I've heard that
there is I I can't confirm that
what is the classroom
requirements for these nursing
programs.
Senator.
Eighty five so
to to address the question about
size requirement is
not to look at the whole forty
year career the bachelor's
degree in nursing they do
approximately one and a half to
two years we've created our
finances.
The general education and we
don't have a lot of control over
on those particular courses are
not within our school the thing
that we try to support students
it is it is again multi pronged
effort we developed the previous
session curriculum
a seminar that is the screen
issues can pay it really
is coming in at for your
oriented and into the degree
plan additional requirements
resources on campus in the
resources that are a school
nurse provide we provide.
I.
Students our students are this
is really kind of a lot of them
into our current students to
students and teachers or levels
allows and to earn earn some
extra funding to support
themselves school that also
helps.
Senator Morris beginning.
we program our.
Mexico the orders are set in the
clinical courses and we we.
Hold on
to one every student is one
reason why the cost of
education is caller higher than
other programs it's kind of
and
clinical experience classroom
and that this is one of those we
had just as we have grown our
classroom were that these
courses March and you just don't
have the faculty at this point
in time to be able to create
different sections of the
courses there is no mandate for
this site.
Officers and active forces but
our goal would be tried as we
continue to grow to be able to
make class sizes smaller but
right now and we we we don't
have the funding.
So
we received any and and our our
retention rates we do a lot to
try to get since we are
legislative Krugman
opportunities for clinical
partners southern New Mexico.
Requests we we try to maintain I
tried to do what we can for
those in need you know.
a clinical experiences in the
state.
An African seventy we
communicate a lot with clinical
partners to you to try it does.
Thank you Mr chairman and your
concerns that you just mentioned
with the not having a faculty
and staff at that one to eight
ratio I've heard before and
actually my suggestion was is
that instead of going down if
you guys are being limited if
you have interested students
that aren't able to get into the
program because we've cap those
sizes is to maybe consider
letting even an additional two
if we have to get in streamlined
and but maybe maybe those
requirements are are limiting
the number of nursing students
are wanting to get into the
program with with the
universities and universities
Capricorn are meant one more
additional question Mr chairman
that was a follow up to what you
had said mentioned earlier Mr
role you mention a Los crucis as
early childhood early college
high school health related track
and maybe Senator Steinborn
knows a little bit about this
you mentioned that that may
serve as a model my question is
if it if there's potential there
wires were we not already
accessing that pipeline what
what and what do we need to do
to help getting that pipeline up
and running as soon as possible
Mister chairman Senator Diamond
I I I think it's an excellent
model I don't have any figures
in terms of the if there's any
students that are actually going
into the nursing pipeline but
it's something that we need to
look at but I know in the
engineering field it's been
something that's been working
really really well in fact I
know of at least three students
that ended up graduating from
the early college high school
and then when they graduated
from college it only took him
three years to graduate the fact
that no one young young man that
to ended up graduating three
years to two degrees but it is a
possibility that that could be
used as a model in order to get
are more nurses into the
pipeline as well and the to to
help address that but I will get
more information on that and
we'll try to gather some data to
see if we can figure out to see
how many of the students are
actually going to the nursing
field as well thank you Mr
chairman we state we often say
we need to look at something I I
know you're you're you're great
at this role but let's look at
it sooner than later is.
I mentioned that the industry
that the profession is in crisis
right now and whatever we can do
to get on this as soon as
possible I'm I'm committed to
helping you downturn Los crucis
area to do what we need to do to
streamline that so again thank
you guys all for your service
you know for the people you
change lives and save lives to
thank you all for being here I
really enjoyed your presentation
thank you thank you Senator
Burt.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
again thank you for the
presentation and and just like
Senator Diamond thank you for
the work that you do
All the time but but certainly
in the last couple years we've
been successfully challenged
with COVID issues so thank you
for that Mr chairman I will try
to be brief
just talking my CEO and I at the
jail champion no border where I
live I think is a prime example
forty percent.
Forty percent of his bedside
nurses are content nurses or
crisis nurses thank goodness for
the crisis nurses what's the the
state provides one of that
program will continue relief for
some time.
But it is a and I know you'll
know this but as a contractors
if they're based in Alamogordo
they will go to read up a
Roswell for three four days to
make.
Two three four times what they
make in Alamogordo.
Going home for two or three days
will often come back and do that
again and that's.
And in open Russell people go to
close because people go to
Amarillo Lubbock community just
as it just goes on and on and on
and on with this general
champion for St Vincent or
Presbyterian you can't keep.
Painters is at that level not
that they're not worth it but
your bottom line just long lot
of that so we've got to get back
we're we're we're we're giving
Anderson is no and and making
pathways to create
more nurses in the state of New
Mexico we have and we have the
colleges with programs I I I I I
know that you have to have small
classes but we have to increase
the number of classes we have to
support these programs with some
money and we have to find
educators who are going to come
out of this data they feel to to
educate more nurses.
So I mean I think that's all
part I think we know that my
concern is we have a pretty good
pathway for high school students
coming up because we get back
now high schools and and and and
try to show my path and
hopefully if they're interested
they will take that.
But I think it maybe I'm not
aware of it but I'm I'm thinking
this is about who is you know
what about the the people come
in the military for years that's
not their career path maybe
we're missing those folks people
have been EMTs how do we get
them into the nursing program
cops a fire firefighters or or a
plumber who just want to be a
problem it is looking for
another group I mean how are we
going to attract those people
because I think we're missing
the possibility that there so
many people we talked higher it
all the time about the people
who wanted to grieving want a
career.
In.
A great career you know nursing
could be for them not only from
a rewarding aspect but also from
the financial aspects.
How are we going to go after
those those people that I'm
afraid that were missing
so in Mr chairman I guess my my
quick question if anybody has an
answer like to know we have to
do it here but offline that
would be fine too but I just
don't want to miss
opportunities by having small
classes and not having the
capacity to expand and I don't
want to miss people who might be
interested in this but are never
informed about it or don't know
how to to ask about something
like this.
Mr chairman and senator Burt the
simple I shared earlier about
our nursing assistant cohort
that purely came out of a job
fair that we had in November we
had about thirty individual show
up and our team was very
aggressive we took several nurse
leaders out on to meet these
people that you showed up for
a job opportunity to see what
was out there and ten of those
people that showed up agreed to
start this nursing assistant
program amid join the program
and a week later we had another
job fair so we have thirty seven
people in the queue now for this
nursing assistant program that
is going to bring people into
the hospital and there for all
ages.
Steinborn second career summer
they have a current career they
want to explore.
But we're doing it on a small
scale so you were right I mean
this is an opportunity look at
how can we do this on a much
larger scale and introduce
health care to people who may
want to make that change I'm
pretty confident that we're
gonna be able to not only are we
going to bring them on board
this saying be part of our paid
workforce but we want to retain
them so we're going to continue
to introduce them to other
opportunities within the
organization once they're there
many many years ago when I
worked at the commission on
higher education we were very
aggressive in moving forward
with the health related loan for
service programs and health
professional repayment program
those continue to be really
really important to helping
people worry less about the
finances when they change
careers or enter nursing or
health care for career for the
first time but I will also say
that individuals who choose a
health care career already in
the stem category if you will
and once we get the men even if
they decide to not become a
nurse but they want to become a
respiratory therapist or they
want to become a coder we've
already had that opportunity to
introduce them to it what it
means to be in health care and
we don't want to lose them so
it's not a necessarily a bad
thing with they want to change
pathways once they start nursing
because we just need introduce
them let them taste the other
things that are happening within
the health care agency a
hospital or clinic and I'll
guarantee you we can keep around
longer.
Mr chair Senator Burt I was just
talking to our Santa Fe
community college dean and a
third of our nursing students
are you know older students
coming back to school and you
all may remember sandy out in
Dhaka's who is American cancer
society
government relations for years
she just went back to nursing
school she's actually at Santa
Fe community college and a
bachelor's and something else
and decided at forty something
she wants to be a nurse and so
she's she's with us Santa Fe
community college so people are
deciding to change careers and
and they are I'm sure the other
schools have comparable numbers
of people who are just right out
of high school.
Well in Mr chairman and and
thank you all very much for that
answer it I just don't wanna
miss anybody and you know why
most of my life in in marketing
and advertising and and so so
forth not this level to
advocating for that but I I just
you know when you teach classes
kids about marketing and going
into business for themselves and
this been two three years trying
to figure out they want to do
this hello I get the money and I
I need to educate myself and you
know four years later you open
your doors lights on the phones
working hang up a shingle and go
home I forgot to only buy it was
here.
So so you can defeat the purpose
at that point is so I don't want
to miss that final step where we
actively in and I mean actively.
find every Avenue orders many
avenues as we can to track
people who really don't know
what they want to do but would
could become incredible access
to this career path so anyway I
just want to bring that to the
table and I hope that discussion
will help take one last step
that you guys need to make sure
that we we don't miss anybody
because one desperate need as
you all well know and we can't
keep on the path of payment two
three four times
as a contractors and in more
power to for making more money I
I think I'm all for making money
but but you know our facilities
can't can't maintain that so
anyway that's all chairman thank
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning everybody good to see
you good to see the folks from
Los crucis that I represent as
well and and my thanks to
everybody in the medical
profession right now the real
heroes of our society and I
don't think that's cliche that's
that's for my personal
appreciation and and I know what
our per our first responders and
our frontline folks have gone
through the last two years and
it's some believable so I want
to start with that a question
about how you've seen.
What's happened with COVID a
fact application rates for
student numbers in the programs
has that affected the numbers of
people that are applying.
Reduce that increase it
decreases.
Senator.
Mr chair I can talk about New
Mexico state are are publication
numbers have state fairs.
through COVID we had a little
bit more traction in the program
and and so that's because of the
vaccine mandates for healthcare
workers some of it is just and
your financial stress over I
decided that you know don't want
continuing professional our our
pipeline is still to be strong
so that hasn't been too much of
an issue I think and I I was
gonna reverse lights on to
senator Byrd's question you need
very briefly I think it plays
into this
you know I think you know your
sanitation worker to talk about
how we can we can strategize
together but but the
hemorrhaging of nurses whether
it's going from you know one
time to the next order of the
state we're not gonna be able to
solve this crisis in the
hospitals are you know can get
the support to try to keep the
nurses and retaining the nurses
often they're using some of the
more experienced nurses were
gradually brand officers who
need time to acquire the
expertise and so.
Definitely not a contract
situation right now so we're
gonna do what we can try to ruin
the moment and insurers are
seeking services from our highly
qualified but we we've got to
strategize about how to retain
nurses in the state.
Hospitals.
Senator Steinborn members of the
committee.
We have definitely seen fewer
qualified applicants.
So at Santa Fe community college
it is much more difficult to get
qualified applicants and by
qualified applicants that means
we are not lowering our
standards or decreasing the
rigor of our application process
that makes it difficult for
students to get into our
programs and that is limiting it
can be very limiting so yes
that.
Crisis the pandemic has
definitely had its influence
there are people who are scared
very scared they're scared to
come on the campus they're
scared to sit in a classroom and
learn how to do blood pressures
on one another much less
whatever else is happening
without throughout the pandemic
whether that is they're taking
care of patients COVID patients
they're trying to and we're
providing all of the safety
mechanisms that we absolutely
can't enter clinical partners
have been more than generous
with assisting us with.
Keeping our students as safe as
possible but absolutely there
are people who in the program
have decided this is not what
they want to do that but it is
something you would mention
something about first responders
and we have many first respond
program and I think that that's
something to to remember that we
are colleagues with many other
health care.
Health care professionals they
see what nurses do and want to
participate in that way so I in
no way are we trying to exclude
anybody we are absolutely trying
to recruit and retain anybody
who would like to become a
nurse.
Really just ask a few quick
questions but I show has all the
programs out there raise your
hand if you're programs will
enrollment right now the
students.
Raise your hand if they're not a
formal.
Okay so that's interesting so
you really have a capacity issue
of being able to expand.
Just to be able to train more
students what is the number one
most effective tool you have to
recruit students into the
profession I heard it's not too
late talked about loan
forgiveness which I know I
learned a long time ago was like
the number one recruitment tool
for for providers in in New
Mexico you know we're competing
nationally for providers what's
the number one recruitment tool
to incentivize students the
profession we have to set.
Tuition assistance.
Wraparound support.
Over thirty percent of the
students at Santa Fe community
college our parents.
It is really difficult when
you're a single parent.
Two others just briefly Google
works because at this.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Gloria
Doherty I am a PhD prepared
nurse practitioner and
registered nurse for over thirty
years.
Tuition reimbursement and loan
forgiveness are really key I
just paid off a hundred and
thirty thousand dollars student
loans on my own from my
bachelor's degree in nineteen
ninety seven got my associates
in nineteen ninety one my
bachelors in nineteen ninety
seven.
And I cannot tell you with
trying to get students to roll
for the colleges of nursing and
this state to represent the
diversity of the citizens of our
state we need to make it more
affordable and we need to find a
way to get people in.
Cost is huge I was a single
parent thank you and now you got
to pay off your paid sick now I
actually didn't have to do that
because I had tuition
reimbursed.
so yes this month.
I think it's a game and the the
growing cost of higher education
I mean it's across the board in
every field right.
But we also need to look at how
do we as to create opportunities
for people to consider health
care is that path.
Rather than you know becoming
the engineer or another path why
would health care be more
appealing and I think there's an
opportunity here for campaign
around what it means to be
engage in health care
professionals and it appeals to
certain individuals most many
which would probably choose a
teaching path and others but
Larson is because people don't
know that there's so much more
opportunity within health care
for job it's not limited to
clinical rule but it could be in
business finance
I. T. there there's just we're
we're experiencing a shortage
and all of those errors and when
you think about what we with
businesses and hospitals around
this state are experiencing in
terms of work for shortages and
and the growing numbers of folks
are choosing to remote work
think about what that means for
hospitals that have professions
that aren't at the bedside but
want to work remotely and they
can work remotely in California
for more.
So the campaign for what it
means to be engaged health care
worker is a key opportunity
right now so my question Mr
chairman is with all this money
all this money you know the
appropriate money that we're
looking at funding is loan
forgiveness factor into that I
hear it down meant for the
schools are we increasing the
loan forgiveness program is
anybody now is that on the
table.
Senator if you're looking your
M. one right volume two on page
four of five and you look at a
student nurse nursing loan
service right there.
LFC recommend trying.
Is a great thing.
We look at those three
categories.
There are.
Actually did fly.
Mr chair I mean the governor's
budget had a one point five
increase for a loan for services
for health care providers in the
LFC rectus not have any I would
flag that because Mr chairman
that's just something we
continually hear loan
forgiveness and I wanted to
focus on that and it sounds like
I have no doubt that while the
schools are all fully booked
right now as we continue to grow
the need to.
You know market the need to make
it an attractive profession and
the we have to work harder I'm
sure you have to work harder to
get people into it because of
the challenges that we're now
facing as a society so loan
forgiveness can be that tool
that helps with that it sounds
like and the final question I
will not ask you to respond to
maybe in the interest of time is
just the working conditions in
the field itself and I know that
something that okay I I know
that's got it it's it's super
challenging since you worked on
through the years went to a lot
and the others I'd like to just
learn about that because that's
something that has to be
confronted as people are wanting
whether or not to go in this
profession is what are we doing
to support especially during
these difficulties.
Of course we know that there's
an attrition rate which I don't
know we really talked about as
well people leaving the
profession because of the
challenges so we just have to
deal with this and re tool and
re engage in and invest
So anyway bigger conversation Mr
chairman I since you the product
one of next question but look
for to hear your thoughts on
that too offline and no probably
the whole committee would as
well.
Thank you Mr Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning to everyone
you know I'm just sitting back
here thinking about this whole
thing and I all I can think of
in my mind as well this is
serious business when you think
about the fact that.
Truly there is no health care
without the nurses we can have
physicians we can have
specialists we can have surgeons
in a variety of those we keep
advocating for but when you
don't have any nurses you're out
of health care.
You know we all come from
different experiences right some
of us grew up this is been
stated today around nurses
family members some that were.
S. nurses already others that
became nurses in the future.
But some of us grew up in a
different environment.
Other than with family members
that were nurses.
I fit in the other category this
category for me is that I can
say part of my life quite a
large amount of my life.
Several years anyway I grew up
around nurses from a different
perspective that perspective is
this.
I didn't have family I didn't
have anyone who was even close
to being a nurse in the family.
But I lived most of my life.
In hospitals or in clinics.
With my daughter.
My daughter was in the hospital
picture this approximately if
not more one year at a time in a
hospital.
And.
I got to live in the environment
where we became a family with
nurses.
I got to have an appreciation
that I can hardly express
without getting choked up.
Because I found myself not only
seen and this was several years
ago not only seen the need to
have more nurses but I found
myself.
Wanting to help no my experience
and my education is not in
nursing.
I did what I could to help more
nurses than for example.
I change the budget.
Almost every day when I have to.
Because nurses were too busy
trying to tend to patients
throughout the hospital I also
changed and cleaned up with
called the Jackson Pratt to you
nurses know what I'm talking
about.
And I did find a funds.
And log them in and have them
come in and verify them because
they couldn't do it on time.
They have the time frame as we
all know when you know what I'm
talking about so.
I got to see first hand and have
the direct insight to those
needs and I cannot tell you but
in a few words here because they
were this no.
No Way it no other way to
express how much I appreciate
the work that you do.
Many times I got to see.
Physicians command they could
come and go as we know depending
on how you have the arrangement.
And the demand on nurses was
huge.
Rural physicians and and I can
see they needed to have that
information to but there was
only so many nurses and patients
were hurting this is not folks
this is not an area where we can
we can scam and and we can put
as a low priority.
This is about our health care
and all you have to do all we
have to do is one time.
Very sick.
And.
You talk about a pain.
Federally we will change.
I got to see that myself through
my daughter we lost our daughter
a few years ago.
and we live it every day
devastated without her.
But I can tell you that.
I never will cease appreciating
the the.
Hard work the determination and
the the work ethic that I got to
see from nurses and and I so
much appreciate that thank you
very much and I just have a
quick question Mr chairman and
I'm gonna move on because the
time is already here late but
let me just say thank you to
Linda for your hard work I know
since the summer you were
working on this matter thank you
for that and of course the many
people who are here today
representing the nurses and the
health profession but in a our
own hospital lately and you are
amazing thank you so much I do
have a just a quick question
first I want to to ask Lillian
because our time I had others
but I'm gonna reduce that Mr
chairman for the time but let me
just say that
on your handout Lillian you
indicated that over four hundred
and fifty hospital beds are
available because I mean they're
empty sitting there because you
don't have staff.
The first question that came to
my mind is what do you do when
somebody shows up I mean how do
you deal with this please help
me visualize we can't we don't
turn people back but at the same
time there's no nurses there's
not enough help what do we do
when for these four hundred and
fifty budget if I go in very ill
and you don't have enough nurses
we're going to put me for
example.
There's so many ways answered.
Hi good Mr Senator thankful so
the the transfer function within
I'm I'm on hospitals as that is
been really key so for example
twice a week we have a meeting
with our spoke hospitals we have
a morning call for an hour our
chief medical officer and our
chief nurses from all the
surrounding hospitals talk about
their volumes in their house and
which patients do they have that
they need to transfer elsewhere
and among the group we figure
out how we can accept transfer
so we're helping each other out
real time and we have each
other's Tax numbers of well done
to texting to see who has
availability so that we can keep
those patients in the region
it's just so much harder on
families that they have to leave
the community so that's one
every day strategy is our house
supervisors calling the
surrounding hospital so that we
can help them out within the
hospital it's about quick
discharges it's really focusing
on how can we get patients into
and through faster we continue
to encourage the community to
not seek emergency departments
for testing they need to go to
test sites because when they go
to the emergency department that
means or someone is sicker than
them that's not getting the care
that they need in an emergency
setting so that does present a
challenge for teams when I talk
about hospital to home it's a
program that we set up so that
we can remote monitor patients
from their home.
And and we are more nurses call
them over four to seven times
over the course of their home
recuperation to make sure that
they're okay but we're keeping
them out of the bed so that
someone who is sick or is in the
path.
The other is within the
organization itself there is
more of a we lean more into team
based care so we're taking as
much as we can automate the
nurses hands that we can so that
they can work top of license we
want to make sure that the that
this the custodial team the team
is going under the claim is
doing the cleaning and doing
everything they can to make it
easier on the nurses good
nutrition is going there it's
just the right time to clear the
room the trays and such so that
the nurses don't have to worry
about moving a trait you know we
want to just make it so seamless
that the nurses can focus on the
patient so that we can get the
patients cared for and and
hopefully this chart sooner we
have a daily practice on
throughput where we have the
emergency department head of
emergency our chief nurse as
well as hospitals team looking
at our patients and who is ready
for discharge of what we need to
do to facilitate that case
management is very involved part
of our challenges around the
state is that we have patients
that aren't able to go home
because they don't have the snap
I'll give an example with two
patients last week we finally
discharged after each having
over three hundred days in the
hospital because we didn't have
an outpatient site to send them
to so it's it's it every day
every minute sort of assessment
on how we can help people get
home faster to be with their
families where they can heal but
also ensuring we have a bed
available for those that are
sick SO it's an everyday
challenge you know that several
hospitals in the state have
declared a crisis standard of
care that is going to that puts
additional pressures on them
they make decisions about who
gets a surgery right now we're
not who can delay a surgery for
example if you have a limited
number of teams to support that.
Thank you so much let me and a
it can interrupt Senator
Rodriguez because Senator
Hemphill I have to go to
committees committee eleven let
me let me ask some questions
real quickly
And maybe Harry's gonna he is
still on with us I didn't like
the word when the UNM person
said they have to get the
proposed portion will share in
the nursing.
That means a big universities
are gonna eat up everything and
the community colleges and in
eastern San Juan right where
those nurses will grow at home
and stay home with will not get
in that system.
It's troublesome to me.
And we may look at making a
direct appropriation to those
smaller universities and
community colleges and.
And and the cost we look at the
program and on and I look pretty
hard at nursing so you can get a
nurse out of eastern New Mexico
for about sixty seven thousand.
San Juan about the same that's
four years tuition and this
type.
And so the smaller colleges and
the rural colleges are a lot
cheaper I think you and them and
and you can correct me if I'm
wrong but it's like a hundred
and ten thousand dollars.
For four Year.
Do a quick minute
Thank you senator
Thank you very it depends on the
level of the service lowest
level Los level is
All cost about fifteen thousand
a year.
So two and a half years in the
nursing course.
Maybe forty some thousand forty
five.
That includes books stipends all
the more hundred percent of the
undergraduate scholarships
Maybe.
Maybe rounded up to sixteen
thousand.
First per student per year.
So in a two year program the
year sixty thousand for that
students with books tuition in.
Under sixty thousand and that
includes housing.
Does not include housing how
much more would housing be
wanted to be I don't Sir I don't
know because
Pretty hard and
And look across the state so
we're going to resolve the issue
and we really want to resolve it
and and you heard the young what
hello member named but what
she's paying off her student
that.
I think we're gonna have to fund
the schools independently and
and given the direct
appropriation so the bigger
universities like animation you
which has branched colleges that
may not get their share and you
and then don't eat up the whole
fifteen million on on themselves
because they're bigger I don't
think that's fair to everybody
and everybody in the green meant
that smaller universities
eastern highlands Gallup grants
when those nurses are trying
their they'll stay there.
So we may have to look at
something individual now in that
program is set up but the other
thing is the universe is always
said it will give us the money
and will build the backside of
the program and then we'll get
more students well we're in a
shortage and I think that.
Eastern said they can get.
And don may remember correct me
if I'm wrong twenty students in
the next semester in in and
moving on.
And San Juan said they had
availability of theirs to get
nine or ten and so that's the
number we're gonna kinda look at
as we move forward so that is.
Is is
Where I think we had a target
some money when house bill two
comes over into everybody look
within their their districts and
in their communities tier C.
Alamogordo has an issue you have
eastern I think center you have
San Juan college and start
targeting those that those
dollars into those schools in
the districts across the state
there may be members that don't
have our representative here so
we'll make sure that that sing
Kerr but we're gonna have to
target those and send them
directly.
To pay the program and to get
those nurses and say here's your
full tuition.
Here's your all your books and
everything you required in your
house.
And just pay that cost and and
try to get people in the market
that's the only way we have to
change the market is to push me
and so I think that's a key
thing.
Senator Steinborn on page four
of five which will be looked
there was an increase in health
care professional loan repayment
about two hundred.
That the LFC wreck at.
So so did go up eight three
hundred thousand.
Yeah but the whole totaling
tires one point four and if you
add all the other medical
nursing you get about two point
five in total LFC the executive.
I do not have the right to
executive director.
So that that's a total there but
we're gonna have to figure this
out pretty quickly because we
tried to figure out and got more
money and more money because
everybody one of the back money
and not the student money and we
want to student money so you
guys can worry about the problem
and is your as you increase you
have more students but they're
paid for and I think that's very
key as we move forward Sen Ron
Griggs similar you chair there
is one announcements
When we in the media we're gonna
hand out some junior
supplementals request and I
think there Campos return that
committee everybody will get a
man and revealed and then look
at the Sanchez and then
hopefully we can have a
subcommittee hearing tomorrow
morning to wrap up the.
This is yes thank you thank you
one more thing the the the
person from you in it our
animation you sent in FY twenty
one they were cut but in FY
twenty one when we did that we
added three million dollars to
the budget and then we came back
during the special income one
point five so they still got a
million and a half increase over
that and that's what happened
the special but you still got an
increase so really wasn't cut
into the received about three
million dollar increase in that
in one half million dollar cuts
was thank you thank you thank
you Mr Harry and has him.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to comment on the on the
statute of the program
development fund that it does
stipulate competitive proposals
there's nothing about a formula
or scale so we would be
evaluated each program for the
in that area state rural or
urban but they would be better
for competitive proposals
percentages that thank thank you
Harry okay Fund gonna continued
out on mine thank you let me
just go for a moment and
continue on my.
Questions that I had we don't
have a lot of time that.
Try to be brief thank you
lily and you were explaining how
you handle that and and I'm not
surprised because you're so
resourceful in every way we
really appreciate you and the
many of our other center here I
can't tell you how much I feel
like I'm part of this family
with everything that we've all
been through together I've
always that there's a cliche
that I grew up with in my family
would tell me when something
just I kept pushing for
something they said you can't
squeeze blood out of a turnip
and that's the many of you
probably understand what I'm
saying that's exactly what I see
here so I will be right there in
the forefront of looking for
long term solutions here that we
can work on together we need
something this what's called we
hear the word transformational
law this is transformational if
we can do something quickly to
change you know what's happening
here in this shortage so I just
want you to know that I will be
working closely on that issue
I yep wanted just to have to ask
a quick question maybe about
Christus here of Lillian the
additional vacancies that you
have you have one hundred
vacancies that in nursing
vacancies how long it if you
could be brief how long have you
had these vacancies are these a
result of this whole situation
with COVID or was that they're
already yes
And Act I had twenty two HSD
twenty two contract nurses I now
have a hundred and twenty
contractors is a twenty five
percent of my nursing workforce
and my number's probably lower
compared to some of the
hospitals especially the most
rural hospitals so it's it's a
significant issue
and we're hoping now that we're
seeing the the COVID numbers
Pato a bit the HSD rates will
come down and that some of our
nurses will make decisions to go
back to their home communities
the
It's not just that you know if I
was talking to someone last
night about the challenges
around contract nursing the.
The agencies are really taking
advantage of this pandemic as an
opportunity to really
advantage there agencies when
you see the premium rates rise
so quickly and they haven't yet
come down enough but when they
do we were going to we will find
that our nurses that have left
us to go do HSD nursing will
want to return thank but not
fast enough as far as I can.
Thank you thank you.
So much like your substitute
teachers we have like subs to
nurses the call contract agency
the contract labor and it's a
contract agency generally for
profit agencies that provide you
nurses from all over the state
and country.
Thank you thank you good
question
this to me what I just want to
say thank you for the
collaboration which is very a
good idea to collaborate with
the community colleges and
others thank you for what you do
right here in Santa Fe and and
other places for doing that so
let me just I'm gonna wrap it up
here in just a couple of moments
that I just wanted to ask this
to make sure I have the numbers
correct in my head here on your
sheet Linda it indicated that
the fifteen million if I
understood correctly would
basically bring get about
fifteen hundred your goal is for
fifteen hundred nurses and
that's all we can provide you.
I'm sorry students not students
test their colleges sections
estimate based on the LFC is
numbers of prior year actually
yes thank you but out of those
three hundred and eight would be
the graduation here limit your
your let your so that would take
approximately five years then we
wouldn't even get there I know
we have to the as soon as we can
double the number of of
graduates not quite and and
that's my point when I see this
in your six thousand two hundred
twenty three nurses short them I
just couldn't see I want to see
the end of the of the I mean
that we have hope here in this
tunnel what we're word trekking
through and so when I saw that I
thought this is not going to be
okay but it's not sustainable
for to meet the need that we
have today but also the
increased need that's coming
continuously
and so it's not only the mean
the variances viruses on is
certainly a contributor but we
have to since way before we knew
this problem was significant and
we just let it go we thought it
was going to go away and so now
we know what we're facing but I
just want to thank everyone I'm
gonna stop because we got to
move on but just know that we
will do everything we can to
ameliorate this problem and work
with you to do some
transformational as I was
telling him Senator our chair
stepped out have to for a moment
that if we do something is this
is been discussed here today I
think we can really make a huge
dent not only and hopefully even
fix this problem once and for
all in a much shorter period so
thank you very much for this all
I have Mister chairman and I
don't see anyone else here on
the list so thank you.
