Thing you're doing I need we
need to make sure we thank them
that's really the back office to
make this all functions without
to upset that many times thank
you.
And so with that madam chair we
have some amendments to house
bill two that we're discussing
in a rack of of some changes
that have been made to us or or
sent to us through agencies
through higher ed in I think
every member has that.
And so we can.
Yeah the members have the the
Shia and the House and over ten
million in reoccurring in ten
million on reoccurring fifteen
fifteen in nonrecurring in
fifteen and reoccurring.
And we had some special ad by
the governor and had to make
some adjustments to get through
that process and those are track
throughout this section of the
bill and so madam chair we can
just begin done you want to
begin.
Thank you madam chair how do you
want to do this I think that it
don it would you like to store
or.
Senator will you start item item
item number two is a bill we
just heard on the Senate floor
for the for this the courts to
raise their pay raises equal
federal judges.
Item number.
For.
For is the fifth and the twelfth
and includes a new judgeships
for monitoring ankle bracelet
that we're talking about in the
prime package.
Well PRC regulation is for some
contracts and policy they're
going to get changed and they
need an adjustment to move over
that's two hundred.
Regulation and licensing we've
had a problem with us see Ideen
inspectors in this is moving the
inspectors into the C. ID for
the mobile home division and
some securities and then the
next line item seven is for Sir
committees in mortgage
regulatory fund that's coming
out of other sources or
transfers of for them to
Track that racing commission
because the testing and
operations were short because
they're they're general fund
gets swept every year would fill
that fill that.
The state engineer this number
item number.
Line is for FTEs for for tribal
settlements in water issues that
is over the request of the state
engineer we're not under one on
tracking we are over with that
Indian Affairs Department for
suicide prevention services two
hundred fifty.
CYFD for domestic violence
programs under so I.
And then on present publications
because the prison population is
down we reduce that number and
then on item.
Thirteen we pick that up with
the increase in social services
CBRC.
We want to stop right there
madam chair she we have any
questions before we go any
further that maybe I think so
yeah do we have any questions
let me just clarify your
amendment the members of the
subcommittee Senator Hemphill
Senator Padilla Senator shares
Senator Woods of course myself
and but we can have any
questions from any one here
thank you for joining us Senator
Campos.
There for the thank you madam
chair and and Mr chairman so
what we're seeing here is just
the this is augmenting other
these changes but there would be
funds and other places to go
with these so as an example
we're not to the Economic
Development stuff on leading yet
but that's twenty five here but
there was already twenty five
should be a total of fifty is
simple in your work we're gonna
get there we're just racking up
but we have so it's very
confusing sometimes you get to
some point in that are going
back and forth back and forth
sort through those questions I
guess somebody ought to get
centers here in center Woods or
locate them maybe there analyst
can text them and get them down
here.
The so we are at line fourteen
for public's safety there's
three FTEs for cyber security
which which the state police is
requesting the line.
Fifteen is a backlog right those
are going to go to the right kit
backlogs most of them yeah that
long list of some of our right
kids that have been kind of.
I think.
Madam Corning to don let me
correct myself that that is for
administrative services to help
clear that backlog.
Right in the in
PED transportation they no
longer need the universal
program so we reduced that and
then we increased an outdoor
coordinator for professional
development for PED.
line eighteen his reduction in
student services for HEDT
students support and then you'll
see an increase in to pay for
that in athletics of the UNM one
point five million and then
you'll see this R. P. S. P. for
fifty thousand this more mental
database so they can track the.
You'll see one point five one
point six for project echo which
would bring them in total to the
house of US three point five.
You'll see a one point five
million increased for athletics
and in the machine.
western New Mexico you'll see a
reduction in the I. Angie in for
eastern New Mexico you'll see an
increase of five hundred and I
NG in that totals the.
In the in the the four million
more for additional call.
In the package we just sent down
to the floor in so you'll now
see this grand total as as nine
three nine almost ten million
dollars in recurring
appropriation.
Will stand for questions on that
page manager.
The question Senator Hemphill.
Thank you madam chair thanks for
the information.
My question is just can you
explain terminus why there was
the reduction in the I. Angie
probation amount for WNMU
madam chair and senator we see a
reduction in the next page and
you'll see increases in services
for nursing teacher nursing
which are fully funded and so
that's an off setting number
thank you madam chair.
One of.
Yes Senator thank you madam
chair and so again I I I know
that everyone's been working
really very hard and I I'm
harping on a couple things
trying to make sure that I
understand the
so madam chair Mister chairman
and on when we talk about the
golden apple appropriation there
would be money that would have
to move from another two areas
to make up the three to five
million that they were looking
to turn to have does that have
to be put here forces in the the
language portion from yesterday
to make those moves.
Mr Kirk madam chair Senator
Padilla the the request that you
had submitted which was
considered by the chairman and
and and reviews by staff
would if it were decided on if
that something that the
subcommittee decided to add into
the scenario that's being
presented in before you that's
something that would be added in
section four or five likely what
that
but it is that that request was
received and reviewed and if
it's something that the
subcommittee wanted to discuss
as changes that could be
discussed here.
Also the department Mr chairman
madam chair Mister chairman did
agree to do this they were
comfortable with two million
dollars coming out of to fund I
don't remember exactly which
funds the work I know one of
them was
K. five I think plus and then
another one was another area to
make the four million dollars.
This is something we do here I
don't want to leave this on the
table I want to make sure this
is understood so Senator I don't
know what you're agreement was
was with them but if you want to
make changes and add additional
money we need to subtract and
reduce and then add this element
with Pete you had agreement to
PED we don't have that language
or that agreement in your
fifties.
Thank you.
This would these dollars Mr
chairman it would be added
dollars already existing in two
other places in the budget just
to move them around not to at.
So Senator the use amended that
and that's coming out of the
public education reform Fund in
so that is dollars and so we
have to circle back with PED
your you need to make sure that
they circle back before we wrap
up the set committees when they
go into full committee and an
adopted I had that done and I've
had that conversation is already
taking place with don and
they've already approved these
two changes.
These.
There.
Hearing.
Eight.
Madam chair Senator yes I did
have a conversation with and you
asked me to to follow up
submitted this request they
confirmed what you said the
request was where they believe
that it could come from
what is being presented here
today was the first pass at the
this the chairman scenario so
that particular request is not
incorporated into this scenario
that is in front of you if that
is an action that the
subcommittee wanted to take to
have added in order to have to
help LESC help look at the
possibilities for switching for
the uses for public at reform
Fund the my understanding of
that specific request is the
public education department
submitted to you for educator
recruitment efforts and
initiatives to support the
development of the educator
pipeline they suggested that of
the five million
all the money they requested up
to five million dollars from the
public education reform Fund
they provided some suggestions
on other of their own
appropriations from the public
and reform Fund on where they
believe that funding could be
adjusted they suggested pulling
funding from the at twenty one
million of public education
reform Fund for K. twelve plus
planning grants poured from the
twenty one million of public
education reform Fund special
appropriation for us programs so
and that is not an action in the
scenario that is being present
in front of you but that that
was their request to reduce some
of their other P. E. R. F.
appropriations to instead fund
teacher educator educator
recruitment efforts and
initiatives that was the request
he submitted that is all
actually accurate so I mean how
does is do I need to make a
motion here to get this done or
how does this work.
I think we need to track them in
and then when we come back and
will come back to requests I'm
more than happy to do it that
way just so it gets done on or
that we consider it gets
hopefully it's not and I've been
and just to clarify that I think
from here what happens is that
we look at these and you know
questions or suggestions of an
LFC has taken back and Santo set
track and bring back with the
sheets for us to do the final
review it that our meeting to
adopt or not adopt thank you the
good news madam chair that's
really the only big question I
have small stop talking thank
thank you.
In.
Any other questions.
The page to you madam chair.
Thanks to this is a nonrecurring
section of the bill.
And if you look at item three
this is the and three and four
the legislature Legislative
Council cash balances that's
where the money's coming from
other state funds we know that
we're gonna have to do some
remodeling in the annex to
increase some office space and
so that's where that's coming I
think there's some other
measures they need to with in
the capital and that's where
it's coming from
the next one is you know the
baby in the box money to
surrender the infant that
there's a house bill coming
across that we're tracking in
that money goes to that.
It if you look at item six
that's economic development and
I want you to recognize that
some of these in the negative
well then be caught up in the
back in some language or in the
fund.
On page four and that's a little
track to page four.
Of.
The joint health item seven is a
study that was eight in HSD is
requests for a new federal
health care issues that are
coming mental health issues
parity in so that's coming in so
that's for that study the game
and fish we deleted the
appropriation for the land
purchase in a change in language
of the on that'll get caught
back up online twenty six with
language of for them.
The state engineer is a hundred
fifty for the water in fifty
year water plan.
CYFD is an additional five
hundred for domestic violence
services statewide.
Of public education is to
increase the teacher residencies
amount for the from the P. R. F.
that's other state funds and
higher ed we've heard this in
the special session we
appropriated fifteen million
dollars we heard an issue with
only appropriating five over
three year period and so we're
program the other ten that's the
nursing issue that Mrs single
has been fighting force.
Items
Thirteen and fourteen our new
items that we move money around
this creates a full rights
teacher scholarship tuition room
and board stipend books for four
year degree in teaching at these
universities eastern New Mexico
New Mexico highlands signs on
college in western New Mexico
well there's one set for
teachers in the next item is a
line for nurses they're the ones
that said I know you San Juan as
an example in eastern that they
have the ability and capacity to
increase nurses at any point in
time we pushed in the special
session try to give them money
so that kids that wanted to
start that in the spring
semester which we're in right
now would have the ability and
there's push back.
Of IBM fifteen is here the UNM
for H. P. V. registry database
of the the head of the AMA has
contacted me and said that's
very important how we do that
with HPV item sixteen is
increased in a mission for the
rodeo teams
they're one of the so members of
rodeo that that don't receive a
stipend and use all their stuff
through
through the college will stop
right there for that section of
the bill is stand for questions.
Estes from committee members
Senator Hemphill thank you madam
chair and thank you again I one
question I have I'm not sure
where this would be applicable
but there's been a request for a
ten million dollar transfer from
the public school capital outlay
fund to New Mexico finance
authority to create a charter
school facility revolving fund
and I was just wondering where
that language would.
There's.
Chairman of that bill is in this
committee and there's a
substitute because my staff
working on an FIR today and it's
other state funds so when that
bill comes to you you know you
could have done it without him
in impairing in anywhere needing
to swap items in question
because it's more state the
state okay thank you Mr madam
chair and David thank you
senator Senator Padilla we have
Senator share first I'm sorry
and then because he has been on
this thank you senator who thank
you madam chair on on line seven
the joy with joy health care
study I know it's just SB thirty
three but what are we studying
in there just in a word or two.
Ten.
Download language with we need
to change and I may not be the
expert.
We're gonna look at the thank
you madam chair thank you.
Thank thank you Senator Padilla
I thank you madam chair and so
on back to Senator quite a and
bills question on the ten
million for the charter schools
so in other states are there
other state funds available to
do that I guess that's a big
number based on what we're
talking about.
Public school.
Senator significant okay this
is.
Or that comes.
Chair committee.
Thank you so madam chair and and
Mr Chairman and Mr Abbey so that
your dad does it I hate to use
the term but does that ensure
that that ten million dollars is
earmarked for this purpose if
this bill passes that the they
were under the to this committee
right now.
Okay yes it is it is
appropriations from the funding
will.
They were used
on transaction is terrific
that's what I wanted to hear
okay.
So a I wanted to be on.
So and I want to make sure the
money was there and then be just
that it's for the now if this
bill passes on level it would be
for these purposes thank you.
Thank you senator Senator
etcetera etcetera sure we we
have the answer your question in
the study.
With a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars and fill.
What is the purpose for
behavioral health option it's a
study four hundred fifty
thousand dollars for it behavior
hope costsharing study.
I'm sure.
So who's who we sharing with.
Madam chair and senator after
there was a bill that
essentially stopped copays on
behavioral health in there
looking at the impact of
how that's affecting is
affecting services for
behavioral health and all other
costs the cost across the
healthcare spectrum right thank
you madam.
Thank you senator okay was there
there was somebody someone else
okay yes you still have before I
think you mentioned I'm gonna go
to senator who was next to us
Senator Woods okay after Senator
Hemphill do just so you have one
more thing.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to also ask about
the one point three million
dollars for child advocacy
centers is that protected.
What part of Senate bill one
eighteen.
Senator Wirth we're not we're
we're looking at that list but I
don't know Senate bill one
eighteen I don't know who that
is
read on madam chair Senator
Hemphill there were a handful of
probation that Senate bill one
eighteen intended to make from
the early childhood education
trust fund
In this scenario on this is
actually going to be on the
previous page we're looking at
section four for recurring we
attended to the scenario excuse
me the scenario attempted to
make up some of that funding
that we was going to be
appropriated in that bill it
looks like that bill may be
stalled and there had been
multiple requests by multiple
members to try and shore up the
funding that would have come
from the early childhood Trust
Fund in that bill and instead
use general fund for it there
are two items related to that
bill that are intended to be
shored up with general fund here
it's to the crime but at the C.
B. R. C. the crime victims
reparation commission for one
million and two CYFD for sexual
assault services for five
hundred thousand so it's it's
not the full amounts that were
in that building is attempting
to recognize that bill appears
to have some and to try to use
general fund to make up some of
that funding but there were
other items and Senate bill one
eighteen that are not in the
scenario that are in front of
you.
Right thank you madam chair
thank you done.
What do of this madam chair.
We had a a pretty dang like
requests from the office of the
medical examiner and one that
matters to me so much is in my
particular part of the world.
There are.
It's such a rural area that they
have no medical examiners in
that for the world and I was
requested in the of.
A million dollars to kind of
bring that up into.
The call of make it worthwhile.
Thank when I came in my office I
said that thirty percent of the
deaths in the state of New
Mexico and has to be make sure
the one NFL play and they're
just pretty short so I just
bring that forward.
Madam chair.
Thank you senator and you know
when you set thirty percent I
couldn't hear it thirty percent
of what the last force worthy of
the.
The thirty percent of the deaths
in the state of New Mexico have
to be investigated by the state
office of.
Of medical examiner for felt
play and and I have to protect
those scenes as a crime scene so
it's it's a very.
You know during this time of
crime packages and all that kind
of stuff this this is part of
the investigation of that so and
they're asking for a million
dollars I see okay and so maybe
that's one of the things that
you can just be taken back for
review by LFC as we're sending
out these questions and so on
thank you very much and then
let's see if anyone else if I
have someone else on my list but
maybe not okay I do have one
question on that day but maybe
you or someone can address line
number thirteen on the and
fourteen for the forty four
thousand dollars is going to go
to the nursing programs then the
teacher
there's the NMAA Q. and San Juan
college's on but I'm sorry NMSC
was not there or you NM on
either one thought what was the
rationale quite members somebody
said something explained it but
I can remove it this program is
oriented more to financial aid
member separately you have
fifteen billion now they start
for nursing for on on take to
expand existing nursing programs
that's a lot fifteen million was
fifteen five million women house
bill came over you just add a
ten million to that and that
separately there's another one
point seven for you and health
sciences to expand their
advanced nurse practitioner some
of all those sources combined
with these that's a lot of
funding hopefully they can go
that fast I think supplies could
be more of a challenge the
funding Senator and madam chair
when we talk to nurses and
teaching across if those nurses
and teachers are in rural New
Mexico where they're trained
they usually stay there and so
that's another reason why we
funded those institutions and
not just you and them in the
machine.
I just wanted to to see what
with the Russian fifty million
with a to do available for all
institutions I think they'll
find plenty of opportunity every
one of fifteen million I see
okay all right well thank you
ensuring guests will continue
and to item nineteen this is a
request from DFA in the exact we
know that at there's a lot of
problems with the supply chain
and shortages in cost overruns
and there's ten million there
for STBs that are appropriated
they're sort of fun you're going
to see that in again in D. O. T.
in a few lines well line twenty
is for local government for
their safety net
Pool and and that's contingent
upon legislation I don't know
the bill number but there's ten
million there
I'm twenty one is the crime
package in this is going to be
pretty flexible as we move
around and is what happens in
the prime package but this is
increased police statement
stipends of ten million for two
years in DFA at it requested
additional money
item twenty two is for DFA for
that housing trust fund.
Are there ministering that may
get switched to NMFA.
five million for Navajo prep for
the dorms in in there that is a
DFA request of for housing
project for homeless that's a
request from the executive that
we're trying to complete
the line I is the spot from
line.
Eight in moving its conservation
actions of species with greatest
need in order to complete this
section we were to do something
for capital fund it's in house
bill do it may.
Senator before we move on to the
next page and ask one quick
question that on the same page
because before we move on on
page a number twenty twenty two
here it's for the housing trust
fund to participate maybe switch
did I hear that now do the NMFA
something was mentioned and I
want to make sure it's still
with MFA editor the
appropriation needs to be to a
state agency and so B. to DFA
and then they would transfer to
MFA which is a graduate of
militants I make sure Santa Fe
because I thought I heard NMFA's
I knew that would be the case in
on yeah thank you no problem
thank you all right we move on
Senator.
Any questions on that section
before we turn the page.
No questions.
We are going to nonrecurring
appropriations and if you will
track this with page for and
then we'll go to page four we're
making some swaps for the
executive in adding some money
the executive requested twenty
four million in food hunger
initiatives we already had nine
in so we'll add this to sixteen
and we'll get to twenty four.
The exact requested another
hundred million in broadband we
don't see a need for another
hundred million and broadband
having two hundred thirty
million sitting stagnant in our
general fund the agency's
request that we heard the most
was cybersecurity
do it is requesting thirteen
million other agencies are
requesting more money we part
twenty million for their.
It should use be used for cyber
security and so that is a key
issue that we need to fly again
that was an exact of secretary
of state for the lection funds
they're hearing election fund
bill or elections bill in is it
Judiciary Committee I think it's
a Judiciary version rules one of
those committees and that will
come to us next we're gonna have
to back fill some money so we
can create a frontier so they're
not having the riding the roller
coaster of having access in
under and cuts in their budget
so we can create some balance in
there is a move force of next
one is reduction in business
space at the economic
development department that is
in house bill two it was at
seventy million for reducing it
by twenty five and may have to
make other changes in order to
make movie for the executive
we're parking the money in well
I prevention in the ETF keep
energy efficiency grants reduce
that we're parking that in the
ETF the five million for the
move the state gesprochen
appropriation into ETF of the
state office of engineer the
good exact requested more money
for tribal and so in order to
make that capacity where we
could have paid off the ad month
this year but in order to us
makes a capacity for the exact
we had to move some money around
for the Indian Affairs in the
teeth which will all go back to
tribal projects through Indian
Affairs in so that gets us
through line thirty seven.
Workforce solutions department
that is a youth reemployment
that came from the feds and and
we're trying to get that money
back to them department
transportation for rural air
services for I.
A wildlife corridors on state
highways two million department
transportation here's what
you'll see the cost overruns and
maintenance money in here
reducing the local by ten
million and adding twenty
million to DO T. for for cost
overruns on projects.
You'll also see a reduction in
lottery transfer fund and we're
gonna have to increase
opportunity that will be fluid
as we move forward as exact
making recommendations they
requested a thirty additional
thirty million dollars to
opportunity we're trying to get
some of guardrails on that bill
as we move forward so we know it
won't drain everything that we
have
we'll move on to line forty five
of eighty higher it is
requesting money for demolition
for buildings we never fund that
and so they have buildings that
need to be removed
line forty six.
Is of for behavioral health and
social workers reducing that
that money has been moved into
the crime package and we're
looking at please type in
increases.
line forty seven is native
American and down its
NM issue you're gonna see this
line come back in reducing the
here and you'll catch a back up
in removing appropriation to
DFA.
Of the forced revolving fund is
a reduction in you'll see that
catch up on page five in will
stand for questions and.
Any questions please Senator
Padilla thank you madam chair
and Mr chairman so I know we're
gonna go to this other page now
but this last week on the lines
forty three and forty four are
reducing lottery tuition fund
transfer and then work adding in
so we are reducing.
Our our I guess the net net is
are we reducing funding to the
lottery scholarship.
Madam chair center we love to a
hundred and forty million into
lottery I believe it's and so
this is a reduction of that one
forty moving in into
opportunity scholarships Mr
chair chair Mister to what was
the original or what was the
regular I don't call a regular
the the the normal funding of
the lottery scholarship what
would have been madam chair
centered the lottery
scholarships has been behind
thirty years in the back field
in the back field and I've been
here for that too and so now we
have a chance to create
stability in the lottery so we
the over funded it so we would
have five years of lottery
tuition and so that we would be
back filling from other agencies
are all call and and wherever we
can back fill for the lottery so
this will add stability we put a
hundred forty million because
the Legislature status that and
we want stability the governor
has come up with this new idea
of opportunity scholarships and
wants to fund that and so we're
making a transfer
ten million from there to
opportunity there may be more
because to get the exact has
requested eighty three million
in opportunity and currently
there's only fifty three million
there.
Correct.
Sixty three this is a proof
sixty three if we make.
Sixty three if this is approved
plus twelve million in
reoccurring so this will be
pretty close to the exact tracks
and so that will leave the audit
with a hundred thirty over and
above.
The water is normally have been
funded sure call is about thirty
million of the regional one
fifty was guaranteeing no
shortfall for five years by
dialing it back you're still
guaranteeing no shortfall for
more than four years.
Thank you madam chair center
that we fooled around with you
know what percentage we would
fund of the the need
What is it now the total
spending isn't I'm gonna say
about seventy million.
Sure.
For the.
Seventy million for short twenty
four what percentage of the
individuals tuition do we help
with that right now under the
current funding without the
additional money for the sixty
five cents on the dollar that
that that I want to the
point of.
So for the next four years plus
with snow a hundred thirty to
cover a hundred percent.
For five years.
Thank you thank you
misinterpret the rules by a
couple million dollars with the
lottery tickets.
Madam chair anymore questions on
that page.
No questions that I have on my
list anyway if you can keep on
Senator.
Then we'll turn the page for and
we talk about this and this is a
bill that we're probably gonna
see tomorrow and and we know
that New Mexico really needs to
figure out how they want to do
their budging if they want to
budget on reoccurring money or
one time money we need to figure
this out in New Mexico so we can
straighten out the way we we do
stuff.
Most of these requests that
you're gonna see are from the
executive she had eight hundred
sixty four million in requests
that she wanted Senate finance
to do and we've booked about a
hundred and sixty four.
Plus or minus right in there so
now you're gonna see a lot of
questions of people were asking
about of the runway for sentry's
airport that's according to what
I've been told and hopefully the
truth is that they're going to
be bringing in some cargo for
the killings to do drugs from a
Taiwanese company the green
corridor inTaos Senator Gonzales
may know more about that I do
not know that we added another
five million for tourism for
marketing advertising twenty
three we transfer the J. tip
money on a prior page over into
here we had an additional twenty
five million dollars to lead up
bring it to fifteen million
dollars even though I'm still
waiting for apology from certain
secretary.
we are a waiting for a twenty
million dollars the governor
exact made of recommendations
for forty million dollar film
school we don't know if that's
going to ever happen or not we
haven't seen any background any
framework where it's going to be
located any purchases but we but
twenty in in capital and STBs
which we're trying to get from
the exact and we look twenty in
this fun
the other ones are well life
prevention we moved it from.
Here we move some money into
sake is for here we move the
money from workforce solutions
and you reemployment transition
into the ETF fund in the higher
ed this is expand the public
health school this is the the
bill that Senator Hickey and
serve on us and and a few of us
others have signed on well we're
gonna have to add some
additional money in there
waiting for the house to to
relinquish some funds so we can
do that the transfer from NMAA
shoe for the soil conservation
districts and the force land you
seen that on the previous page
that we moved in general fund of
and that's a hundred twenty five
million.
Any questions the committee.
Senator Burt.
The question he said the five
million tourism is that open
above the original five million
seven additional I know it's in
addition to what was already in
house bill two.
Okay all right thank you text
messages anyone we're gonna
charger million dollars a text
nope.
Working as we heard earlier so I
want to make sure because.
It's R. two hundred ninety four
takes and then in ninety four of
them are from the secretary of.
Senator I have a quick question
before I move on to others here
before I lose my train of
thought on the leader how much
was total how much we have total
amount due to we're putting an
additional twenty five.
Twenty five million in house
bill two we're adding additional
twenty five million which brings
me to a fifty million of leader
needs to change the way we do
things in New Mexico it's not
accomplishing what we think it
should accomplish as an original
person that develop that it's
become a sprinkler that gets a
little bit grant but nothing
ever grows and we waste money on
small projects and do not save
money for big projects.
We have a fifty million in there
okay Senator Campos you had a
you want to ask a question thank
you very much of Madam chair
just very quickly.
In terms of of the resources
that we have in the projects and
the way that they're being
developed
I just have a question when it
comes to planning
we keep talking about having
shovel ready the course that's
capital outlay but when we start
talking about the programmatic
issues are those programs
planned and they're prepared to
go ahead and go forward for
those things that we're still
going to go ahead and take into
consideration in the future.
Center if you I don't know
anything in on to use a couple
examples we had never heard of
anything about the the runway in
sentry so the exact requested
sixty five million for that we
came to terms we don't know
that's what they told me it was
to to bring the
manufacturing products in and
out of the land hairier
have pressed the green corridor
I I don't live in that area so I
can't Representative with that
would be the film academy I have
no idea I have never seen any
any studies or anything and how
they're going to stand up a
structure for the film academy
location number of employees
number students that may be
going there I was just ten
something tells screen shows a
lot of this.
We don't know.
And that forty million dollars
what it's going to do.
In some of this wildfire
prevention and in the SEC is of
those can be targeted and will
probably come back and look at
some targeted stuff to develop
in certain areas I don't have a
sink is where I live
the opinion treason cedar trees
and so those will have to be by
a members that have those in the
district so they can say this is
a secular need to target
wildlife prevention we had a
conversation with the secretary
today and and she may need help
with fire crews in in the
ability flexibility with that
especially with the drop coming
on and we don't know what's
going to happen.
Workforce solutions that money
has as book from the fed to fund
the correct.
That came.
Could not.
Madam chair and members so the
in house bill two there was ten
million to workforce solutions
some for thank you three
employment and apprenticeships
some for for other workforce
development initiatives what
this would do is move five of
that ten million that was
previously just from general
fund to be then appropriated out
of this fund instead.
On the higher it is the hospital
that that thank you and more
developed I mean we know health
care is important
it's and you know you today it's
it's hard to get a doctor's
appointment in so if we need to
start changing and change health
care New Mexico really gonna
talk about recruiting retirees
to New Mexico where you have no
social security tax then one of
the most important things you
can have that as with with
health care and retirees you
look at Arizona in this time of
year in your jam packed with
snowbirds and so we don't have a
health care system that
sustainable in the plan to do
that then we'll we'll do that so
in conservation districts are
pretty much you know that's been
around for a while we send it
out they do what they need to do
through the soil conservation
district
so madam chair and and
Rural New Mexico says we go
forward just again a few things
I'm gonna continue to highlight
and they're going to be
generalities but I I really
encourage people to continue
without full planning as we move
forward with thinking that but
what we also have quite a bit of
a resource on the table and
within that if we don't have the
full plans for many of these
projects and programs then the
issue becomes yes we have a
concern but is this going to go
ahead and be announced out of
resource in order to go ahead
and address that but I'm just
going to make the closing
comment I really believe in
planning and I really want to
thank the LESC for the work that
they've done over the years as
we move forward because we put a
lot of time and effort into
ensuring that we're going to
fully that a lot of our projects
and a lot of the the systems
within place and so from my
perspective right now the issue
is thoughtful planning is going
to be of the key for a bright
future for New Mexico and so I I
just make that statement again
thank you all with the LFC and
to committee members it really
is important for us and
incumbent upon us to to move
forward and very thoughtful way
thank you thank you senator and
thank you for working so hard
and language subcommittee to
appreciate all you and members
for I have a couple questions in
a minute defer to one more
person and that is maybe and I
spoke to don and you have the
paperwork there are things that
have come to me I know Larry
Martinez with the primary care
association we I brought that up
last time they were they were
left out of two million dollars
from HSD for the Medicaid
provider rates did we find a way
to address that anywhere and if
not maybe we can take back that
one that request there's nothing
in there for the federally
qualified health centers they
were completely able to the
little clinics in the rural
areas and they had requested
five million but if they could
get to at least they could live
to.
This at a minimum to so you can
look at that I don't know if you
had a chance stated and if not
we can the
staff to cover.
Thank you all right thank you
very much for that and then
another one and this one is I
I'd left the paperwork in there
but I had given done a couple of
copies there was two request
today from Senator Lopez and
Senator pope and there were
there is four million dollars in
each one of the
for the areas for the black
Education Act and the Hispanic
Education Act the funding is
already there but they want to
take a portion of that and and
put its spread it out within
from the public education
department is spread it out into
for five different areas within
that same funding it's no
additional funding but they
wanted to just specify where it
would go to a higher education
to meet more of the Yazzie
Martinez is what they said that
was a request it just came
directly so I don't know you can
look at that also see if it's
possible without any in addition
so I'm just passing on requests
that were brought to committee
members as we all got in so you
may want to look at that if
possible and.
Okay all right and next Davis so
you can just take it with you
and then look at it and that I
don't have any other request I
had given him all associate
David correct clarify statements
about the term school yes
Representative to be house bill
forty three it's it's in the HSC
they took the appropriation of
from the public school capital
outlay fund so your choices are
included here and other state
funds or when the bill comes
over the line the amendment
taking about you know ordinarily
you have to practice deleting
general fund appropriations to
not appear the budget because of
this other state funds was not
necessary to do that so this is
to just get to a point of item
whether to do it this bill or
put it back in the bill chair
just to clarify.
Thank you all right thank you
now we have Senator share and
any other committees then
Senator Steinborn Senator
Cherian thank you madam chair so
on page four line ten the the a
wildfire prevention.
I've been an advocate for proper
forest management will this just
will any of this go to force
manager will just go to
firefighters trying to put out
fires are too hot to.
Center we can probably handle
language to to do that as we
move forward.
There's a ten million dollars
for forest land protection
revolving fund which is a lot of
that activity see that.
So both of those I I to me
that's the real solution not a
temporary bandaid.
Of photos us in and of on page
created listening before page
three but but light thirty five
which is the M. Madam.
You've just played why we
thought we're that.
Why we thought it would be
better because to.
You said elsewhere instead of
just paying that off to making
ago ways we never have to hear
about it again centers the the
executive came with is right for
on tribal capital.
And so in order to make
increases and not go over our
non reoccur current
appropriations we had to make
room and we chose we just exact
we can either pay this off you
control the tiff you can develop
that through there and they said
we want to and so in order to
make that thirty million thirty
thousand.
Just thirty million adjustment
online thirty seven we reduce
some expenditures and there's
some left over money from the
tiff that's going straight to
tribal and they'll have to go
through the process so that's
why we made those adjustments
the thank you in in is there
enough money to make our.
Did our payment still on the all
right thank you.
Yes thank you and anyone else
here today all Senators time for
your next thank.
Thank you madam chair a few
things number one on.
Page two line thirteen.
My understanding of the fifteen
million dollars for nursing that
we're appropriating is just for
teaching and I verified that
online what we're providing
money for here or for
scholarships for students and so
which is a different issue right
we need to grow teachers but we
need to gross we need to go
nurses and so I I I would like
I'm and welcome clarification
but it really seems crossed
purposes I can understand
wanting to grow them and in
these areas and I think was
really smart of the chair to
direct funding directly to
students rather than to a pop
that we get sucked up by the
schools I think that's really
smart having said that I I think
it's excludes exclusionary to
not include NMSU and UNM who
have the capacity because that
would really help that helps
local people get a full ride to
become nurses and they need him
to I mean the name everywhere so
I would like to see is include
those schools as well I I don't
know I don't know why we would
exclude them from this one the
goal is to grow more capacity
I'm in support of growing up in
rural areas I think that super
smart I just don't know why we
would limit it to them when we
talk with you in and miss you
they said in order to add
additional nurses and this is
just nursing bill the back staff
first since the prior line on
the line eleven filled the back
staff and so when you says well
we don't have anymore room in a
nursing program we need money to
build the back staff that's what
we did but when you talk to
eastern and San Juan and western
they said we have vacancies in
our nursing program that we can
move people into immediately and
so when you do that you want to
create that rural out there
because they have the vacancies
an opportunity create those
maybe and that's why they were
not include because they will
suck up most of the fifteen
million dollars the bigger
universities will because they
have larger programs and more
students.
And so then the smaller
universities would be left out
so that's that answer that's a
process to that thank you for
yeah that's one of the things
that I would like to just listen
to them on how they plug into
that and and I hear what you're
saying
I want to the ability to look at
that and in one as long as we
look at reductions in I. N. G.
to increase that number if we
want to understand the subject.
Lots of buckets of money so we
do the so I want to just stay on
leader in defense of leader the
money of the world Mr we I know
our local economic developers
really supported in fact they
reach out to me to begin the
session want to really advocate
for because we see deal sit all
over the place and I so I see
grass grown I mean we've we've
created huge shop second think a
champagne of really poor
community where they re purpose
a major a major dilapidated
warehouse and they're doing a
major project super rural
poverty here incredible project
you see it in Sunland park lots
of stuff almost every week feels
like in Los crucis too so.
I see it working I feel working
extremely high levels in our
state we got a really big
pipeline
as far as the film academy you
know I I'm a big tip in a film
economic development and Dona
Ana County so I'd like to see
just have some of the same
successes his flourishing up
north here and Gallup and
rollers and you all know I
champion and of course Las Vegas
who are really aspire to be when
we grow up we're part of the Las
caucus so let's crucis Las Vegas
but
But you know we to champion the
five percent rule incentives to
help spread film around the rest
of the state but I'll say and so
I I I took keen interest in this
academy again I and I know that
they work extremely hard I will
just saying they should find
information you Mr if you have
not yet they've been working
really hard with the K. three
two the the higher the education
folks you know Netflix when they
committed an extra billion
dollars to New Mexico they said
it's going to take an extra
thousand workers I think was the
deal we have a major creating
shortage in the state of New
Mexico where they're having to
bring in workers from other
states he's our jobs are to go
to New Mexico for the academy is
really a next generational next
generation vocational school to
grow the film workforce in the
state in a modern way our
current phone workforce is like
a two year program it's not
really a modern vocational
program so with this is modeled
after Mr chair the Georgia film
academy which she started in
Georgia over twenty years ago.
And they grow like a thousand
film workers here so it's really
a next generation film
vocational school and they're
working really hard to to build
it with higher education and so
I think when you learn about it
is I have it's really a smart
thing to do and to to grow this
billion dollar industry in the
state so any rain I would just
say there's a few other
priorities that we've all heard
about that are on my radar like
the movement disorders center
it's not big amounts of money
I know I people with Parkinson's
in my community who said please
that UNM fact they love to see
one in NMAA you but I think that
is asking for a few hundred
thousand
the agencies yeah there is
junior money for that purpose.
True
Anyway we just got a late
request from the ACC professor
College Donna if you heard about
that one that's super important
as our nursing students
actually.
and then there's some economic
development actually would help
us on putting money in the world
like the Rio Grande trial that I
would love to see some funding
to accelerate that projects for
infrastructure but there's
others how will stop right there
and I appreciate the
conversation Mr.
Thank you senator here we are
what and we have Senator Woods
and then Senator crystal Dunn.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
say something here pretty
sheepishly light Mr Chairman
madam chair because of Senator
Ingle come and talk to me about
eastern New Mexico and and he
was thinking it was being
underfunded by about one point
eight million and why am so
shoot this about it because I
really don't know where he
thinks it needs to be plugged in
but I just.
I just want to mention that
because the.
He mentioned it to me madam
chair and so I really can't make
under which would make me fix it
Madam so in the house eastern
gonna million dollars we're
adding an additional five so
they got one point five increase
and then we go back and tell you
what we really learned today
this morning a long time ago
people were shorting their
accounts are the under accounts
and so is eastern didn't push
and we had a funding formula
based on square footages on
campus in student population
eastern kind or remain silent in
that that are present that push
that we change the I. Angie to
formula so they had to have a
graduation certificates and
that's kind of where that's
breaking we have resolved that
up to one point five million I
think that's as good as going to
get the session so.
this person we're loan which
features.
Thank you senator crystal
diamond thank you madam chairman
I just want to quickly go back
to what Mr Abbey was I was
saying to you and I think it was
more in response to the
statements are made by Senator
Hemphill and Senator Padilla
could you give us a
Two options that you listed the
easier instead of running
amendments would simply be to to
roll it in added and this
committee process there there
really wasn't a conclusion on
that there's.
There is available funding but I
do need that statutorily do we
need to bill for statute you'll
need to fill which you could
included in house bill two from
other state funds contingent on
the bill I know you in the staff
made a list of the visit with
the chair and think about these
with thank you.
Thank you thank you very much
yes Senator is yes I'm glad that
Senator Diamond clarified that
so we've got a couple things we
need to add to this and if we're
gonna have you know some of the
stuff we talked about earlier on
the golden apple teacher
recruitment and then this item
as well so I don't know we're
gonna vote on this today but I
know that we can also come back
when we do it in front of the
full committee with both of the
subcommittees well pretty much
everybody's here but
Sure would like to have it all
depend talked before we act on
this Senator if the executive
one of held us hostage over I
can't control with executives
and I mean we could if we can
clean up but what we need is
preliminary approval so we can
start drafting that we've
tracked issues in committee in
will address them in and.
and catch up cleanup and mold
visit with them individually
make sure that that the program
is right the numbers are right
as we move forward they're still
going to be a lot of movement in
the crime package that's coming
over because of Senator months
and I are trying to do that
together we don't have a phone
number there may be capacity in
their we don't know what's going
to happen with the hydrogen
there may be capacity there
well we've taken on our Senate
side and we've used our a lot of
Senate room in the the F. fund
to satisfy the exact and now the
house will need to help balance
that so in our Senate eggs
Senate rex we'll have some more
movement for programming we need
to add some to the to the call
to the you health sciences it is
an issue for that new hospital
so we're gonna be looking at
movie quickly but we need to get
this.
Graft set up will come back in.
To the language in and then then
amendment process but a review
and then do additions as we move
forward.
That will be adding anything
else that didn't come up in this
committee so those lobbyist
those those institutions those
secretaries of we are at
capacity we cannot change things
for for a hundred thousand
dollars and I want to see what
secretary but in order to change
a six billion dollar bill for a
hundred thousand is a pretty
hard accomplishment to do those
agencies have the flexibility to
make those adjustments they
don't know what's in junior
because we don't know what's in
the house junior they may be
over funded on some stuff and so
there's a lot of catch up clean
of those agency chair because
they spent their money
correctly.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chairman I trust that that'll be
done so I'm comfortable with
that so make sure and and on the
record that we talked about
these items that would like to
have catch up and cleaned up as
we go through the drafting
process thank you thank you
senator and I just have a final
question here on to make sure we
did some kind of unintended
consequence the legal guardian
the guardianship program with
the developmental disabilities
is that I thought there was
something missing I'm out there
that and the pretty short on
some they do you know did they
get fully funded because that's
not what I understand we've
gotten several emails so I just
want to make sure we don't leave
them out there this is a very
important.
A program can you check into
that for me just to make sure
the guardianship for under the
developmental disabilities
program is they were unfairly
shorted in the house bill two I
don't know just take a look at
that.
Majority of the for sure.
Fifty thousand reserves to deal
with the recommendation
of the house okay all right okay
the thank you and of course the
civil legal services that was
the last one the is that
are is that too sure to me they
really kind of shorter how is
that five hundred.
The.
These are programs that usually
get come out very short and for
you to give me a second here
okay thank you.
You madam chair as we're
discussing with this we're gonna
go back to LFC we're gonna track
members comments and then we're
going to probably have to meet
in the morning at the call the
chair health there's some of
this up so we can get it moving
so I can answer civil legal
services.
The current.
You're recurring for civil legal
services was four point six
million and the house passed a
four point nine million million
with a three hundred thousand
dollars the increase.
From.
The general fund went up for
civil legal services from two
point seven to three point three
part of that was because they
had some fumbles answer special
appropriations there were
nonrecurring put on a recurring
basis the in including other
state funds which may be going
down to three hundred thousand
increase with the house adding
to the LFC referred.
Okay I thought the request was
two hundred seventy six thousand
dollars they were short but
maybe it was added I don't know
just take a look at it thank you
day numbers are going to be hard
to accomplish in this bill if
there two hundred seventy six
short I mean we have a three
fifteen there most million so I
understand that but it also and
indicated that that if if things
were not mentioned here that it
would be tough to even bring it
back so I thought I'd bring that
up because those are emails were
all getting so thank you very
much okay then I think we're
good unless I have any when I
have questions Senator yes
Hemphill and thank you madam
chair and
David I was just wondering if
there is any funding for the
developmental disabilities
council for the special ed
ombudsman.
Madam chair because we kill the
cellular in this phone so we can
quit receiving tax.
C. Rep Kelly can answer yes.
And then we all.
In L. C. recommendation which
was this is accepted so in
addition to that they also added
to.
Dollars for rate increases that
they have a twelve percent
increase of about percent
increase which is pretty and I
think thank you the the thank
you madam chair thank you thank
you Senator center we're gonna
need a motion to wrap up so we
have a motion to accept these as
you said it was preliminary that
you need itself okay there's a
motion here so move more
contingent on the items that we
discussed today will be baked
into what we tacked on center we
we can guarantee we'll get
everything in we're gonna try to
work their scenario but the
money we had to give up to the
exact on the Senate side is
causing an issue for us in order
to satisfy that roughly hundred
sixty three million and in in
the exact we all have
constituent issues and and
there's a lot of money and are
we doing this right way I woke
up at four twenty two this
morning thinking of are we
spending three billion dollars
correctly in New Mexico and
everybody is in a hunger mode
because the dollars are there in
well we need to fix stuff is we
move forward sometimes they have
enough to get by and I'm not
saying that we're not gonna do
anything we're gonna look at
everything we can but sometimes
it's it's difficult when we get
to this late point but we will
circle back around on every
conversation we had about add
room in in come back probably
tomorrow morning to try to shore
up something because when they
begin drafting in this will be
my last comment it's going to
take about three to four days we
have a.
The computer not a computer
issue but a programming issue
that we have to have them
between eight and five as we
craft house bill two in case we
have any glitches in so that is
going to be our main concern so
that's.
I made a motion.
Final thing as.
Senator Steinborn sexual assault
services are very clean up on
page one of the.
We.
Team.
We can just go.
I have some ideas any opposition
in the number okay all right so
LFC thank you you will come back
in with your if those members
will wells will hang around for
a few minutes so we can make
sure that we got the rex right
in the tractor I want to make
sure that we got the rex right
so we can figure something out
thank you.
Committees.
With those.
Okay.
I do not want.
