He was out of order Mr Chairman.
Unistar SOFR.
I thought it is looking to begin
if they want to present this
with.
And while.
The author and.
Senator you have a.
The presentation you to really
kind of slide deck but it won't
take very long Mr chair members
of the committee good to see
you.
Senator trees.
Two nine two thank thank good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee I'm ginger
Anderson LFC analysts
and we have here with us today
the office of the state auditor
their agency code zero eight and
if you guys are following along
in your volume two the big thick
one of from LFC I'm you will
find that these guys.
Sorry let me grab the page
number for you.
On page sixty three and sixty
four of the volumes.
okay so the LFC recommendation
for the general fund was about a
hundred and sixty eight thousand
dollars below the executive
recommendation the LFC
recommendation is a four point
three percent increase over the
FY twenty operating budget.
So we see the differences I'll
just quickly review the
differences between the exact in
the LFC you recommendations
we're gonna see the differences
of about a hundred eighteen
thousand in personal service
employee benefits because of the
LFC comes in below the executive
recommendation applying a
slightly higher vacancy rate.
On the executive is requesting
recommending two hundred and
ninety one thousand to build
Bacon sees for the office of the
state auditor.
the LFC recommendation funds
fifty thousand dollars below the
executive in costs for grants to
small political subdivisions so
that's the grant program where
the auditor helps the small
subdivisions to stay compliant
with their audit so that they
are able to receive capital
outlay funds and those are the
two big differences so with that
I'll turn it over to DFA
counterpart Simon Miller in case
you want to make some comments
on that.
Thanks ginger Mr chair members
of the committee ginger cover
the differences perfectly so no
additional comments head over to
our state audit auditor.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee Joseph Maestas
I'm honored to be your state
auditor I'd like to just start
with some introductions I have
my deputy state auditor to my
right Rikki behind on all.
I was away for applause I was.
And then we have my assistant
general counsel Christopher hall
our budget director Laura
Montoya.
And our director for special
investigations Sean back.
So what I want to start by
saying you all know I just
started on January one and
inheriting a a budget that I had
no part in and so over the
course of the last couple of
weeks and had an opportunity can
look under the hood and assess
the true needs of the office and
so during the course of my pre
presentation will be talking
about some of those needs
So the if you refer to the slide
deck there's a there's a page
that basically speaks to the
primary functions of the office.
the first major one is to ensure
that the financial affairs of
every agency should be
thoroughly examined and audited
each year and we're also
statutorily tasked with
evaluating the financial affairs
and transactions of agencies to
be audited in full or in part
we're talking about almost a
thousand public entities
I'd say between five and six
hundred are subject to a full
complete financial audit the
rest of the a public entities
are reviewed under a tiered
system the tiered system it's
based on their their annual
revenue
and the tier one is basically a
self certification it doesn't
require any kind of engagement
from a public accountant.
But from tears three through
five there is some level of
financial analysis that's
required
And I want to get into kind of
the state of some of the smaller
public entities that I think
would be of concern to each of
you
but what we also do is we also
regulate independent public
accountants or IPA's
I'm a beer aficionado I like to
have an IPA every now and then
some having to adjust to the
accounting world IPA's
independent public accountant we
have about fifty three a pre
approved independent public
accounts are listed on our
website and what this does is
that frees them up to engage in
other contracts of the public
entities the way it works is the
public entity being audited
actually pays for the audit.
One thing
we've been tasked with a very
new and different function and
and and that is to review annual
conservatorship Reports this was
the result of a house bill two
thirty four passed in twenty
twenty one so effective July one
we are tasked with reviewing
every single conservative report
and then it's we have full
discretion based on that initial
review to do an audit
and so we're do instead of
dealing with public financial
information we're dealing with
private private financial
information so this is a new one
H. B. two thirty four granted us
three F. T. E.'s to do that work
so we have a unit that focuses
solely on reviewing these annual
conservative reports.
If you turn the page two or or
chart I'm not going to go into
great detail but I want to focus
your attention to that box at
the very bottom we basically
have a six exempt positions and
thirty five classified positions
and one temp position the last
bullet there is you know we have
we've been plagued with high
vacancy rate it's very difficult
for
CPA's doing public work to
compete with the private sector
and we hope to to change that to
improve that but right now our
vacancy rate stands at about
thirty four percent.
If you go on to the next slide
this is just a snapshot of the
FY twenty two workload that my
office has as of June thirtieth
twenty twenty two we reviewed
five hundred and five full
financial audits to were
conducted internally and three
were done by a joint venture
with other independent public
accountants that last bullet on
the work load gives you an idea
I mean we review thirteen
hundred line of these
conservative Reports and we
expect to see a lot more up to
sixteen hundred in this fiscal
year.
The next she just gives you a
snapshot of our special
investigations and kind of the
the case load that we're
experiencing what is the special
investigation during the court
of course of the an annual
financial audit
an engaged accounting firm has
to alert us if they if they see
any potential criminal activity
and they're bound by law to
inform us and we have several
choices we can either have that
engaged public accountant
modify the scope of their their
act audit and focus on that area
or if it's caught if it's
complex and the engaged auditing
firm cannot look into it then we
we will basically work with that
that entity and oversee the
procurement for a special audit.
and basically of all these cases
Half but have for actionable
this gives you a sense for you
know whatever we whatever intake
we have in fact if you turn the
page
it gives you a snapshot of how
we get these
confidential tipsters
providing us with information of
potential fraud waste and abuse
of the the the prevalent methods
are through the web of the web
portal we have a.
A fraud waste and abuse hotline
it's both by phone and by web
and then we also get a lot of
anonymous complaints by email as
well.
But for the way the online fraud
hotline is
Is the primary way that we we
get this this information.
Now we we handed out separate
sheet it has a summary of our
legislative initiatives it
should be a separate sheet and
I'm gonna go in that order.
We are seeking an appropriation
of an additional one million
dollars
to help my office assist the
small public entities that are
subject to the agreed upon
procedures my office we did an
analysis
let me back up we we offer the
small public assistance grants
so we can engage accounting
firms to do a financial analysis
of the small entities but if you
look at our at risk list we
have.
Who's issues go all the way back
to FY thirteen I just signed a
small it's called S. P. S. small
of political subdivisions S. PS
it's an assistance grant that we
that we find.
And it was for Raymond
it was only for FY twenty
thirteen will at this rate will
never get Rehm off of this at
least during my tenure and so
after I signed that grant
I asked my staff to do a
projection I said.
What funding level for the small
political subdivisions
assistance grants do we need to
completely get these folks off
the list so that they're
financially compliant and
eligible to receive capital
outlay and federal funding.
Well my office is analysis
basically concluded that.
We need over two thousand
certification reports for these
and.
And the requests average about
two thousand dollars or talking
four million dollars and so
I believe maybe my predecessor
under estimated the need for the
funding levels for the small
assistance grants or asking for
a million dollars the second
appropriation on this sheet it
looks like this kind of a
summary of legislative
initiatives.
We're asking for a hundred
thousand dollars to engage in a
qualified research firm to study
the feasibility of a singular
audit of all state agencies.
We're one of the few states that
doesn't have a singular audit
Now this has potential to really
improve the state's bonds and
the terms and the interest
rates.
And so this hundred thousand is
just to look at the pros and
cons of having a single state
agency on it what we do right
now is we have individual state
agency audits and we do an
annual comprehensive financial
reports called the act for but
it's by no means a detailed
audit and I've heard at least
one instance where to state
agencies were concurrently
managing the same federal
funding and their individual
state audits did not reconcile
and so you can see how this is
problematic and I I'm not a
betting man but I guarantee you
every single federal Judy that
oversees funding to the state of
New Mexico would be very pleased
to see a single state agency
audit.
The next appropriation we're
asking for is for two hundred
ten thousand to fund the
replacement of my office is
fraud complaint case management
system
And then the last two are not
monetary in any way we're
requesting amendments to the
uniform probate code with regard
to conservatorship.
in order to provide more
practical timelines to audit
these conservative reports we we
have basically fifteen days to
review a conservative report if
we feel like we have cause to
audited and we need more
information that's not in the
initial report we only have
ninety cap is a counter these
ninety calendar days to look at
that and we're dealing with
conservatives that are you have
professional conservatives then
have no private citizens many of
these folks reside out of state
and so.
Ninety days is not enough so
we're asking for a hundred
twenty days.
The last legislative initiatives
we were requesting an amendment
to the audit act to clarify the
confidentiality of fraud hotline
tips an audit work papers audit
work papers are confidential
there always confidential but
Why do we need to preserve the
confidentiality because there's
information on tipsters in their
and so we feel like the current
statutory framework is much too
vague we need more act of
clarifying language in there
that ensures that those working
papers are confidential even
after the audit is complete and
consider public.
So that includes a brief
presentation of my legislative
initiatives I'm gonna share with
you some other priorities for
the remainder of your that's not
germane to this to the session
we're focusing on where the the
financial risk is right you'll
know you've we have to follow
the money and so that's where
our focus is going to be whether
it's federal funding education
funding Medicaid funding.
I intend to partner with
stakeholders my office has very
limited staff thirty five a
classified employees
difficulty competing with the
private sector so I plan to to
partner with the stakeholders
that basically advocate for the
very public entities that we
regulate I'm talking about
municipally New Mexico counties
the a secular Association they
all have a stake in the success
of their own constituents and so
we're going to formalize that
relationship with them mainly in
the vein of enhancing and
expanding our our education and
training in good financial
management procurement.
We are going to restructure
reallocate resources to expand
training and education statewide
with my office to help prevent
fraud waste and abuse with a
focus on those small political
subdivisions we've already had
two meetings with the
legislative finance committee
we're going to be partnering a
lot closer with their program
evaluation unit I think here's a
perfect way for my agency in the
LFC ease of program evaluation
unit can combine our resources
and really truly focus on areas
that that need to be looked at
and perhaps added.
We you know my office only has
one chief general counsel and
one assistant general counsel
but yet my office does have
subpoena power
it during the course of a
financial audit for a public
entity and we have subpoena
power to request additional
information of the conservative
reports in the conservatorship.
But it it's quite labour
intensive to issue track and
enforce the subpoenas and so
that's going to be a potential
expansion area as is my effort
to expand the training and
education role that my office
currently has.
And the last the last priority
is to ensure cost effective use
of office space
we're already working with
General Services we've provided
them with an assessment of our
office space needs we will be
making some decisions regarding
return to work but in the
process of meeting with each and
everyone of my employees were a
hundred percent telework and
No decision's been made but we
will definitely not remain at a
hundred percent telework and so
we're bracing for some potential
resignations and.
so anyway that that's a decision
that that still remains so under
Mr Mr vice chair.
That concludes my presentation
are there any questions for me
thank you thank you very much Mr
state auditor congratulations
again thank you and I I feel for
you coming in as you said
without having had input into
all of this in the past but
obviously you're hitting the
ground running and that's great
thank you thank you happy to
have you and your staff and let
me get of course hi ginger from
our staff always want to
recognize our staff that worked
so hard tell me how to pronounce
your name this gentleman I see
it all the time it appears to
even mention it this general
next to you.
Yes you.
They had no see I was wrong I am
glad I didn't pronounce the
behind on a thank you and this
gentleman is who again.
Madam chairman Simon Miller an
analyst at the FAA thank you
very much Simon okay great I
have a question but not till
after I go to the committee to
see if there's any questions
before we proceed Senator
Gonzales here first and then
we've got Senator Padilla and
Senator Steinborn I got you from
under my eyes thank you thank
you madam chair and thank you to
our panel thank you welcome.
what else could I ask you is so.
You mentioned the shortfalls of
auditors.
And I thought that they had
introduced a program to have in
terms.
Look on the training part to be
eventually potential.
mainstream more into the
profession.
Madam vice chair Center Gonzalez
I'm not aware of any formal
internship program that we have
in my office but
we do have one in terms in our
office but you know we're
working closely with the New
Mexico CPA cisa society
we do have a problem just in the
industry in general the pipeline
is is really kind of at a
trickle and
you know private sector jobs pay
a lot more I would imagine it's
a lot more labor intensive than
working for a public agency but
the competition is stiff with
the private sector and my hope
is to have more competitive
salary structure so we can
compete with the private sector.
We we can't sustain of thirty
percent vacancy rate and really
fulfill our constitutional
mission.
So madam chair of.
Whether the suggestions to.
Overcome this or to.
Make changes to the.
Well I think re visiting our
salary structure it would be
great to to have maybe some comp
in class information benchmarked
against the private sector and
see where our positions lie with
respect to the private sector
you know upper and lower in mid
point
I mean I'm not a betting man but
I would I would think that our
salaries are inadequate relative
to similar positions in the
private sector.
Well I think the we've been well
it has some
thank you so
much my W. would like to weigh
in on that issue as well.
We'll go to and then ginger your
next so madam chair Senator
Gonzales the the issue is to a
great degree pay.
And it's also that are.
Auditors are essentially in the
pool of when CPO does comping
class they will define auditors
across the board ours are
required to once we get into the
review face and actually you
have to be a CPA to sign off on
an audit it's just required in
the industry as a standard that
but that doesn't compared to any
other areas the company class
study needs to be made our our
comms need to be against private
industry against firms and even
their firms will tell you
they're struggling like crazy to
hire CPA's or CPA candidates
it's going to continue to be a
problem but we're not even in
the game currently.
Because of our structure and
we've got to one get those
classifications up to that
level.
And number two and then start
recruiting very actively but
until we have the the pay
structure to do it we're not
even in in competition with
them.
but are are calm so not against
other state agencies because of
the requirement at the
management level to be a CPA.
And that's an industry standard
you you're not allowed to review
audits and sign off on audits
unless you are certified and you
have the background there are
various standards that we have
to meet so when the these
comping class comparisons are
done they're done against other
agencies and we wind up in the
same place we started which is
not able to compete with our
actual competitors were at which
are public accounting firms and
then private industry also hires
CPA's.
Thank you ginger.
madam chair members of the
committee I just wanted to note
that in the original a state
budget request that there was a
request the request included
forty seven at sorry excuse me
forty three point seven thousand
to fund the agencies internship
program to create opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate
students and that amount is
included in the LFC
recommendation.
I'm and again that madam chair
and members of the committee
that's page at sixty three and
sixty four in volume two the LFC
shaped agency code three zero
eight so the three zero it's at
the top of the page not the page
number than the page numbers
down hello.
The manager I wasn't dreaming I
knew it.
This address is up to three
years ago because of the.
The same problem with the small
small entities that can afford
to here on the team in the the
grant programs and always will
again.
Madam chair representative was
that for the or Senator was that
for the the small of the grants
to small public entities
that amount let's see at.
I can find the exact information
but from the data that LFC has
we know that unless it was an
able to distribute over thirty
thousand and this year's LFC
recommendation puts them at
ninety five thousand four grants
to small sub public sub division
sure the last part so.
So where are our universities in
the if this is something that.
Statewide that we are in need of
or is there program their
curriculum there.
Entice to.
Help us you know with the.
Providing more graduates of.
This.
Madam chair Senator Gonzales.
there's a paucity currently it's
a big shortage of students going
into the accounting profession
the number of reasons number of
journal articles that we could
present to you where we we just
don't have the number of people
going into the accounting
profession that we use to that's
part of the problem and with
regard to interns even if we
could if if we have twenty in
terms ultimately you have to be
qualified to review these audits
and has to be a CPA that does
the actual final review and the
actual signing off on these
audits because that's required
so all the interns can help us
with the very preliminary basic
things ultimately what we need
are are professional
accountants.
Okay very well madam chair I
hope that we can move that way.
Two more interested profession.
Yes thank you very much thank
yes of course and I can see why
this would be so important in
your area so okay thank you
Senator Gonzales center Padilla
then of course Senator Steinborn
patiently right we.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation
congratulations Mister arbiter
into your team thoroughly enjoy
working with you and all the
different rules to health I know
it's going to be great for you
to be in this role so once again
and Senator Gonzalez started
down the path of item number one
on your legislative initiatives
so so what is a million dollars
get us out of the two thousand
report hole that we're in we
could at least you know address
the fourth of that backlog.
as I said earlier we projected
that we need over four million
dollars.
to really get all these entities
off that at risk list
and other accountants Mr auditor
may madam chair charter that are
there available human beings to
actually do all this work and
that's what I'm also worried
about we got that question in
House approached and we're gonna
have to really use much more
innovative methods to really
assist the small entities if we
do get anything close to what
we're asking for right now we
just have an individual an
individual
independent public accountant
that'll engage who is interested
in gauging for a two thousand
dollar effort for this you know
small a second so we're looking
at a way perhaps of clustering
these entities that are non
compliant and hiring an
accounting firm to do all the
audits for this geographic
cluster of the small entities
that are not compliant that we
we xcelerated we incentivize the
interest of public accounting
firms because there's more
business but right now the
status quo is not working the
rate is at a at a snail's pace
we will not move the needle in
this list Liz at risk list and
as long as that executive order
which bars entities are not
financially compliant from
receiving capital outlay
I know that's a of a kind of a
at this stage of the Martinez
administration but it is a stick
it is an incentive to it to be
compliant and so we just need to
be smarter and more effective in
addressing this list thank you
madam chair instructor so how
are you prioritizing the two
thousand reports that are needed
is there us a ranking system
because there's some groups out
there that are working their you
know their rear ends off to get
their work done and whatever how
are you prioritizing the well
I'm gonna go with the entities
that that have been on the non
compliant list the longest.
Have some to go all the way back
to fiscal year twenty ten.
yeah.
Okay so so thank you and then
of.
Yes we need to get our hands
around this for four million
dollars versus a nine point five
six billion dollar whatever
budget seems like we can try to
help resolve this quickly but we
also don't probably don't want
to go down the road of fully
funding it if there is an human
resources and ways to get it
done there there's a lot to it I
understand that so but full stop
madam chair just wanted to also
ask about your tip line are you
going to continue that in your
administration here in this
office and how's that going what
what should we expect from that
it seems to be very valuable you
know in different times we are
and I mean it's the source of
all of our special
investigations are confidential
tipster intake.
What I can tell you if you look
at that chart the the that phone
number the actual fraud waste
and abuse phone numbers not used
very much it represents about
three percent of our intake in
fact that's a timely question
Senator Padilla and vice chair
of we're we're gonna be
revisiting the contract we have
a contractor that basically
handles that intake and we we
believe we can save money in the
next generation contract by no
longer utilizing their services
for the phone number we're still
going to keep the number and
it's not gonna prevent folks
from calling in effect you can
see from that bar chart we have
folks walking in they call on a
regular line not all the intake
comes through that fraud waste
and abuse web hotline and phone
hotlines so we are going to
reform it prognoses out the
phone services keep the phone
number and focus on the web
portal but again we have some
confidential confidentiality
issues that we have to deal with
with these working papers that
are the source of specializing
even referral to law enforcement
or whatever prosecuting entity
we make a referral to.
Thank you madam chair and this
will be my last point so I
encourage you to keep all
avenues available including the
phone line
web phone.
Carrier pigeon whatever the
easiest way to get most people
able to reach you cousins and so
we still have areas of New
Mexico as you know one of my
major swim lanes is broadband
here getting a bunch of
broadband work that some people
don't have the ability to reach
you that way so I think you
still want to hear from all
those communities as well so
thank you thank you Sir by the.
Thank you for the S. Senator
Steinborn thank you madam chair
Mister out of here welcome to
the committee and welcome to
your team and everybody else I
saw a question about this first
item that it's kind of
That's a huge number two
thousand reports so my
understanding right just try to
do that that's two thousand
small organizations that are not
in compliance with your office
these could be reports for the
same entity yeah so it's not
separate entities it could be
just multiple reports from the
same entities but but I think
that is under estimate on my
opinion because if you just take
a second alone
I just attended the Congress of
a sick as and they threw out a
number of six hundred and forty.
A second us but we only have
about two hundred twenty five
that are registered in our SA
connects estim and all of those
two twenty five about forty two
percent are compliant what's
happening Sir they're not
maintaining the contact list of.
And you can see six hundred
forty versus two twenty five and
of those two twenty five less
than half a compliant so that
number this is probably a low
ball number in terms of the need
so thank you and madam chair
Mister other how many times how
often are they supposed to
report to you annually annually
so so the person that hasn't
filed the entities since twenty
ten and that would be whatever
that B. twelve reports that they
owe you so but
well and then you said there's a
lot of so I guess that's of core
problem I mean to accrued two
thousand right
delinquent Reports Khanna says
that there's a real problem
with.
Maybe people understanding their
responsibilities are taking them
seriously or hi obviously a lot
of organizations you mentioned
you have a lot of volunteer run
board can the US problem right
I'm sure a lot of specific is
land grants mutual domestics.
So madam chair Senator Steinborn
let me give you some numbers
here of that.
Two thousand plus reports that
that are lacking sixty percent
are from mutual domestic so I
don't know yet let him with
mutual domestics in your in your
districts sixty percent of those
are mutual domestics thirty five
percent are as sick as.
So you know we have the
secretary of state sitting back
there they're pretty good you
know we have to as we know as
candidates we have to file with
them and then they've got an
automated now we're literally
the care reports to we're
getting an email the day before
you know five minutes late we're
getting an email it used to be
that way all you city on paper
but but I bring this up because
What's that.
The second in the US and access
welcome
but you know people need that
reminder especially volunteers
to get into compliance and so I
just.
I'm sure you are looking at it
but obviously how we're training
them what kind of automation
what we can do to educate people
on the line get him to take it
seriously get into better
compliance specially when they
you know can't get funding from
us unless they do it's in their
interest to do so right now it's
kind of like a a lot of people
just thumbing their nose like I
don't know why.
Public capacity in part but I
just I'm I'm I'm really interest
in the core problem that created
that massive workload and what
we can do to kind of.
Bring more people into
compliance more the time so that
you know but clearly so for now
you need to do so when you get
those reports and then you need
to audit the so what you do or
you review them in a program and
then determine if if all the
reports are in for every single
fiscal year then we consider
them to be financially
compliant.
And so the money that we would
be giving you madam chair fodder
what would that be would that be
for your review of the delinking
reports once they come in that
would be working with hand
holding with them to get him to
you know we can do it we do some
of that in house but most of the
work is contracted out to these
independent public accountants.
All right good luck look forward
to seeing how we get our arms
around this bigger problem that.
I to help yep thank you senator
thank you Senator Steinborn.
To my SS Senator Diamond and we
have Senator Woods thank you
madam chairman thank you guys
for your presentation.
I'm looking at the bottom of our
of our sixty through port it
says that the the state auditor
was able to distribute over
thirty thousand in the small
grants to those political
subdivisions last year how many
entities were you able to bring
into compliance with that thirty
thousand.
Thank you for.
Vermont twelve.
Madam chair Senator.
Of those that thirty thousand
dollars and we were able to
distribute we were able to us
four to twenty six entities of
those twenty six entities they
still that was just.
Here for instance this year
we're gonna work at all at
twenty thirteen that's all we
have so they still need twenty
fourteen to twenty twenty two so
I can get you the exact number
of.
Of how many were brought into
compliance but I can tell you
demographics full compliance
thank you madam chairman in it
is the way these requests
operate is you're just giving
them the funding to hire to
contract with the CPA to
complete the audit is that's
correct that's right so there's
a big discrepancy madam chair
**** because the recommendation
for LFC is ninety five thousand
but your request is one million
there's a huge gap there that we
need to find out if if you've
over asked if it's really gonna
take a million dollars to get
these into compliance and then I
worry is that as you know you
mentioned mutual domestic server
or somewhere worse offenders
they just don't have the
capacity and neither do some of
the so on water districts so
you're dealing with a part time
up employee one employee part
time maybe not even have a brick
and mortar office or you're
dealing with the volunteer board
of directors for these acequia
so my question is is once we
even bring a to compliance this
just seems like this million is
still just a bandaid because
they don't have continued
capacity to submit these
required reports even once we
bring them up to compliance now.
My incorrect there Madam vice
chair Senator Diamond you know
you've hit the nail on the head
yeah if we're gonna go in there
and invest this kind of money it
has to be sustainable and that's
why there's two elements that
are critical to really help them
one is to work with the
organizations that advocate for
them.
To really get serious about
assisting them and raising the
capacity right so they can
sustain this annual exercise to
beef financially compliant the
funding is is good but we need
those advocacy organizations to
step up and work with us and the
other element to this is the
annual training and education
that we provide
we intend to really expand our
training and education with a
focus on the small public
entities and this is annual
training so I feel with the
annual training with the
additional funding and the
direct assistance of these
advocacy organizations we might
be able to make this sustainable
going forward.
Madam chair in thank you Mr dot
seems unrealistic to me only
that we would rely on non
profits to come in and assist
some of these entities if we're
being real about the struggles
that we're having with in these
these subdivisions and I say a
secular so on water district in
the middle Sierra her dog County
who has a part time employee who
works twelve hours a week you
know doesn't how to send an
email you know has a volunteer
board of directors.
To say well go work with your
advocates to get these reports
and just seems like we're going
to you're still going to run
into the same problems and and
maybe we need to look at the
entire system of what we're
requesting from in the in the
first place just don't know if
if we're if we're really I
understand you're asking for
funding to solve the immediate
problem but it doesn't seem like
this is addressing long term
that will be right back here in
five ten years you'll be asking
for more money to back fill and
and bring many more up to
compliance but I do want to
noted offender in here though
it's one thing to pick on a
small so on water district that
has very little funding but the
City of Santa Fe is not in
compliance since twenty nineteen
how can that be.
I was afraid I was going to get
that person and and vice chair
Senator Diamond.
Yes City of Santa Fe is at least
a couple of fiscal years late in
their financial audits I puts
their their
central accounting officer in my
W. here but we are working with
them but if you noticed in that
at risk list the City of Santa
Fe is a fiscal agent for two
joint city county entities Santa
Fe solid waste management agency
and the Buckman direct diversion
and so those two city county
entities are also on the at risk
list because of that
consequential delays to the City
of Santa fe's audit so yeah
that's that's a I would say the
City of Santa Fe is is an out
liar among all those other
entities on the at risk list but
we are working with them to get
them back into compliance
my understanding is that the
withholding of capital outlay
has already begun and so they're
feeling the sting of being non
compliant or on the at risk list
give anything to add Rikki.
Yes the.
One one of the questions is been
fired hasn't capital outlay been
with help from the city of Santa
Fe and they allow.
DFA has a lotus for projects
that were in place already to
continue into completion but
there is no
there will be no new money
coming into the into the are in
compliance I do want to address
the thought.
Thank you mentioned if I may
madam chair Senator Diamond with
regard to the small political
subdivisions.
The those are statutory
requirements that they be
examined this under the tier
system it will result in in
complete audits and some cases
it'll be.
In in some cases be filling out
a form sending the information
so that we have that on file to
get him into compliance but part
of the issue here is that when
you have an entity that let's
say ten years behind we really
don't know what's going on what
the issues are I grew up in
Lordsburg by the way so I
totally understand what it is to
grow up in an entity that does
have the resources but we've
we've got to get out there we've
got to find out the reason for
the million dollars is that
trying to get this work out at
two thousand dollars apiece if
if you've priced public
accounting firms lately
the minimum for staff is about a
hundred dollars an hour so we've
got to make it appealing for
some of these IPA's to bid on on
some of this work so the
clustering effect is something
that will say okay let's say
we're talking just the southwest
region trying to bring all those
entities into compliance so we
try to get
IPA's to bid on that work S. as
in total.
And that'll be more appealing
than no no one's going to drive
to look for example for two
thousand dollars to complete a
professional function but if we
can combine that and try to make
it more cost effective as well
as profitable they're in the
business to make money.
If we make it at least somewhat
profitable for them to make
money to help us bring these
entities into compliance we
think we have a better shot
we've got to start somewhere.
Madam chair and thank you for
that explanation yeah I'm I'm
wrong though this this could
also be interpreted as somewhat
of a bailout and I say that with
our small entities I understand
they simply don't have the
capacity and we need to bring
them up to speed but when
elephant Butte or truth or
consequences or large Burke
submits reports in a timely
manner so that they can continue
to get capital outlay and the
City of Santa Fe or Texaco into
can carry doesn't we're gonna
come back and back fill the City
of Santa Fe by paying for their
audits that they haven't done in
five years that that's not much
of an incentive to my small
communities who have stayed in
compliance pay their bills and
we're and gotten reports on time
and I I also think at least for
the larger entities where there
really is no excuse some of
these domestic source on water
districts I can understand but
in some of those larger cities
there's no excuse that the
state's coming and you're
requesting a million dollars for
us to pay for Santa Fe to get
compliance when my smaller
communities have had to play and
play by the rules and on time.
If I may madam chair of Senator
Diamond the money that we're
asking for is only for small
political subdivisions okay so
this will just back fill those
only one water does smaller
entities that aren't doing a
full audit madam chair Senator
Diamond that's correct only
small thank you madam chair I
can sleep tonight.
Thank you and I can wait to
interject on that I'm just I'm
gonna go to Senator Woods but I
was here like no no this is not
for the city's Senator this is
for small mutual domestic
suspect yes small little
communities that have membership
more than anything they their
volunteers a lot of these and
they survive on their membership
dues so that is completely
different and.
On for the City of Santa Fe we
have confirmed that they are on
track to finally do they get
their audit done and I know you
were there before
by June of this year so we
should be completed by then
according to all the information
we have received so nothing's
been held back is just been
flagged that they will be
delayed because of the situation
if I may madam chair members of
the committee all of this
happened before I was there the
last year.
I must interject I apologize
for.
All right I wasn't sure when you
left for anything but thank you
very much all righty and now we
are going to go to Senator would
you who are so patient and kind
you just look this way and wait
for your turn years thank you
your next thank you thank you
madam chair you bet.
I guess the question I would
like to ask madam chair is.
Is we talked about if you don't
turn in on it you can't get
capital outlay awards is there
any other of.
K. to the fact that you don't
turn in our office.
Is my question.
If I may madam chair Senator
Woods there is there is there
are other requirements for
example federal funding is
potentially at risk.
And other types of of
appropriations that are tied to
being compliant
it's it's not just capital
outlay I think the best example
is probably federal funding.
Can can be at risk if
Some of the examples we set it
if you're not in compliance with
the smaller entities the federal
money doesn't necessarily flow
directly to them but it flows
through other entities like
cities like County let me
disabilities like the state
where there is what's referred
to as sub recipient compliance
but they have to ensure that and
that can cut that money flow off
as well so there is risk.
I was wondering can we get a
list of those of non compliant
of.
Agents are not agencies but
entities in the state of New
Mexico email to this sure.
We're happy to provide that
Senator because it happens that
three the to name here or in my
district.
So you know that helps me
distribute my capital outlay
quite a bit because all three of
those have asked for capital
outlay the school around.
So and the deadline to turn in
those audits.
Is what day madam chair.
If I may madam chair Senator was
it varies to type of entity some
it starts as early as November
first and concludes that
December thirty first and it
depends on the type of entity.
So from September to November.
Madam chair representative
Senator Woods it starts actually
November first.
Starts on November that goes all
the way back to the September
the next year.
He's.
As far as Filene's Senator Woods
the filings of the reports that
have to be submitted start
November first and by December
thirty first all right all have
every entity should have filed
or submitted the reports to the
city of that a sensually a month
in their.
To.
To have those we had said on the
school board one time and that
school board that school.
Didn't get their audit in one
year.
And we had the PED show up.
And say we're not gonna leave
here until you give us that are
coming given the so those
financial papers.
And they had just couldn't we
had just converted to a computer
system and the the young lady
that we had that a in truth.
Some have there was nothing in
there to get.
And we literally had to hire
someone to go back through the
warrants that we had issues.
And build.
What happened the year before.
And it was a timely
process that we had to go
through.
and and of course the ladies
from the EDD after about three
our state so there was anything
so H. one backed Santa Fe.
Because why state there if
there's nothing you can get.
So I understand
a.
The people keep in the books can
get confused and and and public
accounting is completely
different than private County.
And even your auditors.
as you say you have a list of
auditors to use him those
auditors specialize yourself and
and some specialized schools
some specializing in towns and
different things and so.
I'm getting around to the point
of the million dollars.
And.
Your budget.
And and twenty one and twenty
two.
FY twenty one.
Was three million two hundred
twenty thousand.
And twenty three.
I was two three million seven
hundred and four thousand.
The agency requests this year
was.
Four million.
And now you're coming in and
saying what I really need.
Another the so that would be fun
the and you see how much
increase in budgets that ideas
over a short period of time and
I realize you guys are brand new
in town.
But you have to understand the
way I look at things to that's a
huge increase.
And and these guys have been out
of compliance for a long time.
And for them to come back and
say we're going to make up
looks so that you can audit on.
For four years five years six
years.
That's not easily done thank you
guys are in up and then this way
I understand it with our readers
you guys are in the business.
To certify audits.
You're not in business to do the
audits.
So you so with the million
dollar shoe wanting to hire
auditors to go audit someone
when they really have to get a
set of books Steven audit.
I have a little bit of trouble
madam chair that.
Maybe.
Then maybe we don't have enough.
Bite.
In the law to get people to turn
in audits.
Anybody can can have a
bookkeeper that maybe they don't
know what they're doing and get
screwed up.
But after a year you know that.
And after that point in time
it's it's your fault
management's fault for not.
Getting your books in shape to
get about it.
By in the law to.
Maybe people comply.
And I know these are small
entities and we can say whatever
we want but we're given public
money.
No matter how big the.
I don't know I don't see how we
can do that the suggestion was
well let's just wave Revenue
started new.
But if that's the case school.
Why does anybody need to get an
audit.
So I can add you know I can
agree with that.
That's all I have madam chair
thank you very thank you away
and just briefly because I
usually don't do this to and but
maybe while we're on the topic I
can weigh in a little bit on
that is that you know we've
looked at different ways to help
the small entities for example I
refer back again to the mutual
domestics as an example these
are people their volunteers
their members they pay they
survive based on how much water
how much do some it that much
money in dues they pay
membership dues there's no it's
not a an enterprise fund of any
kind they just pay for the water
they use say for example I'm
gonna give you an example the
apple three of it which has a
domestic water association the
only funds they have is what the
members membership pays for the
water they use and so when it
comes to audits for example it
poses an extreme
of hardship to say the least the
least for them because they just
don't have that extra money they
they use the funds they get from
their membership dues to
maintain the system to do other
things leisure or whatever else
they need we are familiar with
that because those of us that
have a real communities can see
that so we looked at options one
of the options was well what
about just out right requests
you know grants that
specifically have a language
that say for example would be a
grant for two can that would be
used only for conducting the
audits that means that the
organizations serve these small
systems would be able to use
grants to to do only their
audits the funding would be
going to that but then the issue
is not that simple because then
we have the issue of possibly
the anti donation costs you know
can we work around that with
that get in the way it's all
these things that we just need
to iron out it's just it has
seemed difficult to find a way.
Way any other way to to help
these entities and and they need
help I can see why you were just
going to continue to build upon
all the years that there late
because they just can't do it
there's no funding for its how
do we do it I think we need to
re circle would go back to the
drawing board and see how we can
do this I really appreciate you
bringing up some options though
because we have to look at it
somehow find some way that's
right and it's still judiciously
uses public money to do this and
assures that these funds are
being used you know in an
audited and and and right so
thank you did you have anything
else in a longer saying madam
chair I really don't think it's
a problem.
This is not the problem.
They don't have the books to
audit.
I'll bet you dollars to donuts
that's the problem.
They don't have a set of books
to audit.
If they haven't had a set of
books for years are they hadn't
had audit for years they
probably hadn't had a set of
books for years hello I could
say.
Government accounting is
different than any other county
you do.
So.
They don't have the ability.
Five years ago they don't have
the ability to date.
No matter how many auditors use
and there's not the books to.
And my opinion madam chair only
my opinion thank you thank you
know good point Senator I'm glad
you brought that are vice chair
I need just to point out there's
a total of six tiers
that determines what level of
requirements the small public
entities are subjected to but
the top two tiers tier one and
tier two tier one are entities
that have revenues less than ten
thousand tier two revenues
between ten and fifty thousand
those two tiers are not subject
to any kind of financial report
they simply self certify so not
all of them are subject to a
financial report and in terms of
our budget in response to
Senator words that Madam chair
in FY twenty two we did except
the statutory mandate to expand
our organization to to conduct
the conservatorship report so we
added a a new unit with three
FTEs to process those and I
think that's that's I think the
last major expansion at this
office has has seen and it was
it was not voluntary it was just
it was a statutory mandate.
Thank you for that explanation
thank you all right yes we're
going to move on to Senators
hoper Senator share let's see he
stepped out for a minute we'll
go back to any other questions
for the committee no okay I'm
gonna just make a or have a
quick question maybe Senator
sure walk into given an
opportunity to ask his question
but while he's out
I don't know I could just cross
my mind here on the replacement
give me a second here that we
had
just a second yes here it is for
to replace them the the audits
that you do for each agency
auditor and do a singular audits
for example you know that sounds
like a good idea but explain to
me how briefly I can only for
the sake of time because we have
a on the agenda but how would
that work because individually
we are ready to HSD so we get a
comprehensive audit for each one
but if you do a singular I guess
I'm just wondering what that be
maybe of a less comprehensive
audit into wonder how that might
W. thank you thank you madam
chair.
That's one of the reasons this
this is been attempted before by
the way in two thousand eighteen
and the bill essentially died in
committee it made it through a
committee in the night and the
next
that's one of the reasons were
going back at that we'd like to
see a study by an expert
research firm to come back and
tell us how are other states
doing this they're all doing it
differently
some have a console the singular
consolidated audit and and this
is in the approach ultimately we
wind up with a.
An annual comprehensive
financial report that's that's
just a requirement so the
ultimate.
product is the same what we're
talking about is the process in
New Mexico what we do is we go
agency by agency by agency and
then combine all those reports
as to what we for two as the act
for what this would be doing is
doing whether states do and
that's combining that process
into one process you would the
HSD would essentially sample
across the entire state all
agencies and whatnot but.
We are not sure how we would do
it that's what one of the
reasons for the study so we can
find out what the best practices
are out there what other states
are doing comparable and non
comparable and then come back
and report on what we find but
we are I've heard it it's it's
been stated that we're just one
of seven that aren't having a
singular audit as low as a one
firm reported to me that's a
national firm that they think
we're the only ones with so we
may it be in this by ourselves
it could be one to we could be
within a pool of seven states so
we could just be the the last
one we've got to get up to
standard and up to snuff as
thank you thank you for that
explanation thank you for your
ideas and pro activeness okay
here we are Senator share we
called on you you just stepped
out we wanted to hear from you
so much that we waited so you're
back you're it thank you.
Thank you know my phone is going
crazy so.
I don't know nobody calls me all
the time.
So I'm.
I'm thinking about this million
dollars madam chair and so it
looks to me like the total audit
fees generated for two hundred
and seventy nine thousand
dollars is that right.
Know the typical engagements for
the small public entities are
anywhere from two to three
thousand dollars total for these
are small these are small
engagements.
These are not full financial
audits.
I I get that but.
One on this page sixty four
total audit fees generated two
hundred and seventy nine
thousand two hundred forty
dollars.
So you generated two hundred
seventy nine thousand two
hundred forty dollars in fees
yeah he's referred to okay and
so in in this case so you want a
million dollars.
If this is my money personally I
I would not spend a thousand
dollars to generate two hundred
eighty dollars.
That seems counterproductive to
me.
Madam chair Senator share their
two completely different things
the audit fund that we have to
generate our audits that we have
to conduct has as the office and
it's essentially it's what we
refer to as program revenue that
we have to generate I think the
target was three hundred
thousand we generated two
seventy nine of that and those
are not small public
subdivisions I believe last year
the office audited the State
Land Office in conjunction with
the firm they've audited some of
the commissions I could get your
list of the audits or time but
these are we're not talking
about the same types of entities
the entities that we're talking
about to get up to.
To a compliance are the small
public subdivisions include
mutual domestic soil and waters
and those types of entities
madam chair I I.
Are there any fees generated
from the small.
Mutual to madam chair Senator
share not that I'm aware of.
Okay.
And if madam vice chair Senator
sure if I may add that the audit
fund is also
used to defray operational
budget so we don't get a hundred
percent general funds were
expected to use the audit fund
to partially defray our
operational budget requirements
madam chair I understand that
too it's just in my mouth I
would not spend a thousand
dollars to get two hundred
maybe.
so from that perspective is
there a better way to do this
and certainly for the acequia is
where we have one part time or
one volunteer of.
What if they just sent you the
check book you can look at all
they put in a hundred dollars
they spent seventy five they got
twenty five left on a complete.
Madam chair so Senator sure
that.
It essentially that's what we're
talking about when we talk about
the tiered system there is there
some of the reporting that will
actually amount to that
and that'll be of a very low
standard and I think we started
ten thousand dollars and revenue
that is essentially going and
reviewing the checkbook and
what not and then at it
graduates as the amount of money
that the entity is receiving as
to what they have to report
these aren't full blown audits
these are primarily agreed upon
procedures.
And the hand don't rise to the
same standard.
Can be done quickly efficiently
and to just to ensure that the
money's going where it should be
going.
Madam chair certainly for these
for these small places then you
can look at it you go oh so you
know they paid for this piece of
equipment make sense they paid
for this person to do something
make sense.
They had a party.
Maybe doesn't make sense you can
see that in their checkbook
unless of course our divisions
for you honestly trying to hide
it in the front to and then
they're going to hide it and I
do anyway because not full blown
on.
And effective for talking about
literally a few hundred dollars
which most of these the state
gives a couple of thousand
dollars maybe annually.
These are just a better way to
do it than spending two thousand
dollars to audit two thousand
dollars madam chair or senator
fully audited two thousand
dollars an entity that spends
just a few hundred dollars or
anything less than ten thousand
dollars wouldn't have that
requirement anyway.
Okay.
Well Madam chair on that's as
far as I'm gonna go but it does
seem to me that we're not.
I'm confused as to is to why
we're spending so much money for
so little return.
Thank.
Thank you madam vice chair what
what I what we can do when we
submit in response the center
which requests for the at risk
list we will send a table
showing the different tiers and
and and I think that'll that'll
explain you know where these
entities fall and what the
requirements are I think that'll
help.
Yes thank you that would that
would help I thank you very much
and I think for now if there's
no one else on the list we're
gonna have to get going because
we're running out of time but I
want to thank you for your
presentation and we understand
your position on that on the
executive budget versus a LFC is
and someone so we'll take a look
at all of that and consider all
your request thank you so much
Mr yes good to see you great to
be with you thank you and your
staff thanks Micaela and
everyone ginger.
Thank you okay we are going to
move on to the secretary of
state do we have the secretary
here.
And it's HSD three seventy where
are we.
But.
Thank you.
Terry come staff thank you and.
And of course Jessica thank you
okay we're gonna move a little
quicker only because we're
running out of time but just
gonna start with you and then we
will go on to the secretary of
state thank you thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Jessica hits then I'm
the LFC analysts I'm doing here
was Simon Miller who's the
analyst for the executive our
secretary of state Maggie
Toulouse Oliver New the chief
financial officer for the office
Justin oshi on this is again for
HSD three seven zero and I
apologize for not including
numbers on your sheet but if
you'd like to follow along in
the big book volume two those
are for pages us starting on
page one twenty eight.
and that'll take you through
page one thirty two in the
binder so one twenty eight
through one thirty two thank
you.
so madam chair at this time
we'll go over the executive
recommendation you all have some
high level bullets as well some
more detail differences but for
the sake of time we'll just
start with the bullets the
executive recommendation exceeds
the legislative recommendation
by nine hundred and fourteen
point two thousand in general
fund revenues but the
legislative is slightly higher
in other revenues by about
twenty five point five thousand
so when you take the difference
in the total revenues for the
agency there's a difference of
about eight hundred eighty eight
point seven thousand so as you
can see the executive
recommendation provides just
over sixteen point eight million
where is the LFC recommendation
provides just over fifteen point
nine million.
the executive recommendation
provides three hundred and four
point three thousand dollars
more than the Legislative offer
person so the executive of
reduces the unfunded vacancy
rate a little bit more than the
LFC recommendation and then the
recommend just over a million
dollars more for other general
election cost for things like
tabulators and equipment both
recommendations supported the
requested revenues from the
agencies federal help America
vote act grant Fund balances on
you will see those recommended
again as fund balances they were
incorrectly requests as federal
revenue but since it was an
existing grant that the agency
already had again we we
correctly recommended those in
the fund balance money.
I'll speak just quickly about
some differences in the
recommendations for the
elections program this is a move
in more detail on pages five and
six of your pockets but the main
differences for the lections
program total five hundred
eighty four point four thousand
on the executive essentially
provides more funds to support
general election costs however
the LFC supports more of the
requested contractual
information technology needs
with recurring funding all the
executives provides three
hundred and forty thousand in a
nonrecurring special I. T.
appropriations in regards to I.
T. the LFC also provides one
point eight million in capital
outlay.
I do want to note so there are
some nuances in terms of the the
recommendation regarding the
local elections so I'm as I'm
sure secretary of state will
mention on their budget often
fluctuates from year to year
because in odd number fiscal
years there's only one election
and even numbered years there
are two election so you'll see
their budget generally go up for
those additional elections and
then come back down and so as
part of a way to kind of
stabilize the budget this year
all the LFC in the executive
take the cost of funding the
regular local elections so that
extra lection every other year
we take those costs out of the
recurring budget and we fund
those instead as a special and
so all walk you through a little
bit more of those in the back of
your sheet but I just wanted to
provide that for the committee I
also want to just briefly note
that the agency recommended and
again this is in relation to
more so about the HSD specials
so I will let Simon Miller
provide some comments regarding
the agencies admin and
operations program and any other
comments on the elections before
we go up into some specials
about the right madam chair.
Thank you all right Simon your
next afternoon madam chair
members of the committee so as
Jessica said overall the
executive recommendation for the
recurring operating budget the
executives nine hundred thousand
dollars higher and that really
can just be broken down to two
items so first is the executive
three hundred thousand dollars
higher in person
so that allows the agency to
fill a few more positions than
the LFC recommendation and then
the second thing is that the
executive is six hundred
thousand dollars higher for it
the administration of the twenty
twenty four statewide primary
election
the sector it's the secretary of
state's office has a current
year short shortfall for the
most recent general election so
they're requesting supplemental
funding from the legislature and
also went to DFA sport finance
for an emergency grant to shore
up this year's current shortfall
so the executive recommendation
that's six hundred thousand
dollars higher for elections is
an effort to avoid a shortfall
of in FY twenty four.
on the non recurring side of
things the do you want to you
are Sir just yet madam chair
this point you all to Page ten
of your guises sheets and and
just real quick before we go
into a nonrecurring and you just
want to note the executive also
provides an additional FTE
expansion for business
implementation specialist and a
trainer which the LFC did not
include so again that that's
just another small difference
but if we turn the page ten all
just briefly walk through and
then have Simon find a little
bit more detail but madam chair
I mentioned that the Mr chair of
New both of the recommendations
at this point remove the costs
of that second election and put
them into special appropriation
so line one of the she is the
executive recommendation on the
projected costs of about five
point eight million for the FY
twenty four election where is
the LFC find seven point five
million in lines to and line
three this is based on prior
year estimate so again the
executive is based on prior to
the actual projections the LFC
recommendation is based on prior
costs so as you can see the
executive provides five point
eight million for FY twenty four
the LFC find seven point five
million for FY twenty four but
also provides seven point five
million in FY twenty six which
would be the next time that the
agency would need that
additional funding as an
additional aside the executive
also recommends a twenty million
dollar one time infusion into
the state election fund and this
is attended to act kind of I
don't know savings account is
the right word but that funding
would be available for the
agency to come for both general
election costs in local election
costs I'm here to here and they
would ask to replenish that fund
every year and then moving
forward on the some of the other
items you can see that both a
recommendations include a
hundred thousand dollars online
for for upgrading the existing
voter registration and.
Integrity system and then the
executive goes on to recommend
additional I. T. funding in the
amount of three hundred forty
thousand dollars combined across
these different items where is
the LFC recommendation found
that some of the requests we
felt were duplicative of their
capital outlay and some of the
recurring funding so that was
provided for in in those areas
instead and then lastly
assignment mentioned lines I
believe seven eight and nine are
speaking to the agencies
projected shortfall which the
executive recommended however we
are the LFC at the time of the
recommendation did not have
those projections and so we've
been asked to work on those and
so those are in terms of non
recurring I will just have
assignment at any other
following comments but madam
chair that is the majority of
the of the recommendation the
only last thing I just want to
know is that in terms of the
board of finance request again
there was two point four million
dollars requests to cover
statutory obligations to
counties the state has since
moved into a basically hundred
percent cost share for statewide
elections so the county submit
the reimbursement secretary of
state meets those reimbursements
however the LFC is is unsure how
the agencies validating those
expenditures and so we're seeing
an increase in requests to cover
and reimbursements for things
like equipment I believe that
eight counties are able to
submit for reimbursement for any
costs associated with election
so we've seen the cost share
increase and she can not correct
and so madam chair I'd like for
the secretary to to speak on
that thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee no additional comments
I will pass it over to our
secretary of state thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman and vice
chairman members of the
committee Maggie Toulouse Oliver
secretary of state I I just want
to hit on some some brief at
talking points more than the
overall narrative of our budget
request what we're trying to do
this year their budget request
is get out of the cyclical which
we were all very familiar with
most of you been on this
committee multiple years at this
point and so you know the story
where every year we come to the
legislature we say this is how
much money we need to operator
office and to conduct elections
and every year we unfortunately
come away with less than we
requested and so we are able to
provide our agency R. I. us more
office in our elections through
a patchwork of supplemental
specials in some cases like this
year going to the board of
finance to meet at the needs of
actual costs that have already
been incurred as the result of
the twenty twenty two election
we were granted a one point four
million dollar grant last week
that is of the entire two point
two million dollars that was
available to the DFA in their
emergency fund that is just not
good public policy budgeting for
us to have to come to you all
explain what our needs are how
much we think things are going
to cost and then when they come
to fruition because we don't
have the full amount of funding
we need to have to go get an
emergency fund to pay already
existing bills and so with that
Mr chairman members the budget
that we have requested is
reflective of our actual needs
are projections based on actual
costs we've gotten very good
over the last several years of
knowing how much election costs
and mind you we are also
conducting elections within the
context of a global pandemic
we're conducting them within the
biggest forest fire in our
state's history and now of
course we're combating inflation
and inflationary costs of
services to conduct elections
just like every other sector in
the state and in the country or
dealing with inflation cost
we're going.
To bid for contractual services
as required by law this year
we're course going to do
everything we can to get at
those contracts in place to be
at.
Deserving of taxpayer dollars
and not wasteful but we you know
that is a process that we have
to go through and so with that
Mr chair and members you know
what we're trying to do is get
out of this patchwork of special
supplementals trying to make
ends meet now last year this
committee were very supportive
of the concept of the twenty
million dollar Fund that sort of
always exists we come to you we
ask for you to budget we tell
you what we're going to need for
this upcoming so for example
this coming fiscal year we have
as Jessica mentioned to
elections that is that regular
local election primary election
and then in the next fiscal year
will have the general I'm so
we'll know how much those are
going to cost will estimate
those will come to you and ask
you to budget this committee
supported that request last year
the challenge was that it was a
diversion from the permanent
fund that funding source this
year were saying let's make a
general fund let's just be you
know straight about where this
funding is coming from and what
that will do is that will help
our office to be able to plant
to not have to come to you year
after year had in hand saying
please please give us the money
we know we need to conduct an
election please give us the
money that we need to pay our
bills that we already from the
last election to clarify the way
the reimbursement process works
of the counties and then I I
will complete my initial
comments in and of course here
for any questions we have we
asked the counties we give them
a schedule of what are
statutorily mandated costs and
we ask them to tell us what
those are and they tell us what
those are that is not to say we
don't get requests for
reimbursement for things that
are not statutorily mandated we
do get those requests but we do
not from those requests if we
don't have the funding we will
only funded the statutorily
mandated costs and that is a
system that we devised as soon
as we got into this place of
having the state bear the cost
of all state federal and local
elections which is where we are
statutorily so Mr chair and
then.
Reserve the committee in short
the DFA recommendation gets us
to a place where we are not
having to come every year
wondering and hoping for going
to be able to afford to conduct
our elections that are mandated
by state law instead what it
will do is it will give us the
freedom to come to you and say
these are the costs and please
just be aware of them approve
them but that we're not always
worried about whether or not
we're going to be able to pay
our bills because Mr chair and
members that is where we are
just just to come mentioned that
house could.
Appropriations and finance
committee has appointed a sub
committee to work with us to get
us closer it was the LFC
recommendation was adopted
yesterday I am going to be
working with that sub committee
to get us closer so hopefully
when at the budget bill comes
over to you all we will be a lot
closer but at we would of course
ask for your help and support
and I'm getting these sort of
long term it's not for office
and with that Mr chair members
thank you very much for your
time thank you.
Secretary all rights any
questions the committee with
them first Senator Woods.
Your.
Your have you got any money in
this budget to increase the rate
to the election workers.
Thank you very much for the
question Mr chair and Senator
Woods yes so a request that
we've heard loud and clear from
our county clerks is that we
need more funding to recruit and
retain folks to help run our
elections on the ground and so
currently there is an a cap of
two hundred dollars per day
purple official we have a
separate piece of legislation
that will increase that to to a
Max of four hundred dollars of
double the cost of course the
county clerk will be able to
determine the actual rate for
poll workers and that is
incorporated within this budget
request Mr chair and senator is
madam chair is that in the
Approved LFC budget the.
That was approved our is that in
a bill that's coming forward I
think you said it was a bill
that's coming forward.
Chair so Mister chairman Senator
so two pieces that the
permission so to speak to
increase the rate is in a
separate piece of legislation
that's in our administrative
priorities bill which you're
familiar with because it's very
similar to a bill that you
carried a couple of years ago
and this is the budgetary piece
of that Mr chair and senator
okay thank you madam chair.
All right.
The house.
That money was in the action
from president he tried to find.
The whole thing with them and
that's why you're in that
situation you are.
In New Mexico and
because of the.
Cautionary tale.
Always try to make things and
independently manage.
In order to so that's partially
on this committee that that
portion that's when.
Can you in the house yesterday
but it to have say about the
twenty million dollar.
That is what we call the
election fund it is so yeah so
Mister chairman so there is you
know anything one of the that
confusing things is over the
years as things have involved
we've gone from not having a
designated election fund and
just funding Alexion's out of
our operating budget having a
fund specifically for regular
local elections to now having
over the last three years the
statewide election fund which is
for the purpose of funding
lections and for those actual
costs instead of operating costs
for office so to your point Mr
chair and and also your previous
comment very well received
tenant knowledge
which is why we're doing things
differently this year it Mr
chair
so I did not hear a push back in
in that you know of course of if
the analysts want to chime in on
the concept of course what we do
see is not only a five million
dollar difference in the
recommendations but we also see
the LFC recommendation being
split into two years as opposed
to the DFA recommendation being
for now because again we're
trying to get out of this
pattern at the supplementals and
specials right now I get it I'm
gonna fix that we're going to
fix that they don't fix it in
the house.
Mr chair I just wanted to make a
comment the HFC did not take
action on specials and so yeah
they didn't they didn't discuss
it in much detail on however
part of what they wanted us to
look at the subcommittee was how
do you create the operating
budget to make that whole in
tandem with the specials and so
that was something they just
look at.
But that won't be part of the
operating budget that would be a
single separate fund for
election purposes and missile
force.
So I don't know why we would be
looking at it as as a base
operating budget when it's
actually operating cost on
excuse me Mister chair I on a
what I meant to say was that
they you know in terms of
looking at the a lection funds
in the probation just as a whole
to make sure that both the
operating budget and the special
appropriations would meet the
needs and so yeah and so I
apologize.
You confuse me.
No we'll fix that and then we'll
go back through in in the in
touch up on the other stuff
thank you Mr like I've said
before me and I said this last
year there's no reason for us to
piecemeal this in and do this do
it right once right and then be
done with it because it other
issues we have to move on so
thank you madam chair thank you
thank you and I I fully agree we
spoke about that last year now
you have to keep going back for
specials or supplementals to
make any sense knowing that we
know what's coming we have
elections right we have a cost
that we have a history to prove
it so that way to do it is put
enough in there and let you do
your work so you don't have to
come back and asking us and
waiting right for more thank you
all righty then do we have
Senator Padilla next in line and
then anyone else before and
Senator Steinborn thank you
madam chair and I think the
chair actually got most of what
I was going to ask about senator
chairman yes just so doesn't
mean you're going to use the
whole twenty million dollars
it's just gonna be there I think
it's very smart which are coming
forward with here and one to do
it this way I mean I think it it
helps to prevent maybe unusual
things that could potentially
happen that you they're faced
with all the time so I think
that's great so once it's it's
there
how do we replenish you won you
do several years down the road
use all twenty million of it do
we have to have to come back up
that's the question for you or
for the chair.
On the one hand center I mean we
had it set up or it would
automatically drop back down
from the general fund or the
land grant permanent fund and so
replenish itself annually as we
move forward and there's a
little bit of push back on
drawing down from the general
fund I don't have that push back
at me.
you know what election costuming
and to put twenty million
dollars in there so you're not
one of state to DFA writing a
report requesting money and.
Our agencies and they told the
state police quit begging for
money that's fix problems and in
the form but that's how it was
gonna be replaced either annual
triggering the general fund when
it below ten million if I'm
correct and accept a couple days
and how to find a solution for
us though.
Or it was just going to
replenish annually once it was
you so and Happy Birthday Mr
chairman.
Well someone's birthday is also
a January baby like me I'm in
September so.
so Mister chair I mean we we are
we are open to the renewal
process that and would be
prescribed and so we certainly
can you know my preference would
be to
get a piece of legislation
passed that just sent it is not
automatic supplement but that we
always come to the legislature
for that budgeted for those
budgeting purposes for that
oversight right that's important
and that is the independent
provocative of the Legislature
checks and balances we fully
support that we can also come
and say this is how much we
spent last year and this is how
much we need to fill up Mr chair
and yeah happy to do that
excellent that's exactly does
open here thank you.
Thank you senator all right
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you madam chair and madam
secretary state hello quick
question for you the business
services division.
I think you know we're a little
short staffed maybe over the
last couple years and things
were taken little bit longer is
that working out.
Where we have with that now Mr
chair Senator we've we've been
short staffed period so one of
the requests as you saw is to
create a new at at funded
vacancy for a training at
business special business
services specialist and so we
have managed to overcome our
frankly sort of the COVID
nineteen challenges of that the
delay in processing and we are
now back to a same day next day
time frame in processing but we
are acutely aware that should
some disruption occur that we
may get back to that again and
so Mr chair and senator part of
sort of the vision of this
budget that we have requested is
that we always have the
resources we need so that we
don't get to that point Mr chair
and senator.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Thank you very much Senator is
that it did you have any other
questions thanks again I don't
have any other questions for the
committee let me just say thank
you thank you for all that you
do for your information you
submitted and we understand
where you're coming from really
appreciate it my sister and my
Senator and Mr chairman members
thank.
Thank you very much thanks to
Simon and our staff senator
Dorsey Mr chair no she she
played favorites in committee.
By Senator.
Eight with action was shared
everyone's my constituents here
in Santa Fe.
Thank you thanks again are are
going to move on to
I do have it on.
Thank you madam secretary and
years to Simon you know Simon
was so quiet that we appreciate
your time thanks for your
attorney general's office only
for the sake of time we're
moving a little quicker hi
Brandon all right HSD three oh
five and here we are with our
new we need congradulations in
them first thank you.
What K. yes hi good afternoon
Mister chair members of the
committee my name is Brandon
gray LFC fiscal analyst is the
turning general's agency code
three zero five this will be in
volume two of practice excuse me
in volume two this will be a
page fifty eight you like to
reference the budget
And I'll just jump right into it
or in the behind as of the LFC
recommendation for the agency as
a whole increases general fund
revenue by five point four
percent the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by five percent.
turning to page four of your
packet in the legal services
program LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
for that program by five point
two percent the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by four point two
percent in the legal services
program the primary difference
difference between the two
recommendations that the LFC
recommendation includes three
hundred and eighty nine thousand
dollars for expansion to the
agency's internet crimes against
children division that's not
included in the executive
recommendation.
all now have Mr Smith you might
DFA counterpart present the
Medicaid fraud program budget.
Thank you the committee members
means minus to make clear on the
DFA analyst for the AG's office
in the judiciary Mr to work with
you all the session.
The executive recommendation the
Medicaid fraud program which is
the other program within the
AG's office increases general
fund revenue for the program by
nineteen point two percent well
the LFC recommendation increases
it by eight point nine percent.
Both recommendations direct most
of the new general fund revenue
for person the executive one
recommendation increases general
fund revenue for personal by
eight point zero percent well
LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue per person
by four point nine percent under
this category of both the
recommendations are the same so
headed off toward twenty
general.
Thank you very much yes attorney
general's office proceed good to
see you good to see you madam
vice chair Mister chairman
members of the committee it's in
order to be before the Senate
finance committee and to have an
opportunity to present my of the
reevaluation and vision for what
the budgetary needs of the
agency or one thing that that
occurred in house appropriations
and finance yesterday was an
opportunity to to go into some
of the more detailed elements of
the expansion request that we
were asked to put together by
director Abbey as many of the
members of this committee may be
aware my predecessor had
submitted a budget request on
the order of thirty five million
dollars and a doubling of the
agency by two hundred twenty one
FTEs I was respectfully asked to
modify that request but to also
present my budget given that the
priorities that we've laid out
but I know that you're pressed
for time and so I don't want to
engage in that if if you don't
have another time when you're
agenda but I would like the
opportunity to dig into some of
those issues please do okay with
respect to increases to base
budget we have two specific
requests and there should be
handled debate been made
available to all members of the
committee the first was an
increase to the civil appeals
Division specifically the
addition of two additional
attorneys and one paralegal we
have over the last several years
been engaged at the appellate
level in defending state
agencies statutory action with
respect not only to in the
criminal context as most people
are aware we handle criminal
appeals but we started engage a
lot more in civil appeals right
now we really only have one
dedicated attorney did to that
work and this is something that
we best be added to the base
budget in addition to that is up
to pretty dramatic expansion to
constituent services it took us
a while in the first couple.
A week to get a real handle on
the scope and scale of the
request to come into the agency
but it is something on the order
of ten thousand referrals
complaints requests enquiries
every single year everything
ranging from violations of the
open meetings act inspection of
public records act
determinations on local county
governments water issues
criminal issues it runs the
gamut the overwhelming feedback
that I've received over the last
year or so from a variety of
different agencies of writing
different communities dealing
with a lot of these issues.
Is that often these requests or
for referred to the attorney
general's office but there
hasn't been a timely response
and I think that has to do with
just not enough infrastructure
in place to manage constituent
services in a timely way the
first directive I issue to the
staff was to set up a goal of
trying to respond to constituent
agencies elected officials
within twenty four hours of
receipt of any request and try
to resolve that request any
meaningful way within thirty to
sixty days it is going to take
us some time to get to that
place but we do need to start
building our capacity that
covers the increase to the base
budget the rich the real meeting
of the proposal that we put
before you is in expansion
request the first relates to the
creation of additional positions
for utility attorneys and water
attorneys it may surprise
members of this committee to
know that we currently do not
have a dedicated water attorney
inside the attorney general's
office at at a time when we're
engaged in generational of
altering and and highly
consequential litigation with
the state of Texas and when we
are considering new challenges
in terms of our participation in
the Colorado River basin we need
to have a dedicated water
attorney we cannot see continue
just to rely on outside counsel
with respect to utilities we
currently have two utility
attorneys if you talk to any of
my predecessors predecessors
thirty or forty years ago
Attorney General for the kia
tourney General Udall we often
had for five or six utility
attorneys to handle all of the
rating key increase cases that
are presented by PNM and alone
number of the other utilities
that were forced to to contend
with and so we've asked
specifically to increase that by
two utility attorneys one water
attorney one paralegal so that
we can manage our water requests
in our utility request.
We currently have renewable
dedicated anti trust division
which would make us one of the
only attorney general's offices
offices in the entire country
that does not have an dedicated
anti trust division as you may
would be well aware a number of
states have the authority to
examine whether or not the
merger of various corporate
interests would have an adverse
impact on consumers market
stability and price this is
something that if you go to a
conference of attorney generals
and meet with our counterparts
they will bring an entire
section of antitrust attorneys
we don't have anyone currently
doing that will so we have
proposed the creation or the and
frankly the re establishment of
an anti trust division with two
dedicated attorneys and a
paralegal.
Item number three
is the establishment of a tribal
Indian Affairs division as you
know we have both an ethical and
legal obligation to engage in
government to government
consultation on a range of
issues ranging from criminal
justice jurisdiction to natural
resources conservation to water
access and water rights and what
has been happening is we will
send a water attorney to a
tribal community to discuss
water issues and then four
different issue comes up we will
send a different attorney what
what happens when you have that
situation is that there's no
understanding and there's no
relationship built because you
don't have a single point of
contact people that have
linguistic fluency and cultural
fluency people who understand
the nature of those committees
that have been or those
communities in the things that
they have been challenged with
and so what we need to do is
create a system so that we have
meaningful tribal consultation
for both missing and murdered
indigenous women and and our
water rights litigation
specifically and the biggest
expansion of the biggest
component of the expansion
litigation division has to do
with expanding are reaching
capacity for consumer protection
and also the protection of
children the protection of
children Civil Rights
particularly children who are in
state custody children who are
in foster care children who are
not adequately resource in the
educational environment children
who have a number of constitute
constitutionally identified
interests and rights that are
not currently protected by any
form of state government
in addition to that we have a
number of outstanding consumer
litigation cases and for the
last several years we have
relied on an outsourcing model
where we hire out of state
counsel.
On over arrangements that are
typically a contingency fee
range arrangements and what that
ends up meaning is that we get
big recoveries but we also have
big legal bills we usually space
something on the order of twenty
twenty five thirty thirty five
percent of the total recovery to
the state that adds up to tens
of millions of dollars the
reason I mention that he's one
of the sources of funding
available to this committee for
this agency that is not
available for other agencies is
the consumer protection fund in
theory when we build this agency
out these attorneys operating at
the cost of an FTP will yield
the same or similar recoveries
at substantially less cost to
the state and so we have the
opportunity for them to not only
tried more revenue into state
coffers but fund the operations
of the entire litigation
division with respect to the
only to the there are a couple
of special appropriations that I
would like to highlight the
first is the proposal of the
establishment of a crime gun
intelligence center for those of
you who've been following the
shootings in Albuquerque related
to some of your colleagues here
in the legislature and elected
officials in Albuquerque those
crimes were solved by the
recovery of cry of casing shell
casings that were recovered from
crime scenes and matched to
other casings that were
recovered in automobiles and
homes and other search warrants
what that enables law
enforcement to do is recognize
quickly and efficiently that the
same nine millimeter the same A.
R. fifteen is been used in this
event and is connected to
another crime that may have
occurred elsewhere in the
community we have for example in
the City of Albuquerque's single
nine millimeter that's been
connected to more than twenty
five violent offense more than
twenty five criminal and crime
scenes that have been stitched
together the problem is this
technology is not currently
available to use communities
outside of Albuquerque and
outside of Santa Fe the proposal
that we put proposed before you
is based on a meeting with the
US attorney in the ATF.
To establish and purchase and
I've been machines for
Farmington Gallup Los crucis and
Ross will thereby creating a
regional network of night been
machines we will train local law
enforcement officials in
counties across the entire state
and I believe we will become
only the second state in the
country behind New Jersey to
have a statewide crime gun
intelligence center with the
capability to identify and
distribute real time
investigative leads to frontal
frontline law enforcement.
On page three this is something
that I work closely with Senator
Campos on and something that we
had developed that his specific
request and that was to
establish a dedicated team that
focuses exclusively on fire
disaster recovery for from its
peak in the calf canyon fires we
were looking for is is the
hiring of two dedicated
attorneys one paralegal and to
constituent services
coordinators
we would also like to include
emergency language in this
appropriation so that these
funds would be made available
immediately upon signature of
the budget so that we don't have
to wait to deploy these these
resources and assets many of you
may have seen that one of the
first things that I did as
Attorney General was to cancel
the notice of loss that was sent
to FEMA on behalf of the state
the reason that I did that is
that under the federal I of
regulations that govern
compensatory damages assessments
by FEMA we would have a hundred
and fifty days after the
recognition loss to calculate
the state's total damages from
the fire there's no there's
simply no way that we would be
in a position to in a timely
fashion calculate all of our
damages because we're still
being damaged we still have
state assets that are being
deployed we still may have to
fight and litigate over whether
or not the National Guard and
the deployment of the National
Guard is a conspiracy is a
compensable expense that may be
recovered under that under that
regulatory framework more
troubling we however as we have
a lot a number of local
officials and members of that
community who have responded to
our office and let us know that
they're all our vendors and.
Currently in currently
present in San Miguel more
counties in other communities
trying to sell week legal
services to people who are in a
desperate condition people who
are looking for
answers to how they're going to
make put their lives back
together how they're going to
recover for their losses and we
have very serious concerns that
those people could be taken
advantage of by unscrupulous
attorneys last but not least is
a pretty substantial ask on
behalf of the natural resources
trustee who should be present
here today for litigation
funding four point three million
dollars in litigation funding
for water emanation and and soil
contamination related to canon
airforce base and the NASA white
sands testing facility in
southern New Mexico again this
is a legacy contamination that
has substantially harm not only
the state but other private
entities
The state and make sure that we
have the best litigation
resources available there are
some other matters that I can
take up on question but I do
appreciate your time and your
consideration.
Thank you question from
committee.
Ten nine.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you question for us.
Couple questions on the FTEs
requesting a relatively high
number of new FTE positions and
and I understand the need
expression when you mention
water attorneys it's it's
interesting that you are not you
don't have any in house what I
can't find on these budgets is
if we if we.
Fund these FTEs there's there's
got to be some cost savings from
contracting with outside counsel
help help can we I don't see
anywhere on her hot how do I see
the cost savings.
Mr Chairman Senator Diamond do
that excellent question one of
the things that we have work but
I don't have current information
on is a full calculation of all
of the contracts and all the
outside counsel that have been
utilized over the last several
years how much money we
anticipate saving by taking some
of that work in house what I can
tell you is that and in the
analysts will correct me if I'm
wrong I think something on the
order of thirty million dollars
is currently available in the
consumer protection fund
and I will leave it obviously to
the committee to figure out how
much of the consumer protection
fund to draw down versus general
fund monies to draw down but
what I can tell you is that
there are other attorney
generals offices in the country
that are entirely funded
entirely funded by the
recoveries that that office
makes itself meeting we have
opioid litigation for example
that is going to result in
hundreds of millions of dollars
to the state we have a number of
lawsuits that my predecessor
successfully brought to a
conclusion that resulted in
substantial gains back to state
coffers but this is a state that
unfortunately has not engaged
enough consumer litigation
directly and so it's hard to
estimate the cost savings with
some precision what I can tell
you is that the the size and
scale of some of the cases that
we're dealing with a single case
could pay for an entire division
for several years at a time that
those of the scales of of the
recovery that we're looking at
thank you Mr chair that would be
helpful to be able to compare
the three point seven requests
for in house to whatever you've
contracted with to see if there
is a cost savings there's also
is she here that was handed out
Mr chair just want some
clarification on this this is
the AG offices also funded from
the New Mexico consumer
settlement fund right now
they're sitting on forty seven
million dollars and then you
have an additional four point
three million so you have about
fifty one million.
And.
You're requesting thirty nine.
An additional general fund what
is it do with general fund that
you can not do with the fifty
one tell me what the tell me
with the that consumer
settlement fund can you not use
that for any operational at all
what is that funds designated
for so that they can the
consumer protection fund is is
used to offset the expenses that
might otherwise be drawn down
from the general fund so we
would specifically be using it
to fund the litigation division
so if you look on the handout
that we gave you the the largest
F. E. expansion request was
twenty twenty additional members
of the litigation division that
would be offset that cost could
be offset by the consumer
protection fund Mr chair general
meeting the main correct
something we have to appropriate
out of the consumer settlement
fund I think that's a print
which can tell us to allow him
to use that money.
Think there's all of funds under
the under the Attorney General
he can't use any expenditures
less legislature appropriates
and that makes sense so that's
why you're asking for some money
my question is why don't you
just happened to this fund
because you don't have access to
the fund is is essentially a
okay thank you I had a quick
question.
You have something else that we
move on Mr chair yeah I can
direct the committee to pay and
your different she packet this
has a an estimate as of about
December twenty twenty two of
the balance of the consumer
settlement fund so you'll see
the total
the ending balance online forty
eight.
Of that
and so the FY twenty four
projected.
A page ten of the difference the
packet.
Committee a line item is that
yeah so the ending balance line
item forty eight that in FY
twenty four so the furthest
column to the right is thirty
million and that's after
accounting for the agencies use
of the operating budget
agencies use of the consumer
settlement fund for their
operating budget that's nine
twenty eight.
The last thing I'll draw the
attention of the committee's
attention to is you can see
online twenty five.
There's a restricted use line
item and those are revenues that
have been earmarked by
settlements for selected uses so
they can be used discretion the
by the legislature or by the
office.
Thank you my final question Mr
chair may be for you this
special appropriations requests
for the crime gun intelligence
center it's it's not much as one
point five million dollars and
an eight hundred thousand of
that is one time monies could
qualify for capital our junior.
You're asking me yes.
You better move over Mr turn
general set out there nothing's.
I don't think there's so much
money in the consumer settlement
fund that appropriating Cadena
capital doesn't really make a
lot of sense out only get ever
had an attorney general and I
can remember coming request
capital for a service agency.
So we just need to let them
access the funds thank you on a
personal note I want to thank
you for your pledging dedication
towards your child well being
initiatives I certainly hope
that that gets funded to the
fullest secession thank you
verdient.
Thank you Mr chairman twenty
general while lot of great stuff
that you're coming forward with
reforming that office doing a
lot of great we form and
redesign and that's exactly what
we should do every time every
couple years to make sure that
we're utilizing the resources
the way that we should and so
great great job there
on the items related to you know
again blue lines lines of what
senator diamond said
so in my business just because I
might take calls for a large
company in my call center
business or whatever additional
needs to be somebody in that
company that manages us so I'm
assuming that some of the folks
that you're talking about with
these attorneys will remain in
the offices are interfacing with
these potential contracts that
you may use outside firms for
someone in the office still
needs to is that correct
students to manage what they're
up to and and and and process
what they've come across or
whatever is that about right Mr
chair Senator Padilla that's
that's exactly right we four X.
for example we still have
pending litigation with a large
the national pharmacy that has
been sued on behalf of the state
related to opioids and while we
have contracted that litigation
out of with a large specialized
national firm that has fronted a
lot of those experts when the
last round of mediation needed
to take place in New York we had
to put an assistant Attorney
General on a plane to New York
to be present in the mediation
to manage the mediation and to
work directly with that council
so that's the kind of expense
that has to happen so even when
we outsource things we have in
house litigators that have to
manage and make sure that the
state is recovering everything
that it can it can and consumers
are made whole at every possible
time thank you Mr chairman and
then the areas that you
mentioned that don't even exist
or don't have a direct focus in
your office I think those are
right on.
With what you need to be
considering so so thank you for
setting all those up and then
more specifically to the the
issues related to that child's
well being that you're that
you're working on where is that
in in your documents your terms
what that's going to cost and
how you want to give us I know
it's very early but maybe like
how the schedule what that might
look like.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
if you look on the second page
and it's number four it says and
hands the civil litigation issue
we have requested twenty FTEs
one division director thirteen
attorneys three paralegals one
investigator into consumer in
constituent advocates now not
all of those are not all of that
person is currently earmarked
only for the the creation of the
new children's justice bureau in
part because that does not yet
exist in statute so we're plant
it's a placeholder but we
certainly have substantial
consumer protection issues that
are coming through the door and
once we have all of these these
people in place it will be
within that division that the
new child protection services
will be house and so Mr chairman
Mr Attorney General so
how would your office say
interact with CYFD should this
come to to pass and and and be
developed and deployed.
Mr Chairman Senator Padilla
the new children's justice
bureau is something that will
and and purposely will have a
very broad mandate.
It will certainly interact with
CYFD it will certainly have the
authority to protect and defend
the constitutional rights of
children in state custody it
will have the ability to issue
what are called civil
investigative demands which are
not
shall we say subject to the same
limitations of confidentiality
that are currently present under
the children's code in other
words we will have the
opportunity either on a specific
case or an entire class of cases
to reach out to that agency and
say we would like to see all of
the referrals on for of removal
on abuse and neglect in this
particular County and look at
those outcomes and then it's
it's a way for us to open an
investigation but I want to make
it abundantly clear that
litigation is not a foregone
conclusion
it is however a way for us to
have an independent oversight
authority on behalf of children
but I want to stress it is not
limited to CYFD we have children
who are autistic who are in
school districts that have
inadequate training and
inadequate personnel that have
been K. that the school resource
officer has engaged in
misconduct and those officers
have been criminally charged.
We currently have an Avenue to
charge an officer if they've
used excessive force on a child
with disabilities that child if
they have the means and the
resources has the opportunity to
hire their own counsel to file a
civil rights claim but what
currently doesn't happen is of
is the authority to go in at a
system wide level and look for
answers so that we don't engage
in that pattern of conduct again
in the future and that's really
what we're looking at there's
protecting children with
disabilities protecting
vulnerable populations wherever
they are encountered by the
government by any agency and
that could be the school
district that can be a police
department that can be CYFD
there are constitutional
guarantees to health and safety
that obviously we have to we
have to ensure children are
protected adults we are presumed
to have a greater ability to
advocate for ourselves to use
our resources to hire attorneys
if something's going wrong they
can go out and hire an attorney
to get to where they need to be
children can't do that that's
what this is intended to do
thank you Mr chairman and
district I think that's a great
sketch of how this might look in
and work I just would ask that
you know what you're pulling
together the statewide obviously
you know we could ensure that
this dresses every part of the
we have some of our more severe
issues that we're dealing with
and in the most rural parts of
New Mexico and so having that
ability communicating that this
is available to those smaller
communities can be very very
important
I think that's all I have
pronounced.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
mystery G. thank you for being
here congratulations of.
The the two three professionals
that the cannon Air Force base
issue
is the P. facet issue which
literally decimated a of this is
over there twenty five thirty
million dollar business and the
federal government I don't think
I stepped up at all for that
particular family to my
knowledge
so in this case and it is pretty
deep has and we contacted deal
is this the cases involving the
the and also the NASA cases
involving NASA
is there any movement there
whatsoever I mean this is
there's literally millions and
millions of dollars in damage
here and I know that in times
past D. O. D. and and I believe
it has well I know FEMA has to
step up and and COVID that's
major the costs of this I I I.
I'm trouble that we have to sue
them to to recover the costs of
some of the stuff in a nut shell
can you can you tell me where
the case stands and and how much
money I think I need to get to a
half million in here for just
the economic case
This could take years is that
could be enough money so where
we are now in and is that enough
money Mr chair Senator Byrd I
would I would like to to pass
that question to our natural
resources Tracy Maggie Hart
Stebbins to address the state of
the location and the details of
the request thank you Mr
Attorney General Mister chairman
Senator Burt my name is Maggie
Hart Stebbins I service New
Mexico's natural resources
trustee and
The legislature in twenty twenty
appropriated funding for my
office to pursue the damage
assessment to get due to begin
developing our cases both at
NASA white sands and can an
airforce base
we have to use that money to
develop our case
In the white in the NASA white
sands K. we are ready to enter
into negotiations with the
department of defense
we are waiting for the federal
government to declare to
designate P. foss as a hazardous
substance right now we operate
under federal law we can only
pursue natural resource damage
cases where there has been for
the federal government has
declared something hazardous
substance
The.
The trustee Act very clearly
gives the authority for pursuing
legal action to the attorney
general's office so we can
prepare the case we can gather
the data for the damage
assessment following the rules
laid out by the Superfund Act
with oil pollution act but when
when it comes to actually going
to litigation the attorney
general's office has to
Representative us.
Thank you for that and so we're
we're basically waiting on the
government again
Mr chairman it.
I assume that but I lost the
question two and a half million
is is going to be enough to
cover this this case so I think
it's a little long and deep I
mean we look at the poem
underneath currently airforce
base and it took twenty five
years to get the or forced to
fess up to that one and they've
done my understanding is a
wonderful job of cleaning that
up but it took him forever and I
don't know how much the state
spent on something like that so
that two and a half in your
restaurant going to be enough
for that kind of a starter.
Amount Mister chairman Senator
Burt we did do our best to do an
analysis of the long term cost
of of the white sands medication
and then the economic airforce
base litigation and that was the
best estimate that we could come
up with long term so we've given
the Attorney General both the
short term estimate what might
be required in FY twenty four
but also the the long term cost
you're right I think it.
Of course the office of the
natural resources trustee always
first tries to reach a
settlement with the responsible
party
in only if that's not successful
go to litigation so we will try
that first but we have given the
Attorney General the best
estimate that we have at this
point Mr chair Senator Byrd I
would just say that.
One let's just say disclaimer on
that whenever you are
potentially engage with
litigation with the federal
government which effectively has
limitless resources it is not
inconceivable that we are back
in front of you in future years
having proceeded with the
initiation of formal litigation
and or asking again for
supplemental support to continue
that because it's just that
you're exactly right to point to
the experience that other states
and the state has had in
litigating against the federal
government it is a time
consuming and very costly affair
but this is a good place to
start and then answers store
yeah and and and I would hope Mr
chairman that that that's.
As far as we have to go with
this but again who knows how
long some drag out on another
topic Medicaid fraud do you
estimate on how how much fraud
there is on an annual basis in
the state of New Mexico.
Mr chair Senator Burt I I would
be reluctant to try and and and
give you a hard dollar what I
can tell you is that some of the
communication issues that we
have between the agencies that
are currently receiving
referrals and then there is some
to weigh in referring those over
to the attorney general's office
is impacting our ability to make
full recovery the other thing
that I want to draw your
attention to is the fact that we
haven't met the full twenty five
percent match and that because
there's a thank you to one match
with federal dollars if we don't
hit the full match under the LFC
recommendation will actually be
losing three hundred and forty
thousand dollars give or take a
federal funding because they
will give US federal dollars
based on what we find so we're
leaving federal money on the
table by under underscoring how
how much money should be
directed to that party agency in
Mr chairman I appreciate the the
reference to that because it was
my second question is the
difference between the twenty
two point forty eight and the
full twenty five percent in
dollars and cents how much is
that.
Mr chair Senator Byrd I would I
would defer to the LFC analysts
to give you dollars and cents.
Mr chair Senator the a request
it did the requested personal
increase in Medicaid
participants a hundred and fifty
hundred sixty thousand the LFC
recommendation includesd seventy
six thousand.
It I don't know sometimes I feel
with the federal about how
government works but I'd unless
they're they're looking at
another source of funding to
make up that difference when
truth would need to spend the
extra two and a half percent to
get to where we maximize our
benefit from the the federal
government because federal
government money is our tax
money as well so we probably
should maximize that so I
appreciate clarity on that
Leslie Mr chairman water a
lawsuits
we resolve those I think in your
predecessor we resolved two or
three of those or that close to
doing that if I remember
correctly how many lawsuits
remain at this point time.
Mr chair Senator Burt I don't
have a of all for number on all
of the pending lawsuits that the
office is handling that or
frankly we are working in
conjunction with the state
engineer I can tell you that
Texas purses New Mexico that
there has been a kind proposed
consent decree that resolves
those claims
but the road block at this point
is that the United States
government is now objecting to
the agreement the Texas in New
Mexico have entered into which
if you think about it it's it's
a little surprising that to
western states that are
desperate for water can come up
with an agreement that works for
them and yet the someone in in
DC has decided they don't like
the proposed resolution we are
still hopeful that we can we're
now working with the state of
Texas to get the special master
to approve the agreement over
the objection of the United
States we're scheduled for
hearing on February the six I
believe in Kansas city and I can
certainly report back to this
committee on the outcome of of
that here I I would like to know
I I have not heard that I Mr
chairman I did this again the
federal government's boggles my
mind sometimes.
With the actual cooperation
transparency we we do that
open meetings and we come to
terms with each other to resolve
a huge lawsuit over water which
is interesting because you can't
give text water when you don't
have the water to give them and
so whatever but and then the
federal government gets involved
in that it is yeah in order to
go with that but thank you for
the update on that and good luck
to you in your new position and
the we'll see how the budget
process thank you Sir thank you
Mr chairman thank you I don't
see anybody else and questions I
just want to tell a cautionary
tale about a young the that can
the legislature one time master
bunch of money and and I believe
that money is still available in
the DA's office and and complete
unspent so you can either
succeed we can either help you
set you up for success or we can
set you up for failure.
And being aggressive in HSD
there's nothing wrong with that
right this change has to happen
there's fixing to happen but I I
can add it up
attorneys in number turn right
and my cautionary tale to you is
I don't know where you're gonna
find all these attorneys to come
for the Attorney General work
with printers office at the pace
skills that we have especially
water indication there's
attorneys out there there I
build three fifty to four
hundred dollars an hour Water
litigation and they're not gonna
make that understate agency when
we talk about water litigation
we want the best attorneys that
we can get to you.
and I so that's cautionary tale
I mean I understand what you
need let me ask you one thing
and I I'm trying to
comprehensive.
In I. P. in what you could be
called the inventor.
Sign up for the unintelligible
it's not even is this is the
short handed that night in
machine that used by the ATO I
just don't know how many actual
gun shootings we have in Gallup
we have a lot of stabbings in
why can't they become again K.
and and take it Albuquerque.
Miss Mister chairman of to be
perfectly honest with you we ask
them
how many machines and what
locations would they need so
that we wouldn't have law
enforcement having to drive for
several several hours it was my
sense that
that you know the the folks here
in the legislature would be
interested in not having law
enforcement having to drive but
we can we certainly can get them
in the car and have casings
driven in from other parts of
the state but we were concerned
with those outlying communities
right so if you think about it
it's not just Gallup it's what's
going on in the south western
part of the state and those
rural communities they're gonna
have to it they're gonna have to
get either to Los crucis or up
to Farmington or all the way up
in Albuquerque we didn't want to
have that delay but again this
is something that we're trying
to find statewide coverage at.
I don't mean this in any way
shape or form right but but I
don't think the shootings and
maybe just in part Senator
Diamond I mean we don't have
that many and so.
If we have one a month that
would be unusually raring Gallup
right and in so once a month the
guy tries to Albuquerque that's
that's less time than I have to
drive by forty to go to the
doctors or to go get materials
or anything to me Senator
Diamond are Senator Byrd demi
shootings you haven't.
Your districts you know probably
not the rural areas very many I
could see the benefit of putting
a second one in Los crucis
though because the drive time
from from Hobbs Artesia to
Albuquerque's is a full day.
Maybe one more.
Not very many yeah but.
A little after two hours.
We understand the big city
situation but it just.
Mr Chairman just one thing in
the with the the two air corners
that they're concerned about
number one they were concerned
about Chavis county third
concern about Russell and the
concerned about Farmington and
so that that I think those are
the two places that have got
them the most the ATF most
concerned about the rising gun
violence and then obviously Los
crucis with its proximity to the
border and and intersection with
possible cartel activity at
least but if you.
And he's right because what for
years and and now as I never
with regards to to crime over
there and there are.
She's kind of people are not
kids necessarily so it doesn't
just on make the newspaper that
much but there is a lot of drug
crime check discount especially
Ross.
I'm just for just for Gallup on
this thing I agree with the
other members right there's for
too you can click stuff that
happens in other big cities.
All right I want to visit you
back with you personally about
FTEs in and try to make you
successful so you're not sitting
in front of legislature a year
from now seen I request all
these FTEs in any given okay
we'll start producing FTEs could
you can't fill.
And there is a problem in the
work force and there is a
problem with pay scales in state
government and I'm told
executive office this I don't
how many times at this is the
number one problem affecting
agencies if you do not higher at
the rate pay scale and for
deputy directors for water
attorneys for any any attorney
in any agency.
Then we're never going to be
successful we're gonna come back
to contract labor in we're not
gonna have the the operation so
then that's a major concern I
want to make sure that I
understand how you can hire me
at what rate great so so you can
be successful because I will
tell you you know just like the
cautionary toilet till the young
lady that came here and had a
thirty two minute TV special
about actually this committee
Senate finance
and then left money on the table
and we don't want that to happen
again.
They're just just one on that
one point.
You're absolutely right about
the pay scale believe me I I'm
elected.
In terms of what lawyers are
paid in the state and how
difficult it can be to recruit
people to do this work but the
other thing I will tell you is
that you the kind of young
lawyers who are interested in
doing work on behalf of the
government none of us think
we're going to make money none
of us going to this thinking
we're gonna make money we have
to make enough to pay living and
pay for families we're looking
for an opportunity to have an
impact.
So if all of the litigation is
outsourced to some firm out of
state and I'm care in their
briefcase I'm not really that
interested if I don't do anti
trust work I'm not that
interested if I'm water attorney
but you're not doing water
litigation directly.
I don't want to go there and if
you're not doing civil rights
that I'm gonna go someplace that
does Civil Rights so it's just
as important to create these
frameworks but your point is
well taken about FTEs but we got
to give them the work to do so
they have a sense that they're
having some meaningful impact in
the community thank you very
much thank thank you
presentation.
And treasury next in we're gonna
have you speed through it since.
You all all the money we're
going to spend.
There's no truer statement
spoken.
Well gets deposited in your.
Chairman.
I'm gonna be as quick as we can
get through this.
Your small agency in.
I will thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer I and I'm one of
your comments of the LFC and
also the budget analyst for the
state treasurer's office if you
want to follow along in going to
it's on page one thirty eight
we're looking at agency code
three nine four.
With me today is our new state
treasurer Lori Montoya leader do
she's rolling deep with some
staff so later days when it's
her turn and I have our DFA
analyst Simon Miller as well.
I will quickly go over the
differences between the
executive recommendation in the
LFC recommendation pass it over
to Simon for additional comments
and then to our state treasure.
So overall the LFC recommends a
two point two percent total
budget increase for the state
treasurer's office well the
executive recommends a four
point six percent total budget
increase I will go into each of
the components now so starting
with the contractual services
units the LFC recommends one
hundred thousand dollar increase
over the FY twenty operating
budget and that's for costs
associated with processing The
Daily repo investments that was
transferred over it was
originally in DFA now the state
treasurer how to take over that
responsibility the executive
recommended I contractual
services budget.
For personal services employee
benefits the LFC recommends a
flat budget primarily because of
the high funded vacancy rate and
while the executive recommends a
hundred and thirty eight point
eight thousand dollar increase
over the FY twenty operating
budget and that's to reduce the
unfunded vacancy rate in the
state treasurer's office.
Lastly LOC recommends a flat
budget for other uses.
While the executive recommend
seventy one point six thousand
dollar increase and that's to
support a variety of small
increases for day to day
operational expenses and I
believe rent as well but I'll
let the driver go into that a
little bit more.
And that's what I have so I mean
do you have any additional
comments Mr chair members of the
committee I know you done
probably rather hear from the
treasure than me so I will turn
it over to her.
Simon one of these days you can
choose exact recommends a cut.
And for the good afternoon I
know it's been a long day for
all of you and I have some
amazing talking points but I'm
gonna make it a little bit
briefer so if you'll bear with
me I'd like to first thank you
all for for hearing us out today
it's an honor to serve I'm on
the date the fifteen and we have
hit the ground running I wanted
to introduce you to my team also
for DFA Legislative Council
everyone to be able to know that
it's an open door policy so we
have deputy state treasurer J.
R. ran.
We have our director programs
and outreach Jerry modest you
may recognize them because they
were in the attorney general's
office those were two of my
investments that in very proud
to have in my team our state
cash manager Steve more psycho.
Our chief investment officer
Vicki handles.
And our chief financial officer
Dominic Dunne you we also we're
gonna have a work and save
executive director here but she
had a family emergency I want to
let you know that we have a
transition team are we started
off a little late I got the keys
on January first after I was
sworn in and our transition
chairman is former treasurer
Douglas metro.
Also my mentor sent very
thankful for him staying along
with this so I think what I'll
do is I'd like to first to let
the committee know I had nothing
to do with this budget process
this was done long before I was
elected and and put into place
we got a few points of where we
were at on the budget and we're
requesting six we have a handout
from you because all we have
that we don't.
We don't it's mostly word of
mouth and I apologize that I
don't have something visual for
those of you who are visual
folks but I will make a request
you have to one changing your
budget we need to see something
in writing so we're able to
track the I don't know if you
did that and House
Appropriations yesterday but
we're gonna need something in
writing so as we move forward we
can look at those requests
individually so so Mister
chairman I am actually going to
be very humble and only request
what was requested by the
predecessor which is the seven
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars I will say that that is
not even close to where I know I
need to be but I'm going to work
with it this year and then come
back to you and show you what
that rate of return was on that
investment so when we're looking
at is a seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollar increase and and
what I wanted to make be clear
on after speaking to the staff
assessing concern is and
learning what changes are made
from prior budgets their items
that need to be addressed that
we're not budgeted for others
that were decreased and others
well they weren't addressed at
all
I personally would have asked
for a larger budget but I'll
wait until next year so there's
three being functions of the
treasurer's office that I want
to focus on today banking
investing and outreach programs
the banking division is
responsible for a hundred and
forty state agencies and over
one thousand forty accounts this
includes daily customer service
customer Agency outreach
regulatory training daily
reconciliation in adding new
services we have investments the
largest that we've had in our
history I believe at least since
two thousand nine and that that
division works tirelessly and
has safely done an active
portfolio has not lost a penny
of taxpayer dollars and the
invested manage over fifteen
billion dollars working with
several agencies and.
And then we have the outreach
which is
Several different outreach
programs I won't get into them
unless you ask but it's able
which is a better life
experience that helps our
disability community I want to
expand that to include our
foster care students I was
informed that in November and
December there were a lot of
action items that were made one
of them included a contract that
allowed for five dollars per
debit card per month per user
right now with how many people
are participating that's ninety
thousand dollars a year I want
to expand the program none of
that was factored into this
budget we look at work in state
which is administratively
attached to the treasurer's
office it basically is has a
goal to provide retirement
options to working class
individuals that work in a
business with five or more
employees and do not already
offer retirement savings program
there's also two others that
have never been funded or that
I'm aware of have been funded
that I would really like to
focus is financial literacy and
financial empowerment for women
having the two female portfolio
managers in the state of New
Mexico working in the
treasurer's office having the
first female state treasure in
New Mexico in the first looking
in this country's history it
would be imperative to make sure
that we have other people in New
Mexico know that we're here to
help and support them in
learning finances and business
development
outside of the programs I want
to get into the nuts and bolts
so you know I'm on fourteen
boards and commissions the
secretary state did mention the
two point one emergency funds we
have with the board of finance
on this I know I will let you
know after we gave for that one
point two or one point four
million we felt pretty bad about
it because now we won't be able
to use that for any of our rural
communities that really might
have emergencies and as you all
know the last couple years we've
definitely had some emergencies
with fires clean art
contaminated water and other
sources I'm thinking you all in
advance for fixing that problem
the charges offices responsible
for performance management of
the local government investment
pool I love this pro.
Graham I was a County treasure
for many years we utilized it
small rural county treasures can
utilize this to diversify their
investment portfolio be able to
have a lot less grant they get
the statements from the
treasurer's office and it really
helps the small communities to
be able to expand I want to
expand that program to more of
our rural communities local
governments counties and cities
our schools and our tribal
communities which are also able
to be within the local
government investment pulling it
we haven't really reached out to
them the way we need to that's
going to be challenging to do
because the budget was cut in
half for that outreach and by
thirty thousand dollars to
literally only four thousand
dollars for communication this
year throughout the whole state.
As far as banking our hundred
and forty agencies and one
thousand forty accounts is
really being managed by a very
small team of two people on
maternity leave right now when
we're talking about risk
assessment checks and balances
internal controls they have done
everything they possibly can
with the small ship that they're
running but I will tell you that
out of the thirty five employed
positions that we have many of
them are unfunded vacancies and
when you look at a flat budget I
can't even fill the vacancies
that are already required by our
constitutional roles and
responsibilities with what I
have because it was used in a
different manner from the
previous administration
I would also say that when
you're looking at contractual
services that hundred thousand
dollars as a fix from something
we already were aware of with
DFA on the repos come into the
treasurer's office but looking
and talking to the staff there's
already four hundred and forty
thousand dollars with the
contracts that are not even
involved in this contract
agreement that need to be
considered.
I'm so more staffing is required
to provide a higher level of
service to the agencies the
staff has been working for days
at home and one day in the
office for the past three years
we're bringing all the staff
back we're going to be full time
five days in the office with
with the a good team a good part
of our team I will be focusing
on a couple of key items that
were not put in this budget not
show which is the national
automated clearing house we are
required to develop and maintain
an audit and compliance process
for all ACHN region eighteen
state agencies that just came
out and we need to fund it the
state treasurer's office will
need to develop a process of
centralizing and automating the
collection of cash flow
information from the various
sources funds this system will
be maintained will maintain a
cash positioning and forecasting
you're not gonna believe this
but currently has that process
is being done manually with the
increase in funds it's critical
to have an automated system to
assist projections this request
was also not listed in this
budget with over fifteen billion
in managed assets does
investment trades and money
management processes need to be
modernized to keep pace with the
growth prefer this size and high
transaction volumes this effort
will enable stows investment
accounting and cash management
division to process transactions
while minimizing financial risk
effectively and efficiently
additional resources will be
required to develop and maintain
that new process that also is
not factored into this budget
from fiscal year eighteen.
This is where budget committee
if you don't have something in
your budget you're not really
just a presentation and now much
wanted you these are annual
budget.
if you want to come back at
another time the budget
recommendations.
and maybe reschedule house
appropriations we're finding
that but we're not going to sit
in and read a budget when you
guys state and you want to do
this and want to that.
At any presentation to do that
we don't know what the costs are
and the real numbers are so we
have a vision for the
treasurer's office my
recommendation to you is is you
need to come back with budget
recommendations if you want to
see as a as a new treasure
visionary that that we can look
at and and either approve or not
approve
but just accept.
Your predecessor left you
may leave you short and then
you'll be in the pressing
legislature in funding the
legislature can provide I don't
do this well we want to see that
presentation I mean you can you
can finish that up but I and my
recommendation is we're gonna
call you back and we're going
back with a handout and in a
detailed and that what you want
to accomplish in dollars and
numbers.
I don't mean to be rude in any
way shape or form but every one
of my committee members looking
me like she's talking a lot but
we don't see it on paper we
don't see what she wants to
come.
It's up to you I want to
continue I'd like to finish the
presentation of the of the last
few comments to put this in your
ear I did not request for for
more funds because I knew that
would be a little bit more of a
complex situation and I'm only
literally on my fourteenth day
in the office but what I did
want to do is make sure and be
very straightforward with you
where we're at least looking at
this from a if you moving in I
did talk to House Appropriations
yesterday and chairman small did
tell me to to work with them on
the contractual agreements
because contracts is the only
place where I'm really lacking
other than being able to find
the actual positions which was
already part of the original
budget request from the
predecessor.
Me finish.
Thank you Sir so I just wanted
to point out from fiscal year
eighteen of fiscal year twenty
to the volume of trades has
increased by seventeen billion
dollars additionally the
treasurer's office will be
inheriting operating expenses of
over one hundred thousand
dollars which we talked about
from repose now that staff will
be returning to the office
things that were not factored
into the budget where I. T. and
safety for team members which I
would actually prefer talking to
with you individually if if you
wanted to know more about the
safety aspects just to not put
it out publicly on the record
because of the recent situations
that have occurred selected
officials so in closing the team
at the treasurer's office is
amazing and I am very grateful
to be part of their team the
increase in financial
transactions in both our banking
and investing division have
directly increased workload year
after year yet we've not seen
the appropriate Karelian arses
by not adequately funding these
divisions we're putting
ourselves in a vulnerable
situation as it relates to
staffing internal controls risk
assessment cross training and
continuity it's critical to be
competitive in the employment
market to attract skilled
employees to join our team and
increased seven hundred and
fifty thousand dollars really
putting in perspective if we
looked at the ten million per
day ten billion per day three
percent which we know we have
more than that and we have a
higher percentage that's a
million dollars a day in the
interest earned I'm only asking
for literally less than one day
worth of that interest earned to
fund what we need we can't
afford to have a stagnant budget
to control and manage this
magnitude of funds something
that I did look at while I was
waiting and listening to the
other presentations I look
through that entire budget
process and anything that could
lead to me and from what I
thought it was very quickly the
AG's
with DFA got eight to eight
point three percent auditor four
point three percent sos four
point five and land commissioner
seven point six the other
elected offices of the.
Constitutional duties that we
have only got a two point two
percent request in addition to
that I looked at the rest of the
budget in order that I was the
only one even within the state
agencies that have the two point
two percent everyone had
something greater than that so
that's something that I would
definitely like you all to
consider as well.
Madam chair you need to bring a
request back so we understand
what exactly your question mean
my vice chair sitting here
talking right we're not
absorbing any of this because
we're not seen on paper seen I
don't have this and I don't have
that they're getting this and
I'm not getting that and so if
you want to make a formal
request income back to the
committee were more than willing
to do that but we want to talk
about what your vision is and
what your requests are in not.
except what they get me prior
because this is the one you want
to your shop that you have to do
this and then come back and say
well I'm short the whole time
in so we'll reschedule you
sometime for next week I get
that presentation ready we're
one quarter into the session.
And so it's very important that
we start grasping up what we
need to do and what agencies
need but
Be cautious how do you compare
yourself to other agencies and
what they're getting when we
don't have a request for an
increase and this is the fact
you said you want a flat budget
agree to it but then you talk
about how much more you want how
much more you need and we don't
have that request so this we
schedule back from sometime next
week and you can bring a request
so we can understand exactly
what you're requests Mr chairman
to clarify for the record I
wasn't saying that I agreed with
the flat budget I was agreeing
with the predecessors requests
to make it easier but I will
absolutely do that thank you
thank you.
And I I do have a school lunch
