we're gonna wait in just a
moment to all the webcast comes
back up so if you've just bear
with us for a moment all right
don this is there thank you and
thank you I hope.
Now sorry okay go ahead thank
you so I'm.
Given I hate the case of the
way very at a fund for the
waiver we met with the LFC to
discuss reversion read on our
version we made that reversion
but in the base budget many of
the the predominant component in
the reversion this year was
really additional federal
revenue and so because we had
additional federal revenues is
six point two percent increase
in Medicaid funding of the feds
give us and I I am very very
familiar with that that money
flowed through to the estate we
have more money from fans less
general fund and I would I I
would try to persuade you madam
chair although I know you for
stating and members of the
committee that this is really
excellent management on the part
of the leadership of HSD and the
O. H. optimizing every
opportunity to get additional
federal funds so I would I would
ask that.
The outlook for the view of
reversions not be considered a
negative like it is in other
aspects of society and the
private sector considered
essentially a sign of effective
management and budget I spent we
Waterford we want to fund and
revert every single possible
taxpayer dollars in Mexico back
to the general fund we can't but
K. is that what you're looking
for madam chair yes thank you
very much and I know as I
mentioned you had explained that
we wanted to hear it again
because I don't want to be a
negative this is a program that
is absolutely necessary to be
robust and and fully funded so
thank you very much and I don't
have any further comments or
questions I don't see any around
here the committee so you have a
great day and thank you again
thanks to our staff the governor
staff in your staff.
Thank you very much.
Sure.
Committee on.
