Okay now I appreciate it any
questions with your.
You know it's C. store
Representative.
If there's any questions.
Because
yeah just just let me know once
the letters okay thank.
Well good morning to each and
everyone of you as we get
started with this subcommittee
meeting of first of all Senator
Woods will not be with us this
morning he is on his way home I
understand it is that is in
hospice so he'll he'll be he'll
be there and so please keep him
in your thoughts and prayers
also with Senator Gonzales he's
there with with his wife and
again we all know that it's not
only the work that we do but
it's also our families and so
those are a couple of situations
if you will just if you ever see
either one of the senators there
to.
Sentiment text and to let him
know that you know we do care
for them and and their families
and the work that they do
this morning put our thoughts
and ideas are going to be tied
to will be how we can start to
hone and if you will pieces of
legislation thoughts and ideas
priorities but at the same time
of those priorities not to
infringe upon individual members
pieces of legislation but Hey
how we can go ahead and bring
those thoughts to at least the
level of consensus and then
secondly as we deal with that
how we can service proponents
and advocates for those types of
pieces of legislation and then
from there to review some
additional legislation that has
been introduced and along with
that then to hopefully come up
with some thoughts for the
possibility of may be either a
a full Senate finance committee
piece of legislation slash and
or no this bill that would
entail some of the short comings
that or weaknesses that we do
see what we're dealing with
legislation particularly dealing
with our water situation here in
the state of New Mexico the
other aspect of all this is
incoming upon all of us a how we
get the word out how we really
start those conversations at a
different level with the media.
And I. I really rely on on the
media's ability to get the word
out to our general population
and I say that because in
dealing with our water crisis
the resolve that we're seeking
and of course we know it's going
to take several years
but in that when they bring to
each of us issues like
well we have issues with our
state parks are we making those
improvements when they bring
issues to the table when we
start talking about the
environment our water
infrastructure are we really
resolving if you will Texas V.
New Mexico what are the issues
as we deal with it how have we
come together if you will as a a
very integral group to make
those changes and then more
importantly as we help to relate
confidence to the public in the
state of New Mexico that they're
understanding definitely is
going to be that the groups have
come together now we all know
over the years you all have
worked very closely with each
other but this session and I
always go back to the next
generation session within that
and dealing directly with GNC
and people might say well what
all these.
Different groups have to do with
it we want to prepare if you
will but that future's going to
look like for them and in
dealing with it it means not
only your vision thoughts and
ideas the articulation peace but
also to ensure that we're
investing in in what they're
doing and how they're going to
be doing this in the future so
that's kind of a an overview and
from there what I'm gonna do is
I'm gonna ask a just need to
kind of go over the agenda for
today I believe he might have
extra copies there we'll talk
about these things and then from
there the work of how we put
together in the the approach for
this session and how we're going
to be dealing with with this is
definitely going to be eminent
so with that it's J. if you'll
just get started and then we'll
get into the conversation as we
continue thank you thank you Mr
chair yeah again just want to
get started first by thinking of
the chair the committee the
relevant experts of all come
here to join in and help us with
this conversation today and
again the water policy and
infrastructure task force for
their great work I've left up
some of the stuff from
yesterday's agenda just to as a
reminder for what those
recommendations are how they're
categorized and also for the
category of water equity as we
believe that's important
so we think the agenda for
today's meeting should mainly be
preparing for a full committee
presentation of the relevant
legislation that we want to
pass.
Either individually or ask
Senator Campos had mentioned as.
A package of legislation to
address overlap or gaps in
legislation so high on our
agenda from yesterday was how do
we care for these mutual
domestics and acequia as and
local water sources that are at
capacity that are being over
utilized that are over strained
how do we help them how do we
get money out to them there is
some debate about the funding
mechanism mechanisms for those
programs so I think we should
circle back to that and then
another issue with direct
disbursement would be how do we
compliment and utilize federal
tax available for water related
projects because not all of the
problems that there isn't money
some of the problems that we
can access that money for that
people don't know that certain
funding sources exist so I think
we should touch on that as well
and then as I mentioned
previously identifying gaps and
overlaps in legislation that
would just be asking members to
come forward with their water
concerns that so far have been
unaddressed either in this
subcommittee hearing or in any
piece of legislation so far in
the session to figure out excuse
me how we can be the most
thorough and comprehensive in
dealing with this problem also
topics for discussion just from
yesterday's.
Meeting I had some.
Discussion around management and
operational capacity how can
departments be compliant and
came the authority to like
retroactively be allowed to do
what they have been taken have
what they took on as a result of
the emergencies that have come
up in New Mexico and then also
how those projects are executed
and funded so those are just on
the table a sort of general
discussion.
but yeah if it's alright with
you Mister chair I would like to
ask anyone to come up who would
like to say anything unusual
domestics and safety is or the
for you for any comments on that
thank and so with that both the
state and are going to have a
very direct conversation with
each other through each and
everyone of you as we go forward
I want him as involved as
possible in the dialogue this
morning the challenges
definitely are going to be the
issues that hopefully will be at
the forefront as we deal with
this this information then we'll
be taken back by staff the
research will be done and what
he's talking about now is we'll
bring this before the full
Senate finance committee and
from there they'll be that that
dialogue that will continue as
well in some of the other pieces
of legislation just state that
you indicated that we didn't
have copies for that we haven't
brought forward to this point
you might going point those out
because I know that Senator
Diamond she's in rules now
social to she maybe come in
later but I believe Senator
Diamond center Hemphill have a
piece of legislation that they
would like to have addressed I
also believe that there's other
pieces that you have brought
forward this morning so you
might want to elaborate a little
bit in terms of some of those
that that you brought that with
you thank you Mr chair yes
elaborating further I have added
Senate bill seventy which is a
six hundred thousand dollar
appropriation to the local
government division of DFA for
project proposal development
implementation assistance and
also application assistance
because as I said it's the issue
with funds like the water trust
fund is that a small communities
aren't actually
aware of those funds or capable
of the kind of requirements that
those applications entail so
that is a piece of legislation
being sponsored.
By Senator Hemphill and one
that's not in here because it's
more related to disasters in
general is Senator Campos bill
with Senator Diamond which is
the rural infrastructure crisis
response act which would
authorize communities in their
respective districts to respond
to disasters to two more that
I've added on to hear our own
relatively new bills from
senators about this
they are Senate bill three six
three fourteen excuse me which
authorizes the finance authority
to disburse loans from the water
project fund to local entities
again as your mentioning this
issue of transferring of mmhm
navigating between state and all
the way down to local
communities and then also the
water trust board members and
appointments which is Senate
bill three ninety one which is
status as the water trust board
composed of various cabinet
secretaries around the state
department's or their designees
to be appointed to the
Legislative Council by the
Legislative Council to oversee
the water trust fund and also
Rick related projects so in that
as we see the
the enormity in terms of the
number of projects that we're
looking to to consider and of
course we don't have an amount
the size these projects but.
For the most part have been
vetted and I know that over the
years with Senate bill three
fourteen
There there has been it's a
successful method of of dealing
directly with these projects but
again in going forward why is it
that we continue to have the
ongoing challenges when we deal
directly with with water and and
of course are there the the
parts that are that are included
the land land acquisition the
issues themselves of the
environment all those things tie
in directly so that so the
question then as we move forward
even though we have these
projects from at least some of
the initial research that you've
been compiling are we finding
that this is bringing resolve to
part of our water problem or is
this something that is on going
and what we're doing instead of
mitigating and trying to find
some solutions we're listening
to the reports were indicating
of all funding basically goes
back to the local part because
they know what they're doing but
in reality are we are we solving
problems for New Mexico for a
water system for dams for a
second for the domestic mutual
domestics Tienen if you will the
use of USDA resources Tyne and
what FEMA's dealing with are we
are we really triangulated all
this information or in reality
if we bring it forward and
talking about it but do we
really have that plan laid out
even though we do have the fifty
year water plant even though we
do have a task force that
brought together if you will so
many of thoughts and ideas are
we are we really going to get
there or is this going to be
just another exercise that will
help us to create if you will
more institutional
understanding or are we going to
be able to go forward so if that
if you just respond briefly and
then what we'll do is we'll get
into the conversation thank you
Mr chair yeah of course I'd like
to defer to someone that.
Experts on this but I mean just
my initial thought is as you say
Senate bill three fourteen is
something that gets passed every
year it's more in the works kind
of a formality in terms of water
projects but what we're seeing
is that the need the demand in
the capacity issues that
are funneling are fueling these
water issues exceed the regular
extent of how we've been
treating water in the state of
New Mexico so that's why there's
so much of this legislation up
here to try to reform these
processes with the kind of the
unprecedented opportunity that
we have the.
Delegate very specific and
thorough and comprehensive
solutions to these problems and
that's I believe Mr chair why
we're all here so I think that
it's because the request yes the
the need to solve the water
problem is exceeding well and
how it's being addressed
currently okay so with the soil
so in water conservation
districts with or someone maybe
that would like to participate
anyone else who would like to
come up in terms of sitting here
at the table so we can have that
conversation of today we're
going to try to hone in on how
we're going to present to the
full finance committees so if
there additional thoughts and
ideas and and again we're always
open to the offline if you will
discussion as to how we're going
to be dealing directly with this
so I I don't know whatever feels
comfortable to come up please
come up and then take a seat at
the table so we can discuss it
along with that we have someone
online for okay so so within
that with that.
Harding so water conservation or
he said more specifically
regarding Senate bill seventy
okay thank you from the phone
water conservation so so why
don't you go and and and put him
on letting go and make a the of
the COVID regarding Senate bill
seventy seven yeah okay so
regarding seven Senate bill
seventy after that comment then
what we're gonna do is we're
gonna start the conversation in
terms of your best thoughts and
ideas in terms of how we can put
the information together as we
prepare to present to the full
Senate finance committee so
please proceed.
Mr Chairman my name is called
reductions and I'm chairman of
the San Francisco solemn water
conservation district.
I'm also a member of the New
Mexico capped the entities of
that was put together for
planning of.
For the non diversion units of
from the Arizona water
settlements Act.
And by M..
L. seventy.
Senate bill seven the.
Has a provision in it for six
hundred thousand dollars.
To go through the department of
finance and administration to.
Hey regional planning of for the
established under the regional
planning at.
There is no statutory reference
for the regional planning at.
My understanding from Senator
Hemphill and from Priscilla
loose Errol from the southwest
New Mexico council of
governments.
Is the fading with fact six
hundred thousand to go to the
southwest called.
If they are utilizing the
language of a regional planning
authority or a regional under
the regional planning act.
The card is not.
For under that statute.
And so.
It looks like it may be
problematic that.
That amount of money is is going
to a.
Is going to what doesn't exist
at this point we would have to
actually.
Form a regional Planning
Commission develop an agreement
and then be eligible to receive
that funding so I.
I'm I'm hoping that we can avoid
a hick up in the legislation.
house bill two hundred already
creates a major obstacle in the
and having the region entities
have to go through the water
trust board.
Process which is very time
consuming and very difficult as
was mentioned earlier concerning
Senate bill seventy so thank you
Mr chairman I I hope that we can
get that issue clarified so that
we have a house.
I process in the future so I and
I really appreciate the the
comments and if you would please
with staff leave your contact
information again because we're
going to be doing some extensive
research in preparation for the
full presentation before the
Senate finance committee so I
again that's very helpful and I
appreciate that so will that
will include remarks as we move
forward.
Mr chairman and I put that
information in the trap of that
would be sufficient it will be
yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for your comments I
appreciate that okay so to get
into the the challenges and if
you will the crux of the
discussion now.
Members let you kind of start to
share your thoughts but I want
to I want to go and start with
the with with Debbie I know that
that she's been helping us along
the way and I know sometimes
these pieces of legislation seem
like they're separate.
In all reality we getting to the
point as to how we're going to
go ahead and culminate with
something that's going to
include all of our thoughts and
ideas as we move forward that
Debbie which start the
conversation please yes thank
you very much Mr chairman
members and Debbie Hughes I'm
the executive director with the
New Mexico association of
conservation districts and so
first of all in talking about a
state kia's I want to mention
that we have been able to bring
seven point two million dollars
of federal money to New Mexico
the last for five years and
we've been working very closely
with the Interstate Stream
Commission and the New Mexico
state kia Association and
several local conservation
districts have also contribute
because we had to have at least
a one to one match and we've
been getting that money on the
ground I heard somebody
yesterday talking about delivery
and capacity and I guess I want
to step up to the plate and let
folks know that that's what soil
and water conservation district
to do that there's forty seven
of them in the state they are
political subdivisions of the
state
and they work directly with
landowners and if you look at
our statutory authority we
actually have the authority to
provide those landowners with
funds tools equipment.
All kinds of things as long as
it's benefiting the natural
resources of the state and so we
do a lot of that work already
and I think
you know I know that having
served on the water transport
under three governors I know
that the for example the New
Mexico rural water association
receive some state money to help
with capacity for rural rural
water users I think it the same
kind of thing was was done for
solar water districts we get up
our capacity really quickly
because being local government
we don't have any trouble hiring
folks we can hire employees or
contractors or whatever we do
hire local I'm so we're
definitely doing that but I
think to this list of bills.
The bills I would like to add to
this even though it doesn't say
water all in it is Senate bill
nine which is already gone
through here because the intent
of that is to help all these
natural resource agencies
leverage more money and you know
one of them is for for the up
river stewardship for the
environment department but the
the funding that will go to the
storm water districts that can
it can all be used for some kind
of leverage whether it's with
other state money or with
federal money so I think that's
that's a huge opportunity and
then the last thing I want to
touch on and this is where we do
need more funding is this a
little water districts are
sponsors or co sponsors of about
a hundred dams and I know
Senator Campos has a bill but it
seems like it just we never
really come up with big money to
do that and we can also work
accessing more federal money for
some of these dams but they all
require match all that money
from the Feds requirements from
USDA so anyways would love to
work on that some more because
our dams have become high hazard
because the a lot of the
counties allowed people to build
below the dams so they were
built to protect agriculture
David outlived their life they
filled up with a lot of still so
if we could even get state money
which we're doing in some cases
to clean the sold out then they
are safer and they're not gonna
at least you know flood and and
you know because loss of life or
property so we we really want to
work more on that but we think
that this on water districts can
work well interstate you to we
can work with any state or
federal agency and we do that we
have we have agreements with a
lot of them were running a lot
of federal money through the
slow water districts to put it
on the ground and we really
think that we can definitely
help to state up in a lot of
this and we we are working on
some of the emergency response
for black fire in the northern
part we're helping the for
service to document all of the
structural loss of that has to
do with agriculture whether it's
just taking.
AS or finances so we're doing
that now and we're also working
with and will be trying to help.
USDA dollars to those same
farmers and ranchers to put this
money on the ground so thank you
very much Senator but I I really
appreciate that and a couple of
thoughts that come to mind one
of them happens to be as we move
forward particularly with the
anti donation clause
have been your experiences any
of the assistance that you
provided to private landowners
has that ever been challenged
and and it's it's a question to
bring forward because in putting
this together we want to ensure
that we're helping not only are
municipalities county
governments political
subdivisions the quads I
subdivisions and so forth but or
it's it's just it continues to
be an issue and and it it just
clouds everything that we we
deal with please proceed Senator
Campos Senator Padilla we have
been putting my money on the
ground on private land for
probably the eighty years of
salt water districts have been
existence but really a lot more
in the last up on say thirty
years
so I can I can document funding
going to the water trust board
that the salt water districts
put on the ground for watershed
restoration that's never been a
problem on any type of land some
of the projects for the river
stewards of course the soil
health program a lot of the
conservation districts have
their own cost share through
local mill levies up that's all
being done on private land and
no Sir we have not been
challenged and maybe it's just
because we have been sued but we
have been working with the
energy minerals some of their
attorneys have looked at our
statute and feel like or or
statute gives authority for us
to do that with on the private
land and so I think some of the
other state agencies that need
help get federal money on
private land are probably
looking at that our language to
see if there's something that
they can do for these other
agencies but we can definitely
work with any of them to help
then it and and I really
appreciate that because you
bring up a key word and that's
going to be the authority.
E. that seems to be one of the
key issues that we Fund covered
if you will as we've had these
discussions because we're we're
getting into the authority piece
right now and that's going to be
an important topic as we we move
forward so then from there I'm
just gonna let the panel kind of
you all take turns and be nice
that's a let's see if we get
some more conversation one.
Mr chair I I'd like to defer to
folks that have come from the
lower Grande Valley there's a
for the you know introduce
representative and let them have
a four year from us yesterday
you kind of know where I'm
coming from on this topic but
the go ahead and the you'll to
transform the lower grant thank
you Mr state engineer Mr
chairman and members of the
committee all to you.
Thank you for the opportunity to
do a.
Today movie we more estimates
are hassling general counsel for
the element here Asian districts
and with us today are the city
of Los crucis council and the
state it's in and the and who
represents the large farm groups
in the lower Rio Grande we're
here we're coming together today
holding hands to support the
state engineer and the
Interstate Stream Commission a
request
for funding this year we have a
unique situation in the lower
Rio Grande and that Texas versus
New Mexico and we're looking at
starting to move into Madam
compliance in the area of the
state and what we've done any
AD as we put together I'm.
Package in the state engineers
office and the Interstate Stream
Commission office has paired
with us and if you're over
reclamation to through what's
called a Rio Grande drought
resiliency task force and we're
working really other local
community interesting because we
don't have comprehensive
solutions we have this entity
getting five thousand dollars
this one getting five hundred
thousand and everybody does
their own little project we
don't have a comprehensive
vision but now we do and this is
that included a lot of work on
everybody's part to implement
these solutions what what we're
doing is we're looking at a
number of ways that we can
ensure compliance with the Rio
Grande compact going forward now
that we know that we and what
that means is we have to work
together to accomplish that
thank you to accomplish that we
started with infrastructure.
Re having dance our issue.
NEA the our sponsors in the
neighborhood of thirty of the
faxes our biggest issue is
exactly what was mentioned
before they were built to
protect farmland they are
outliving their designed
capacity their life and they're
now protecting communities
Cologna small subdivisions.
Areas that need protection but
they're not going to get the
adequate protection of the small
intense bursts of storms that
happened right over that but
what we can do it that water you
can capture it more efficiently
we can hold it back we can keep
it for drowning Communities we
can create restoration sites
that we can create increase
delivery to farmers we can
create a recharge of the aquifer
we can create additions
improvements in our system we
can create compliance with the
Rio Grande compact and so we're
bringing everybody to the table
the state has worked very
closely with us city is starting
to look at this for the farmers
groups are here to support the
state engineer for the first
time in my career easy ideas
points to not by state engineer
that thank you to give me.
Well on your.
That is.
He has a long history in costly
water management but now the
partnership to work with and we
hope to fund that partnership
because with the bureau of
reclamation's told us is that
whatever the state it will be
added to whatever EDA D. can
contribute in times whatever the
other entities that have making
sure to add that the child that
anyone mask that is not what you
can give us that's huge that's
the comprehensive plan that we
need for the lower Rio Grande
that will keep the whole state
in compliance with the compact
so we're gonna leave these
happens with you but the last
thing I'd like to point out is
that this is our director of
ground water resources water
main experts within easy eighty
K. only lodges are groundwater
and what this is shown is that
stormwater capture matters we
can protect communities we can
stay in compliance with the
Endangered Species Act we can
capture this water and use it
for the farmers recharge the
aquifer and we can show you that
it actually works and when you
do that yes there's a
conversation about following
still we might still have the
fellow farmers Graham that's a
piece of this but when we can
make more with less.
You might not many farmers.
I I really appreciate that and
also Kelly's here and and I
refer to her because she's been
an advocate for helping to to
plan and deal with this and
I saw a smile on your face to
unlock my money my eyes are just
lighting up I I just really
appreciate the conversation
chair I might also want to
introduce who's with me today on
my board president Mr Bobby
Sloan my board vice president Mr
correct this this might work my
manager Mr Dr Patrick Sullivan
and our our lead X. for
engineering expert Dr Phil keen
and if you have any technical
questions Dr king is a person
who can tell you that I'm not
making this stuff up stuff up as
I go there is a science.
So so in tying all this together
and with our staff if we can
have your your your names phone
numbers because as we deal with
this there will be those
technical questions as we move
forward so we appreciate that so
thank you thank you very much.
The state engineer who else do
you have there like to.
Mr Chairman had.
Thank you my name is yes the
Davidson as Samantha mentioned
I'm counsel for the New Mexico
pecan growers but today I've
been asked to actually speak on
behalf of the southern Rio
Grande diversified crop farmers
those are the farmers down south
that grow hatch green Chile and
ends and other crops my clients
the pecan growers grow about
thirty thousand acres of
pecan trees in Dona ana county
I've also been asked to speak on
behalf of New Mexico State
University on behalf of the
public service company of New
Mexico and the Camino Riel
regional utility association
down south there there folks can
make it today but they did ask
me to pass along their support
for this cooperation in this
cooperative effort that we
finally have I will say that our
groups are farmer groups have
been supporting the state since
about two thousand thirteen and
come up with solutions for the
lower Rio Grande you know that's
when that Texas Mexico case was
filed since then we've been
contributing a lot of private
dollars and a lot of support to
the state to litigation and
through a negotiation I'm so the
state's gotten the benefit of a
lot of support money from
private folks to see where we
are to date where we have eighty
eighty at the table and all at
the same side of the table we we
do know we have a state line
numbers now that's being
considered for settlement we
have a measuring stick for New
Mexico all of us are in the boat
pulling orders together and we
really have a unique opportunity
to get some federal funding to
help us get them we've been
working on the solutions for ten
years we have a state engineer
now who has background with the
federal government and
connections there and
relationships there and we
really do feel like it's a
unique opportunity to take
advantage of so that's why we're
getting our support today
absolutely agree with what
Samantha said we can generate
more water will be less
following that occurs in the
valley less.
Of our guys are going to have to
sell out their land and their
water rights so we're here to
support the state engineers
budget requests.
I I really appreciate that who's
next.
Good morning Senator my name is
Jay Stein our law firm is water
council to the city of Los
crucis and has been for thirty
years we are here to support the
special funding request for the
state engineer as your business
Senator knows the city of Los
crucis is the state's second
largest city has a customer base
now of some hundred twenty five
thousand customers in that
certain to rise and it provides
essential public health and
welfare services through its
municipal water supply for the
school district for hospitals
for homes and the basic
requirement of a municipal water
supply is that it has to be
adequate for these purposes it
has to be continuous and
uninterrupted what we know about
the Texas V. New Mexico
situation is that it's going to
end with the following two
results the first is that
there's going to be a specific
delivery obligation that the
state is required to make to
Texas and that could come out of
the presence of consent decree
that's being debated or perhaps
a different one if it goes back
into negotiations or through
litigation but there's going to
be a specific numeric delivery
obligation out of the reservoir
that we're going to have to meet
to Texas that hasn't happened
before the second is that
there's going to have to be in
in trust state administration.
And Administration of New
Mexicos water users to make
certain that New Mexico can
comply with this delivery
obligation and that of course
includes the city of Los crucis
what the state engineers funding
request special request does is
it provides a unified process an
opportunity.
For the stakeholders to get
together and work on creative
solutions amongst themselves to
enable these two of things to
happen through new
infrastructure through
conservation that's a city issue
through make water of programs
and perhaps other such as
following
and this involves and will
involve us working together with
the B. ID and other stakeholders
and also with the state engineer
so the city is here to support
that funding request I I
definitely appreciate that for a
go to to others to communicate
and and have some other thoughts
expressed I I want to get into
this whole issue of the
municipalities and the need for
the domestic water use and also
accurate culture and and within
that how in the southern part of
the state are you blending that
water use and the cooperation in
order for us to be able to move
forward because you brought up a
very good point it's not only
the conservation water use but
where we gonna get that and so
as we deal with that that means
we move up a little bit farther
north and to ensure that that
water is going to be flowing we
get into the self issues across
the board the a second users as
they've been devastated in the
northeastern and northern part
of the state so that a lot of
those complicated pieces but
maybe if the two of you can just
kind of helped me to understand
how are you the landing and
working together in terms of the
best water use possible.
Well to date Senator the city
has
is part of the lower Rio Grande
water users group which works
together with many of the
constituent elements within E.
B. ID there has not been of much
work directly with the BID to
date but this funding request
will find the path forward for
us to work directly with the
board and there I bring their
for bring all of the groups
together in one form.
She.
Just.
Yes Mr chair
J. rent a reference to the lower
Rio Grande water users and in
two thousand and thirteen we
formed it's a group of the major
groundwater users and the lower
Rio Grande specifically I think
we've rounded up all the water
rights and it's about ninety
percent of the groundwater use
in the lower Rio Grande we saw
really soon the wisdom of trying
to avoid the harsh hammer of
priority enforcement because
when you do strict party
administration the junior users
get cut off and you know there's
some valuable industries
economies and other things on
those junior users and so we
really soon saw the wisdom of
trying to come up with some
situations where we could share
shortages and I know a lot of
that happens in the northern
part of the state of a water
rates attorney so I
Representative folks all around
the state but this cooperative
effort at trying to find
solutions to provide a softer
landing and strict priority
enforcement and so under the
state state engineers a warm
regulate or a warm statute and
its regulations allowing
consensus building on I'm
sharing shortages that that was
our goal we came up with the two
thousand sixteen settlement
framework and under that
framework we've been working
together in and really that
framework provided a general
outline of our goals and our
goals are to protect the project
down south for the farming and
for the act users and also to
provide some alternative to
strict party enforcement for the
juniors like neutral domestics
like smaller water providers
like a municipal providers so we
have a lot of lofty goals and
that settlement framework
actually been before the state
legislature talking about it but
now is the time that we really
need to put our feet on the
ground and get that those kinds
of arrangements and agreements
in place and with state engineer
Hammond's help we hope to be
able to do that we are very very
motivated and that's one reason
we've been so motivated and
supporting the state in this
litigation behind the scenes
are.
Are all of our group all of our
numbers for the lower Rio Grande
water users were either and Niki
in the Supreme Court case within
act very very active helping the
state litigate that case
providing witnesses and
testimony we feel like we're in
a really good spot in that
litigation now and it's time to
turn to to really implementing
the solutions so we have been
creative and we do have a
settlement framework if you'd
like to see if we can provide
that to you it's not a secret
document with provided it to the
legislature before but we help
to now start really getting some
formal consensus arrangements
and bring other stakeholders
that haven't been at the table
yet to the table.
Appreciate that right.
Thank you Mr chair.
Senator Padilla two four to
follow on that you know
litigation native drives people
apart initially and and begin
you have to you know protect
your interests in a litigious
process but Ullman pulls people
together and we work through
this and over the last year and
a half at least I think that
Madam concept is begin to pull
everybody together so that's
what you're kind of you hearing
that today but what I wanted to
emphasize what we talked about
with you you yesterday the
regional solution is the right
solution and it takes all
parties in the region to come
together and I've had
discussions even with going into
County on their masters for
motor planning efforts and
things like that they have not
been party to the litigation or
this other complement of of of
the future of the Water Rights
you know disputes but and
settlement but they they're
they're they have a very
comprehensive storm water
active program to that they are
coming here to ask for funding
on as well we believe that of
having so water conservation
districts and and the federal
leveraging on all of the NRCS
dams that are virtually failing
the combined and with what's
going at and the counties trying
to do in their master plan is as
a whole approach to dealing with
storm water and the most of
appropriate way we also have the
requirement well a component of
the of the Texas index
approaches that anything over a
thousand CFS flowing by Gage
Mexico does not get credit for
that as a delivery so so being
able to capture the water on our
side of the border and put to
beneficial use in any way that
we can is is a really good
component so that's going to
take up an entire you know re.
Regional approach to it and and
then I'm obviously working with
the the the urbanizing component
of it this is really critical to
think that ahead of time and get
those issues in place about how
we can have a somewhat seamless
a transition to other urbanizing
Water uses without injuring
a good culture at but also look
at new source of supply of
particularly for I industries
were maybe even brackish water
treatment makes some some some
some good sense there are
dollars.
associated with meeting that
demand
and then also importation from
other other basins we were
looking into as well so it has
to be a comprehensive approach
at all then that to the doing
what we need to do in the middle
valley to make sure the middle
of the meets its compact
delivery obligations to elephant
Butte is highly critical to a
comprehensive solution in the
Middle alley as well so so so
it's it's it's it's a big
regional approach when you
combine the middle Rio Grande
with the lower grand and this
model can be used anywhere in
the state we we've heard some
great things going on with the
grout the Grant County regional
system that Center Hemphill's
bill is trying to emphasize
their those entities are pulling
together as well
and so I think by implementing
the Interstate Stream Commission
regional planning process
throughout the state will also
help us move with good planning
and good sound
You know prioritization of the
of need so that we we can sure
from a regional perspective
share that with the Legislature
well ahead of any session so
that you all know of from a
state water planning regional
water planning and local
government planning process that
we've got our act together where
we need to get it together from
us and that that comes from a as
we talked at length yesterday
about capacity development as
well growing that water
workforce intending Planning but
but but that to me is to kind of
ties all of this all this these
bills are we're talking about it
really does time all together
from the con the the construct
of being able to plan for and
implement in the future.
The thing says you are a
discussing and ensuring with us
a couple things on the authority
the regionalization and of
course the importation of water
within that do we have a a
visual model so that we
understand what the regional if
you will groups are going to
look like how is this going to
go ahead and if you will then
transenterix for all state
picture because what I'm hearing
of the regionalization but what
I'm seeing also as I talk to
people as well what part of the
region are we going to be
involved in what what water use
is going to happen within our
area what's the application so
so do we have something that is
beginning to look like but what
you're talking about that is
that is in print.
Mr chair the the the the bill
calls for the sensually standing
up the process again and
rulemaking within the Interstate
Stream Commission so I think
within the first year of of of
the process that's that's where
that would come from in terms of
forming the regions and doing
the outreach to the various
areas I think I think sixteen
planning regions is too much at
the the the of overlapping
hydrologic boundaries and things
like that so we need to take a
look at that again and be a
little bit more
thoughtful and and working with
the regional entities to see how
those boundaries should better
be organized but you know
something on line of it eight
eight or nine regions kind of
makes sense in terms of the
hydrologic regions and and
things of that nature but we
haven't.
Set those boundaries it and and
the reason I bring that up
because in the past as we dealt
with some of the economic
regions we found after awhile
that they were beginning to go
ahead and overlap and then from
there people were totally under
understanding what those regions
we're definitely gonna look like
so you're you're indication is
that this would probably develop
over the next year and within
that that way people can offer
their input in terms of you know
what their similarities are what
their differences are and how
these regions then we'll we'll
we'll develop and so so part of
that's going to be the outreach
and and the education now so
that people begin if you will to
to to offer that input please
proceed Senator but let me say
this about the lower Rio Grande
we're not gonna wait for that
it's for them for the my goal
there is to use the set up of
something similar to the to the
water task force process where
we convene all the local
governments together and begin
this master planning process
after the session is over that's
that that's so as soon as you
guys are done with being here
Santa Fe I'm going down the plus
crucis.
and maybe finding a little
because he to somewhere I keep
asking if anybody has one
for me to live in there for a
while but no it's going to take
that level of efforts Senator to
pull everybody together
in a in a reserve group you know
a short period of time actually
you and and and while the the
the special master's making his
decision and then the Supreme
Court has to make their decision
we're going to be working we're
not going to wait for that.
So so part of what I'm hearing
is that this definitely is a
priority of the state engineer
and and we appreciate that so
you're putting us on notice that
this is what you're gonna be
working with terms of the the
water importation are there
plans in the works to hold if
you will our permanent pools and
and other states and other
reservoirs outside of New Mexico
in order to help us with our our
water crisis here in the state.
They could like to let Rolf
Schmidt Petersen discuss that a
little bit from from the
Colorado River perspective
because a lot of really heavy.
Do the you know big issues going
on there right now that you you
know this committee and and the
legislature needs to know in
general so and and it Senator
related to our water supply for
sure.
Thank you state engineer so at
first when it comes to the lower
Rio Grande region I I just
wanted to step back for second
and in remark about the
capability and capacity of this
entire group of people right
it's an amazing group and can do
work at multiple different
levels of of government you know
from a political subdivisions to
locals right and that capability
and capacity I think would be
listening to the discussions
yesterday in the last week or so
is I think what what really is
needed to move projects and move
money we heard quite a bit in
the last week of well there's a
large amount of money there's
not a whole lot of people and
definitely no in the state
government part of it you know
it's been pretty flat the only
way to do this is to team to put
the dollars on the ground in use
the unique capabilities
capacities of all of these
different groups and I think
that serves as a great example
about how to go forward in that
regard
the you know so well when it
comes to the specific questions
about importation of water I
just number one I'd like to
recognize John Longworth use
somewhere in the room here
behind us who's been working a
lot with the.
With the with the media.
And vice versa actually
but in the you they have been
looking at specifically in the
area around the lower Rio Grande
at particular possibilities of
importing water because as you
remarked right what we're doing
and what we will have with the
decree is a set really amount of
water we need to deliver but
also in the end what we can use
the and if there's no new water
to be used down there and in
fact we got to pull things back
a little bit we're all working
together to do that but then we
need to say how do we take on
new uses right and we we know
what we want for you be ID to
have a system that has long term
longevity right so within this
overall framework the only way
to to do that and then look at
the type of growth that Jay was
talking about and I know we a
number of others have brought up
the even south of Los crucis is
to get all those parties
together right and and then look
at what the potential is within
the farmland to move some water
is that possible or not and
what's possible with regards to
bringing water in from our
perspective one of the first
places to look though is that
bringing water in peace and so
there's some brackish water
opportunities that that present
themselves in the or nada you
know just to the north and east
a little bit of Los crucis but
also there's been a quite a bit
of work looking at the San basin
on the border with Texas at the
possibility of utilizing water
from that area and then bringing
it over into the low rate grant
or even doing some kind of
exchange with Texas in the city
of el Paso to make things work
in that regard so that those are
some of the specific pieces down
there and John.
You want to mention anything
else in the.
Committee chairman my name's
John.
A senior adviser to to profit
from my
Lower your granted in working at
the VIP very closely and also
the bureau of reclamation start
thinking about what kind of
projects we need to do is
in the basin itself I think that
the the dam's been mentioned a
couple times I think there's a
real opportunity is there
cell funding internally to be
able to start that planning
process started down a fine
structures that are are fired
and then what is it gonna take
to upgrade due to their standard
for in the in the long run to be
able to hold water which is
which is expensive
Budget that we're just about
ready to launch were looking at
the frustration of water in the
drains within the BID so we
start getting some baseline
information of how fast water
might be able to to be able to
put into the into the ground
from least insurance we're also
working on a project where we're
looking at expanding the the
ID's mapping of the State within
my the other opportunities if we
get these intense storms be able
to wrap water through to both
attenuated for the excess flows
state engineer spoke about but
also to provide the benefits of
The other project I think we're
office referring to this is so
basin project this is the talk
about the many years we got a
grant from your reclamation
three four million dollar grant
to do groundwater modeling we
work with New Mexico tech
underground water models
together really fantastic model
down there that's that we had
ever to start understanding
how's that I prefer going to
respond over time because they
could get into a money situation
which I think goes to James
point about making sure we have
sure to supply so it's six of
that models helping us
understand how to manage that
resource.
We have an engineering firm is
actually reclamation now to us
that we're sizing for help we're
looking for places to put that
one I think we have a number of
different locations
and sizing park sizing wells of
those kind of basic engineering
task easier it's gonna be a big
issue because we got to go
through some pretty heavy duty
firing Jizan military bases but
I understand there's a process
there and said that the next
part is we're putting forth a
grant application under U. S. B.
R.
smartwater sort program on study
in.
Thanks for and the center for
desalination and so we're
thinking in those terms of start
to look at the whole system down
there where the best
opportunities to be able to.
At the south plant that can
serve multiple areas also be
able to bring in the salt basin
water to.
Combine that so this these kinds
of sources of water in this kind
of grant application uses games
of be able to find a little more
regionally how you can bring in
new water portrait that we have
to to a standard that the
appropriate agency please so so
I'm hearing basically is that
there are a lot of opportunities
and and dealing with it.
How are you able to go ahead and
secure we'll just say state
resources in order so
fundamentally this becomes one
of the major charges as we bring
this together for for the
overall planning have you have
you all thought about some of
those things as to how we can
really do that because it here
again as people say we have
quite a bit of money available
but is this money going to go
ahead and go divided into a lot
of other areas where maybe it's
going to be held in advance for
a long period of time or we
gonna start to put the resources
into things that definitely are
gonna make the difference for
the short and long term when it
comes to what water planning and
and and the best use of the
water that that we do have
available is chairman I'll just
start and turned back to the
second team but
But I think
this far castle brought forth
some of the information some of
project do I do have those are
the projects where we need
proper language and funding to
be able to take Fund and put it
on the ground.
she mentioned thanks and what
would be a certain amount of
action will also be able to
begin to deteriorate these big
storm flows that I can't
emphasize that enough because it
will fix that come with that
and that is a pretty good list
from building new dams to
creating sway either is taking
right yes storage areas that I
think it really you know a good
starting point and and we will
work and I was working with
filled drive came who stared
expert to start piecing these
things together and we're
scoping out a couple different
projects through this through
the Interstate Stream Commission
state engineer to start.
And so that's what so for
example we sponsor the study
where we look at what is it what
is the region look like for
Act for recharge what are some
of the issues that we're gonna
have to overcome you know to try
to fifty page study draft but
yeah we started that process and
now we're looking to go to the
next process going on okay if if
we we know infrastructure we
have how to best manage that
infrastructure to be able to get
the best bet budget after we
recharge so we've been looking
at it we continue to look at it
but I'll turn it over to mine
sectors talk about money.
Really appreciate sure Mr chair
if I might I am thank you John
because that was the point of
putting out this big packet full
of ideas we're checking a lot of
boxes aquifer recharge is a
really big one but if I can
capture that water slow down and
control the release I can also
reduce groundwater pumping by
giving a farmer more surface
water so we're checking a lot of
boxes we're doing better flood
control that's public safety
we're doing more community park
and recreation areas habitat
sites at all of these locations
where we can capture stormwater
we can also include a plan in
right hearing habitat so we can
bring environmentalists to the
table with farmers with the
state with cities and actually
agree on a project and and the
whole point of bringing money to
the lower Rio Grande to do that
is that I mean it only slightly
take issue with what the state
engineer and the Interstate
Stream Commission saying I am
creating water we're actually
importing water by doing more
with less with storm water
that's a new source of water for
us that we haven't been able to
effectively use before that's in
effect importation the days a
large reservoirs capturing all
of this drainage and then
controlling the release are gone
we're getting hit with majorly
intense storms that sit over to
square blocks and just devastate
those areas and we can't so that
water down we can't use it
effectively it takes houses with
it and then we send that water
to Texas and it's gone we need
to capture that we need to
protect people we need to
protect habitat we need to
protect the B. ID system we can
do that it's still gonna take a
lot of money because these dams
are cheap and they're not in a
condition where we can use them
for this purpose but they can
get there and that's what.
We're already looking at John
Longworth and Dr king had been
working on this for awhile and I
want to point out one very key
point this was a Canadian born
out of the settlement
discussions and the state and
the feds NEPAD looked at it and
said we can't afford to lose
that committee we're going to
keep going and all we've done
since then is broader efforts to
try to bring more people in keep
going as fast as we can to fix
this situation because the court
orders will not fix the
situation for us we still have
to come together so we have
three million dollars the
federal government has already
given us to just play with
figure out how we're going to do
this but they said there's more
if we can get more from the
state and then we can at PED
eighties cost share if the city
can help if the farmers can help
if in our CS can help whoever
can help we can add that all
together so we're we're actually
looking at a broad range of
opportunities yeah that's going
to include some following
potentially it's going to
include importation these are
big expensive projects but
they're needed because we are
the most populous area of the
state outside of this region a
couple of things with the
precipitation and evaporation
how does all that fit into what
you're thinking of.
I'm gonna defer to doctor king
for that if possible it in if
you could just come up to the
microcenter stand that they're
not hearing all of the comments
that are being made but just
just in privative in terms of
that because I know when we talk
about the environment that's
that's going to be key and then
for their courses were we're
gonna be coming into the the
last fifteen twenty minutes of
of the discussion than what I'd
like to do again as we're gonna
be looking at legislation
presentation before the full
finance committee and then of
course what those
recommendations would be I would
like to work directly through
the state engineer with all of
you being a part of this because
he's been here he's heard it so
that we can continue if you will
with the sidebar pieces to see
how we're gonna possibly put
together some of the the omnibus
or if you will the legislation
that will also help to advocate
for so anyway please please
proceed on on on that issue.
What terms you're you're.
thank you Mr chairman
In addition to being a
consultant to both of bitter
addition district but I had a
busy couple of years here I did
serve on the Interstate Stream
commissions Clemente a task
force where we in twenty one
twenty twenty one twenty twenty
two.
in interestingly coming out of
the
we painted a very bleak picture
and and our part yes was to sort
of lay out the status of climate
change for New Mexico.
And
Our biggest fear coming out of
that is that we would produce
this report and we'll go sit on
a shelf.
I also serve I guess I still
serve on the
the
Order a policy interest rate
infrastructure task force.
Follow that up and that has been
really I think positive
experience that has given you a
lot of detail on what needs to
be done.
Then the other thing that I have
been doing in my spare time.
Is
Working on the settlement the
Texas.
And
With with all these these
experiences I see them coming
together right now at one time
in one place of because all of
the things that the water task
force.
Produced in those
recommendations help us get to
Madam and stay in compliance and
settlement.
And that's why reclamation is so
interested in investing in our
infrastructure in the lower Rio
Grande if we can just bring
the money with the.
Now getting back to your
question could you restate your
question so so it's all related
and and you're you're answering
it but anyway we start talking
about evaporation and
precipitation and and if you
will how we're going to keep the
environment if you will moist
and supple and and and really
working for each and everyone of
us how how is all that time okay
Make no mistake the environment
is changing to the our our
climate is changing in the
environment that supports is
changing.
And the.
Rio Grande pick a spot on the
Rio Grande any place is not ever
going to look like it looked
fifty years ago.
It's just a it's a different
we're in a different climate and
different ideology.
however
One of the ways that you know we
we've got to storm water issue
the keeps keeps coming up where
we we we will be in you can have
a **** right in the middle of a
severe drought in a additional
damaging the the actual drought
is damaging and the water is
lost downstream because come so
fast and furious we don't have
the infrastructure to capture
and hold it in our system we
want to capture is high in the
watershed as we can hold up hold
up slow it down so that it takes
its time getting down so that
less of it is flushed out the
bottom of the system as
you know excess flow to Texas
that's really what we're trying
to prevent in excess flow is
something that has always been
in the in the works
when he was in Texas gets more
water than they ordered under
Rio Grande project operations
it's not charge to the.
In the settlement I know I can
say this because my party
mentioned that if there is water
over a certain threshold the
goes past the index point it
does not count as a delivery to
Texas the water winds up in
Texas but it's not part of the
New Mexico delivered to Texas.
So if we can hold that water in
our system it what's our soils
it recharges our aquifers our
weather soils will
produce more
viable habitat then there would
be without the infrastructure
and the ability to control the
water but again it will never
look like it did in you know in
the in the even in the last the
driver of the fifties to the
seventies is not going to look
like that because it's warmer.
And so
what we're not trying.
Recreate the past exactly we're
trying to.
mitigate the effect of this
changing climate.
Thank.
We have any any comments or
anyone else that you'd like to
maybe have make some comments in
terms of what we're dealing with
and course we can just continue
to open up to the ongoing
conversation.
This process chair out.
Mr Chairman is just a little
short piece I forgot to mention
before one other group that
we're working with is the New
Mexico department of agriculture
and animus you to do we've had a
small study that we were hoping
to ramp up on how to manage
lands in the event that there
followed and management a way to
reduce dust
reduced us to keep the soil on
the ground
make it more more like a sponge
and provide habitat so we are
starting to advance ideas
with NMSU in yes it is It goes
again to the state engineers
discussions about building
partnerships and bring people
together that's another the
source of of information and
cooperation so I just want to
bring that point out because I
know there's been some talk
about healthy soils initiative
and so we've been working with
the
New Mexico department of
agriculture on initiative
exactly for that thank you.
Share those with you for two
coats of the New Mexico
environment department and then
that you know that the
river street program and and a
number of fortune goes that kind
of tie into this whole thing to
so
And I'm just going to make the
comments but just real quick
when it comes to the
reforestation when it comes to
ground cover when it comes to
our quality soils the the this
pieces is much larger than
people fully understand and so
the coordination definitely is
going to be needed as we we do
move forward so in your face to
see.
Mr chair John Roderick with the
New Mexico environment
department
as our state engineer said we
have the river stewardship
program and in my division and
they the program is designed to.
Repair and enhance
river habitats we deal directly
with private individuals
nonprofit organizations
other communities to to get this
money out and put that money
into the local economy hiring
local contractors to do the work
it's.
Not a super extensive program
this year
from last year session we we got
ten million dollars in fused
into the program of our funds we
put out
requests for proposals which is
how we operate those it's
competitive and we have
Basically we have have.
Obligated all of that ten
million dollars for projects
over the next two and a half
years
that's one piece of what we do
but at peace it plays into
everything that we're talking
about here is not only the
quantity issue but the quality
issue and one of the things you
know as we talk about recharges
we talk about potentially using
Brackish water as we look at
other water for re use this is
where NMED is heavily involved
and engage but we need to do
more we currently have animal
you in place with New Mexico
State University and through
that email you the created date
produced water research
consortium.
And its purpose and design going
into the third year now is to
evaluate.
Whether or not produced water
from oil and gas can be treated
in such a manner that it can be
used outside the oil and gas
industry for
The civic purposes okay we're
also engaging with several
communities about the
How to reduce question or as lot
of folks may remember it it's
the toilet to tap concept.
And.
The issue for us is that we need
to develop the regulations to
allow for those County uses and
that has to go hand in hand with
these types of projects that are
going on because one of the
things that has to occur to
reduce the
the urban usage the municipal
usages of this water our
groundwater so hard is reviews
no it's not the total answer no
one thing is the total answer
here but it takes all the pieces
working together and this is.
It's a challenge for us but
because it takes a lot of.
Time a lot of staff investment
to put together legislation to
take you through the process to
do the the investigatory work
the scientific work up front.
To justify that legislation
because when we take something
to the water quality control
commission it's essentially like
a court here we have to go and
make our case this is valid put
in place and you know we have
people that our opponents we
have people that are for the
legislation is huge process and
because of our staffing
situation.
Even fully staffed it's
difficult because we don't have
separate staff to do legislative
work.
I'm using the same people that
have to write the permits and
inspect the permits and to
handle the issues that to do
that work.
And so.
A couple of things that we have
this year for the legislation
our special appropriations is a
five point five million dollar
request specifically for water
re use and just to allow us to
develop the regulations that
allows us to to do the science
that needs to be done to get
this path forward and it's
critical that we start on it now
time is not in our favor.
as I said it's not an issue of
us having the staff we don't
have so we're going to have to
utilize their parties we have
developed relationships with the
Senator the NGOs here in the
state the non government
organizations
environmental agent
organizations that are actually
working with us to help pull the
science together to help develop
expert testimony to move this
forward but.
We need in in in fusion of
funding to be able to do that in
a timely fashion.
I do not believe this is a
conversation we can be having
five years from now we need this
taken care of and a short track
to legislation is anymore about
twelve months the time to go to
the public hearing processes and
everything in order to get it
done and that's which not
contest.
so we need that support to be
able to to move this forward and
it has to happen in conjunction
with everything else because the
only thing worse than having
water is having a source that
you could use but you can't
because we don't have
legislation in place to allow
for.
So we really want to move that
process forward the other piece
that hasn't been talked about
too much but that I want to
touch on again as far as water
quality.
Is the impacts to our
groundwater across the state
the we have identified over
three hundred what we are
calling abandoned contaminated
sites
these are a lot of them old dry
cleaners from back in the
twenties from current time
simmering operation many of not
old.
metal plating factories all
kinds of different things that
we have identified is to record
research.
But now need to be further
investigated to determine if the
contamination is there and if so
what does it take to to clean
and that.
we commissioned a report it's
called the orphan site report
we've changed the name because
we didn't want to enter
confusion with or from wells
That that outlines this that
that looks at these and these
are located across the state.
There's very few communities of
the sites that don't have one of
more Senator.
And many of them if we evaluate
them we can if they hit a
certain threshold we can hand
them off to the EPA for cleanup
under the Superfund program many
of them fall below that
threshold and often don't have
been identified responsible
party to pay for the cleanup and
so we're looking at.
The funding to do the
investigations to go ahead and
take that out and and really
identify which of the sites need
to be cleaned up the priority
and potentially pay for some of
that claim.
again that's a special
appropriation request in the
amount of eight and a half
million dollars now those
requests designed to be over the
next two to three years so we
recognize that it may not be you
know may not be appropriate to
fund all of that in one shot but
again it's a it's a problem a
project that we need an infusion
of money into again to deal with
this it's not going away and you
know we we just have to
understand this is impacting
communities and one of the
things that we try to do.
As we get these cleanups that as
we identify to step we also have
the brownfield program in the
water protection division and so
there's funding available to
rehabilitate these sites and
make them you know
More useful to the community
just you know to literally to
enhance and and revitalize
communities as well and again
it's it's all part of the bigger
picture water touches this at
every aspect every level of our
lives and we have to address all
the issues quantity quality.
You know
it and it's it's a.
Wholistic approach the cost
money and likely right now we
have funding available to do it
nothing we don't have time to
get into but I'd like to have a
sidebar conversation with regard
to infrastructure for these
communities to water wastewater
infrastructure and how we use
these federal funds to get this
money into the communities and
there's a lot of legislation
moving now with regard to.
Changing how capital outlay is
utilized at least how we
determine what it used for we
talked at the last meeting a
little bit about the need to
fund us to be able to manage the
project better and we have some
ideas about that that that would
like to put forth to yet again
that can be offline and
recognize we're short on time
slot stopping Department calling
with energy and minerals thank
you for that time.
For State.
Mr Chairman top Lacy and
gentleman was a natural
resources thank you for this
time I just want to briefly
touch on a couple of the points
that would have been have been
restore out this meeting one of
much of our forestry work
couldn't happen setting across
landscape scale setting are the
way we look at setting practices
is not.
Sort of confined by.
Landowner Act so we sent and and
and so we try to establish
partnerships to make that happen
one of those partnerships this
Debbie has left but has been the
soil and water conservation
districts a lot of that setting
up and clearing work couldn't be
done without their help and
support.
Because as you waste Sir the
anti donation clause keeps us
from doing it directly but they
are a work around and I I would
I would I would.
Encourage everyone to sort of
look at what what that means as
all of this federal money flows
in.
What's the capacity of the soil
and water conservation district
for us to keep handing them that
kind of money.
So so I would I would point out
is a consideration as well.
No not the staff.
I heard something mentioned
sorry I was trying to help the I
just used in the five million so
we did that
I was just talking about how
much you you help us with our
our forestry projects but also
to keep in mind that you are
work around for the anti
donation clause and as more
federal money roll in your
capacity that's so water
conservation district to handle
the amount of work we might have
available just for consideration
on this committee so when yeah.
And Senator Campos I guess one
of things I will mention is in
order to help with this capacity
and I heard this mention
yesterday with the New Mexico
association of conservation
districts does is hire a lot of
retired folks they're trained
they're educated they have the
capacity I believe I have like
about thirty retired contractor
retired folks including of the
deputy state forester it is
retired putting the BLM director
from the state your line
management and then a big
country of of retired USDA NRCS
and that's why we're able to get
this money on the ground and
then when we started bringing
this is taking money we actually
hired our own engineer so we
have our own engineers that we
can use for any of these
projects and we've been kind of
where we need if we we have a G.
I. S. firm that we've hired
sometimes we have to hire
certain mileages for certain
projects to get different parts
of need but done we're actually
doing our clearances for the
bureau of land management and
USDA NRCS we've got contracts
with the love and private
archaeological forms so we have
figured out that we have a lot
of capacity in the beauty of it
is we run the money through the
local conservation district they
hire local so we're putting this
money back into the rural
communities which I really love
so thank you appreciate it.
the other the other thing I
would like to touch on is we
have seen at at engine minerals
a dramatic uptick in the re use
of produced water in the oil
field which means a decrease in
the use of fresh water in the
oil field so to to the the topic
of sort of available water
especially in southern New
Mexico the industrial use of
water in especially southeast
New Mexico has is going down the
industrial use of fresh water
excuse me.
so the I mean so that's.
The the biggest point that John
made was water sort of touching
everything that we do I mean
that's that's true it at and
there to whether it's forestry
state parks or conservation in
mining right like that this
water issue the quality and
quantity and use and we use is
sort of fundamental to what we
DO and so I would I would
encourage as you've encouraged
us to continue part of this
conversation I would encourage
this the subcommittee to
continue to engage with us as
well thank you secretary but if
Senator come on another topic
but I know earlier when SJ was
talking about the bills and I
don't remember which one there's
one person funding goes to DFA
in just to try to help with
capacity for local governments
to do like grant writing they
had I think about I would say
million dollars last year the
solar water districts try to
access some of that as political
subdivisions and they were
basically told it could only go
to cities and counties which
should have been true so
basically I want to I hope that
you guys can stress that this
should also be used for a sake
isn't mutual domestic since all
of our districts and those local
delivery systems because I think
if they could access some of
this money to write for some of
these you know access some of
the federal and state funds that
would definitely help us out so
thank you.
Anything else on.
So so just a I'm gonna go to us
today and we're gonna wrap this
part up and in that what I'd
like to do with the state
engineers to work through you I
ask that all of you insure that
we have your contact information
because now we're going to go
ahead and start some of the
intricacies of what we can maybe
put together and before our
presentation before the full
Senate finance committee so
that's that's going to be
crucial the series of meetings
have definitely assisted us to
better understand what what year
fifty of what you're facing and
how we're gonna go ahead and
deal with the complexities but
more than that and most
importantly
this definitely has not only
been a very sincere conversation
but one to those that have been
listening and paying attention
to it hopefully this will serve
as the ground work if you will
as we move forward so that
people do understand that for
this particular legislative
session water definitely has
risen to the top as one of the
one of the priorities so just J.
if you would please just kind of
what we're going to be some of
the next steps that you see and
then from there we'll close this
out and again I thank each and
everyone of you for making the
long trips over and more
importantly for taking your time
to to have the discussion I
think thank you Mr cherry I'd
like to echo thanks to all of
you and everyone for showing up
this is been really helpful I'm
just one point briefly before we
adjourn I wanted to see if I
could get some clarification
from the lower Rio Grande people
on page built specifically
supporting the office of the
state engineer there supporting
this legislation I believe
there's for five of them and I
don't know if people know the
numbers or the names or anything
but I know that a lot of the
recommendations were for bill
supporting the office of the
state engineer so I was
wondering if someone could list
that specific legislation thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair right I can
only do this on a very high
level there are of course
there's the main budget request
there's a thirty million dollar
request for river channel
maintenance habitat restoration
local low flow conveyance and so
on within the middle Rio Grande
that thirty million dollars is
specifically supported by the
lower Rio Grande group here
because if we get water to the
reservoir then there is a
special request for seventy five
million dollars in the lower Rio
Grande for water treatment and
offer recharge projects and it's
generally for implementation of
the settlement under the Rio
Grande project and that is a
five year request.
The the support for it for the
full seventy five million as
quickly as we can get it is
because the federal government
has a short window and we
understand that that's through
fiscal year twenty twenty four
but if they can get the bulk of
the funds dedicated in fiscal
year twenty twenty three which
would and for them in October
that's our best shot at
leveraging those funds so if in
a with the with the Federal
short window what are you
talking about another twelve
months or or is it less than
that I'm I'm talking about
through October of this year
guaranteed and then hopefully
into fiscal year twenty twenty
four we can still potentially
leverage more but the bulk of it
has to come up front which is
why we're so we're here to
support the full seventy five
requests now for the lower Rio
Grande to ensure we can lock
down the Feds because what we
will work on throughout the rest
of this year is bringing the
rest of the community to the
table to figure out what they
can cost here contribute or
otherwise add to it to get that
number is highest possible
because then the budget has said
will match whatever that is so
if I just see can bring some as
he can bring some P. B. A. D.
the farmers groups the city's
mutual domestics everybody can
come together than they will add
that up and give us the matching
to that so the higher we get the
state engineers number for the
lower Rio Grande the better off
we are overall and and we
understand that we have the
potential to your window but
we're being told right now
treated as a one year window.
And I I think Mr state engineer
those are the two direct
requests that we're here to
support you on can you correct
me if there's more when we were.
In the I. C. I. P. which is the.
Regional fifty million ten
million for five years to the
kind of at the bottom table
there for that that's for the
water acquisition.
Rio Grande Papa for
sustainability that's right yes
the LFC is already up
Appropriated are asking to
appropriate to thirty million of
the fifty so.
But the other one.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
thank you madam Mr chairman
that's what we need
with that it seems like we're
moving towards kind of zooming
out on how we actually achieve
this regionalization of water
systems that we're talking about
here which I think is really
helpful
at this point I'm not sure if we
know for certain when the next
meeting will be scheduled but if
anyone would like to receive
communications about these are
continue to participate again
please give your contact
information to me or to us on
you know the finance committee
secretary what I need to receive
updates on the agenda so you can
be here for these meetings and
continue to be very valuable
resources so again thank you
very much and the yeah well you
you Mr so if I may what we're
gonna be doing now in
preparation of if you will the
presentation of the full Senate
finance committee it will be
gathering data there's other
things that you all I would like
to share some of the offline
pieces that we we may still need
to talk about it see if we can
start to hone in on what this
this piece of legislation slash
support for some of the other
pieces of legislation is going
to look like so that's going to
be on going and if I may just in
front of all of you to our state
engineer thank you very much and
I I believe we need to start
having those conversations how
these pieces are going to come
together and it's not to
discount any of the agencies
it's just to say as we start to
coordinate more and more it'll
be through the state engineer
and then and then like I say
that all the pieces are going to
be very important as we as we
work on this we'll try to give
you an update as we go along it
may not be through one of the
conversational meetings that
we've been having but within
that will set if you will a
parameter in terms of your the
updates here some of the things
that we need we may need
additional input but that way at
least you all aware of what
we're dealing with we don't have
much.
Time the session as we deal with
it so we're not talking about
two or three weeks out we're
talking about days as we deal
with it thank you all very much
