Yeah.
We're here for budget cuts,
right?
That's what secretary we're here
from budget cuts, right?
No or you're in the wrong place.
We're gonna try to go through
this pretty quickly.
We do have a
Dinner date tonight.
Specialists hold on.
Mexico School for the place.
We're gonna do something.
Where's our president for New
Mexico School for playing.
Where's Patty?
Patty.
I wanted to tell you, Thank you
for your service and for helping
all those kids and we appreciate
you working for the schools and
the schools are blind. You're
retiring, so
We appreciate everything you've
done for those kids. So December
Yeah. Thank you, Mr President.
Just want to say thank you to
We've had two wonderful
presidents back to back and then
in seven years, I can't believe
it's been seven years.
But the improvements and the
things have gotten done on that
campus and especially with the
actual core, breaking them and
teaching the kids.
Has been phenomenal, and I just
want to personally thank daddy
for her work as well. Um, we're
gonna miss you. So let me know
we'll start breaking in the new
person as soon as you possible
can thank you, Mr President.
You're in charge of janitorial
services until the president is
hired.
Connor. You wanna start? Believe
me.
Connor.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. My name
is Connor Jorgensen. I'm the
LFC analyst for higher education
with me are Nicole Macias of the
Department of Finance and
Administration and Secretary
Stephanie Rodriguez of the
Higher Education Department. I'm
going to give a very brief
overview of this packet.
Um Hmm. Skip some of the
background items And if you
Would turn with me to page
Six there. You're going to see
the
Budget recommendations that were
heard in HFC on the 23rd the
LFC recommendation was adopted.
I'm just going to go over a
couple of the highlights here.
Essentially what you were
looking at in the base budget
was a 3% increase recommended by
the executive and 1.5% increase
recommended by the LFC. However,
the LFC included, uh to targeted
investments. One for $3 million
for students supports and
another $7 million.
Um, for faculty compensation.
When you go down to line
Ah 31.
You'll see the other
categorical. This is a roll up
of all of your research and
public service projects as well
as categorical expenditures.
Those recommendations are pretty
close. Overall. Um, be executive
recommended a 1.5% increase
while the LFC recommended a 1.1%
increase. One other item of note
on this is that
The Legislature asked HDD LFC
staff and D F A, um, as well as
higher ed institutions last year
to take another look at our PSP,
Um, to take a look at what in
our PSP was, actually I n g
functions and what could be
rolled into the base? Um, that
examination was done.
You can see online 14 titled our
PSP Roll up there is about $9
million across all of the, um,
institutions that was moved from
a normal dedicated
LP SP Line item into the I N G
base. No R P S P s were actually
cut or had their funding
diminished, but it was moved up
into the base.
If you'll turn with me in the
packet to page uh, 10, you can
actually see this is the list of
all of those R P S. P s that
were recommended for inclusion
into the I N G base. They're all
laid out on that one page for
you and then
On page 12. That's the detail of
the higher education
institutions that has every
single line item that is going
to appear in G A from I n G down
to categorical and all of the
individual R P S. P s.
Um, those peach colored lines
that are zeros that is the R P.
s p that was rolled into the I n
G, um base.
Finally, if you
We'll turn to page 22. That's a
summary of performance measures
and the proposed consensus
targets for all of the measures
that are recommended to appear
in the General Appropriations
Act.
And Mr Chairman, that, um
Includes a presentation on the
on the H E I and H D budgets
like to turn it over to Mr
Macias for additional comments.
Do we know what the house did
yet, Connor?
Yes, Mr Chairman. They went with
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is Nicole
Macias and I would like to
mention a couple of items that
were in the executive
recommendation that were in the
LFC recommendation. There was
about $11.9 million increase for
the opportunity Scholarship
500,000 for the anti hazing
2.25 million for the tribal
technical assistance centers.
Which was a mandate by House
Bill 280 that was signed in the
2023 legislative session. Um
$1.2 million for maintenance and
operations for the Longitudinal
data system.
200,000 for adult education
testing materials and 100 and
50,000 for instructional
materials. This breakout can be
found on page seven of your
packet. Um and that's within P
505 and 506 and the executive
also includes $1 Million for
mental and behavioral health
initiatives and within the LSC
recommendation.
Um, there was an inclusion of
only two FTE. Um, the executive
recommended five FTE to be able
to assist the department in
financial aid, oversight,
Institutional finance and the
Agent Indian Education Division.
Um, also, I would like to
mention that within the
executive recommendation we
requested
$5 million for the Teacher Loan
repayment program that was not
included in the LFC wreck. Um
and then, lastly, as far as
supplementals for the special
schools, I would like to mention
that the executive recommended
1.3 million for enemy 600,000
for the school for the blind and
visually impaired and 250,000
for school for the death first
supplementals that weren't in
the LFC can recommendation.
And that concludes my remarks.
Mr Chair.
Thank you, Secretary.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. Thank
you for allowing me to present
today for the record. I'm
Stephanie Rodriguez and I'm the
secretary of the Higher
Education Department. And I
promise you I have this 3 to 4
minutes. I timed it, Mr Chair
Over the past two years, New
Mexico has experienced Montana
monumental growth in the number
of students pursuing degrees and
certificates across our 29
public colleges and
universities thanks to and for
its historic improved
investments by Governor Luhan,
Grisham and you as a
legislature, New Mexico created
a successful state response.
It's to declining enrollments
over the last decade, and we are
leapfrogging over other states
and college affordability and
access.
I'll be referring to this
handout for my presentation
today that you should already
have. Let's start with
Page one, the average enrollment
this year across all higher
education institutions sectors
was 2.3% with the highest
enrollment growth actually
amongst the comprehensive
universities this year and New
Mexico's enrollment post
pandemic has increased by nearly
7%. Since 2021. Please draw your
attention to graph one
cumulative degree production
Since 2018 we as a state have
awarded nearly 4,145,000 degrees
ranging from certificates all
the way to graduate degrees.
During the last academic year
alone over 29,000 students
completed a credential and
increase of nearly 9% over the
previous year. And as you can
see on that graph, the highest
rate of completion is within
stem and healthcare fields at
46,700, followed by humanities
and general education at 43,400
like to turn your attention
quickly over two full time
employees and vacancies. The
higher Education Department
oversees over $1.5 billion in
state capital and federal
dollars.
And serves over 110,000 students
and 25,000 faculty across 31
educational institutions. Now
our current vacancy rate is at
an all time low of 9%,
representing just five
vacancies, all of which are
posted in the process of review,
interviewing or awaiting an
offer.
As we have mentioned before, our
agency will need further support
in several areas to achieve
staffing capacity. Therefore, we
are questioning five FTE and
institutional finance financial
aid in Indian education. Now
let's turn over to page two over
42,000 students are benefiting
from the opportunity Scholarship
of those students awardees were
most likely to be Pell Grant
recipients. Hispanic students,
female students or age 24 or
younger in the fall. 2023
semester, Additionally, in a
preliminary assessments
Students receiving the
opportunity scholarship were
more likely to be retained from
fall to spring compared to their
peers.
I also want to highlight that
nearly half of all current
opportunity scholarship
recipients are pursuing a
certificate and degree program,
career technical education,
something that we don't hear a
lot, but it's absolutely true
An impressive 10,000 students
took advantage of the
opportunity scholarship and
attended classes in the summer
and we are requesting a small
increase to accommodate the
summer semester totaling 157.9
million.
Additionally, we have increased
applications to our loan
repayment programs by over 600%.
In this past year, we broke a
record with the health
Professional Loan Repayment
program awarding over 700 New
Mexicans with loan repayment
assistance, whereas in the
previous year we only had 44 now
that we have shown that there is
interest in our programs. We are
requesting $15 million for the
Teacher Loan Repayment program.
15.1 million for the health
Professional Loan Repayment
program and 1 Million for the
minority doctoral loan
repayment.
Program, which has historically
been underfunded.
On Page three. We have
highlighted other projects we
will be working on in the
interim that we have already
shown you significant gains on
us as a state, one of which is
college basic needs and a survey
conducted in partnership with
the University of New Mexico
Basic needs project. We saw some
numbers that are really hard to
see. And you'll see that in your
booklet. Therefore, we are
asking for continuous support
and addressing the needs of our
students. We have a proven track
record in providing support
Since 2020. The agency has
awarded more than 1 million
projects aimed at improving food
security.
On our campuses and we have
already impacted 15,000 students
are $2 million request will
actually allow us to support 30
to 60,000 students.
House Bill 280 was passed last
year to establish to tribal
education, technical assistance
centers. Thank you for your
guests vote and your support in
that the centers will focus on
supporting tribes nations in
Pueblo, spend down state funding
develop, culturally and
linguistically relevant
materials, enhanced recruitment
and retention and professional
development of indigenous
educators and more to support
the intent of the law, though we
are requesting a recurring
appropriation
Of $2.25 million so we can
continue this work. Also, we
have heard the news related to
hazing in New Mexico. We need to
put a stop to this practice and
ensure students on our campus is
feel safe and supported at all
times. The higher Education
Department will be putting
forward an anti hazing bill this
session. Mexico is only one of
five states who does not have a
law in the book when it comes to
hazing.
In the portal will ensure that
students can report instances of
hazing and receive support and
half a million dollars will
allow us to set up the portal.
provide two FTE administer and
provide statewide trainings for
administers faculty
administrators, faculty staff,
athletic programs and other
student programs. I have two
more, I promise I'll be done
soon as part of the sea tube C
two I t budget request we are
requesting 3.725 million for the
New Mexico Longitudinal data
system.
The system will help state
agencies policymakers like
yourself. Educators and families
identify student challenges
early on make targeted
investments and practices that
actually work for new Mexicans
in our students and not in your
packet, but equally important to
all of us are a couple of things
1st $200,000 for high school
equivalency testing vouchers and
150,000 for upgraded
instructional materials for our
adult education programs in New
Mexico.
Both of which have been
instrumental to the success is
we are seeing in completions and
we also had a record breaking
year in adult education with an
11% increase in our student
enrollment. Additionally, we
know our state's workforce is
6000 nurses, short and
investment of $10 Million for
nurse expansion will support
existing faculty and potentially
recruit new faculty members and
roll 400 new students and
support nearly 7000 students who
are already in our programs
across the state and in closing,
Mr Chair and members.
I want to mention that my agency
colleagues are here with me
today, ranging from directors,
the deputy secretary I was
recently on maternity leave, so
I need a lot of support. I'm
still getting up to speed so
they may help me in some of my
responses today and we now stand
open to questions. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you, Mr Steinberg.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Madam
Secretary. Welcome back. Is that
it? Welcome back.
Um, sorry. I walked in a minute
later. I just have a question
about our region system. And all
of you probably know that I've
been
Working for a long time to
implement the same system that
we use for our judge Chefs for
our university regions, which is
that we create nominating
commissions to really expand the
pool of potential regions and
Interview them and select the
most dynamic people to be
university regions and
I don't know how how the
administration feels about the
proposal, but but I'm not gonna
ask you that you can tell me if
you want. But that's actually
not the question. I was going to
ask you. You know, I had I just
by chance, ran into a previous
higher education secretary Today
we were talking about this
subject.
And we talked about the issue of
training regions, and my
question to you is, is there any
training that gets given the
university regions when they get
selected? Mr Chair? Thank you
for that question. Senator Stein
born So we have a consortium.
It's the higher Education
Regions Committee or council,
And they actually have been
putting on trainings every year
for their regions. However, it
is the responsibility of the
higher education Department as
well.
Since we are very low at
capacity right now, it's been
really hard. It's usually are
institutional finance division
in our general counsel who
provides the trainings or
myself. Personally, I've done
three actually, since being
secretary. We've been doing them
on a request basis so of an
institution reaches out to us.
We will actually go to their
community and provide a day long
or two day long training, the
most recent that we did was Miss
Ellen's Community College last
year.
Thank you else has requested
training just curiosity.
New Mexico Highlands, Luna
Community College Southeast New
Mexico can can college and then,
of course, Mesa Lynn's community
College off the top of my head.
So I know there's a lot more
colleges than that.
In New Mexico.
Well.
I think this is really
important, moving forward
regardless of what happens with
Senator could I sample is either
reform on Regent Systems.
Um
People board members, just like
board members who are running on
profit need to learn how to do
it if you're running a higher
education institution you really
need to understand.
The role of the fiduciary the
role of being independent. The
role of
Using your voice and knowing who
your boss is and all these kinds
of things, so I I anyway, we
just encourage that and it's
thought I'd follow up. Have
other questions. That's all I
have right now.
Senator Hempel. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
for your presentation and Connor
for your work and lfc staff and
congratulations on the new baby
and welcome back.
So and I also want to thank you
for your work on the
opportunity Scholarship program,
which represents a generational
change or new Mexico's families,
and I know how hard you worked
on it and the governor and
appreciate your work. And, of
course, the Legislature that
funded Opportunity Scholarship
program, um, to make that a
reality for state.
And secretary. I also like to
thank you for your leadership
regarding the expenditures for
Western Mexico University
looking into that, and we look
forward to continued partnership
with you and the governor.
I'm just to find out what's
happening there. Western New
Mexico University president
responded during the questioning
at the last legislative finance
Committee meeting hearing and
December
And that is spouse was in fact
given estate per purchasing card
and have been using it. Can you
tell us Secretary with HDs
policy is on the state
purchasing card who can be
issued a procurement card?
Mr Chair. I'm going to defer to
director Gerald Homie.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator for the question.
Um, so the higher Education
department follows the
Department of Finances,
Financial control processes for
use of purchasing cards or P
cards.
Um
That That process is defined by
the Department of Finance. Uh
and it extends to, uh to state
agencies that fall under the
governance of the Department of
Finance and Administration.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for that response, so just to
clarify can a spouse of a state
employee be issued a p card?
Under the guidance for the state
of New Mexico and our state
agencies under the procurement
code, and that they cannot
And what would the consequences?
Mr Chairman and secretary be if
an employee was provided a P
card to his or her spouse?
She likes Joseph.
Mr Chair. I'm going to defer to
Gerald.
Director, Honey Mr Chair,
Senator, Just just to clarify on
your question. Um, what would be
the consequences if a state
employee were to be issued? Uh,
P card or apps state employee or
a state agencies spouse be
issued A P card. So the policy
The department. The Department
of Finance currently has is no p
card can be, um, um, provided to
any non state employee.
And, uh,
The the penalties for that, Uh
Are outlined in the policy. Uh
and it lists up to termination.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and it's
if I'm not
Mistake and it's also
reimbursement of that. Whatever
charges were charged that were
not authorized or done in the
correct way, including 18%
interest is that correct?
Mr Chair? Yes. That is one of
the things under our code under
the Department of Finance.
There's also the immediate
removal of the procurement card
for the cult cardholder in
possession, and we all have to
follow the state personnel
office disciplinary procedures
when that happens.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary for that
response and his H E D had a
chance to investigate the
situation at WFMU Specifically,
Mr Chair. Yes, we are looking at
that. We're actually working in
coordination and collaboration
with other state agencies that
oversee that. So General
Services Department and
Department of Finance and
administration to see what the
penalties would be for a higher
education institution that
receives state funding in the
state of New Mexico.
Mr Chair. Thank you, Secretary.
Do you know who provided the
president's spouse with the P
card?
Mr Chair. I do not do that know
who that person is, but
typically it's overseen by the
chief financial officer of the
institution in the staff below
them. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Secretary. Are you aware yet of
what type of purchases were made
by the president's spouse under
her P card?
Mr Chairman going to defer to
director Honey, who was one of
the individuals who did the
review?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, we in our initial
request for documentation
Western did provide us with all
of the supporting documentation
related to the use of the P
card.
We do have records that show
what the purchases were that
were made with the P card.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for that response. Um is
that information that could be
available for the Finance
Committee to review Mr Chair?
Um, um
Senator? Yes, that that
information is is available for
for
For radio and Mr Chair. If I can
add to that we also have that
outlined in the letter that is
dated January 5th of this month
with some of that information in
the letter. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Secretary and
secretary of the department of
had higher. Ed indicated that in
that letter, I believe it was
that letter to you and, um, W
and M you that the department is
concerned about the university
leadership.
Um, that they failed to perform
a cost benefit analysis to
justify the reported $100,000
that was spent on international
travel over the past five years.
And secretary You requested that
a cost benefit analysis be
conducted and shared with you.
Has the university responded to
your request.
Mr Chair. They did respond to
the request. However, they did
not provide that information in
the response in that letter.
Mr Chairman, Secretary. What
additional steps is H e D
considering
Mr Sheriff, I can ask
clarification in relation to
this instance or as a whole with
our higher ed institutions. Mr.
Turn secretary and specifically
in terms of the cost benefit
analysis for the international
travel, Mr. Chair. Um, Senator,
we are actually going to be
responding to the letter that
was sent to us last week on
Friday, and that will be one of
our concerns that is listed in
that letter.
Thank you. Um and Mr Chairman
and Secretary on behalf of the
Committee and myself. I really
want to thank you for your
leadership. And, um your
continued partnership looking
into this issue and grateful to
have you back and
Look forward to working with you
moving forward. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Mr. Chair if I can
just stay really fast in my
absent Deputy Secretary Patricia
Trujillo and director Honey did
step up. So I'm appreciative of
the work they did before I came
back. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
Yes. I also want to thank the
acting secretary who was gone
and
During your absence. Thank you,
Mr Chairman.
Aaron Padilla.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary, and I think your
director might want to come
back. Yeah, so
Well, I just know that you know,
and you sent me some photos the
other day. How beautiful babies
and just wonderful
Congratulations. Um, I know
you've been just
Jumping for joy since he got
back, and so just make sure you
spend all the time you need to
with those babies. I promise
That's the most important thing
is, you know, Uh, Mr Chairman in
Madam secretary, and whoever
you'd like to have answer. I'm
just trying to help out there,
But, yeah, you know, I'm trying
to wrap my head around sort of
this whole thing that we've been
reading in the papers and data
that we've been seeing letters
We've been seeing in some
analysis that we've been seeing.
And I am extremely concerned as
well. I mean, so when you look
at the issue that is purported
to have occurred here is this
I'm guessing this isn't
commonplace across higher
education in New Mexico. I mean,
is there is any sort of
comparisons you want to give us
to where this was? You know,
these things were done in other
locations. Or is this solely a
western New Mexico, you know,
situation, Mr Chair based on our
annual reviews of budgets right
now, we can tell you this is
exclusive to Western. However, I
do want to say that we've been
performing site visits under my
leadership and Governor Liu Hong
Grisham's leadership with
director Ho Neely.
Eating these of the institutions
to find issues that are arising
on our campuses and provide
support to correct or mitigate
those issues in any way we see
necessary, so right now it's
exclusive to that one
institution. We do have a site
visit coming up this year at
several other institutions We
completed five last year.
And we will continue to do those
and hold institutions
accountable under the confines
of New Mexico State law.
Appreciate that. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Madam Secretary. I'm
so happy to hear you say that
because these are very critical
matters. Not only are we, you
know, educating new Mexico's, um
You know, students at the higher
education level and what they're
there to learn about becoming a
doctor or a teacher or whatever.
There's other things they're
learning as well. And that is
not to do these things that were
being that we're concerned about
right now. And it is what it is.
You know, we were elected for
this very purpose of calling
these things and and and trying
to understand what's going on
here.
Um, I am very concerned just
because of the math that I've
seen. You know, I'm a business
owner, and I'm not going to be
making decisions to lay people
off and and and and go on. You
know, uh, what appeared to me to
be, you know, very lavish.
Trips all over the world if any
of that's accurate, told, you
know, furniture purchases
flowers, you know, my girlfriend
would be thrilled to fight spent
that much money.
Flowers for her. You know, I
hope she's not listening. Um,
you know all the while we're
laying people off. That's just
completely unacceptable.
And I'm also, you know, been
made aware that I guess there
was
Was it Was there a PR firm hired
to manage this issue for the
university for the, uh, Does
anybody know anything about
that?
Mr Chair. I may have to defer to
director honey, but I am not
aware of a PR firm related to
this issue.
Hmm.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator for the question. Um, we
are not aware of a PR firm being
hired to address this issue.
Well, thank you, Mr Chair and
Madam Speaker. Let's let's take
a look at that. I think we
should. Also, while this is
getting sorted out, let's just
kind of
Maybe have some oversight and
some, you know, pumping the
brakes here and having some
additional sign offs and
approvals before anything else,
you know, goes off the rails
here because it sounds like
there was some seriously bad
judgment happening in the
president's office there, and we
can't allow that to continue.
These are these are dollars that
are going out the door while
we're, you know, laying in
furloughing and, you know
employees.
We have to put food on their
tables two and so I'm very
concerned about that.
Um, appreciate you immediately
jumping on this issue and doing
something about it. I just felt,
you know, in my in my role as a
represent, you know, people that
go to that school and, um, just
felt like I need to say
something about it so we can't
have this continue.
That's one thing and then you
know, I am very interested in.
um you know the administration
or somebody coming forward and
talking to us about this s J. R
two by Senator Stein, born and
others on how how we go about
the selection of regions just
seems to me like, you know,
we're trying to reform a lot of
different things. And now we
have sort of something that's
happened here that nobody's
happy about.
And I hope that it gets solved,
you know, quickly.
Um, but I hope that you'll take
a look at that and provide us
with some guidance on what that
might do to the higher education
scheme or schema, or, you know,
overall, you know, not scheme
schema. Um, you know, here in
New Mexico because we have to
have the most qualified people
starting at the region's level
all the way through, you know to
to the entry level employee at
these higher education
institutions.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Burke. Thank
you, Mr Chair. And and I
appreciate that, I hear, um,
that there's supplemental in
there in the budget for
The staff at
In New Mexico school, Visually
impaired and blind, deaf school
and Naomi
Ah for this year's, um
Increase that they did not
receive is is that in? Where is
that, Mr Mr Chair, Senator Bert.
The answer is yes. So in the LFC
recommendation, there is a 4%
increase in competition
compensation that's covered at
100% for the special schools.
However, in fy 28. They did not
receive any compensation so they
did request supplementals for
that in the amount of
1.3 million for Niemi 600,000
for school for the blind and
visually impaired and 250,000
for the school for the death
death. You said fy 20 fy 24. So
those are supplementals for F
What? What did I say? Yeah. Ah,
I wish going backwards. 18. I
apologize, Mr Chair, confused as
it is.
But I appreciate that, and
Mr President, or Mr Chairman,
didn't I thought when we passed
the increases. I heard the
executive use the term We only
use the term for all the
employees. Why? What was the
justification for cutting out
the staffs?
Or was any justification ever
given what
I would like an explanation as
to why they were not included.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Senator. So
When the compensation amount is
calculated. It's calculated
based on the proportion of the
general fund.
In each entity.
With the with respect to the
special schools. The vast
majority of their funding comes
from the comes from permanent
fund distributions.
So that General fund proportion
they get
Is really small. It's it's 20%
or less. So, um
It's it's in keeping with
legislative practice.
Historically, that
Those amounts are
Reduced to reflect that so in FY
25 realizing this is a problem.
That calculation was redone, um
and calculates the special
schools as if 100% of their
funding was received from the
General fund.
So that's 4% going forward will
be 100% paid from the General
fund. But there was a deficit
created in 24 and Mr Chair if I
can. The other issue that we saw
last year were significant
increases to the public schools
and their compensation for
teachers and educators. That did
not happen for our special
schools. Unfortunately, so,
although they received
compensation increase, like
everybody else across state, the
state
They did not receive increases
for their educators, which
created a lot of competition
with the public school system.
So we're trying to make that
hole with this request and the
executive budget.
And I appreciate that. I hope
that it comes to fruition
because you know when we do
things in this committee, and we
do things as Legislature with
regards to budget, all that and
they say all employees, I mean,
my assumption was that they
would be included in something
like that. I think that's the
anticipation. We all had.
From this bill, so I was a
little taken aback when when I
heard that they were not
included in this. So I'm hoping
Mr chair that we can make up the
difference from last year and
make sure that they are included
going forward because I think
that's the right thing to do.
And Mr Chairman and senator just
to be clear.
What happened is those raises
were given. Um, the employees
received the Rays. But in so
giving that raise
A deficit was created,
essentially because pay is now
growing at a rate that is faster
than those permanent fund
distributions. So that's um so
That's the financial condition,
but the employees did receive
the Rays. And now the question
is
On the financial side. Um,
should
Non recurring appropriations
being made for the current year.
Assuming that it's taken care of
going forward. Okay, um
And no offense to anyone appear
just like a little bit of a
shell game going on here, but
But the bottom line is, I think
was the intent of this committee
as well as the Legislature and
make sure everyone was covered,
including these three schools
and their employees. And I'm
hoping going forward that they
will be included in all of these
things without
Any detriment to their all rob
budget. I think they just just
they should be treated just like
any other school and make sure
that their whole just like the
rest of the, uh, the employees
in the stand in Mexico, That's
all have, Mr Thank you.
Thank you. Mr Chairman is a
follow up to Senator Padilla's
line of questioning. I think
we'd better be careful. I know
there's a lot of discussion
right now of reforming the
region selection process. You
just have to be really careful
that if we require meaningful
qualifications or experience
that's going to discount any
former legislator from serving
as the region and we're done.
But, um, I did have a couple of
questions for you, Madam
Secretary Senator Diamond.
Expect your resignation from
this committee but today by five
o'clock there's 100 and 12 of us
that are qualified. Then, um, I
have a couple questions when it
comes to the details of this
budget on here we have, um,
you're asking for $2 million for
college basic needs, and I saw
that in the breakdown of the
budget and I still don't have my
head wrapped around what That
means.
It's to include housing, food
transportation and childcare,
all of which are meaningful
investments. But I I know of at
least $25 million that we have
going into food banks. We have
rental assistance programs. We
have all sorts of transportation
money out there. Why are we
funneling $2 million for higher
ed than to do really kind of the
same thing? And then my next
follow up question would be
How are you? How is that money
distributed? How are you?
identifying those students that
that qualify for transportation
needs or housing needs.
Mr. Chair, Senator. Thank you
for the question and
congratulations. I heard you got
married. And so I just wanted to
say that I appreciate you, Um as
far as college basic needs are
concerned. And you said, Why
aren't we pulling from the 25
Million pot? And where are we
doing? Specifically 2 million to
the higher Ed department and I
could see it looks like
duplication. But oftentimes are
college students don't know that
they qualify from Sorbonne for
some sort of assistance and the
first line of, um
I want to say the first line of
communication, they will go. Is
there a college campus and that
will be the student resource
center that maybe financial aid
that maybe advisement, So we
want to have some sort of
emergency fund at our higher
education institutions where
they can decide how they would
disperse that and how they would
administer it. But as long as it
goes to these kind of needs, a
student doesn't have to go
through a lengthy state
application process to receive
food doesn't have to go through
a lengthy application process to
receive rental assistance they
can actually receive.
Assistance right there. Oh, and
additionally, you could qualify
for state assistance. Let me
walk you through that process,
so that's the intent of having
it live at the higher end
department. Specifically that 2
million as far as how do we
disperse that?
Many to our institutions. We do
require a request for
applications process at the
higher Education Department, all
31 of the institutions can apply
for that. Um, and in that
process, they proposed what they
would use that money for and
then we go through and we score
fairly and we picked the best
ones. Um, right now our current
allocations range anywhere from
50,000. Because our rural
schools they can't spend 250,000
budgets in a matter of a fiscal
year, so 50,000 maybe more smart
for them all the way.
2 250,000 for some of our
largest schools like you and M
and C and M, who could spend
that money right away.
But that's typically the process
and why we have that set aside
for the higher Ed department.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I know
that a lot of campuses at least
speaking for New Mexico state
have have on site food banks or
some emergency assistance
facilities. Is the money not
better spent trying to get
representatives that income
support or whatever it may be in
those student unions that when a
student comes forward and has
needs, I mean $2 million isn't
going to go.
Very far. And yet it's still
another big chunk out of the
budget that we could save.
Wouldn't it be better just to
have a representative who can
speak to the resources and the
and the that are available at a
statewide level and help them
with the paperwork? I mean,
This is still just kind of a
band Aid.
Out there. I'm afraid the money
would just sit there. If if I'm
not, And I guess we can continue
this conversation offline just
seems like we're still not
meeting the overall needs that
continues her student.
And I don't know if it's really
making a huge difference. I
guess I almost also wanted to
ask along the same questioning
Mr. Mr Chair. We're giving
another million dollars to
mental health needs confused by
every agency that comes before
us needs their own pot of money
for mental health. Um, you know,
I d O H isn't coming in and
providing that's that's their
will house and providing those
Those resources online campuses
and then I also wanted to ask
you while I absolutely agree
with the anti hazing efforts to
push back on that you're asking
for half a million dollars in
recurring, recurring, not one
time to establish a quarter
portal to report these
incidents. I can understand that
we have to create maybe a
website and maybe some marketing
money to get that that
information out there to
students of where to report it.
But where in the world would we
need half a million dollars
every single year?
For a website portal.
Mr Chair, Senator. Fair
question. I think this is a
great start forgetting that
established like you had just
said, And then maybe working
with us in the next fiscal are
during the interim to figure out
what does that maintenance of
operation cost to the agency,
and we can figure that out in
the next budget cycle. I would I
would hope it's not half a
million dollars a year, but it
seems like that request should
be a one time asked. Instead of
recurring money on many of these
ask from agencies a one time ask
of $500,000 to get that side up
to get the information out.
But but I just couldn't justify
half a million dollars and
recurring for something that
should be as simple as promoting
a website. Other than that,
we're those really my only
concerns. Thank you for
addressing them directly. And I
will. I will visit with you
about food. Make things too.
Thanks, Mr Chair.
Senator Campos. Thank you very
much, Mr Chair and I really
apologize for missing not only
the presentation, but, uh, some
of the remarks that have been
made regarding one, possibly
more of our institutions.
What I'd like to do is to take a
little different approach and
this is going to be more
platitudinous.
And in dealing with not only the
budget and of course, once HB
two at all.
Uh, comes over to this side and
we continue to take a look at
it.
I understand that we'll be
closely looking at higher as
well as if you will secondary
education and where the
resources need to go, But I want
to just
Breakfast. All this with a
couple of remarks. First of all
the issue does become, and we
all know this is definitely
about our students and about the
future of our state.
And we continuously get into
these types of discussions or
the discourse as we move
forward.
But one of the big concerns that
I continue to observe as we move
forward in this process.
Is. How do we all really work
together?
Have that cooperation in the
communication where
Legislators, people who are our
institutions.
Are able to sit down, possibly
over a sandwich or a cup of
coffee.
And have regular communication.
In regard to how we're going to
go ahead and make things better.
When we start talking about
things like faster as an
example.
There's gonna be changes there.
And those changes, of course,
are going to benefit students.
But are we ultimately prepared
to go ahead and deal with not
only the scholarships the
resources that are available,
how we're going to tie that
together so that we can provide
the best for our students?
But it all goes back then to the
communication as we move forward
and right now
As I continue with the
discussion with Senator Hemphill
Right on this committee you have
over 100 years of educational
experience.
So we know this at all levels.
But in dealing directly with it
again.
Where is that communication that
interaction?
Where we're all in this
together.
And you might say, Well, we've
heard that type of of
communication or speech before.
I'm not preaching.
I'm really concerned about the
future of how we're gonna deal
with education in New Mexico.
And I invite anyone to go ahead
and have that one on one
discussion with me.
Because in education as we've
all dealt with it
There are so many other factors
and as you can see, with the non
recurring and even some of the
recurring resources that are
needed.
Many of our students during will
just say Thanksgiving break.
Don't go home because they're
from out of country or out of
state.
And within that, what they do is
they do the best they can,
either through employment or
other means.
As we all have done.
To try to get through so that we
not only have the degrees, we
also have the experience.
And were given an opportunity
for upward mobility.
But it's really time for us to
think about.
How that consensus can be put
together.
Where we can all understand, and
really, even those that have
been in education for quite some
time.
How do we remind ourselves about
what this future is going to be?
Because if we don't come up with
the solutions
As we continue to go ahead and
see those jobs created another
states.
Where our young people are going
to be educated here.
They leave.
But then what happens to in
leadership positions?
Not only with our educational
institutions, but our hospitals
and so along with the full
commitment needs to be
How do we respect the process?
Continue to go in. Follow us.
We've all talked about
Not only the statute, the
compliance is the rules and rags
but all the way from if you will
or border regions all the way
down to our custodians. Those
people that operate our kitchens
and others.
How each and every one of us is
part of if you will, the team
that educates every individual
who is on any of our campuses.
And I bring this up and I really
applaud the efforts of Senator
Ham fill.
For coming forward and to have
the courage
To state something that she
believes is important to deal
with.
Because it all goes back to
students.
And hopefully this would be a
reflective and reminder to each
and every one of us what our
purpose is, as we deal with our
communities and with our
students.
Our faculty and those people
that continue to take care of
our facilities.
It's really important for all of
us to know.
That it is one family and one
team.
And again as we go through this,
I hope in a short period of
time.
We're able to rectify that,
because as we deal with the
budget
We know that's where the focus
needs to be.
And so, Mr Chair. I really
I apologize for coming at that
at this with this angle.
But the issue as we go forward
is definitely going to be
How do we ensure that resources
are going to be used to benefit
our students?
And that's an emotional piece
for each and every one of us.
Otherwise, you all would be in
the positions that you're in.
And I appreciate you all
listening to this because in it
It's just a reminder in a
reflection
That we are about our next
generation and anyone who's kept
up with the compliance piece in
our state.
It all means what
How are we going to best serve
those interests of the students
that choose to go to our
institutions? Thank you very
much. Mr President, members of
the Senate Finance Committee.
Mr Chair.
Your president to me.
Maybe I'll get my own coins
someday. Yeah, Presidential
coin. Um
And, um, Secretary, You know,
we've taken a big role in the
last couple of years with
opportunity.
Hmm. And we know there's needs
to be continued services were
trying to fund things correctly.
Get them in place later on,
we're not cutting those right.
It's difficult to tell a
student, okay, We're gonna go
down this path.
And then the state of New
Mexico.
Are are reoccurring revenues are
on the decline.
We're gonna start seeing flatter
and flatter budgets as we move
forward, everybody's had a large
increases across the board. We
picked and chosen what we want
to
Target and New Mexico with the
Legislature and the executive
agreed upon and how we want to
process that.
And we can't do everything for
everybody, right?
We're giving you free tuition
there.
That's a lot of burning off of a
student.
Right?
They still may be working jobs.
We've given them flexibility
with that an opportunity given
flexibility if life happens to
him any way, shape or form that
they can go back to school and
still have that opportunity.
There comes a point where you
know you gotta tighten a little
bit.
And as you grow up in life,
you're going to take some
responsibility for what you need
in life, right?
And and I see it a lot in my
area. I mean, they get the pell
grants, and then they go buy a
new car.
They don't
Pay the rent. I mean, they're
college. They're gonna go have a
good time.
Yeah, it's part of growing up.
There's not everything that we
can handle. Should we handle
mental health shirt? HST should
tie those students to Medicaid.
When they first meet and
Medicaid should either get him
into the snap program if they're
under that low level of income,
and we should qualify those
through Medicaid, so now they
have health care as they travel
through the system in and get
that fixed.
Expanding some of these
services.
Or good? I don't know. I went to
military school, so
You know, some of these bills
are going to be a little tougher
to hear than others.
Um
I will tell you.
I don't know why, but, you know,
I went to school nears when I
was kind of forced to go because
my sisters went my dad bought a
house. So then I had to go
right?
Because I had a place to live
and tuition would be a lot
cheaper, and and that's the way
life went.
I mean,
At some point in New Mexico and
I looked back and I go to
Arizona a lot right. It's close
to 20 miles. From where I lived
the Arizona border. It's shorter
for me to be in Phoenix and
Flagstaff that is in Santa Fe.
And so, um
That's kind of warmer weather.
Except maybe not in the summer,
but but I I kind of grew up
there in my college is right. I
see those institutions thriving
so much, right?
Yes, she puts a facility right
next to the mayo, right?
There's a mass expansion buys.
Every school they can online
school. The game part student
population in
And your laid as exactly the
same thing.
And watch that growth and then I
sit here at our universities and
No pun intended. You know,
Senator Compost, but I struggled
at my university.
I struggled at my university
with a guy that hunted Bigfoot.
We found dinosaur bones.
Never found a big football.
Struggle with the guy at my
university that sexually
harassed my wife.
Then you and him do anything
about it? Not shit is still
employed in the, um, system.
It's one. Senator Hemphill makes
these comments about things that
happened at universities.
They're they're critical.
I mean, the money that the guy
took to hunt Bigfoot, but
student money, right?
What happened to my wife was
wrong.
But I didn't
She wanted to handle it, and
that was her. Her decision.
She's a strong woman. She knows
what you want to do. She handled
it in the way she wanted to
handle it, because not me,
because I would have hung the
guy with the rope.
And so at some point, people
have to take a stand for what's
going on.
If we know if this happens to us
This is happening to my wife to
center him phones in the school.
It's happening to students.
And that's where you have to
draw the line.
As elected official.
Our priority is
We're in this game together, and
we're going to protect you.
We're gonna make sure you have
the right directors. You have
the right president. We have
everything in place.
But there are things that happen
in life.
I can go to the DMV and I can
see person struggling line and
and then I'm treated the exact
same way And if I'm treated that
way with an agency, I let the
secretary know.
I'm treated that way. Other
people are treated that way but
to go to higher ed universities,
I
I don't see that vision in the
state.
I don't see that vision of how
am I going to expand more
students? Right? Where am I
going to get these students
from? What do I have to offer?
Online universities here. Here's
my two cents from my own life,
right?
Kid goes to you and M Gallop and
there's a U N m student enrolled
with the U. N m email.
And has a U N m i D.
Signs up for an online course.
Your name 1000. You gotta come
to main campus for training.
I'm pinning unit for two years
and gallop.
Oh, my online courses 1800. All
right, I'm gonna get it from any
U 700 bucks.
50% of the cost.
I don't know why that online
courses double compared to
another state, and that's why
you see these kids.
Completing and graduating doing
online courses across the United
States, right?
It's not just here but across
but a issue and you have a have
made this and maybe Graham
Kenyan to use me this biggest
push to be the biggest online
universities and the biggest on
University of Mexico. I just
don't see that leadership in
some of our higher ed places.
I mean farming tonight. I mean,
that's that's really a community
college. We draw from Colorado a
little bit right.
But the big universities New
Mexico state
You and m right?
I don't see that mass expansion.
Those kids wanted to come to
that university and it's really
struggling to say okay, we're
only going to educate.
Our kids. I see a lot of people
from out of state and across the
states at Northern where Las
Vegas when they were there this
summer, right? There was a wide
variety of kids from across a
lot of places. Not just New
Mexico a lot, especially all of
the athletes who you talk to
you, right?
I don't see that other
universities and I don't know
how we get that, right. The only
way we're gonna grow in and
reduce costs and education is to
get more students.
Students. We have the mark. We
can educate.
And in the better off it is
But it
At some point in this budget,
right? These budgets are
starting to top out and Max out.
It increases are going to get
tighter and tighter.
And university is going to have
to figure out
We have this amount of student
population in our overheads.
This
Where is that going to come in
line, right?
Is that layoffs is that
How do we? How do we regulate
that small schools like Gallup
and Las Vegas and
Two and Las Vegas northern
How are they going to manage the
Uh, branch colleges at MSU and
in Alamogordo has very low pop
student population.
I don't know how we make those
grow.
Hopefully, CT is gonna make
those grow in the next couple of
years, right?
And we're gonna get those
categories and and built up. I
mean, I don't know what fixes
the fixes that problem and that
disparity. And then when you
look at health sciences, you
read that report. 11th Worst
hospital. One of the
One of the 11th worst hospitals
in the US, and then you read
further into the report.
And the only needed 33 employees
for cleanliness.
Out of a billion dollar budget.
You can't tell me that we can't
have a number One hospital.
And somebody throws a fit
because we don't have those
employees for cleanliness, and
we've got to be ranked worst,
getting kind of tired of people
being protective of their areas
and not doing their jobs.
When they do that.
And so
I know we're kind of on a
soapbox today and kind of off
topic, but I think this all
leads into two things and
You know kids in our kids in New
Mexico.
May have the greatest
opportunity from
Cradle to career.
Opportunity. I don't know how
many states that's available in
right.
But if we don't clean up our act
All the way around in certain
areas. We're not going to get
them where they need to be in
life.
And then we're gonna carry him
forever.
And that becomes a struggle.
Part of that is parenting. Part
of that is
Their kids. I mean, 18 year old
kids. Everybody had a little
wild streak and did what they
want, but they come back to
planet Earth around the age 24
when I'm finding out my family,
but you as educators and US
universities
Coming up here and saying giving
us more money for this and more
money for that doesn't really
fix the problem.
It's it's how do we grow our
basin? How do we? How do we make
that?
New Mexico, graduating more
students anyplace else.
But I mean
We can hear horror stories from
Directors. There was one at you
and m a couple of years ago. I
can't remember what the outcome
of that was right. It happens
and that human nature
At the end of the day, we're
going to have to figure out how
to get a handle on it.
How to get our kids in higher
education.
Educated, especially for free.
And they're gonna have to take
out some of life's
responsibilities and not say
Okay, well, I got my education
paid for
Having that opportunity in New
Mexico. I wouldn't have that
opportunity finds another state
so
I may have to take on some
Personal responsibilities and
myself to help take care of
those so
And secretary anything else
before we
Move on Mr Cherry appreciate the
opportunity to make a last
comment. I want to say
enrollment increases were a
state response. Your response.
So you should be proud of that.
It's because of us and our
partnership that we were able to
increase enrollment anti hazing
once again as a state response
between the executive and the
Legislature. We have to respond
to that now, and we are with the
bill.
Now as far as the institutions
and they're spending, I hope
that you have the confidence in
me as the secretary of my
colleagues that are in this room
today that we will hold every
institution accountable for
misuse of state funds, and we
will find holes and you will be
sure to hear about them before
the next 60 Day session when it
comes to the current
investigation and review that we
are doing right now.
And just know that if you have
any questions, you all have my
cell phone. You can contact me
and we'll continue to look into
this matter further. Thank you.
Connor real quick to wrap up on
the 4% increases across the
board. We have the special
schools in their correct
Mr Chairman. That is correct,
And is that the additional, uh
1.1% or 2%?
To allow for the flexibility.
Mr Chairman. It's a 2% Cola and
a 2% at the discretion of the
Receiving entity.
So they can not have a
compression in those
universities. But we do have
that handled right?
Yes, that's correct. And you can
see that detailed on the last
page of your volume. Three.
Okay?
All right.
Next. We have the cup right up.
and my C C and N m A. C. C Mr
Chair.
Oh, Madam Secretary real quick,
You may want to sit down for one
second.
So so they can hear this. There
is a bill in the Legislature
that I did that everyone Adrian
gave me Tell me the one about
amending the definition is a lot
of the scholarship scholarship
packed.
For eligible eligibility. Yes,
Mr Bill, So, you guys are that
If it's uh you may want to go
over. You made it, You know,
Like better than I do. Probably.
Yes, Mr Chair. So this is a bill
that we have been working on in
coordination with your chief of
staff. It will expand
eligibility instead of just fall
and spring semester for
receiving tuition having to do
30 credit hours in the four year
sector, Your students will now
be able to do it across the
whole academic year, meaning
that if they fall out of
eligibility or want to take only
12 credit hours a semester in
the four year sector, they are
able to do that and then make up
for it in the summer semester.
There's also an issue with dual
credit if a student receives too
many credits indoor credit they
will still be able to receive
opportunity. At this point in
time. There is a credit capped
so they can only receive lottery
but not opportunity. Um, there
are a couple of other things
that are in that bill that I
don't know if you want me to
talk about those yet. I think
the CT points making that now
allowable and opportunity. What
else was there?
Oh,
I think the last one was just
pertaining to program semester
so summer semester will not
account against a student's
program semester and they're
allowed to take up to three
summer semesters for their
degree in the last one, Mr
Chair, and I'm sorry I had a
little bit of a moment There is
if your student has only less
than six credit hours.
For them to complete their
associates or bachelors degree
They're now able to do so with
opportunities so that they can
get their credential and
graduate from your institution.
And this is some of the
The problems that we've run
through with even opportunity
and lottery where kids
Online went to summer school in
with lottery. They were not
allowed. They were, they were
maxed out at the number of
credits. They couldn't take it
during the summer, so that
allows that flexibility.
And the dual credit I ran into
that several times in my area
because of dull credit college
kids came out with two
associates and had too many
credits and made them kind of
ineligible for that. So, Mr
Chair That's a testament to your
dual credit program at U. N. M
Gallop that they are getting
students credentials, so that's
a good thing, but we fixed it.
and I'm looking forward to
helping you with this bill.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Who's gonna status started off
man president or much, madam
President.
Madam president, Madam
President, Madam President,
which one You gonna start us
off?
And beard more and from western
New Mexico University, Joe
Shepherd and all turn to my
colleague Monica Tourists would
like to introduce the New Mexico
Association of Community College
members from the eastern New
Mexico University system from
Roswell as Sean Powell.
Really doe. So is Ryan transfer.
The New Mexico State University
Presidents, uh from Alamogordo,
Mark Cow from grants Marlene
Chavez to even in and from you
and M from Gallup Chancellor
Sabrina YSL, Melissa Alamos
Chancellor Mike Holtzclaw from
Taus, Chance American terrorists
and from Valencia Chancellor Sam
dot sumo.
Thank you again for our look
forward to. We're glad to be
here today and look forward to
having further conversation with
you. Um, we've kept our
presentation very short as was
requested. And so the next
patient, I wanted to go over
with you Ashleigh shares with
you what The recommendations
were with the base salary base
funding was for FY 24.
But then includes the executive
and LFC recommendations related
to our base related to what's
already been described as the
roll up for the R P s. P s. You
can see here. What that looks
like, Um, you see the percent
new formula funding and the
various recommendations there.
Um And, uh then some target that
I n g that the lfc included as
part of their recommendation. Um
And so, you know, this is
something that you've already
seen actually presented by by
the leaders before us, And so,
um Ah.
We see that some variations in
the ways in which lfc and the
executive have, uh, talked about
the compensation on our
campuses, and so, um, we'll be
talking a little more about
that, Um, and in a bit, so I'll
turn it over now to Dr Rally to
go over the next slide. Thank
you, Um, Committee members. I'd
like to start by saying that we
all agree that the higher
education funding
recommendations are all very
close, and they're all very
good.
All of them support teaching and
learning. All of them support
student success and also work
for force development.
Um, but we do ask that the
committee begin with the LFC
recommendation as a starting
point. Um, this this request
includes at 1.5% targeted I n g
increase a targeted $3 million
for students Services targeted 7
million for faculty
compensation.
Target total of $4 million in
employee compensation. Um and
0.4% increase for support and
benefits, which is really
critical to us because we all
see steady insurance increases
every single year.
$32.5 million for building
renewal and replacement 5
million for equipment renewal
and then $80 million for
workforce training and community
colleges. Regional universities.
Um, community colleges are
particularly interested in this
because it also includes funding
for non credit workforce
certificates. And this is
something that we're all doing
much more of in response to
community needs, but it's
difficult sometimes to get
funding for that.
With that alternative, my
colleague Monica there. There
are several items that we
thought are not covered or not
fully covered in the
recommendation that we thought
were really important. Um, the
first we want to talk about is
safety and security. Those are
those are both critical and
they've always been important.
Perhaps not more important than
at this point in time, And so
the first thing we want to talk
about is public safety funding.
We request $11 million for
campus of safety and security,
which is really a tough a tough
concern for our students for our
faculty staff and for our
communities, two points in
particular access control is is
central to this request, as is
lighting and lighting in those
areas, exterior lighting in
areas that really are meant to
be to be used for.
For outdoor activities. The
second one is a cybersecurity
request, and this is for 11
point 5,000,001 of the things
that's happened lately is that
post secondary education has
moved into the number one spot
for ransomware events. Um, this
is, uh, expensive in all sorts
of ways when when that happens
in an institution
And so one of the things that's
happened is is lately There's
been a statewide, um, statewide
coalition we're working with the
consortium we're working with.
do it to really try and address
some of these cyber security
issues that that are emerging.
And then there were a couple of
other requests. That Technology
enhancement fund we're asking
for an increase from a $10
million recommendation to $70
million.
This fund is really critical for
the research institutions in
terms of supporting innovative
applied research. And then
finally, as as we've been
talking about for a number of
months now, the opportunity
scholarship has made a huge
difference in terms of a lot of
people being able to get back to
school and so and so we are
supportive of fully funding the
opportunity Scholarship.
And and without alternate over
to Garnett to close this out.
Thank you, and, uh,
Ah, we hope that this
information is valuable to you.
As you think about what it is
that higher education is coming
to, Uh what? We need your
support for and we're grateful
for all that this committee and
the Legislature and the
executive have done to support
higher education in New Mexico,
and we welcome your questions.
About our request.
Thank you for your presentation
will go to committee questions
Could um Senator Stein born
Madam chair and thank you
Presidents chancellors. And did
I miss the title in there? Okay,
that included. All right. Um, I
have a question about campus
security in your request. I
would hope we could all
appreciate how important that
is.
Vitally important in today's
world.
Um
Kids can't feel safe at school.
That's a serious problem that
undermines everything. Everyone
here is
What can you do?
Has the House and House Bill two
gotten closer to your goal.
Your request. Do you know
Mr Chair, and Senator Stein,
born
But house met on the 23rd and is
still worth about one thing I
would note is
You. There is another $32.5
million in, uh, non recurring
for building renewal and
replacement. Um, an eligible use
of which is security, But I
believe it's this funding is on
top of that.
And Connor. Real quick. The
built madam chair, the building
renewal.
Does that? Can those funds be
used for any campus in the state
Are those for new buildings or
Madam Sharon, Senator the
building renewal and replacement
is distributed by the higher
Education Department and can be
used for facilities. Um,
statewide.
Okay, so
Presidents, chancellors, world
leaders. Is this a
Do you need 70 Million on top of
On top of that building renewal
to accomplish effective security
across your schools.
I think Mark Saavedra might
chime into
Um uh, okay. I'll go ahead
Differ to Mark Saavedra. Thank
you, Mr Chair Members Committee,
Mr. Chair, Senator Stein born.
So first of all your first
question, so the there is no
recommendation for our request
for public safety. Sorry, Mark,
I can't hear you. Yes.
Yes, Mr Chair members of the
committee.
It is marked today is your
chair. Not not the other one.
Never have never the other one
and and Senator Stein, born
March 3rd of Mexico Council
University presidents and for
your first question, there was
no recommendation for public
safety in the LFC wreck and so
forth. And right now, we don't
see anything in the house.
Version at this time, But as I
mentioned they're still working
on that. We're hoping to see
some additional funding for
that.
Regards to the $32.5 million
that is B, R and R, but that is
mainly usually four deferred
maintenance of our facilities
and that is made to upgrade and
keep our families safe when it
comes to older buildings and
things like that, and so I think
we have a backlog.
Think of something like close
to you know your mother sport a
million dollars worth of
deferred maintenance. So that
does but we've been by really
appreciate the Legislature for
every year under the leadership
of the secretary and W.
Secretary, homey, and and he
also see we've been putting more
money into B, R and R I have
ever seen every year for the
last three years. I appreciate
that from the committee.
But we tend to not use that for
public safety when that comes to
lighting blocks, things like
that Those would be those are
the things we want separate than
the B R and R. Mr Chairman,
Senator Stein, Mr. Chair. I'm
asking about school security
because one of the requests is
more money to lock be able to
secure the schools and
classrooms and different
technology.
And so, um, I guess with the
backlog, you're mentioning Mark
and B, R and R or whatever it
would to Legislature were to
give more money Could you use
it? Could could you deployed
that was security measures in
the next 12 months? Mr Chairman,
Senator Simon? Absolutely. I
mean very quickly week and just
so you know, we are working with
all the institutions.
And working on building a
statewide collaboration on
public safety and security, and
the lead has been the chief of
police at New Mexico State and
the chief of police, the
University of Mexico but also
like to look at lieutenant
assessment and then also working
with GPS. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator cyborg. Okay,
Well, thank you for this, and
the other priorities are
important, too, but that one
kind of particularly flags
flags.
That's important, so I hope we
can build you up there. Thank
you, Mr
Yeah.
Mr Chair and Senator Munoz. Um
The, um I can. I can tell you
where. So? So in Las Cruces, we
have a number of organizations
that are working on on film and
media.
The community College has a two
year program and and
certificates of completion and
that's kind of one sector the
second. The university has a
Creative Media institute, which
is a bachelor's degree in in
film, and then we have been
working, UM and anti Arrowhead
Park or arid center at New
Mexico State University has been
working with economic
development Department and, um
The film office to see whether
we can finally work out a studio
project. Um, at that site or
close to that location, as far
as I know, they're still in
negotiations and working out
some details. I don't have the
latest information minus
probably three or four weeks
old, but I know that they're
trying to work that out as a
site for films.
Company production companies to
come, but that site would also
function as a site for
internships for students coming
out of both the two year program
and the four year program. But
those three loads those three
entities are all trying to work
together to to really support
film and and and digital media
more broadly as well production
in that part of the state.
Are they working together?
Mr Chair. Yes, Yes, we are
working together. There's a
there's an organization working
together. But are they working
together? Holding hands working
together? I would say where I
would say we're
We don't always have the same
perspective. But I would say
that we're holding hands pretty
well.
Ah, we have regular
conversations. There's a large
group that meets monthly. And
then there's a smaller group
that meets and then they're
They're kind of ad hoc groups
that are working on specific So
Arrowhead Center, for example,
there's an ad hoc group that's
working with, um
With E D D right now, but they
report regularly to to the to
the working groups that are
collaborative group. And what
time frame do you your best
Guess. Do you think that all
kind of all be completed and
wrapped up it'll it'll happen in
stages. For example, one of the
things that's happened Johnny on
a community colleges building is
in process Right now we will
open up the two year program.
Uh, facility next fall. It's
it's on.
On task to move and fall. I know
that, um I don't because I don't
have quite the right information
about about the studio and how
that's progressing. But you
know, the original plans were
that it would follow within a
year of that, senator, but I
don't want to. I don't want to
make any promises because I
don't have the last information
And and I know that the Creative
Media Institute right now
doesn't have a doesn't have a
project on the Geo Bond bill.
Um, I know that there are some
folks perhaps working on that,
but I, but the Creative Media
Institute is about a mile away
from the site, so if they're not
immediately located on the site,
we will still collaborate quite
closely. We worked closely with
the university program for those
students who want to go into a
four year degree from the two
year degree.
Okay?
Um
Hold on one second. I mean, take
the state please.
We're looking for a staffer
that's in the hospital.
Texas State police called us and
told us he was in the hospital
Texas and he then we're trying
to find out where he's at so we
can check on him. But we can't
find him so
I just need to make sure he's
all right. Um
On the public safety issue,
right?
I mean, you look at what
happened at UNLV.
How much public safety do you
have? Or how? How Well prepared.
Are your police force? Is it?
It's unit College campus at
University for something to
happen.
Uh, Chairman. Um, I would say,
certainly at the University of
New Mexico where we've our
police force. We have our own
police force on our campus. Um,
they work routinely with local
and state police on a variety of
issues. I would say that they do
regular training to prepare for
a whole series of incidents.
That could occur on our campus
And so, um, uh and we have an
organization within the
institution that is responsible
for ensuring that we do that
kind of training. I will also
say that routinely we have
required training for classes of
employees that are associated
with trying to maintain and
unawareness of safety issues
that could emerge.
Mr Chair. I would add that on
the Santa Fe Community College
campus. Our officers are safety
officers. They're not certified
law officers. Um, we do work,
though, with local law
enforcement and with the county
law enforcement since we are in
the county. Um we all we do have
we use um, lots and lots and
lots of security cameras. We now
have someone full time who
monitors
Those security cameras so that
we can tell if you know there's
anything going on, Um, one of
the things that we received
funding for through our bonding
package that was passed in
November, But that is a huge
priority for us is to have kilos
entries on all of our entrances
and all of the all of the rooms
and offices on our campus, so
that in essence, the entire
Campus could be shut down with a
click, and right now it's
extremely manual. Um, so we have
a lot of bolt walks, which do
Which do help an individual
instances. But you can't just
shut down the whole thing really
quickly, So that is something
that is a very high priority for
us.
Mr Chair. We're somewhere
between we do not have a police
force on force on our campuses,
Except we do have armed security
guards that work very closely
with the New Mexico State
University police. They are
trained by the police
department. Um regularly and and
we collaborate cleverly
regularly on security exercises
to to ensure that we can respond
appropriately.
Make your life more questions.
I'm sorry Lighting request is
not in the capital request.
I believe we do have Mr Terror.
I do believe that we have put in
requests for lighting and other
forms of security routinely from
the university and from the and
from cop.
Um yes, I would echo that too.
We do We have used capital funds
for lighting improvements in our
parking lots. This would be
really something lighting.
That's that's the result of the
safety audit where we know that
we're really covering all the
dark areas on our campus.
enable to eliminate those more
safely.
Okay. Anything else? You think
you want to tell us?
Mr Chair. I'm sure there are
many things we'd love to share
with you
now is your chance. We
appreciate your, uh, your
ongoing support for higher
education in New Mexico, and we
appreciate the opportunity to be
here and are happy to talk to
anyone of you individually as
well. Thank you. I appreciate
those of you that didn't raise
tuition, right?
And we're going to have a higher
ed study out and it may tell us
we need to fund you to higher
level, right. We're not funding
you correctly. It may tell us
other things that we need to do.
So those that you didn't raise
tuition. I mean,
I want to first thank you for
that.
And for working with us in more
help fix that problem, but we'll
see what comes out of the study.
Okay. Thank you.
I think we're adjourned.
