The staff.
Process.
That.
Yes Mr chair thank you so much
I'm Kelly Clark with legislative
finance committee with me today
is Dr John Courtney R. W. LFC
for program evaluation and of
course sex secretary can ski
from the early childhood care
and education department I'm
gonna be speaking first from
this presentation with the
capital logo on it you also have
several other documents in front
of you that.
Provided that are grant that if
we need them but I will be going
over them and up that are more
budget related but if we have
questions on that forty one look
at those
there in front of you so if we
could just turn to the second
page we were asked to give an
overview of early childhood at
this meeting will be going into
in depth budget hearing on their
budget and about two weeks and
so this is going to be a little
bit different than just the
budget so on slide two you're
going to see in a graphic that
many of you are you saying and
not shows the early childhood
education system in New Mexico
and the way you read that is
that pink purple arrow at the
top given your age range and
then the boxes below correspond
to what age ranges those
services service so for instance
childcare assistance starts a
few weeks after birth and ends
at the age of thirteen and so it
goes beyond that zero five years
old home visiting depending on
the model can start prenatally
and go up to the age for and so
on and so forth in this chart
represents childcare assistance
home visiting the wick program
the idea part C. energy part the
most of you know that as fits
the family infant toddler
program.
Early head start head start and
I would remind this committee
that had star is federally
direct funded so does not fund
to the state those providers
receive their funds directly
from the federal government and
so they're not appropriated by
this body.
Although we do coordinate with
them given that they are a major
part of the system there about
eighty million dollars from the
federal government to serve us
the head start program in New
Mexico in the current fiscal
year so pretty significant in
both funding and service levels
of course we have the
prekindergarten and early
prekindergarten program on this
chart which serves three and
four year olds and the K. five
plus education and that's on
there because the LFC research
shows that the biggest bang for
our Buck happens when children
receive pre kindergarten and the
extended learning once those two
programs are put together we see
the largest return on investment
and eight and outcomes and we
actually of a slide on that
later so I won't go into too
much detail.
I have committee turn the slide
this is just an overview of how
early childhood funding has
grown over the years and you can
see from FY twelve we were close
to you know hundred and thirty
million has grown to almost four
hundred fifty million in the
current fiscal year since FY
fifteen that's about a hundred
and fifty seven percent increase
and that doesn't include that
head start money that we talked
about earlier or the with money
so you can see that that's
growing pretty significantly
every year even in those were
the state was of really
struggling financially in the
Great Recession early childhood
group through all of those
really strenuous years it was
one of the very few policy areas
that this body decided to
financially support during that
time and not reduce funding to I
would note that that purple the
line on there that's
K. five plus funding we were
asked to pull that out
separately
That that is included in it but
not in the stacking of Turks.
With that I'll turn it to the
next slide and let Dr John
Courtney make a few comments
thanks Kelly so if you'll turn
to slide four you'll see a graph
showing the number of New Mexico
point going back to two thousand
ten and this is an important
consideration when we're talking
about capacity for the for a lot
of different government programs
but early childhood in
particular we've seen a twenty
four percent drop in births
since twenty ten this is
following national trends
although in New Mexico the trend
tends to be a little steeper so
the decline of about sixty six
hundred births per year since
two thousand ten we have a
program evaluation a report on
this in twenty twenty one that
talks about impacts of
population declines not only in
early childhood but kind of the
domino effect that could that
could have going forward and
many of you who said on
education committees have seen
those population declines in in
schools so on that's been at
times exacerbated by the
pandemic the other thing I'd say
about this is that you see this
this trend is different in
different areas of the state for
some areas of the state your
very few you don't see a decline
in for other areas of the state
you're seeing an even steeper
percentage decline that's
representing on page four.
And just add on to that the
reason why we look so closely at
births is because it affects
early childhood so quickly so if
we were to build a pre K. system
that serves twenty six twenty
seven thousand kids and we only
have twenty one thousand kids
we've over bills that at the
extent of other programs so we
need to be very cognizant of how
the birth trends are trending to
make sure we build our system in
a way that serve that population
correctly and we put the money
in the right place.
So if you'll turn out of slide
I.
Well Sir to go through the
different programs that Kelly
mentioned early on starting with
child care assistance you can
see the description up above the
subsidy program for children six
weeks to thirteen years old
whose families make less than
four hundred percent of the
poverty federal poverty level
Kelly will talk a little more
about how that has changed
recently basically the the that
four hundred percent operation
operating budget in FY twenty
three the two hundred fourteen
twenty fifteen million and
estimates capacity twenty four
thousand you you'll see these
types of static for each program
that that we go through
as far as the impact of child
care LFC to twenty nineteen
program evaluation with with a
lot of assistance from the early
childhood Department where we
saw a child care participants
saw some benefits families saw
an increase family income of
thirty five hundred dollars
increase well child visits and
increased dental visits the
other thing to mention those you
know child care assistance has a
quality component and we're
we're on knew it duration of
what we call the quality ratings
improvement system
we're investing additional
dollars are incentives for
higher quality care and that's
largely based on inputs that are
going in to the centers such as
class sizes to date we haven't
found it in impact of those
investments that and again the
most recent that LFC look at
that was back in twenty nineteen
we've also look to impact on
child care on educational
outcomes and
found some of the facts of both
us and the child's
CPC CPI was.
Realtor Policy Institute there
is at UNM found some impacts in
kindergarten but those those
impacts fade out of my third
grade.
And if I could just actually
have the committee it to volume
three is with yes reduce your
spiral if I could potentially
have you turn to page eighty
eight quickly just to kind of
give just what is our eighty
eight eight eight.
And you'll see a stacking bar
chart on that page.
great I also slide.
My apologies I'm sorry so then
we can turn to page eighty seven
the one for it I just want to
make a point on the spending is
so as as you see in the chart
that John's talking about on the
slide you're gonna see the
average costs going up per child
since FY fifteen and that will
continue in this training you
can see how that's financially
broken out on page eighty seven
and how we've been putting more
and more money into those
highest level of care options I
mostly known as star levels I
start level childcare four star
level and we haven't necessarily
seen educational outcomes last
beyond kindergarten which we are
seeing from the pre cake
programs.
And then the next slide in the
power point is a little bit more
detail on that spending an
average enrollment for child
care assistance I know many of
you know that the early
childhood departments increase
eligibility for families who may
receive child care assistance to
four hundred percent of the
federal poverty level and what
that means is the higher income
persons are not eligible for
this assistance program there is
at this point it's a free
program because the department
is also paying for all the
copayments with federal revenues
to at this point that won't
necessarily go past the next
fiscal year and so what you'll
see in these charts as you'll
see that in thirteen we're
covering on average twenty
thousand kids in enrollments
and that has spite receive
depend the pandemic years and
then you see a spike in the
recent years because of that
increased eligibility so more
families are eligible you're
gonna see we're paying more per
child and that last turn on the
right is the rules of
eligibility that has been in New
Mexico since nineteen ninety
nine so we were most the time
around two hundred two hundred
fifty percent and have peak now
to four hundred percent of the
federal poverty level.
On the next page of that
presentation this actually gives
you what that income level is
for four hundred percent of the
poverty level so you can see for
instance for a family of four
that family can make a hundred
and twenty thousand dollars for
a family for and be eligible for
child care assistance for free
childcare as long as that family
has the work or school so they
have to be participating in the
economy in some way.
in addition to the covering the
copayments any increase
eligibility department is
currently offering a three
dollar per hour supplemental all
childcare employees in the
Senators us regardless of your
teacher or your making the meals
are in the janitor everyone
right now is receiving a three
dollar weight supplement use
with federal funds the HSD I
don't think it's going to be
moving forward with that program
given that it wouldn't
necessarily need our general
fund not anti donation clause
laws in the future but it isn't
a total total allowable expense
using the federal stimulus
monies that they have at this
point.
and I would know that a lot of
the changes that we talked about
in the last few minutes
eligibility copayments are using
a lot of that federal one time
stimulus money that the
department gets and so when we
talk about the budget in a
couple weeks you're gonna see a
large child care assistance
asked to fund those going
forward with state general fund
before the trust fund
distribution kicks up probably
sets the executive
recommendation in the next two
fiscal years.
On the next page
slide eight you're going to see
the distribution of aging Roman
such child care assistance
service and so you'll notice
that almost forty eight forty
one percent up to fifty percent
of kids that are receiving child
kiss Care assistance are
actually school age children and
so we have to remember that even
though early childhood is
thought of this prenatal to up
to the great age third creators
a big chunk of this month
program actually goes to older
school age children up to the
age of thirteen and so we have
to remember that it is a broader
spectrum of services in ages
being sold served and that the
smallest portion of children
being served by this program is
actually infants and toddlers
and so you'll see only fourteen
to eleven percent or the
youngest children being served
by the child care assistance
program.
On the next slide I'll turn it
over to Dr Courtney so the next
program on on slide nine is
prekindergarten early education
program for three and four year
olds operating budget of about
one hundred million a hundred
eleven million in FY twenty two
and capacity of thirteen
thousand five hundred
near did a study on
prekindergarten a number of
years ago where they found
impact on language literacy and
math estimated at estimating a
six to one return on investment
LFC is done a number of studies
on on pre K. over the years
finding actually the the exact
same R. O. Y. six to one and a
number of other affects the kind
of feed into that
and you know some of those are
are listed there the one I would
point you towards those at the
the graph on the left there
we're we've actually been able
to track the inaugural a pre K.
co work through high school
graduation and found an eleven
percent increase in in the
graduation rate there along with
improved reading and math scores
of fifty percent reduction in
grade retention and a reduction
crop chronic absenteeism no this
is particularly important given
the news coming out of other
states like Tennessee or they're
they're finding no impacted pre
K. or in some cases potentially
detrimental impacts of pre K.
Steve Barnett who is the the
head of near wrote a really a
good article awhile back that
you know basically said that's
like comparing comparing apples
to oranges taking a program from
one state and trying to trying
to say well this is going to be
the impact in another state
given the the the differences in
context and and inputs.
So you're next slide is the home
visiting program which is a
basically intensive parent.
in we have many different models
throughout the state this home
visiting is just kind of the
umbrella term for all of those
models and.
Any of the models are very
evidence based in the state
nurse family partnership parents
as teachers and first important
program in New Mexico we're
seeing some good outcomes coming
out of the departments early
childhood home visiting annual
report
Particularly when it's related
to health and the improvement of
child development what we do
have one significant policy are
at issue that we've been talking
about throughout the interim and
is is that which is the Medicaid
home visiting pilot so Medicaid
match brings us three dollars
every one dollar we spend most
of you know and a couple of
these the models have been read
into the Medicaid waiver which
is allowable spending so we can
get those three dollars to one
but we have very few families
were actually enrolling in those
home visiting problem programs
to allow us to bring down the
federal funds so if we could
just really leverage that
program we could bring in many
millions more dollars and
support families in the state
general fund that currently
exists and so that's something
that we look at the summer that
we're continue to look at what
the agency with the Human
Services Department there were
some discussion that maybe the
incentives program that already
exists in HSD which gives
families a financial incentive
to participate in well child
visits or other programs like
that might incentivize families
to participate in Medicaid home
visiting be able to leverage
those the federal funds easier.
the next slide is just I will go
over it in detail it's just the
funding history in enrollment
history of home visiting over
the last few years so you'll see
that we have ramped up spending
quite significantly and
enrollment has picked up but not
necessarily at a at the level we
would like to if we were able to
meet those federal funds.
the next slide is just on the
head start and early head start
program as I said before federal
direct program we do not
administer it or appropriated
it's eighty million dollars at
service seven thousand children
a statewide
there's some quality measures
hazard is considered a high
quality program nationally we're
not meeting some of those
federal requirements federally
they would like to see at least
fifty percent of head start
teachers have a master's degree
and nationally about seventy
percent of head start providers
are meeting that however in New
Mexico it's only about thirty
four percent thirty three
percent so we're falling well
below that quality measure
And then I'll have to turn to
the next slide which is John
Courtney.
Thank you Kelly so now on slide
thirteen.
And you know the we've told you
about a lot of different
programs and you know some of
the some of the great things
that these programs bring
you know that nurse family
partnerships and in particularly
interesting to me because they
have research going through
through adulthood and showing
just a a slew of of potentially
positive impacts including of
reduced
involvement with the criminal
justice system for example but
the point the point that I'd
like to make here is that
there's there's not a silver
bullet to this there's there's
not one program that's going to
catch kids all the way up
there's not one program that's
going to going to you know
address all all the issues that
that we're facing
and when we look at some of the
programs that that we just
talked about when they're
actually
of combined the the impact can
be can be quite powerful so you
can see from of the twenty
seventeen accountability report
that we did where we looked at
participation in pre K. and K.
three plus which is represented
by the red bar they're almost
completely made up for it for
what we commonly refer to as the
achievement gap which is the gap
between the non low income
children on the the left side
there in the blue bar and low
income children that maybe
didn't participate in K. three
plus our pre K. there are
represented by by the green bar
so you know as as Kelly
mentioned and going back to the
very first line of how these
programs kind of staff together
the the path to success likely
involves implementation of and
participation in a number of
these programs rather than just
of one.
Okay and the next slide I just
threw into the show you the
projections of the early
childhood Trust Fund at the end
of the previous fiscal year that
the purpose of the beginning
balance the fund was three point
four almost three point five
billion dollars
and the current amount it's
kicking out is about thirty
million and that's a part I
would say artificially low and
if we many of you may be
familiar that the trust fund
distribution is based on three
year average given that the fund
has not existed for three years
that first year is being counted
as zero which brings than your
average distribution have first
you're not being counted as is
zero it probably would have been
spitting out at eight hundred
and twenty five hundred thirty
million
we at the beginning of the
budget season of the created the
consensus revenue estimating
group thought that with that
average it would only be
spending increasing
distributions for the next
fiscal year about forty six
million and so that's what the
LFC and executive budget
built some initial assumptions
on however a distribution of the
corpus was maybe sooner than we
initially thought and so we just
got this information in December
that actually new distribution
twenty four is going to be about
sixty eight million and so
that's going to be something
that both committees are going
to need to work out going in
forward since that was not
assume in either the LESC or
budget recommendation and then
the fun continues production
group to up to nine almost ten
billion dollars and twenty
twenty seven of the distribution
of almost three hundred and
eighty million dollars at that
time.
And so this final slide really
quickly I know we're trying to
go fast here it just is a
representation of service right
we've talked about all the money
that we're spending and what
these programs are and so the I
turn the left is you can see
these are zero to five year olds
and this is what we care we talk
of as the early education and
care program so things the
programs that families can leave
their children safely within
more may not have an educational
component within so you can see
the young this year's are the
least served
by this program and IT skills up
pretty quickly because the pre
K. K. program kicks up SO zero
the prenatal look taller areas
of the lease or buy this and
then the chart on the right are
also early childhood programs
but they're more of support
intervention program so coming
in like home visiting coaching
and supporting parents and you
can see it it's reverse the
younger you are the more likely
you are to have services and
those programs.
And with that we will yield for
any questions.
Okay okay.
Mr chair members of the Senate
finance committee it's nice to
be here with you today and thank
you Kelly and John for that
presentation I think it
underscores why the legislature
thought it was so important to
create the early childhood
education and care department
and to make sure that our
efforts are coordinated and that
we're looking at quality that
we're thinking about the needs
of families and young children
and the people who care for and
educate them every day so couple
points all just a point out on
slide three of the LFC
presentation of course as you
know as the Senate finance
committee we would absolutely
expect costs to increase over
since two thousand fifteen to
current and we were doing that
because we're serving more
families were serving more
children and we're doing it with
him what I focus on quality I
think some of the biggest
increases in costs are what we
did here in New Mexico for state
in the nation to truly look at
what it costs to deliver high
quality early care and education
in our child care facilities and
what we found is that we were
funding it really on the backs
of the early childhood workforce
through low wages so we right
size that in July of twenty
twenty one so it's going to take
us some time to see the impact
of those changes on the lives of
not only our children but on the
educators who care for them have
some incredible testimonials
from teachers for the three
dollar an hour raise of just
said I can focus more now on the
children in my care every day
because I'm not living paycheck
to paycheck I'm not working that
second job so I'm excited to
come and care for and educate
the infants in the toddlers in
my child care center so that's
just a couple of points on costs
were of course going to see
increased costs and expression
we actually are looking at the
true cost of delivering care.
I think the other thing is that
I want to point out on slide
five around the that comment I
think it's as massive increase
in quality that again is
reflective of we're looking just
like you have with K. twelve
educators just like you're
looking across the board with
state employees how are we
paying the people who are caring
for our most precious
It's people are little as people
but also our future and so when
we see the increasing the
quality and the increase in
those dollars it's really in
that increase compensation for
educators and we know that we
know need to go further I think
it was in house at our LFC
hearing where different members
were saying what do you mean
twelve ten an hour I think it
and then you Mr chairman saying
who's going to do this very
labor intensive work for that
and we agree we think that those
those increases must come they
must come soon so wage increases
on the upside seven I think we
talk about the competitive pay
for professional secretary can
use the LFC report as your
presentation or no no I just I
just making a couple points
about that in terms of saying
that not all providers are
participating in the CPP but
those that are opted in to do
that so and then I just want to
say on home visiting that we
absolutely agree with the LFC
that more has to be done with
the centennial home visiting and
that's why we have taken action
steps both with Human Services
Department with the Medicaid
managed care organizations and
our home visiting providers
because we are we were not doing
enough and I think that that
again is a testament to what you
all did by creating the
department so that we can be
more coordinated more training
there's a lot of staff turnover
as you know with case managers
both in our home visiting
providers and arm and CEO so I
just want to highlight those few
things where we absolutely agree
I'm on the home visiting and
more needs to be done.
In your packet I've put a one
pager on protect the early
childhood Trust Fund a priority
of the governor and also our
annual outcomes report and which
is a legislatively mandated
report we used to do for reports
for you and send them separately
we combined them all into this
annual outcomes report and there
you'll see some of the data from
all from FY twenty two for the
for purpose home visiting early
intervention childcare and pre
K. we also included a copy of
our spring two Garcia can get a
sense of what the department is
been doing as we travel the
state in your communities
talking with providers talking
with families and talking with
higher education.
nurses and other providers in
the community who are supporting
families prenatal to I.
So I do have a presentation it's
right here in your packet early
childhood programs and funding
the first you have all seen
hopefully many times which is
our commitment the commitment
that this department maybe when
the legislature and the governor
created the department in two
thousand nineteen and we went
live on July one twenty twenty
and that is to make sure that we
are creating a cohesive
equitable and responsive
prenatal to five early childhood
system that supports families
strengthens communities and
enhances child health
development education and well
being it's clear in the charge
of our department that we have
the responsibility to educate
and care for children in those
years leading up to their entry
into kindergarten so that
they're prepared and able to
take up that K. twelve
experience.
All New Mexico families and
young children are thriving is
the vision of the department and
our mission every day is to
optimize the health development
education and well being of
babies toddlers and preschoolers
through high quality community
based and family driven early
childhood programs and services
I think that's important to know
that it's it's the totality as
Kelly pointed out it's when
we're working in alignment and
when pediatricians and home
visiting programs and childcare
programs and early intervention
is all know each other and are
working together to support
families taking a family
centered approach to how we
support how we work in
communities and how we support
families in the earliest years
of development I think this
committee knows like so many
this is the most rapid and
critical period of development
in humans life eighty percent of
the brain is developed in the
first three years of life so
those experiences that a child
has the opportunities that
parent has to both learn and
have their child engaged in
learning is critical to all the
success we want to see in the
state in K. twelve outcomes in
health outcomes in economy and
jobs and wage earnings and
lowering our criminal justice
and our juvenile delinquency
rates.
So we focus very much on equity
as a key pillar of the work that
we do in the department
partner engagement we can't do
this work without local
communities without our local
partners without our private
sector partners and our public
sector partners we have to
support early childhood programs
and being the best that they can
I'm hopeful that one LFC does
another evaluation of childcare
in a year to they're going to
see the difference because in
two thousand nineteen we weren't
paying our providers and what it
actually costs them to deliver
the services that means they
weren't able to retain and keep
high quality child care
providers in their programs so
we may not have seen the results
that we want to see for the
investments we're making and of
course most importantly we have
to be accountable the to be
accountable to you as a
legislature to each other as
apartment leisure and also to
the people of New Mexico who are
counting on this department to
actually make a difference in
the lives of families and young
children.
We have a five year strategic
plan we built our budget the
executive budget reflects the
goals of the priorities of this
agency over the next five years
and this first year FY twenty
four is the what we have in the
in the budget that you'll see
from the executive when we meet
with you in a few weeks.
We also have our early childhood
continuing similar to the one
you saw with the LFC but these
are programs and to Kelly's
point early head start and head
start we don't directly
administer but we have the head
start state collaboration office
which works closely with the New
Mexico head start association
and the tribal head start
programs to ensure that we're
removing barriers and that we're
just making sure that our lowest
and most vulnerable income
families are getting access to
comprehensive services.
So slide six slide numbers on
here.
And there is provided.
Excellent thank you Mr chair.
Projected number of children to
be served by program type in
fiscal year this gives an
analysis but but I want to be
just paying a little bit of a
picture because I know there's
been a lot of that on a
discussion about whether
childcare is education and what
is education and I just want to
and I know you all know this but
just to make it explicit that
children under five are
educated.
Through their day to day
interactions and if you have
children or grandchildren you
know that when they're with
caring responsible adults that's
how they're being educated so in
early childhood education it
looks very different than once
the child turns five the sitting
in a classroom and getting
educated but those educational
Kurds what's happening in early
childhood education and care
settings which includes
childcare home visiting prepay
is that their learning these are
the building blocks for their
leader learning they're learning
to talk learning to read
learning to interact in social
and group situations and they're
really learning to manage their
emotions call executive function
how do they persist when they
have a challenging task how did
they manage their emotions
they're learning how to engage
with their adult educators so
that is the work of early
childhood care and education and
it happens in all of these
different settings we believe
strongly that children under
five years of age cannot be
educated without being cared for
and they can't they're not cared
for without being educated so I
just wanna say childcare is not
babysitting it's not day care it
is childcare and it is early
care and education so we believe
strongly that we need to invest
in the educators who are working
with our infants in our toddlers
every day and making sure they
have the support the learning
the education that they need to
find that high quality care.
So if we turn now to projected
number of children to be served
I just want to show you that is
Kelly had the stackable charted
within so these programs are
often are offered simultaneously
so you could be in childcare and
having home visiting and being
in early intervention so this is
showing just the discrete
numbers of children that would
be served in each of those
programs and what we projected
out and this is the for your
finance plan that has been
mandated by the legislature for
us to do these are new
projections so the document we
gave you last November has been
updated and we've actually
projected out to I'm twenty nine
but you can see here we're going
to be serving more children so
the costs are going to go up so
that slide what was it seven
yes.
slide eight shows you are FY
twenty four summary which will
go into more detail when we meet
with you about our budget
numbers you can see here again
sixty seven thousand one hundred
eighty seven children are with
the Department anticipates
serving through these four major
programs and these are just
direct service numbers these are
not our numbers for quality and
infrastructure which are
absolutely essential.
So on the next slide.
Total projected spending on
direct service by program in
fiscal year you can see here in
twenty four our budget at about
five hundred and twenty six
million some of this will be
from federal dollars that will
need to bring in in the omnibus
spending bill there was a little
over fifteen million more that
New Mexico will receive through
the child care development block
grant and that will be in
starting in FY twenty three.
so you can see is it goes up in
the out years were serving more
children and so the costs and
the investments will go up and
will be reaching more families
in all four corners of the
State.
Then you see the next slide is
show's total projected spending
direct service and quality
supports infrastructure and
infrastructure so this is the
work that we put into coaching
consultation supply building we
know we need to build more
infant and toddler care across
the state and we know that
overall the capacity of our
programs whether it's home
visiting early intervention we
need to support them in being as
high quality as they can paying
their professionals eight wage
that reflects the value of the
work they do so that we don't
have to turn over that we can
attract people to the industry
and to to do the work and to
enjoy the work as we've heard
from so many early childhood
educators from across the state
who now can breathe easy who can
now focus much more clearly on
the needs of the children and
they don't have the stress of
worry about their own family and
their needs the final slide is
head start and early head start
and Mr chair Senator Gonzales I
know this came up at our our
last hearing and so we went and
reached out to the office of
head start and worked with the
regional office staff to get the
data on the two thousand twelve
to two thousand twenty two I
think the good news is while
there has been a reduction in
head start slots of one thousand
six hundred and sixty nine slots
we have increased by six hundred
and seven the number of early
head start slots what you see
there is a to add one early head
start slot it took two point
seven five head start so the
funding for head start is much
lower because you have more
children in the classroom the
level how many and teachers in
the ratio so I just want to
point that out that the good
news is the head start funding
in our state has stayed constant
since two thousand twelve to
twenty two I'm and early head
start funding has increased by
eighteen million early head
start allows us to serve
pregnant women and children up
to age three and we know that
again that critical and rapid
period of development this is
this is a good approach for us
in New Mexico and so I just
wanted to share.
that and any questions we're
definitely happy to follow up
with you on.
So those are the highlights guy
given the topic of being able to
talk about early childhood
programs and services and the.
And madam secretary thank you
we'll go to questions from
committee members.
Center this thank you Mr
chairman good afternoon to
secretary Groginsky in our staff
and everyone here today on this
important matter early childhood
children I just have a quick
question secretary on the and
maybe also for staff whoever
answers it but I think you spoke
about the the fact that on page
seven from the LFC report we
were talking about the four
hundred percent the eligibility
increase that took place in the
fact that he's would cost about
sixty million dollars for that
in in the copays that were
waived at the time the question
that I have is I think you
mentioned that the that we may
be okay in getting this funding
replaced through Medicaid did I
hear that correctly in a three
to one match because it's sixty
minutes and it was nonrecurring
money so how are we going to
keep it up if it's not recurring
can you explain that to me
briefly thank you what I do now
so I think Mr chair.
Senator Rodriguez but I think
this home visiting that's the
Medicaid match not child care
child care okay so that's right
yeah okay fine thank you how can
I make one point on the right
nonrecurring Kelly answered
thank you yeah child care
assistance is not eligible for
federal for Medicaid match as we
discussed all of they are
receiving and increased
distribution from the news
federal budgets will be sixteen
million but it will not be
enough to cover all of the non
recurring federal revenues that
I've recently gone into the
child care assistance program
through all of the COVID
response federal bills that came
through so I think it was over
four hundred million is about
four hundred million dollars if
they received over the three
packages that have been used for
various things and child care
assistance that will need to
some of those things will need
and like covering copayments
fully and some of them will need
to either be rolled back or
funded through state general
fund the department asked for a
hundred and twenty five million
dollars a nonrecurring revenue
to do that in the next fiscal
year while the believe that
they'd like to wait for the
trust fund distribution to
increase in the next fiscal year
beyond that I see Mr chair if I
could Mister chairman Senator
Rodriguez just to clarify a
couple points executive budget
includes a hundred and twelve
point five million for childcare
increase with the notation that
that would come through the land
grant permanent fund revenues
that we did not have figured
into the executive budget given
the timing and I just want to
make the point that all of you
know clearly like from day one
governor Lujan Grisham said
should early childhood education
and care for all New Mexico
families was her number one one
of our number one priority and
that is what she's been working
towards when we all were hit by
the pandemic the relief money
allowed us to continue that
vision because it was in
alignment with what the relief
dollars were to be used so well
we used what we use the non
recurring this is the this has
always been the goal of the
department of the ministration
to create high quality universal
early care and education.
Thank you and Mister chairman
thank you Kelly as secretary
Groginsky so basically I want to
make sure I understand is that
the so it's conceivable band
that the sixty million dollars
that have already been pretty
much earmarked for this for the
co pays and the and the four
hundred percent
would increase the the of the
child care assistance income
eligibility would increase to
four hundred percent that the
cost of sixty million for these
two things may not be fully we
may not be able to have
sufficient federal funds for
this even with the four hundred
million we're talking about
because there's other things
that have already gone to
recurring or I'm just want to
make sure that we're going to
continue this and if we're not
that we need to know why and
what's going on thank you the
four hundred million dollars
that have that the department
received directly for those
COVID packages no longer will
exist in twenty four rate and
those the that money was
earmarked by the feds for the
department to do things like the
debt and so there is no federal
money to cover these in the
future at this level that's why
the department's has asked for
the additional I said general
fund because and she said Langer
pretty fun because land grant
permanent fund is general fund
so state funds they've asked for
to continued in the future that
sixty million dollars by the way
is only for covering coal
payments that's not the cost of
increased eligibility and all of
the other things that were
written into it so
yeah there's going to be a large
discussion on what the cost to
continue these programs at what
level and with what revenue
source coming at you in the next
few weeks I see thank you for
explaining that yes thank you
appreciate that Kelly you know I
I see where the executive well
the department requested a
hundred twenty five million and
the executive recommended one
twelve point five LFC
recommended forty two and so I
just wanted to say that because
we were waiting for the.
Additional influx of the funding
that's coming in then.
Mr chair Senator Rodriguez no
that's because the LFC
recommendation took a
fundamentally different approach
to help us to fund early
childhood so we the LFC
recommendation does a major
expansion of prekindergarten
services both to expand services
for three years for old and also
to is create more hours in the
day and a longer here for all of
those three and four year olds
which means that you don't have
to use child care assistance to
pay for those individuals to be
in childcare and see switch the
revenue source in addition to
all of the money the
legislature's putting into
extending school hours and after
school care that reduces the
pressure on child care
assistance to be that funded
that fund that pair of funds I
see okay thank you for that
explanation how many children do
you serve with that I see twenty
twenty four thousand.
Kids here with child care
assistance or is that the
capacity.
It says here capacity estimated
for twenty three is twenty four
thousand yes estimated monthly
enrollment capacity is about
twenty three the department is
close to twenty five is the last
I looked for their enrollment
now that's only an estimate
depending on the age of the
child in the level of quality
the rules that can majorly shift
cost estimate so it's if you're
of a thirteen year old in a low
quality center it's not very
expensive if you have an infant
in a five star center it's very
expensive so depending on who
comes in the door that changes
that capacity
okay thank you Kelly for
explaining that I don't have any
further questions for now Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So I don't know what this is and
I.
The total projected spending
direct service and quality
support infrastructure by
financial year.
Then you're talking about going
from FY twenty four to.
Six hundred and one million.
To FY twenty seven to nine
hundred and fifty six million.
Correct.
In.
Explain me that to me that
funding stream that.
That does this.
Mr chair Senator Woods thank you
for that question I just like to
point out we go from serving
sixty seven thousand one hundred
and eighty seven children in
twenty four to serving ninety
two thousand eight hundred and
sixty five in twenty seven and
those revenue streams will come
from a variety of places Tanith
federal child care development
block grant funding US
department of education I I'm
individuals with disabilities
Education Act
state of the land grant
permanent fund.
The early childhood trust fund
and general fund so so we've got
richer what we're talking about
several funding levels it would
be better for me if if you could
the next chart to put those.
Different funds in there instead
of just having the blue and a
grey.
Do you.
here center was I appreciate
that feedback and we will enough
for childcare that the largest
payers the federal government
right now for our child care.
That has that been the a steady
player for years in the past and
it's we're expected.
This is done by a per child
basis and you said your role
that was going up.
I don't know how to ask Miss
Mister chair so I'm going to
make a.
Attempt.
We are revenue decline.
In.
And birth rates.
So why do we expect the
enrollment to go up.
Mr chair Senator Woods well our
birth rate is declining at about
a two to three percent right the
number of children were serving
for example we're only serving
about ten percent of families
eligible for home visiting right
now we're only serving at about
thirty five percent of those are
eligible for early pre K. and it
childcare you know what we we
are I don't know the exact
percentages but we're probably
at about forty seven percent of
eligible children that we're
serving up I don't know I'm
gonna correct that number for
you to act so that's the issue
is that even though the birth
rate is declining it's not going
to decline to zero and so we're
always going to have children
being born in the state we need
to build that system to meet the
needs of all those families that
currently we're not meeting so
so what is so much for your work
what what you're saying is we
expect to serve a higher
percentage all of us exactly
thank you and.
I'm not.
Chair if I could also and then
to address Senator road races
question about the sixty million
that includes the childcare
right and the way parent
copayments for the expanded
eligibility which is about ten
percent of the overall
population of children were
serving.
What you're not yes I'm done yes
There Gonzales are I can go
ahead if you need to finish our
conversation let me just.
You know.
John Laing says never let him
back in a corner right.
And what you've done is you've
expanded programming.
And without the legislative
approval thank you expanding
programs to recurring costs and
we could we the legislature
don't have any say in it.
And it's getting pretty tough
and then tell you this will
remain in sentence almost.
What are you gonna do if
revenues fall off.
What programs are gonna cut
because you've expanded those
your over a.
You're looking at a sixty one
percent increase in the C. ECT.
I don't know if you've been in
New Mexico long enough but we
like to ride roller coasters
over here and there's worst
thing we can do is start a
program and cut.
Start a program and cut.
And so what you think about that
Senator Gonzales got some
questions and.
I I type money up last night you
know you always ask me where I
come these questions and I said
and I think you know what
questions are questions us I
don't buy that type of right
here Senator Gonzales will go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman of I just
have to think so.
One is first of thank you for
following up with head start.
And then the other one and the
what has brought this question
is from a presentation that we
just had a couple of weeks ago.
And we were looking at two
districts that for twenty
nineteen to twenty two.
The absent T. is basically like
twenty two percent.
And the this children eventually
will be in first grade second
third grade.
And the I think it was really
excellent from LFC the one of
the information that came out.
so we talk about a lot of
things.
But if we don't six absentee.
High absentee rate in education.
We're not getting anywhere.
So and I figured on that twenty
two percent you know how fewer
take on my math that's like
almost forty days of absentee.
You know and how can we expect
you know what we're looking at
with that high absentee you know
on the regular school calendar
so what date of this B.
employees Stewart is there any
data on.
Attendance.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales thank
you for raising that issue I
could not agree more that happen
you know attendance is how the
children benefit from those
caring adults in that
instruction and learning
opportunities we it's an area
that we need to improve in the
department and we do pay for
childcare based on enrollment
because that helps our early
childhood providers very plan
and know they have a budget in
pre K.
I do I I think that they
definitely collected I know in
our school based settings and
they do collected in our
community based settings but
keeping an eye on that you're
absolutely correct that's a very
important data point for us to
know how young children are
doing and why they may not be on
on par because they missed too
many school day so I appreciate
you raising that and we'll take
it up with the department and
get back to exactly how we're
collecting it and if we're not
we're going to start collecting
that.
Mr chair go.
Mr Chairman Senator Gonzales
back on slide nine I think this
is an excellent question the and
it goes back to that point that
that no one approach or one
program is going to solve this.
Took to your point you know we
it's very possible that schools
alone are going to completely
solve this or that their other
upstream things that you could
potentially do so on slide nine
towards the bottom one of the
one of the research studies that
we've done has looked at chronic
absenteeism for pre K.
participants in fact the signet
significant reduction of chronic
absenteeism later on in school
for those participants.
And that's I think the third
bullet from the top on on slide
nine twenty five percent
reduction in chronic
absenteeism.
It does good we just want to
make the point that pre K.
prekindergarten does have an
effect on chronic absenteeism in
schools and so it has a lot of
facts as educational effects it
has family income effects
because you don't pay copayments
it's free it's inclusive and it
has those out here a.
It houses out your educational
outcomes that is just beyond
what many other states are
saying and so you know that's
why LFC recommendation has taken
a different route and really
expanded prekindergarten.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
of Mr chairman I think this is
something that we really have to
fall off.
As of it'll if we're talking
about.
Improving making a difference of
where we're going and also that
solid foundation at the early
years.
You know why can't that continue
to the.
Offer grades you know so as
children progress to a higher
level the if it's still have it
that's important role within
the.
I guess I don't know what you
would call it but if that's the
expectation of parents you know
that they don't have to be in
schools or whatever have they
have.
we need to work with that.
So.
Mr chair Senator Gonzales semi
just excellent points and I
think that's where we talk about
the of the bringing our programs
together so the family is
struggling and we see that a
child is absent that we can
connect them with home visiting
programs maybe there's other
challenges at home so we have
other supports and resources
that we bring in from up some of
our sister agencies whether it's
children youth and families
department helping with their
behavioral health supports or
whether it's our partners at
Human Services so I think you're
absolutely right and that's the
goal of the department and the
mission is to make sure that
we're supporting families cause
chronic absenteeism is usually a
sign of something much deeper
and it could be transportation
it could be health issues so I I
appreciate what you're raising
an we absolutely will get back
to you with how how the
department is looking at
attendance on a day to day
basis.
Mr chairman of the just and with
this so we're doing an early
childhood presentation but.
Charles so loose from of.
The LFC brought an excellent
point plus we've for a few days
ago.
So.
Just for example.
You know that you're safe say
that you're looking at a third
grader.
Just for example the.
This individual
Why.
You know for the expectation for
New Mexico.
To be a lot of number fifty or
forty ninth ranking.
That's a huge load when you're
looking at two years plus the
growth of the nation wide so
you're looking more at maybe
whatever it is a three point six
two point nine so then the next
Grace is the same thing I mean
that so that's a very very hard
number and the this is really
the time to really fix him right
up getting and you're on carried
on and hope the.
That achievement gap can just
really just start disappearing.
Thank you yes the achievement
gap I think they say starts as
early as eighteen months so the
work that we do in our
department to care for and
educate children is absolutely
critical to closing that gap and
improving our expanding
nationally.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary good afternoon could
be with you and tell the people
from running Mexico came today
and first off I want to start by
thanking you for your passion
for the work that you do and
you know you can kind of tell.
How good people are their job
sometimes by their work product
and some of the other things
going on and I just really
enjoyed watching this department
take flight and seeing numbers
move in the right direction
obviously have a lot of work to
do
So I just have a question ask
about this tension between
Pre K. and child care.
And what I'm hearing from LFC is
this is the desired put more
resources into
pre K..
And obviously childcare has a
lot of benefits but I I don't
anyway and so forgive me for not
being an expert on it and I just
generally want your thoughts on
that and if there is a desire to
see more emphasis on pre K.
because of the demonstrated
benefits to children in that.
This week to Mr chair Senator
Steinborn thank you and thank
you for the for the feedback
compliments on the work of the
department I think it goes back
to that point about we have to
think about how education
happens for children under five
and who provides that education
and it's provided in all types
of different settings and
sometimes those settings are in
a school at their end of the
school based program are of
special education preschool but
often times it's Santa Fe center
a childcare center or it's in a
family childcare home or it's
delivered by a home visitor and
so that the notion that there
should be tension because what
the governor has asked for is a
quality early care and education
system that meets the needs of
all New Mexicans and so it's a
mixed delivery system some of
it's going to be delivered in
our tribal communities some of
it's going to be delivered in
our communities through child
care or for schools it's
critical that these sectors work
together to meet the needs of
families some families want that
elementary school preschool
experience because they have an
older child or they have
somebody home and they don't
need the before and after care
or they do and they're in a
program that desk and school
that does K. five plus but other
for purpose other families need
the year around ten and a half
hour eleven hours a day so that
they can get to and from work so
I think it's important that we
build a system here that is
cohesive and equitable and meets
the needs of families across the
state so there shouldn't be
tensions and we funded local
early childhood coalition
specifically to address some of
the tension issues and in local
communities having people come
together and talk through these
issues so it is early care and
education were ever a young
child is and there's a caring
responsible adult there's a
learning and education
happening.
Thank you for that answer thank
you Mr so I have Senator
Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the presentation and
secretary thank you so much for
your work on behalf of New
Mexicos most vulnerable children
in their early stages
Kelly on your presentation and
John on page nine it mentions
that.
Prekindergarten shows a higher
rate of exiting special
education services can you tell
me a little bit more about that
is that exiting in kindergarten
or what are you seeing in terms
of early access.
That's right looking at exit
through the third grade.
So Mister chairman and John is
that in terms of students who
qualify for as like
developmentally delayed or just
are you seeing that across the
board and all types of
disabilities they're being
exited I believe that analysis
was was across all types of I
don't believe we we have data to
that level but we could
potentially do that I'd have to
look back to see the the level
of detail we have an accent yeah
I just be curious Mr chairman
to.
See more data about that and
possibly like how does that
Steve on costs as well in terms
of K. twelve education because
obviously it's more expensive to
educate a child with
disabilities and so it's
interesting to see that that
affects whether a child
qualifies for special education
or not I was also wondering
secretary again ski if there is
a particular curriculum for our
early child hood educators and
what kinds of training they
is it required or there in order
to be eligible for the pay
increase is there any additional
training that you're trying to
those races increase of hourly
wages thank us yeah Mr chair
Senator of Korea Hemphill thank
you for that question there are
requirements in all of our
licensed childcare facilities
that anybody working with young
children has to have extensive
course work in basic health and
safety but also a forty five
hour certificate program so that
they understand child
development they also as they go
up the quality levels have to
take courses through the child
development certificate and
directors also have to have
education it take educational
courses we do want to work I
we're still working on
implementing one piece of our
legislation which is the wage
and career of compensation
latter we do have a wage
supplement program right now
that does look at at educational
levels and reimbursing folks but
the three dollar an hour raise
was for all professionals
working I mean it was really
just to stave off of the crisis
that we will we have avoided of
that other states haven't which
is not having enough
professionals to open classrooms
and having people leaving the
field for other jobs that we're
paying seventeen sixteen
seventeen dollars an hour so
they are they're all.
Also undergo and they they are
provide preschool teachers have
to have bachelor's degrees and
their assistance have to have a
child development associate for
aids and so they are working on
that they have to use a research
based curriculum in our pre K.
programs and in our higher
quality childcare programs they
also have to do ongoing
observations of children and
also use.
What we call the continuous
quality improvement and
implementing in their classrooms
implementing in their classrooms
and a structured curriculum
using the early learning
guidelines so it early learning
guidelines tell us what a young
child at different ages should
be able to do and no and so the
educators in our childcare and
pre K. programs use that as a
guide to help scaffold their
learning.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your spot secretary
I know that so I graduated with
my bachelors in early or not
early childhood but elementary
education and was a kindergarten
teacher back in nineteen ninety
four I started and I know that
when I graduated I thought I had
all these preconceived notions
of what was going to be like in
the reality was not at all like
that so as I went through the
school year they were.
Challenging behaviors that I had
no skills to know how to manage
and so I'm just wondering for
early childhood education
educators when they're dealing
with children at this very
vulnerable impressionable age
when we're really developing a
lot of the nervous system and
that the foundation of no
development what types of
continuing education if any are
required for our educators Mr
chair Senator the there there
are a number of training is just
around child development child
growth and development for in
that forty five hours
certificate but what we've laid
out in our five year strategic
plan as at all early childhood
professionals need to have
access to trauma responsive
professional development trauma
responsive caregiving so we've
been working with CYFD the
children youth and families
department and they're
behavioral health division and
at New Mexico State University
to identify under our chief
health officer Dr Gonzales how
we can scale this up because I
think you're absolutely right
anybody working with young
children needs to understand
their behaviors and what their
behaviors are signaling to us
and what kind of support they
might need so are we also and
the legislature has been very
generous with investing in the
infant early childhood mental
health consultation which we
think will be a lot of benefit
to an early childhood
professional in a classroom
children with behaviors and
being able to consult with
someone about.
What other strategies they could
use if the child needs to be
referred referred them but often
times it's just building the
confidence in the competencies
of that early childhood educator
and maybe helping with room
arrangement and other ways they
can reduce stress and create a
more quality environment in that
childcare classroom.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary for that response I
think that if we can get this
right we can provide the
training for as many adults who
interact with children as
possible so that we can help
children really reach their full
potential and become more
successful individuals we could
go a long way in reducing
violent crime in New Mexico
because I think that that's a
real group because when you
don't have that solid foundation
and early childhood years it
just sets you up for trying to
solve conflict in more violent
and aggressive ways so if we can
get this right I think we're
going to see some real benefits
in our the long term so thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you
Come back to a lot of questions.
A lot of special
We talked about early childhood.
For those who are facing
Representative.
Owner.
A lot of legislators and jump on
the bandwagon.
Incentive.
That led to tractors farm.
Hi costs.
because.
In order to this last.
Said that we are not enough for
pre K..
Use
a.
To
find out of the work.
Again since.
And then.
The and in trouble again.
That.
Before.
For.
That.
Mr chair.
Is that right.
Tell us if there's a court case
that started early childhood.
years ago and started the
general what they're at reform
is the.
Vaccines.
We we have it in terms of the
the original cohort and then
some of the some of the more
recent cohorts and what what we
consistently see is that
you know you get a pretty big
pretty big bang for the Buck
with pre K. with K. three K.
five plus you know that that is
it's a significant effectively
but it's it's that extended
learning effect as a a little
smaller pope smaller than that
which makes sense right with pre
care most essentially adding a
year of learning with extended
learning K. five plus reading
ten to twenty five days that's
going to take awhile to build up
and it's going to basically also
be based on the participation of
the students over time
with child care we've we've had
a more difficult time finding
those types of the faxes as we
mentioned we we found other
benefits including increased
well child visits increased
dental visits of better income
for the family but the the
effects the age educational
facts we found through child
care have tended to be
relatively smaller in
kindergarten and then fade out
over time.
I mean Madam senator I think
that's a gold apartment as long
term education children and not
fading out with with child.
The other things and then just
one per persons that.
We should be creating
efficiencies in in this program
right you can expand it in
similar increased my numbers
because it's I've expanded
eligibility for a family of four
making under twenty thousand
dollars but is that really where
the quality needs to be I mean
raising the level is not where I
don't think it needs to be an
expansion you in one committee
said that in McKinley county in
northwest New Mexico that is a
desert for early childhood
education.
Those are some of the most
vulnerable people that we have.
You haven't targeted that to
make that efficiency in in the I
don't know if you have or not
you may have some that may be a
mistake.
On my part but if we're having
trouble getting it out the way
it is right now.
Why the met mass expansion.
but I mean I I ask this question
and everybody in there and then
the room's gonna raise our hands
is you want me to raise your
taxes.
You want me to raise your taxes
because we're not getting
fishing season government and we
need more money I don't think
people are gonna grief I say
owner right your taxes ten
percent for early childhood so
we can target that in so we
should have efficiencies in
government you can talk about
smaller class sizes and
everything else but there should
always try to be efficiencies in
government in the middle it's
it's hardening in your starting
this from the ground up but
we're gonna come back we may get
Courtney in New York some some
questions and make when you come
back in and talk about that in I
would caution you
can I respond the other caution
before it for a let you respond.
Is that I've been here long
enough to know and not as long
as some people right.
Don't back the legislature in
the corner as many back just in
the corner and try to create
programming that we don't look
at and proven work together on
then we get into a fight and in
we have the dollars in the and
we don't want to do that we want
you to be successful.
We want to be successful but
don't back us in a corner we see
you got to do this programming
and we're gonna expand without
your approval it takes time you
should you should consult with
the legislature as we move
forward so we understand what
you're doing and not say we got
federal money so into the mass
expansion that we want you to
fund that's not fair to us it's
not fair to the kids in the
program and it's not fair to
your success in your agency
seeking comment from there so
the executive budget reflects
meeting all these meeting
eligibility and doing everything
and it does not increase it
increases it but we don't
there's no we're not asking for
mass expansion we're asking for
the land grant permanent fund
which that seventy percent of
people voted for in the early
childhood trust fund which is
growing when I make three points
expanding preschool is never
going to reach are vulnerable
infants and toddlers and as I
said eighty percent of the brain
develops in the first three
years of life so we all need to
be concerned about where infants
and toddlers are every day
that's going to return thirteen
percent annually for every
dollar invested in high quality
care you're gonna see reduction
in corrections expenses you're
gonna see reduction special
education going to see reduction
in remediation and and K. twelve
but not unless we invest in high
quality care from prenatal all
the way through I.
Thank you madam secretary but we
back at some point go through
that and and the.
To our end up.
Thank you thank you.
Yes.
Thank you.
You guys entirely clear the room
so we can in our presenters
started in.
Read.
Fire away anytime you're ready
all right.
You might as well start in just
you talk louder than them in the
league hi can talk louder than
anybody.
Pretty much
the chairman manuals members of
the committee thank you for
having us here today the topic
of discussion for today is the
first one home visiting program
we are happy to come back and
talk about pre K. at any time as
you know it's a very important
program to going in New Mexico I
do want to acknowledge as you
already did senator Munoz the
valiant Dennis's in the room
here with us today and I think
everybody probably remembers
that the big push towards first
one home visiting in pre K. was
created largely during Diane
Dennis's administration and she
continues to be passion and then
help us maintain these critical
programs in New Mexico so I when
introduced to I have here with
me today this is tackle Johnson
tackle is the director of the
first time program that is part
of the Santa Fe community
college president rally would be
here today with us she has
participated in this
presentation but she had a board
meeting so we couldn't get our
this is merry of the Cerro who
is the first born home visitor
and of course you already know
but I want to make sure she's
that the table Kate noble who
will be succeeding me as CEO of
going of New Mexico after the
legislative session so we're
sort of one person right now.
Kate the Kate and I are that I
also want to recognize
Representative Susan Herrera who
had a lot to do with the
creation of the first born
program everything to do with
the creation of the first point
program many years ago so this
is really a Senate finance kind
education meeting and we're here
to shine a light to celebrate
the twenty fifth anniversary of
the first one program which is
important to New Mexico and to
shine a light on this critical
program and the and the really
critical nature of continuing
first born home visiting in the
state of New Mexico now and into
the future I'm gonna talk a
little bit about what that is I
also want to recognize and thank
Senator minnows Michael could
Senator Padilla Nancy all the
P. nats Senator Rodriguez I'm
sorry forget my formality all
the people who've been so
instrumental in the first born
program and funding for the
first point program since day
one and so thank you to the
legislature for continuing to
support these critical programs
and we know that you will in
future I want to highlight New
Mexico's investment and the need
unique local character of
firstborn which is also really
important thing first one was
created in New Mexico for New
Mexico families and it began in
Silver City in nineteen ninety
seven first one was also named
one of the nation's ten most
innovative an example of
exemplary prevention programs
and in your packet I'm not
following along on a power point
but in your packet is the
journal article that recognizes
that accomplishment first one is
also a high hi impact on
visiting program it is evidence
based even though it is not
attained make via per.
Rueful yet so Medicaid funding
is still a question but it is an
evidence based program those
studies were conducted by Dr
Rebecca Kilborn a long time ago
and you have another journal
article that talks about that.
And then I just kinda want to
note that the legislature was
very helpful at the same time
that first born was being
created and home visiting was
being funded in helping us pass
the home visiting accountability
which isn't really important
part of the home visiting
structure.
First one is New Mexico's home
grown culturally responsive
universal access home visiting
program a lot of words but
important ones local home phone
universal access it also
represents an incredible
opportunity for promoting strong
families in preventing issues
especially through expansion.
In smaller more rural
communities first born is
designed to do well in rural
communities we need first born
to work for children and
families for another twenty five
years and beyond I'm gonna turn
it over to tackle Johnson now
who manages the model office at
the is director of the model
office at this intimate
community foundation and the is
the expect.
Think of what might thank you
thank you thank you chairman yes
and members of this committee
I'll highlight a little bit of
what Catherine also said that
first morning and it's part of
home visiting.
Mexico and home visiting is
really about prevents problems
that can come up later on and
promoting the health and well
being of our young children and
families who are caring for them
there's a couple things about
first born that I think really
special and want to highlight
here I've been involved in home
visiting in New Mexico for
twenty three years and with
first born since two thousand
and eight so I came in with our
early head start with my
background and really working
with families who were at risk
as determined by that program
and when I came to first born I
was the first time I've worked
in the universal program there
are hardly any universal
programs in home visiting and I
think it's a really special
aspect of first born and means
that the stigma of participating
is gone so everyone can
participate and feel good about
that.
Even though our name is first
born and we started there we
have grown to the meet the needs
of communities and now serves
any family with a child under
five years old any birth order
so that anybody in a community
can access first born there.
We are evidence based as has
been mentioned and you'll find
that article from pediatrics
that was published in two
thousand sixteen and one of the
things I really love about that
research was that it showed
across socio economic status and
family experience.
Statistically significant
outcomes in the areas of health
health care utilization and
accident prevention I think
that's really powerful when we
think about all of our children
and families here in New Mexico.
We are successful and really
thrive and enjoy working in
small communities tribal
communities center steadily
adding those types of programs
to the programs that we serve
across the state.
We're very grateful for the
funding and support from the
junior bill in twenty twenty two
that allowed for another large
research project to begin that
is under way and we are working
with researchers at UNM to get
that started and get more
reserves for first born to look
at what's working well for
families how we can improve
things and move continue to move
the model towards evidence
status with the federal stamp of
approval with May be.
So we are growing working while
we're we are in the different
communities across New Mexico
and very much appreciate the
legislative support this
effective and local programs
thank you thank you very much
for that do you many just one
minute and then I'll close we're
done thank you maybe go to Kate
for a few moments Kate now okay
thank all right good afternoon
chairman you listen committee
members thank you so much for
having me in just so grateful
for everything you've all done
for New Mexico and continue to
do and I'm here to share a story
is a home visitor for growing up
in its whole working with first
born curriculum I'm just so
proud and humbled to come here
and talk about families and a
family in particular that I
worked with and I'm gonna talk
about a prenatal family Mexico
pair to different families that
I know about one did not and was
not looking of coming to home
visiting early on and shared a
story about going through
pregnancy having a child and
dealing with some post partum
depression and what a hard
difficult time that was not
having lots of resources and
education to students with new
to parenthood and didn't know
what to expect needless to say
that was a dark cloud in it was
a really hard time sh this this
mother went to her OBGYN was
told you know if you find
yourself in a bad way to get to
the hospital that's stayed with
her for a long time and kind of
marks her first story no.
The I'm a home visitor and
working with this one family I
had a mom who was able to come
to home visiting luckily a
little bit before she gave
birth.
She shared with me very similar
to the the family though you
just shared about she had some
issues with things that in the
past but just very excited about
what was about to happen but
there's a lot of no knowing what
she shared with me I was able to
share first board curriculum
evidence based some some really
good important information.
And support I was there on a
weekly basis just helping her
with strategies tips things to
prepare she went on to let me
know you know whatever story was
she had her baby there was some
some moments where
the fear kind of overtook her
but she was so grateful for the
support and information that I
was able to share with her.
This child is now a toddler and
not a month goes by that she
doesn't tell me thank you thank
you for giving me that support
that I was able to to.
To celebrate yes this child and
get the help that I needed the
comparison was my first mom
share with me a lot of shame she
didn't know she had a lot of
fear that she was going to be
able to carry when when when a
medical professional tells you
just get to the hospital you
find yourself in a bad way well
this month that I work with the
my home visiting caseload has
said you know thank you for
giving me the support I felt
very comfortable talking sharing
with people and and had some
great strategies to work with so
what I can say for sure is that
I know when we support our
families we really strengthen
our community and again I just
appreciate all of your help
thank you thank you thank you
very much for that information
thank you Maria just quickly in
closing at you know again Maria
brought up really important
points in that if a mama wants
first one moment gets first born
that's the way the program is
designed some of the programs
around the state have a lot more
sense then up front and it's not
the first one doesn't do
assessment but the connection
between the home visitor and the
mama as early after the birth.
Research shows immediately after
the birth of the baby the
introduction of the home visitor
needs to happen so those are
important things in maintaining
a home visit that first point
home visiting program in New
Mexico so as you heard from tech
lower poised for growth.
Community college is a place for
growth especially in smaller
programs and geographically
Anders underserved communities
we want to ensure that first
born as an evidence based on
home loan program that is
culturally responsive to New
Mexico families can grow to
support more communities we ask
your support and the support and
partnership of the CCD in
expanding first born in keeping
this important program strong
for New Mexico's diverse
families and communities I know
that both the executive budget
and the LFC budget have put in a
million dollar increase for
first born in I mean for home
visiting into the budget and we
may be talking to you about
that.
So thank you Catherine every
moment it shows your passion
your commitment you retired and
you're you're really not you
just sent.
Right.
Thank you and of course our
president from going through
Mexico now with K. noble welcome
okay appreciate it Senator
Gonzales and then we have
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you madam chair of.
So does this program will
coordinate with the grads
program.
And madam chair and Senator
Gonzales thank you for that
question we as the program has
moved to the community college
and we have been growing our
connection to hire and we've
been working this year starting
to plant those seeds around
really coordinating much more
with grants programs and have
been working in the last couple
of months to expand and create
new curriculum that is a student
parent curriculum specific for
students that are parents in the
grads program and also new to
like SFC seer other higher
education institutions so we are
building that out as we speak
we've always worked with young
parents but we're really looking
to solidify that partnership
between grant programs and
community college as students
make that transition and our
parents at the same time.
Very well thank you thank you
madam chair thank you senator
all right senator Correa
Hemphill thank you madam chair
thank you so much for your
presentation all of your good
work my mistake in we're was
first born started in Silvercity
it was at what nineteen ninety
seven I nineteen ninety seven
thank you madam chair because I
remember I had my first baby in
nineteen ninety three and my
sister had her first baby about
six months later and we were
just commiserating about how
challenging it was and what it
be great if there is like
support in the community that we
could reach out to in state I
don't know what to do My Baby
won't go to sleep or you know I
need a shower just having
somebody to listen to him you're
just that you're you're sleep
deprived you don't know what to
do and you're frustrated and
it's nothing like you imagine so
thank you so much for the work
you're doing but I can't help
but notice on the map that the
city is not on.
Can you can you tell me a little
bit about what happened there.
Insurance Senator humble
there has been with the Medicaid
reimbursements and other
opportunities and different
national programs in the state
to different programs have
chosen different routes and so
our program remains very focused
on promotion and prevention and
each community has different
needs around that and more
intervention services and I
would say Silvercity with the
current family situations that
they're looking at we're looking
at more of interventions
continuum rather than a purely
prevention program like what we
have and ended up looking at a
different and choosing a
different model to meet that
need.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that explanation can you
talk a little bit more about the
differences in those models and
intervention as opposed to
prevention so is it did you and
what did you use to make that
decision.
So madam chair and senator
humble I don't know if I totally
understand but like as the model
office we chose to be fully
preventative because we feel
that in those early months and
years there's so much transition
and change that everyone is at
risk at some point something
goes wrong so that's our focus
on prevention as we know
probably there's a big challenge
that will come up in almost
every family's life during those
early months and years
intervention looks more like a
behavioral health
assessing for risk before
letting someone into the program
maybe because of limited
resources or other reasons so
it's more of like a diagnostic
based or assessment based
entrance into the program and
then often I including more sort
of behavioral health
interventions rather than
prevention implications thank
you madam chair thank you for
that clarification so I had my
first baby in nineteen ninety
three and then I had a child in
nineteen ninety six my son
Nicholas who was born with a
very rare genetic syndrome and
multiple physical disabilities
and cognitive disabilities as
well and he's been in a
wheelchair since he was four
when he had of his osteosarcoma
diagnosis and have have left
like amputation back I remember
taking him home from the
hospital and just feeling light
shouldn't there be some level of
support do you have
employees who are specially
trained to provide support to
parents who have the infants
with disabilities students it's
not anything I know of Senator
Rodriguez and I have that in
common and it's part of a club
that you never imagine yourself
being and and certainly the need
for support and very specialized
intervention this support during
those early years is is critical
for the family because of the
level of stress and just
uncertainty that you're dealing
with.
Madam chair and senator what we
look to do in first born is we
work with any family so we have
many families in a similar
situation where a child is born
whether they were expected
disabilities or not or diagnoses
that happened and so we're
really focused on supporting the
parent and the family through
that process still thinking
about like what are the things
to celebrate what can we help
you with here let's get in other
folks to do those other
resources and so
what we would still work with
early intervention we try to
create more of a team one
behavioral health is needed or
early intervention or more like
intervention type services we
bring in others and work
together collaboratively to do
that and there I think some
programs have chosen to pick
models that feel like they could
maybe kind of do a little bit of
both together.
Rather than kind of creating a
team is strictly staying with
the prevention model that we're
really focused on that makes
sense madam chair did they have
extra training if they're
dealing with like it's more
specialized situation like that
yes Sir or madam chair and
senator yes I mean all of the
the home visitors receive a lot
of training on all of these
different topics part of the
first born model is to have a
post partum home visitor who is
focused on of medical support in
the home so for mostly referring
to the doctor but has more
medical training and also
lactation and early feeding
training so can help with those
things and then really again the
focus of the home visitor is to
provide that support so you to
mint the communication the care
at the thinking creatively
together about what can we do to
support you that really looks
very similar across all family
experiences so we do a lot of
training and we do think that a
lot of our core.
Interventions and supports work
across any parenting experience
and madam chair my last question
is do you have a hotline where
parents can call if they're
having a crisis and they're just
like at their wits and what the
support to have if it's midnight
and there's apparently just.
Needs to talk to somebody yes so
madam chair and senator I don't
know if we're if there's
something new since I've been
home visiting that you want to
add that I know during the
pandemic there's been a lot of
wonderful support on the side of
New Mexico to provide lines to
find other things to people of
anyone including parents who are
having mental health challenges
so we do at home visitors always
keep in mind that what is out
there we do not provide twenty
four hour support we do not have
a warmer hotline and there are
many out there around suicide
prevention put perinatal mood
disorder other things that we
definitely make sure that
parents have that information
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you thank you for your
responses we have Senator Campos
thank you said thank you very
much madam chair and of course
to the individuals that are here
thank you for your ongoing
commitment and lieutenant
governor thank you for your
interest in the work that you've
done over the years and of
course my condolences on the
loss of her he was a very strong
advocate for not only our
families but the the entire
state the question that I have
is in relation to the private
sector support do you all have
a break down in terms of the
dollars that you receive from
either not for profits or other
private donations that continue
to help to support the first
born program.
Yes madam chair and senator
Campos are you referring to the
model office or to the programs
that are running the first to
the programs that are running
the first born program across
across the state yeah so and
madam chair and senator these
are these programs operates
fairly independently and so they
all from my knowledge do get
some extra grant some programs
more than others to be able to
buy books for families or to be
able to offer other things that
might be outside of the scope of
what they ECECD funding pays for
so I don't have that exact
number on off the top of my head
but something that I could
follow up yes we can definitely
and so if I may um Mr chair in
in dealing directly with this
one of the concerns as we go
forward in some communities are
more resources going and to help
with these programs but yet in
some of the others as an example
in the more seventy Galleria I
know that we do have additional
resources coming in but the the
need as we know across the state
is is an ordinance and and I
hope as we go along that we're
able to figure out more of the
coordination and how we can we
can address that because it
definitely is a is an important
issue and a much needed one
throughout the state thank you
very much Mr chair thank you
Senator Campos so Senator Woods
of thank you Mr and.
I'm got a little disconnect
going which is not unusual for
me so.
You're not a state contractor
you don't contract too early
childhood at all you do contract
to the yes we can yes you want
to take this so we do have ECECD
contracts for first born.
Local sites yet but sites yeah
okay yes so and then that's what
I was asking about because you
made statement Mr chair and
earlier about we had some money
in the budget for home visiting
so that's what I was wondering
about why would you apply for
that if you're flying through
early childhood our our agency
already so.
Am I missing something here you
don't want to apply directly.
You're applying to our agency
for your chair yes for contract
okay and you also get some
private funds on top of that.
First born has all along receive
some private dollars right now
the for Pueblo first one
programs that you see on the
state are funded buying corn.
Fully fully funded by.
So you know the balance has
there's always been some private
funding for first point and we
can apply through the state of
course we just want to expand
first born rural counties in a
more robust way and other
counties which is why I'm
addressing the budget issue the
eight million this new dollars.
Okay in my last question is how
much trouble do you have with
your audits.
Financial audits
of its going back to the state
because you're using state
monies and you have to be
audited for that so you don't
have any problem auditing
between your private funds in
your state funds and keeping
everything straight Mr chair.
How.
Mr chair Senator Woods.
No we don't have any trouble
okay so you're you're current on
your.
Okay thank you very much thank
you Mr very well thank you Sir.
Is there anyone else.
Well.
Thank you thank you very much
for being here.
Thank you senator and members of
the committee.
The analysis.
The state state
agency today also for the maybe
the.
The Mexico state fair.
You're sure to find for you
here.
Yes go ahead.
So this.
K. where cells.
The state fair.
The other ones are percent.
recent commissions.
Your cell.
We're going to.
Thank you for.
Eric you want to get Roland yes.
Right now.
Eric let's get rolling hi Mr
chair members of one ninety.
my name is direction a on the
LFC analyst for the state fair.
sitting next to me is
Dan morning the executive
director of the state fair
sitting next to him is Laurie
Siaka.
the executive analyst for state
fair.
the executive recommended a
fifty percent and LFC
recommended in eighty seven
point five percent increase in
general fund revenue to support
the African American performing
arts center.
given prior year budget
shortfalls in the need to
supplement state fairs budget
with general fund revenue LFC
recommended maintaining other
revenues such as concessions and
entry fees commensurate with FY
twenty three operating budget.
LFC recommended more contractual
services for a pack and the
executive recommended more for
personnel costs for minimum wage
increases and a pack
appropriations.
the executive recommended
language specifying that the
general fund.
Appropriations are for a pack in
general well LFC is language
specifies the general fund
revenues are for a pack
operations and staffing is very
small change difference between
that and then I just want to
mention I I know you have the
the bullet underneath the
underneath state fair on capital
outlay and so on LFC is November
capital outlay one million or
greater quarterly report the HSD
had six projects totaling
fifteen point seven million all
over three and except for one
which was the kitchen for a pack
and with that Mr chair I'll go
ahead in pass it off to Laurie
agency or agency Jakob she has
any other comments.
Good afternoon Mister chair.
The I do not have any additional
comments at this time thank you.
And with the permission of over
to a general manager Dan morning
or presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I would like to
quickly introduce a couple folks
that are very important very
special us one CFO bill Northey
and he's retiring here in the
next few days and he's put an
enormous amount of effort and
work into the state and helping
us with the fair what we do is
work is greatly appreciated but
for handing off to good hands
keris mouse we over here we'll
put her into the fire so to
speak and I want to do this one
of my dear friends and a great
ally of the fair but
commissioner Dr Claire for blood
to help or your support for the
fair so I know you like me to be
brief and I will be so we will
go ahead and talk about what the
my favorite subject the state
fair
you know we don't have to talk
about that if everybody's room
understands has been a rough
couple years
of the State Faris had its share
of.
Obstacles to overcome as we
speak being enterprise you know
we we're shut down and it's a
difficult the for the
entertainment industry to get
back into gear it is just now
we're starting to see pre
pandemic numbers and attendees
as well as shows a lot of shows
of of left and gone out of
business unfortunately what we
are in always effort and to
provide new shows up for us as
we have all of their local
fighting championships will
happen here in the next couple
of weeks that's a televised
event so very exciting to get
new partners into our facility
but I want to talk a little bit
about the Mexico state fair
twenty twenty two what a fair
fantastic.
One of the big things that I
want to talk about is that the
revenue was up to million
dollars more than it has been
previously we saw the numbers of
attendance four hundred and
seventy five three hundred
eighteen thousand people came
back to the fair this is the
people's of it make no mistake
it is for New Mexicans and they
overwhelmingly came back in
support of the junior livestock
shows it was so great to have
him back there were people in
doubt to know what they would
come back they did not when they
came back they came back in
record numbers over two thousand
livestock entries raised over
six hundred and ten thousand
four twenty five dollars for the
four H. and FFA kids you know
these young men and women work
so hard year round and the super
bowls the fairness that proved
to be that so we're glad that
those numbers are back up again
I think it's important also know
that you know we're forecasting
as we believe that we would be
running about three million
dollars is for Paul for this
year that is now we believe down
to one point two five because
we've again increased our
revenues and had four shows are
starting to open up a can work
very hard for this we also saw
an increase in the the card the
payment because more people of
their rights part of the whole
sales were up as well as our
credit cash sponsorship we're
glad to have as a partner
Senator.
You energy company they were a
large sponsor of the fair for
this year as well as pandemic
energy and several other so
again you know we feel that
attendance for the fair was
almost back to pre condemn
Dimmick levels also whatever the
future fair this year for the
country over twenty two
different fair came to see what
we did how we do things and how
we do it just a little bit
different became C. R. ward
winning century station they saw
our of cannabis educational
exhibit which is what it is it
but it is something that is part
of New Mexico now it's a I
recall for profit we need to
educate people that's what we
did over fifty thousand people
came through that exit I hate to
say most of the K. my caller
here so it was interesting to
see that the demographic is yes
you will this was a something
that know what the fair has been
able to do at this point time so
very from being innovative in
that
We still serve as a beacon of
hope for the people of the
Mexico I will tell you that
there was one point eight
million pounds of food the
district through our through our
facility with our partnership
with Rebecca foodbank neck
continues today over one point
five million meals were served
so we're proud of that work that
goes on we work the department
of department of health working
on vaccines and and we also do
not shut flu shot Spirit affair
and your around that are awfully
market open air market we are
involved in the community as a
witness during the fires it's
important to state that we are
receive actuation point were
also on RSS site and so when the
person declaration came down to
activate FEMA the department
workforce engineers within forty
eight hours of activation we had
FEMA and important for mention
years on site and moving
resources to those fires down
south as well as up north in the
state wonderfully and is the
proportion our staff it'll sell
to handle that as well as run
offense so we'll probably work
that we do and understand that
any natural disasters of the
fairgrounds is there and we
always have been we always will
be you'll inflation that is not
anything that of the fair's new
to you know our costs have gone
up exponentially as everyone
else's has utilities
unbelievably expensive of cost
of of employees of cost of goods
from you know from anything from
fuel the toilet paper it's all
gonna vote we have to watch
those things we do we're running
the for with less people than we
ever have and we still want a
great product and we will
continue to do that work and
it's important to know that we
have big events there that bring
a good economic value to the
state of for instance a
gathering nations as a twenty
four million dollar impact to
the state of New Mexico drug
spent
State for a little you know what
the the shows that we do year
round and one point four million
people to come to the grounds of
these promoters it's a seventy
five million dollar positive
impact and we have a lease with
the with the downs of
Albuquerque understanding that
twenty six percent of that gross
that they go goes to the state
of New Mexico and twenty percent
of the horsemen and up two point
seven five to the fair so it's a
great win win situation great
use of the property
we're getting better and
Capital money we will continue
to make those great improvements
such as our new food court area
where the infrastructure was
approved it was a huge success
and that now we have one of the
following building the
agricultural building is going
to completely re done and we're
excited about that because not
only will it help and enhance
what we do to Sarah now I can
use it as year round leasable
facility for Justin examples and
I don't want to rambling on
because I will but I stand for
any questions you might have at
this point time thank you for
your time thank you Senator
Gonzales thank you Mr chairman I
just have a couple of things
So with our education program
our kids still allowed to go to
the state fair and count as a
major conditional day.
Center of chairman and senator
we have a school these programs
APS it doesn't have a day as
they had in the past but a lot
of the most but we had sixteen
thousand kids come to our school
these programs and that's free
to the kids as well as the the
people to come in several what's
happened is that APS has not
been able to participate fully
because of cost transportation
costs is the big excuse or
reason that they've used we
think that that's the greatest
educational platforms to fair
you can learn more about New
Mexico and you can during the
state fair I would so we
endeavor to to continue to push
that in our program continues to
grow on school days.
Mr chairman of there for a while
it was discounted I mean Public
Education Department did not
allow.
To make a field trip to the
state fair and be counted as an
educational day.
So that's being lifted.
On chairman Senator we're not
sure we're if it's new APS but
we know that charter schools and
other schools and and a lot of
both the public schools that do
come yes they do it's free to
the we do not charge in the kids
with the schools to to come out
to the fair itself it's a
Freeman it is a great education
support and know that chocolate
Bill don't come from a brown
calf.
I'm glad to hear that and.
We can follow up on that you
know that so because so there
for a while districts were not a
lot.
To confidence and educational
day I think that was totally
wrong in the.
And when that came about but I
will double check on that the
other part the House Cholesky
since you mentioned utilities.
Is there any thought or.
study to maybe put some a lot of
solar panels.
On chairman center absolutely of
the four.
The two this sounds crazy but
when we checked earlier this is
many years ago we look into
solar and because the fair
grounds is such a large user of
the two is it was cheaper for us
to stay with PNM believe it or
not then to go incur the cost
and that we would save much
money now that is kind of
changed so we have converted
through capital money and and
reporter the the stuff that
we've done for that that's been
updated the the lighting for
instance LED for more energy
efficient Seoul's kilowatt hours
that we've been using are
getting dangerously close that's
under fifty thousand once a year
one singles are than our rates
will go up so yes we are looking
into that we've also looked into
but again I've been to pattern
energy is one of our sponsors
we're looking into that as well
so of those things are being
investigated as we speak yes.
Well thank you thank you for
your work thank you Mr chairman.
What's on Mr chair.
You made the of.
You made statements sure that
that twenty percent twenty six
percent of the gross of the
casino.
does it come to the state fair
commission or does it come to
the general fund all.
So the great question no it goes
right to the state does not only
thing state fair commission gets
is the two point seven five
million in lease payments they
have a land lease for now for
the next twenty five years so
that's guaranteed.
And and who Mr chair who does
the upkeep on.
That that part of the the
racetrack in the to see.
Well.
Chairman of the center that is
the downs of Albuquerque they
are solely responsible for
that'll keep in the repairs.
Okay.
I haven't been on the state
fairgrounds in a while do we
still have the same tingly
Coliseum or have we rebuild.
Chairman Senator unfortunately
senator Munoz has not been able
to bring a screw gun out to take
typically part but we're in
every to do that but also
understand that this nineteen
fifty six facility that ward
Rogers and Dale Evans and
trigger opened up is still a
viable AC facility know what's
not as new as some of the other
facilities but we've been able
to upgrade for instance the HVAC
systems to lighting for state of
the art brand new we've done
things to make it more appealing
to promoters for able to use it
one of the things we believe
that will happen and yes we
would love to see a new arena
happened at the fairgrounds but
it till that happens to glee is
still heavy lifting up facility
and understand that it is still
one of the largest facilities in
the state to be able to house
some of these access to work
through of New Mexico the part
one forty with people like it or
not the superstructure of that
roof is amazing and for these
big stage acts they require that
so we're able to gather some of
those shows that would bypass is
normally and a notice on your
capital outlay.
some of your projects your
double a packed kitchen addition
is still on finished you're not
doing much with that can you
elaborate on that.
On chairman and senator that is
up was not part of our I. C. IP
that was something that former
representative sure way
Stapleton's put into for for
fund are much for us to complete
at this point time working with
Representative up Pam Herndon to
figure out exactly what they're
going to need to require going
forward with that addition so
again the that money that that
is not been spent because of
really not been a clear
definition not just the kitchen
one of the things that was
brought to my attention as it is
it's a performing arts center
and not a community center and
so we want to make sure that
that if we do it we do it the
way that best serves the
community okay.
And
So you're pretty wealthy
Well up for own your.
All of your severance tax of
capital outlay stuff you're
you're pretty will spin up in.
everything's pretty square on
that right now chairman center
yes we we have what most of our
projects identified for the year
understand that when we receive
the money in August we're in the
middle of fair so there's not a
lot of big projects we can do
with that money but I can tell
you right now my capital
projects managers bureau right
now so we are we're getting
after the end of a lot of great
improvements to not only the
infrastructure that you don't
see but the things you do see it
enhancements to some of these
buildings that the new rules for
instance instead of repairs you
know utilizing buildings that
are just here Representative
first state fair are now used
year round those are the things
we're trying to do one of the
things that we also but in
different to do right now is up
a master plan for the future I
mean it's been tough for us the
last few years we're just trying
to survive basically and and
stay afloat and and be able to
serve the people of Mexico what
it's done it's time now to look
what what's next have are you
still attracting that Arabian
horse show.
On chairman Sir no they they are
moved on to also in Oklahoma
City that's where their home is
again you know it's amazing what
a you know back in the day in
Oklahoma City two hundred
million dollars of a new
investment in their fair park
did and also the City of
Oklahoma City and Tulsa gave a
lot of money for them to go
Right now I mean we fill those
dates and what we we're doing
fine I mean if they came back
knocking on the door obviously
we don't we would entertain
that'll those offers.
Okay.
Ordered up today.
Chairman absolutely center this.
Thank you Mr thank you I don't
see any other questions
you know take more than a screw
gun multi.
In this morning.
We we should look at
redeveloping the fair has been a
conversation about putting a
fifty million dollar renew
their.
I thought we were going to do it
last year and it fell apart it
in I mean no matter where you go
you need an arena in New Mexico
me my son talked about going to
those fights this weekend but
the roads are snowy and icy
right I think there this last
week and there are some this
last four weeks yeah and so
professionally and I see and
then fill the risk is worth for
award but will probably try to
ten those but at some point we
got to redevelop that area we're
going to make a commitment to
redevelop it and update it and
have a first class I mean I
don't care if it's for soccer I
don't care you know if there's
indoor football there if there's
what what the facility needs but
you're not gonna grow stating
that she have the type of
facility that people want to go
too much concerts and I hope so
I don't think I don't know if I
was born when Roy Rogers and
Dale Evans.
But I did see Bob Hope one time
my dad made me go with with
former governor Bruce king.
And so we had a C. Bob Hope it
team himself.
It was exciting for me but they
have been for my father.
I think Lawrence Welk was there
one time he also maybe go see
Lawrence Welk it and so.
Chairman also you know don't
forget the king was there so you
know helped almost was in the
building so we had a lot of good
success with that building but
you're absolutely right it is
time to look for the future and
yo being top of kirke New Mexico
is the most desirable secondary
market in the country not
because I said so these are
people that are in industry
we're talking about live nation
AG overview group up these big
access there here in New Mexico
lady Gaga absolutely they're
just at the Los truckstop in the
next venue there by passing us
because we don't have the venue
but it's not just about the
concerts it's it's special
events a big events and that we
can do better thank you you go
up stairs the for four incoming
put fifty million in your budget
and and see what reaction you in
the come back to us and tell us
how successful you are giving
agreement to do that.
You can check in your budget I
can't see him but so should
thank you but at some point it
in New Mexico's one want to
change in the visionary right.
You actually want Snoop Dogg
there and that that the bulk of
the unit not learning that the
four H. kids learn about four
leaf clover.
You make jokes about that how
they look on the.
thank you for presentation
appreciate it.
We have.
Racing commission and then that
we're gonna council's pull.
cruise the analyst Kayla.
Have any racing commission.
No no sentencing a former racing
commissioner entertainment.
Can you start us off yeah okay.
Alright good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee today we have with us
the state receives commission.
we we're looking at agency code
four six nine.
And in the volume let me grab
that page number for you guys in
case here for those of you that
are following along.
Thank you page one ninety two.
I'm gonna quickly the the
differences between the
executive and the legislative
budget for a budget
recommendations for the racing
commission.
The LFC recommends.
A ninety six point nine thousand
less and the general fund then
the executive recommendation of
both recommendations included a
million dollars and other
revenue and that and now is
comprised of seven hundred
dollars in revenue from that
resource testing fund and three
hundred from industry racing
revenues the LFC recommendation
includes a thousand at yeah a
hundred thousand and fund
balance noting that the endpoint
testing balance replenishes then
the LFC recommendation is a five
percent increase from the
agencies FY twenty three
operating budget.
and with that I will go ahead
and pass it over to DFA
counterpart gonna be fast.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee
BC executive recommends about
thirty two thousand above the
LFC recommendation for personal
services and basically the
executive recommended less in
other costs category and the
LESC recommended the agency
requests level for that
particular for employee and
Stuart travel costs both the
executive and the LESC support
language in for for Barnes
language for six hundred
thousand dollars to allow the
agency to use the FY and testing
Fund in.
It's it's basically the language
is there for you wanted me to
read it or not and as far as
performance measures the
executive and the LESC are
income on in consensus and I
have if with your permission I'd
like to go ahead and turn this
over to the racing commission
director Ismael fiscal.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee to my left I
have miss amber Trujillo our CFO
she'll be open for any questions
as well but that the
presentation the racing
commission
service the racing community and
the people the waiter on New
Mexico's horse races we're here
to keep the racing is fair and
square as possible the agencies
work hard in my time here since
March twenty six two thousand
sixteen to really work hard at
that dissolving the drug abuse
in the racing animals we've done
very well at that we feel that
we've had our our glass ceiling
and we're wanting to do better
and eager to do better but we do
need some resources to do that
another thing that's infringed
upon us has been the horseracing
integrity and safety act also
known as hisa that is a federal
legislation that was passed in
twenty twenty that rolled out
at July first twenty twenty two
with the safety program
questions that legislation and
now starting January first
twenty twenty three the anti
doping portion was supposed to
allow but because of some legal
battles so at the federal level
at up and been put on hold and
we're expecting it to be rolled
out sometime in March or April
that being said the hisa program
requires a lot more staffing for
the agency and and hear me out
it's not gonna sound right but
this is the way the program is
modeled as this the state is
going to have to pay for it you
the racing industry in in New
Mexico we're going to pay for it
the racing commission is going
to
enforce it and execute all all
the
The violations and so forth that
occur in racing and the federal
government dependent on us to do
all that so we're looking for a.
We need staff to do it we have a
small staff we have ten people
at our home office CFO's
compliance licensing we don't
have a lot of boots on the
ground we don't have a lot of
investigators we have to
investigators and pursuant to
the laws we have three
iterations Stewart's that that
do the regulation of the
racetrack so we're very small in
order for us to take on this
monumental task of enforcing the
horseracing integrity and safety
act which is mandated by the
federal government we are
looking to grow our agency and
we certainly want to continue to
make New Mexico racing up proud
and talked about at a national
level we have made a lot of
ground in these last seven years
since I've been here with our
drug violation so we're going to
see wanted improve but we we
can't do it until we get some
more resources and staff so that
that's exactly what we're
looking to move into this
upcoming here and I stand for
any questions.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
There would.
You're off to the races.
Thank you Mr.
For the
Then on and then.
We'll get fired up here.
Tell me about your hundred fifty
thousand and sanctions.
Twenty twenty three.
Mr chairman Senator Woods
members of the committee.
I don't know that.
That that that was actually
realized we had submitted a bar
request for that because we had
an issue with the attorney
general's office we were just
we're signed an attorney and
that person did not file
responses on behalf of the
racing commission so we were
given the loss in the quarter
law and we face potential
sanctions opposing counsels had
re uh petition to the courts to
sanction the racing commission
for that as of right now we've
we've had to submit under maybe
thirty some thousand forty
thousand dollars back and then
we just have another lawsuit
that we had to pay seventy five
thousand dollars
it in damages so
We we didn't we haven't realized
a hundred fifty thousand but we
thought it could get to that it
was a timing issue when we
submitted that we were.
We're going to need to Kate or
and or if they were going to
issue sanctions against us but
so far we just have to pay some
attorney fees and court costs
and so forth it hasn't hit us as
hard as it could of chairs same
plan of on all of the services.
Mr chairman Senator and members
of the committee and you don't
have to name the plane is now it
is it is a variety over thirteen
or fourteen Pete licensees.
Okay
Two areas in my district.
So the next question is you know
what is going to be.
Have you again anymore thought
R. is for any more action on
that.
License.
Mr chairman Senator Woods
members of the committee that.
That matter is still in
litigation and we just got a
mmhm motion our order to dismiss
our motion request to dismiss
the case so it's going to
continue on where it's going to
go it's going to be up to the
the judge that's handling that
matter so right now
it's just caught up in the court
whether this commission is going
to pursue it or not that's yet
to be seen in down the road.
So is that part of the
litigation expense that you're
asking for.
Mr chairman and senator and
members of the committee it is
not.
We have not gotten that far down
the road with damages or
anything in that case.
On.
So what so there's been a
recommendation for some special
litigation expense.
So.
And in particularly like to.
I know you can probably talk
about ongoing litigation so.
That's.
Mr chair
I guess I would ask if you
notice that you're talking about
Sunland park accounts for about
thirty six percent of the the
budget that you have the right
dose of thirty one percent do
you have to know off the top of
your head if Hobbes is still.
The highest.
And yielding.
Racetrack.
Mister chairman Senator with
members of the committee if you
mean high ceiling racetrack in
regard to their casino
work there in regards to their.
I'm actually talking about their
horse race no no
read also does the best live
handle they do a very strong
export signal as well there
there's good Sunland park as has
been very strong they're
predominately the the number one
mutual handling racetrack in the
state they provide a lot of
mutual taxed us down that
Albuquerque they do fairly well
because of their simulcasting
business throughout the year
there there number major
population center for so they
have Cathrynn go there
constantly and that so they they
actually probably I don't know
if they're perform someone but
it's very close on the on the.
On the money that they end up
giving generating for the are
you going testing fund but the
the part is not close to them
okay and your some of cast.
Is ever track have some cast.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
members of the committee every
track must simulcasted in order
to to be
They must run a live race meet.
Or they must import another
racetrack from New Mexico as far
as I am a Casco is and that
enables them to came as well.
So that so they can only import
from New Mexico they can import
from other tracks as well which
we do at for the patrons have
other
options to bet on like the
Kentucky Derby the Preakness the
Belmont the breeders Cup and so
forth but it ties in together
the horse racing Act says in
order to simulcasted you must be
conducting a live race meet or
import eight New Mexico
racetrack which means if you're
Albuquerque and reduces running
in order to Sam cast Albuquerque
has to put on the races for the
patrons there on the facility
any tie that into the new gaming
control board act which says in
order to gain you must.
The reading of live race meet.
Or you must be simulcasting it
all ties together to
simulcasting having the
permission to simulcasting or
face neck they have permission
to came in the gaming control
board act and and we really
don't have anything to say about
some of the
native American casinos or on
their.
Mister chairman Senator with
members of the committee now we
they're not licensed by us they
do their own thing.
And and so that we receive no
revenue off of that part of
their gaming that is correct.
Okay.
Hi your it.
The LFC recommends to additional
vets veterinary.
And
I know that the state that has
some.
degree of control over your
tracks also.
but these these that matters
here are just for.
Testing our technicians testing
hello.
Why are you requiring fits on
your racetrack other than that
tax and.
Maybe you could explain that
little that to Mister chair
Mister chairman Senator Woods
members of the committee.
Veterinarians are are high on
our priority.
Because it ties together with
the enhancement of animal
welfare our facilities
Because our men don't
necessarily speak our our I
don't know the and that any of
our it can pick up on what
horses has an infirmity
We believe regulatory
veterinarians and others a
difference between legislative
and regulatory veterinarians
we're looking for regulatory
veterinarians they will be the
advocate for the horse there is
the the mouthpiece for the our
are the ones that watch the
horses.
Warm up for the races or are
they're the ones that are
inspect the horses in the
morning prior to racing to see
if the horses have any
infirmities and make a decision
whether that horses fit to run
or not fit to run the agencies
fully aware of sensitive
sensitivity of catastrophic
injuries on our race tracks it's
something that we don't like to
see what's more damaging for
horse racing then for our
patients to see our die on a
race track and it's not pretty I
might add at all so we fill the
more due diligence we can do
before our runs
the more we can minimize
catastrophic injuries occurring
during the races.
Okay.
I know at one time there was.
That we can turn Mr chair of the
bill passed thank you very much
Senator which I think you beat
that dead horse or any.
The questions our state which is
the is is there anything else
that you in meeting your budget
with this for a with that I mean
we've added a bunch of stuff in
LFC is there any additional
thank you and your budget Mr
chairman members of the
committee you know that this
agency is extremely tiny
compared a lot of other agencies
I like to say we're a small
agency that takes on a big job
we're a regulate in a pretty
significant industry in the
state of New Mexico with over
five hundred million dollar over
maybe almost six hundred million
dollar economic impact we do a
lot of passion not a hard lot of
hard work and we just asking for
the resources to grow the agency
so we can do a better job we've
already done New Mexico proud on
a national level receiving a
national award for the work that
we do but as I mentioned earlier
we feel that we've hit a glass
ceiling and we're really looking
and eager to grow so we can do
better work to help sustained
the integrity and the well for
the horses in the state of New
Mexico.
I mean rephrase that question
you need additional funding in
your budget for you good with
what current that the direction
we always need additional
funding Mr chairman would you
tell us what it what the
national funding and how much it
would be in the in the in the
this is that Trujillo here.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
your time today
Initially when we started in
October we and we we had just
received a notification from SO
that we needed approximately are
additional positions I would say
approximately but to start this
off into basically
you know get the position to get
the program rolling we were
looking for a in additional
positions which would include
you know the investigators the
The two veterinarians and some
stewards
just to name a few positions on
this one point eight million
that we were looking for you
know was basically to pay for
the salaries and to kind of
implement his
is the executive director
mentioned you know this is a
program that they're trying to
implement piecemeal and again
the agency is not receiving any
funds at this point in time for
for this program.
And that the federal requirement
under ace.
Is that what you call say the
wrong name.
It Mr chairman it is just a
horseracing integrity and safety
act.
Thanks you think in that and if
you giving you a FTEs to me and
federal compliance can you get a
minute.
Your vacancies our reserve it to
forty percent.
It's low you know the vacancies
out.
Mr chairman if I may
basically it looks like they
have more vacant positions
because they have some racing
stewards which are basically
hired and then they're not you
know just they're not on full
time so it looks but in
permanent positions they have to
positions that are permanent
that are vacant and in addition
to that there's one that they
have requested which both the
executive and the LESC every
classified as a veterinarian
position.
So out of the nineteen.
Point eight plus the one term
position there that's how many
that are considered vacant
ginger and Mister chair members
of the committee as of October
sorry it might have been closer
August September timeframe the
agency how to funded vacancy
rate of seventeen percent and
there
me just check and see here on.
Funded agency rate of.
Sixteen.
Sort of.
Twenty point eight authorized F.
T. E.
they were costing up they had
filled seventeen and they have
three point eight vacancies at
September time frame those
seasonal workers or whatever you
wanna call right two of them
are.
So is the isn't that enough FTEs
to back fill up.
Yes Mr chairman that is.
What she said or what and.
At apercent yes the FTEs.
But you need a may have in FTEs
yes she said you had
seventeen build and then three
point eight vacancies and the
three point eight that is the
seasonal guys that come in for
the just the races yes Mr
Chairman is a I'm just want to
clarify how many you need so we
know if you're gonna be a
violation of federal law we need
to know that.
We need a minimum of eight
additional FTE ease to we feel
fully execute and roll out the
and are in force to his surprise
Graham.
If not the will of the fence to
to us if we don't give you the
FTEs if we don't comply with the
federal laws the the for the
federal on our race tracks they
will not allow our race tracks
to potentially do not race
anymore or cut off their export
signal which means each of our
five racetracks sends their
racing by a simulcast to betting
outlets across America and
across the world the federal
government will cut that off
that I mean less revenue
compared mutual taxes for the
the purses are in the state and
the the HSD.
And are the racinos
participating in that.
I think as much state to lose as
we do yes Mr chairman members of
the committee we we've got a lot
of grace from the federal
government right now they they
know that they're on a lot of
states I have a lot of resources
to do this knowing that you
think that to help fund this but
but that's not the way it's
working so I.
The agency that racing
commission is dedicated to
helping the race tracks pull
this off so that they can
conduct business as usual and
our racing facilities across New
Mexico.
A look at fixing the problem a
little bit no they're all the
way so what we're gonna try to
get out in this you have a real
quick have no more questions Mr.
What well it did but if we need
to leave all are you can be
quicker LESC what I'm what I'm
thinking is is
The race tracks their selves are
not.
The racing commission is the
regulator of the race track.
And and then the federal
government steps in and says you
need further regulation than
what you're doing right now.
And.
From what I understand they need
to veterinarians.
In place to do that further
regulation and then they need
some storage to go along with
that.
No.
Regarding the FTEs any pain
additional FTE ease compliance
with his yes Mr chairman Senator
Woods the the the list goes on
of of staff we need the safety
director we need to a medical
director we need a and the.
Thanks for regulatory vote that
Neri and protesting liaison an
investigation liaison as well
there will be our liaisons
between the New Mexico racing
Commission race tracks the
horsemen and the federal
government.
Okay thank you Mr.
Member that just a Mr Chairman
phone question the number of
veterans veterinarians that you
need is that to meet the federal
requirements or is that truly
what you need would do you
really need for vets or you know
to really do the job right are
we trying to make make good on
on our cars to the federal
government or we really do we
really have enough that's that
you have on payroll to cover all
of the horse racing in the state
of New Mexico Mister chairman
senator Byrd that excellent
question ideally if you look at
our strategic plan we we need
veterinarians just within the
internally to execute our our
programs but his the really and
has a big emphasis on animal
welfare and so with that.
That would.
Duties of a veterinarian
pursuant to has a loss is
enormous there's a lot of data
tracking a lot of data entry all
the pre race inspecting that's
going to need to be done all the
gathering of documents should
our have a catastrophic injury
now there has to be a gathering
of of that records from the
private practitioners so there's
a lot more workloads because it
has a but at to say the least
the agency on its own sure could
use more veterinarians to help
roll out some of the programs
that we want my question is how
many vets the U. as the agency
really believe you need but
let's let's let's not worry
about federal regulations how
many veterinarians do you need
in the state of New Mexico to
make sure that we're taking care
of the the horses and the owners
and the tracks in the state of
New Mexico Mr chairman senator
Byrd members of the committee I
would say we need at least four
or five veterinarians.
Thank you Mr that's what we
added to we're gonna look at
adding additional FTE Senator
Rodriguez and I are talking so
try to get that done and then
make sure you talk to the house
about what doing as it moves
forward so thank you for your
time appreciate it thank you
everyone thank you before we
leave we're gonna have a C. guys
then go up we're gonna have a
subcommittee on capital we
haven't reached an agreement yet
where we're going with a capital
number we did agree on junior
they'll be a hundred million
dollars split three ways between
house Senate in the in the
executive there will be tight
guidelines that are coming out
and so that's about for Senate
member around six hundred
thousand yes I'm orders doing
the math already a pro member so
it's almost double of what was
last year and so then we're
gonna point capital subcommittee
the governor has a billion
dollars in capital we need to
let's see DFA share them but so
you have a government up there
and get a search capital bring
it right back down to to make
adjustments we have an agreement
capital we're working on that
number finalizing that and see
what the exact is but amassed
Center Rodriguez Senator
Gonzales in center Shendo do
capital the house appointed to
Representative Lente who runs a
tax to me that's why Center
sandals on their so we have some
legalization is that moves
forward and then that the two
have members from appropriation
I don't remember who they are
exactly but no matter to us
what's more important is that
DFA guys goes get capital so we
can get our share before the
government get search and then
tomorrow afternoon we're gonna
cancel higher and stuff.
And in the budgets yeah so we're
gonna cancel hired staff and
because we're gonna have a
training tomorrow at two
o'clock.
And with probably gonna run over
because you know how how we work
and so it's better just to clear
the counter we got plenty of
time to catch up and everybody's
working hard and capital I think
the capitol hearings are
bring information some issues
and and people are really
stirring in I got the air for
about.
What's happening in that they
better get busy so of we do
that.
That's it.
So tomorrow morning and cancel
tomorrow afternoon.
We're looking at school lunches
and I'm I'm an imitation I'm not
looking in embarrassing the
executive or anything but we as
legislators right.
Senator other than Senator
Hemphill.
None of us go to school in the
legislature to go prepare
teachers and parent isn't
lunches in school and they where
we are
Right but it's interesting to
see what kids are eating today
and if they're eating it are not
eating right.
And it's not really.
It's quality over quantity in
how do you meet that and and if
you want to go back to look at
the staff and look at some of
the main lunch magic send us
locally like you know bread
sticks in and
And mariners sauce our quality
lunch.
I mean I mean it doesn't make
sense grooming if we can do this
we spent a lot of money into
this so we should know something
right you won't be sitting on
before on these are hot dogs
those things and then you can
write in.
It's only fair to the kids that
it's something so.
Children.
Okay this.
On that the.
Capital outlay subcommittee.
What Republicans on the.
We need a point in public and
yet because we need to get some
framework and that you know and.
We didn't get the Fehmarn belt
because the exact has a billion
dollars in there right.
I am totally willing down then
we'll come back and we'll be
doing the capitol some committee
we just need to we need to start
willing the exact number down
before we get that.
We know we're going to push for
a third a third a third a third
community green green on the
number if you remember from last
year and I hope the DFA still
sitting here of the exact does
not give us capital in the right
time frame we'll see right
across the street the Supreme
Court.
I think we have a winning record
over there but we're not gonna
wait this year past the deadline
because there's way too much for
us to do and and and we're not
gonna wait but we just need to
get an agreement before we
start.
Saying everybody go do their
capital and and get that right.
I suggest Senator Woods going
our little.
One is on capital that's right
to start and then if you want to
rely on your capital but that'll
be good I I know I understand
the issue and and the House
supported three democratic
members right we don't know
really what the framework is the
exact has a billion dollars in
in I can send you over there but
it's.
We're gonna get to an agreement
and and.
Cell numbers first and then we
can really start looking at
capital.
Three million two years seven
almost eighty six
Not six hundred.
Question eight seventy five
seventy six.
Campos come in numbers to try to
take some more time.
This.
Yeah one of the tables.
Right some is.
We'll
to figure out.
In the case of the.
This year is right and we have
an obesity and diabetes crisis
so.
So kids may not money what's
healthy.
For a.
Vegetables are healthy things
right so
we're gonna talk about this
more fun School rex's Dale free
for all Mexicans we should be
talking about the health of the
food to not just.
Yeah but tastes good.
Okay school district is doing
that I'm more concerned about
what we show you the menu with
that that idea sounds like it
was like.
Right there rather than like
hello the yield on the interest
from.
It and then schools can teach
kids whether the leader not a
responsible thing to do is to
feed on a healthy nutritious
