There is retiree health care and
Connor have you changed quite a
bit finish from.
Your bill in for Conor today you
want to go and start.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
with Simon Miller I I hope every
health care is the DFA on Mr
chairman
Mr Miller is Mr Miller are you
on.
We let him in.
We have the Senate for everybody
knows.
Somehow our zoom link got sent
to committees and subcommittees
have the same resume milling and
so we're trying to send out a
news in link to our members and
the presenters.
And so and that's what our delay
is just so.
As we move forward will.
Make sure.
Okay ready are you sure service
terms reminds provided and then
make sure that that that the DFA
is on.
Mr chairman this is Senator
Padilla here.
Mr Miller are you with us yes.
Thank.
We're just waiting for the
agency.
Okay good Mr Abbey at Mr
Miller's on thank you Mr.
Of affordable it's.
And
The retiree health care
authority runs a post employment
benefits
for both pre chair in post well
Medicare eligible retirees the
cover fourteen thousand four
hundred people.
The fund in rural members if you
look at volume three which is
interesting to take a look at
the confines of the page forty
one finder with that.
Following three page forty one.
You know over decades this phone
needs to grow sharply and
actually the fund I'm gonna say
it wrong numbers only covering
about the investments that the
holder of the billion only cover
twenty percent of their accrued
liability so it's it's clearly
not sustainable for the long
term then again to repeat one of
the main points in the full of
the biggest benefits go to pre
Medicare eligible retirees so
this is a benefit mainly for
younger retirees rather than
Social security eligible
retirees who are on Medicare as
well
even the subsidy right
A pre medicine care subsidy is
sixty four percent of the plant
coast will Medicare participants
receive only a subsidy of fifty
percent so.
Policy wise that that's
something to think about.
on the difference between the
budgets it's pretty small it's
shown
in your.
Binders.
This you have the packet.
The the difference is.
One hundred.
The total difference is a
hundred and seventy three
thousand out of there almost
four hundred million dollar
budget in terms of their
administrative cost it's eighty
nine thousand personal services
budget.
Another eighty nine thousand
other financing uses that may
represent the double counting
that happens of given the way
the if it kills for operating
transfer so I would think of
that mainly is only a ninety
thousand dollar difference very
small with that I'll turn it
over to Mr Miller for his
comments.
We're waiting for him I guess
Mr Neil are you with us.
If you were there.
More going if you want to go
ahead and present we got about
ten minutes to get the.
Okay.
Started in.
Of.
Right now.
You're gonna have to get closer
to your Mike or speak up a
little bit it's hard for us to
here.
This is are you able to see my
presentation.
No we are not.
The line once again maybe an
issue on our end.
Background while you're waiting
Mr chairman Mr Cooper is an
interim director David Archuleta
long time director return health
care is the new director of E.
R. B. and you probably see him
in a moment.
Neil we we have your
presentation so if you just want
to go ahead and start with your
presentation even though there's
not a good resume we do have it
in our hands and those members
are not here out in their
emails.
The
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I want to go for
this time.
As was stated for any appointed
interim executive director New
Mexico retiree health care of
forty.
Background the regards to help
through forty we were
established in nineteen ninety
to provide health insurance to
retirees.
ready no appropriation pre
funding and we began budget in
January nineteen ninety one.
The thirty one eleven member
board of directors comprised of
individuals in a five star
Health Care Act Representative
populations within forty
insurers.
We do provide non Medicare
Medicare eligible retirees and
their dependents access to
medical dental vision life
insurance all employees
participate entities
contributing percentage of the.
Neil let me let me stop you so
you you are sharing your web
page it's not your presentation.
And so.
Yes the your your web pages of
the night presentation.
I don't know.
Yep we got it now.
I apologize.
Okay
Back to the locker room.
The state all employees do
participating consumers pay.
In order to receive expectations
when they do retire.
upon the committee member of the
program chairman of the team
meeting.
Quorum health care benefits
offered based on their election
service.
The mission of New Mexico
regarding health care of forty
is to foster quality of life.
Money and be responsible
administering oral secure health
care benefits for public
retirees and their families.
Over ninety two thousand active
members and thirty three hundred
participated public entities
coming up from us from state
employees public school teachers
cities counties universities and
charter schools the composition
is fifty percent schools twenty
members of the state agencies in
twenty five percent local
governments we currently offer
coverage to more than sixty five
thousand retirees and their
dependents who are participating
in various health and life
insurance plans.
Most recent average age upon
retirement is sixty our funding
sources for the program for
employees or contributions which
is a percentage set by statute
we also want to do since paid
participating retirees the
DOCSIS fence Fund miscellaneous
revenues such as dollars for
Medicare part D. program or
agency departments committees
and it just turns.
I will.
Race request as it was more than
they are pretty close to school
bit into the personal services
employee benefits covering.
Four investment one item they
will point out is that we do do
a bi annual publication review
will be looking to have another
one of this year.
So we was stated our former
director
David Archuleta has moved on to
a new opportunity.
In the interim I am serving in
this role until the board again
posting an Iron Cross builders.
As far as COVID nineteen
operations or is with
resorted were always working in
the office and the remainder
dollar or a combination of the
two.
Our offices are open to members
by appointment and customers
Services answering calls and
emails Monday to Friday I to
ensure members of millions.
Early childhood looking more
meetings are being offered to
the committee.
We are currently in our second
year of our medical dental and
vision contracts with the option
to renew for two more years hi
during our annual board meeting
and review of health care
programs an increase of six
percent response for pre
Medicare plans and four percent
for supplement plans to keep
pace with medical costs.
They're negotiations one of our
Medicare advantage plans are
decreased with zero dollar
premium and our largest increase
was ten percent dental digital
in the state.
Early warning of an order the
pharmacy benefit managers
Services with our other partners
BMX will be schools insurance
authority Albuquerque public
schools state elections Services
Department and joining us for
this RT the University of New
Mexico to further leverage our
buying power or total members
four hundred seventy thousand as
participants of the interagency
pharmaceuticals purchasing
Council this is
the work groups together we will
continue to look for
opportunities future to partner
with public entities ones MRP is
needed we will be gearing up for
the next our life insurance
which is expected release date
of all twenty twenty two.
Financial updates.
Looking at our trust fund we're
seeing here and slide I
stand for November we have a
little over one point one
billion dollars the grant those
shore stated here over the last
ten years beginning with the
twenty.
Where we were two hundred ninety
million and as a member
of to little more than one
million dollars this is
contributions.
Are not.
Four million in order.
With the.
Really the last ten years.
Really
does.
Trust.
When.
We can continue
is.
And it is more in this is this
is
the which is thirty years as.
This is a recorded Department
agency departments for these.
Where are.
On this is
twenty one and.
Process validation and more we
would be really good at this
year.
Looking
for more.
It shows.
Doing.
Individuals.
We could.
This is a department
for one year almost twenty
percent.
I almost.
And then
You're
not wanted twenty.
Right.
Those are the ones.
In relation to our area looking
for more twenty.
We're really.
We're going
hundred million with the salt
is this is.
Finally on.
To over a billion dollars and
thirty eight.
How does.
We will talk line as it relates
to other.
Which is.
Which is.
Program.
This report is.
This committee is
estimated one
hundred.
This is
leading to.
But.
To see three years twenty
twenty.
Approximately eighty five to the
work order.
And.
The decrease.
Or we.
This is increased with limited.
Three point two percent compared
with four point eight is as well
as.
costs.
For the bottom of this page with
this.
It would not I would.
To the contrary a little more.
Because.
The decrease in.
For costs.
Overall this is
just slightly lower percentage
was only order.
And this is a leading Group One
status.
Slide does.
The HSD is.
The.
To our return is in the meeting
the requirement to ensure we
don't.
On some of the problems maybe.
To amended.
Officers is excluded this is.
Understanding the correctional
officer role.
Under current.
Invasion this
is this is.
The state needs we.
Yeah this is
actually.
Did.
The gentleman dated programs
across the three hundred forty
thousand dollars.
Last year special appropriation
the department of public safety.
Your nose dollars.
And joining the program is.
Part of the funds.
President.
With.
The requested under forty
million dollars.
As an actual person.
Representative program easing.
It really.
Seven twenty.
The long.
Limiting
bills calling for mental and
hated Services starting.
Your December twenty eight.
This change to our.
Result is to our program our
control
based on how.
Thank.
Thanks behavior use eight.
This program a little bit
higher.
New Mexico there is respect.
Regional.
The impact to the trust.
Three hundred.
The last special appropriation
request is being made for COVID
nineteen testing and treatment.
As stated on this line between
March twenty twenty and
September twenty twenty one for
our self insured plans has
exceeded nine point two million
this requests but point offset
this additional cost and
mitigate the impact to our trust
fund or put additional financial
burden on our return for this is
the.
The regional.
He was
On in the trust fund.
One
eight eight eight.
To make.
By leading is going from one
percent to one percent.
Increases
from two percent to point.
I'm.
It is Lloyd.
Who is
over here early in dollars or
ninety cents per area.
Four.
For your with the CD needs.
Constitution
for preparing and I.
One sixty eight sixty dollars a
year for the would be.
Two nine hundred forty does to
you.
The regarding.
Minimize the use of the internet
this is extending the solvency
on thirty years.
The more.
Around we.
And it is funded.
The percent.
This is also participating in
order not.
Information line as well as.
Reporter for myself and I.
At this.
Yes thank you very much nail
Senator Rodriguez here I I have
a quick question but I'm gonna
referred first to David Abbey
our legislative finance
committee director who have some
comments and then will continue
thank you just one last very
brief point on page.
Your hand of there is the multi
year projection no wonder your
attention to the line tax
revenue then they get a district
distribution of personal income
taxes the is growing by statute
at twelve percent a year and
that was suspended during one of
the solvency struggles the state
had in the last decade but for
the long run it twelve percent
that's probably not sustainable
you can see how that this is a
diversion from the general fund
so it shown at forty one
million for the.
For next fiscal year FY twenty
three the fifth column it's
going to rise over a billion in
twenty five years because of
that twelve percent compounding
which is extraordinary to have
the higher compounding wait so
you know for a few years it can
grow that fast and you could
probably manage it but when that
distribution gets to be three
hundred four hundred and keeps
growing at twelve percent a year
it's going to spin up to
a unacceptable surely General
Fund.
One like that thank you madam
chair thank you very much David
and I may have to run to present
a bill they're going to come and
get me from another Canadian
Neil but I am going to stay
until by the that the common
actually try to take me there I
do have a question on your
funding for the COVID costs and
so on that you have have you
order any FEMA dollars or
federal dollars and in any way
for that.
Mr chair Senator Rodriguez a yes
we have been working with the.
And provided all the information
that they are requesting it has
slowly moving forward however we
have no direct determination it
has to be something that would
be approved for receiving
funding are foreigners okay
thank you very much and and
thank you for your continued
perseverance on this fund I do
recall several years ago when
not governor Richardson was here
there was an effort to join and
combine the retiree health care
Thor Eddie with other insurance
companies the state had and for
example the HMO so if the have
the state for the employees and
we knew it wasn't going to work
truly because retirees have paid
into this fund all their lives
while they were working for many
years with the understanding
they were paying a portion of
their paycheck into this fund so
that some day when they retired
they could count on this fund
and to me when you do that for
so many years and retirees are
led to believe that they're
providing funding from their
paycheck into a fund that
forever will cover them for for
their medical insurance once
they retire then we need to keep
that commitment and sure enough
that happened back then there
were swarms that's an
understatement swarms of elderly
people retired people middle
aged people that have retired
and were and we're on this
insurance company who swarmed
here and fought it instantly and
guess what happened they kill
the bill rightfully so this is
not something that we wanted to
ever consider and not saying we
are I'm just making a point that
every year and I've been here
twenty seven years and almost
every year I hear that there is
a problem with this funded that
is going to go down and that we
need to look at combining it
well that's not the answer the
answer is not to take from our
senior.
Percent of tape for retirees for
something we promise them
something they complied with all
the years they worked the answer
is for us to fund this
particular fund do what we can
to make it solvent so that our
retirees can have the assurance
that they need to continue but
anyway so I'm gonna leave it at
that but for now I I spoke
earlier before the I asked for
comments from committee members
only because if they call me I
won't get a chance to to say
this but for now I'm going to
defer to members of the
committee for any questions.
No questions or comments by
anyone so okay David from the
staff did you have any other
comments now thank you very much
and that neo I don't have any
questions or comments myself
other than what I said I thank
you so much for all your work
and hopefully we can maintain
this founded keep it solvent for
retirees this is been promised
all right thank you very much I
don't have any further questions
we are going to come as we're
going to move on to the next
item thank you David also for
your presentation.
Mr Miller you want to start with
this one.
During similar let's with the
education retirement board the
next.
Director Avid community yes.
Okay great yeah I can take is
twenty if you don't want to.
Either way.
No follow up please okay
madam chair members of the
committee this on Miller and I
am an analyst with DFA the next
the C. that would be in front of
you is the educational
retirement board the budget
recommendations here are two
point one million dollars
alright the executive uses two
point one million dollars higher
for FY twenty three and the
majority of the increase in both
of recommendations for asked me
fees
The executive is a little bit
higher than the LFC for these
asset management fees just
because of the
strong performance is here
twenty twenty one overall HSD
had a
investors Richard twenty eight
point eight percent so FY twenty
two asset values is expected to
and higher than originally
projected so with that I will
hand it back over to you again.
Thank you Mr Miller on looking
at some of the bullets.
Let's see it for the twenty
twenty one valuation the ERP
retirement plan was sixty two
point eight percent funded
with an unfunded actuarially
accrued liability of eight point
seven million that's that's not
very good that they want to get.
Yes B. directs them to reach a
hundred percent and the.
Just because of that in the last
year there's a lot of discussion
about increasing employer and
employee contributions.
The bill that passed last year
increased the E. R. B.
contributions by one percent for
the current year and one percent
next year of the LFC
recommendation funded those
increases their issue here some
of the budgets for public
schools and higher and I think
inadvertently the executive
didn't include the one percent
in addition the LFC recommended
an additional one percent
contribution to bring up the
funded ratio from sixty three
percent which is well below
because we target the ERP has
had strong investment
performance a they have some
outstanding investment
professionals and you can see
Let's see the
Thanks for the hand of.
And the average on the second
chart the rankings are very
interesting fifty percent is
average one percent is the best
ninety nine percent and isn't
good and here are be
consistently has been above the
average you can see six percent
return for year twenty three
percent for three years forty
percent for five years and forty
fifth percentile that is of
higher than fifty five percent
of the rest of the funds that
are surveyed over long term
periods so that strong
investment performance has
benefited the fund in the
taxpayer
the differences on the budget or
or
Mainly relate to person the
analyst notes that he R. B. has
about almost a million dollars
of a surplus in the person on
but still the LFC recommendation
in the executive recommendation
personal services are of of.
Let's see.
A couple hundred thousand.
but again a hundred thirty seven
thousand nine hundred dollars
difference between the executive
so with that we're we probably
turn to the new director of
research but it is probably on.
Thank you thank you very much
David for that information and
yes can we go to David Archuleta
you were with the retiree health
care with already remember.
And now
you are not you are the are
based so okay we can proceed.
We have any there's no now
Do you believe it there we go I
think you are muted yep.
Let's try again.
The madam chair yes we have we
can hear you now all right well
as director Abbey mention my
name is deluxe Fund executive
director of the educational
retirement board and formally us
he said that for for quite some
time the executive director of
the retiree health report
today I was going to give you a
brief presentation to give you a
little bit of information about
the organization we are what we
do as the little cracks are not
entirely familiar with that is
that we also have a few comments
in a few slides that a Mister
Jackson will present as it is
due to mention just some of the
incredible and best performance
as a courteous organization
since inception of the program
and most more specifically and
in the last that particular.
I also have with the services
and director Mr X. problems tell
me answering questions you might
have our deputy director of
mourns tested and we also have a
chief financial officer
surprised.
I'm gonna move to the second
line of this presentation.
a little bit about the yes the
educational retiree Education
chairman that was created in
section twenty two guests eleven
to twenty two that's one to
twenty two eleven destitute
we've got a really great on our
website your staff created it
goes to the long history of the
educational retirement board or
educational pension system to go
back all the way to the nineteen
twenties lots of great
information about it and how
it's evolved ever since but it
also just basically boils down
to the fact that is
organizations responsible for
providing public teachers
retired teachers with their
pension basically we task
ensuring that the the program
solvent and making efforts to
make sure to make sure that
occurs
our mission is this to make.
To make sure that there's a
secure retirement system for all
past present future retirees.
on the next slide this is a
listing of our board the ship
the board of directors our
missiles off and you can see the
needs of the other individuals
here I'd say that it's a highly
valued is a highly qualified
individuals you can see with
broad representation from both
retirees well as active
employees you can see some very
distinguished individuals listed
here so lots of ideas and lots
of but it's how this
organizations run this is the
staff you know running the show
with this it's a a lot of
qualified people this is the
value and this is responsible
for managing this issue.
Just briefly in terms of
highlights we have nearly fifty
nine thousand active members
school teachers university
professors and and everyone and
folks ranging between their
contributed to this program
right now we have fifty two
thousand seven hundred ninety
this information is probably
close approach W. two thousand
more members are actually
seeking attention from this
program it right now we're
paying over one point two
billion dollars in pension
benefits beyond extension
approaching twenty four thousand
dollars per year last year the
average recently joined on this
program sixty two point two
system has a bunch of young
folks moving into that
retirement spectrum also like on
seven hundred or eight hundred
eighty million arsenal always
wears part of the proposal that
the talk a little bit is on the
last line in terms of what we're
on behalf of members.
We also refund a little over
forty five million dollars per
year has pledged last the
numbers.
Based on people not in the
system no longer expected to BBC
twelve leaseholder prosecution
thing eight three maximum
points.
if you drop on over thirty
billion dollars in the.
from the two hundred sixteen
participating employers and have
reported assets of over sixteen
million dollars a little bit
about a little bit we'll talk a
little bit.
This presents and not to take it
one of the sales happy to repeat
any mention that investment
returns the last year approach
twenty nine percent.
Just a few updates current
projects in our operations right
now we're.
About the final polls are
receive requests for proposals
for actual services actually
Services a one on one.
One of those organizations
responsible for both in terms of
reporting for how we manage the
organization is helping us
create our strategic plan along
with reporting back to the
legislature we recently
entities in this is the product
of the CD ninety of the
operations organization.
In March so looking for the
completion to the to this
program are to the results of
the.
The nation's
community organization forward
we are also in the process of
determining whether or not we
are within our region in
replacement for the creation of
our pension administration
and its life cycle and are I. T.
seventy nine eighty whether or
not we want to move forward with
these this time you're also in
the process of reorganizing the
member services member services
in your those folks are
responsible for processing
applications for chairman taking
phone calls and answering
questions we recently completed
the information technology your
organization some of the
activities have been undertaken
as well as completed prior to my
arrival you can see just a
little over two weeks ago.
And then if we move we are FY
twenty appropriation requests
basically.
Percent increase for this last
year that includes full funding
for the one entities were
requests full support contract
for services as well as.
Slide.
Faster G. races are present or
any DocuSign Services the LFC
recommendation would ultimately
adopted by the house
appropriations and finance
committee basically reflects a
six point one percent increase
are about two million dollars
less than what was requested by
the agency for years this year
just briefly if you additional
questions we have we updated the
infrastructure council approved
the plan requesting support for
funding to be streaming in
additional finally Norris for
the construction under final
construction of the new offices.
Sierra Sierra we've also
requested
the extension of the special
appropriation we received in
fiscal year twenty this is on a
on going project is yes we need
I think you spent almost five
hundred thousand dollars you
know funding and be a priority
the ram and the resources
necessary to care on the
county's listed here this is
five thousand members whose
accounts of the Norman
act for some time this easy to
use of those members
contributions chairman Dr
eligible for receiving benefit
and with that I would turn it
over the next three sides to
Mr Jackson this is just another.
Thank you.
madam chair committee members.
Could we move forward to slide
eight please.
No I do not have control of the
slides who guys can you move
forward to slide eight years.
It if it's already been
mentioned how we did for the
fiscal year about twenty nine
percent but this slide shows
over various time periods how we
did it relative to our assumed
actuarial rate of return of
seven percent that's that black
line.
In I think that's the most
important benchmark for what we
need to do is you can see we've
done rather well versus that
over those time here is the
census section when we started
keeping track of returns was
initialized in nineteen eighty
three we were more than nine
percent per year since that next
slide please.
Again this is for the.
Fiscal year just ended up and we
simply compare ourselves over
various time periods to our
policy index which is we didn't
no active management and just in
the US than in any axes and we
did have down with all of those
time periods so we we exceeded
the policy index and that is
Mr and you mentioned earlier
there is our universe twenty we
did rank above average in all of
those time periods.
The next slide please.
We show the same.
Criteria just updated for
September thirty again we added
versus you access all of those
time periods we still exceed
seven percent all those time
periods and our universe ranking
is still very.
And as you can see the one year
end September is about twenty
six percent.
the last last of my slides the
next one please.
This is the asset growth for the
last twelve years you can see
units on September thirtieth two
thousand nineteen we were at
about eighty billion and that's
growing to around sixteen
billion it's just about double
purse thirty of twenty twenty
one.
Another key point for the fiscal
year he's we earned three point
six billion in investment gains
which was our biggest donor
gate.
And that concludes my remarks.
Thank you.
Thank you.
The last flight that I have for
today is the overview overview
of our legislation that's
included as part of Senate bill
six contributions to the
educational retirement fund as
director Abbey mentioned this is
in support of Martinez forty one
hundred percent funded scenario
not to go over the details again
just to make mention of the fact
that this would lose funding
from the for side to further
improve the solvency of this
program basically this
translates to an additional
thirty four.
Here
that would be funded in part of
which was included in the LFC
recommendation but it would
reduce our funded period from
the current forty two year mark
down to thirty three at which
time its program is expected to
be for the funding and with that
in terms as many as requests
thank you David thank you for
your presentation and your staff
and we will miss you at the
retiree health care with already
but I know you're on to new
things and thank you for
accepting this responsibility
I just wanted to mention the for
I go again we still waiting for
them to get me for another
committee but I wanted to
mention something I truly can't
take credit for because I didn't
know about this on to our
director David Abbey told us
that your father.
Actually worked here as a
carpenter made furniture here
for the capital for many many
years we very well may be
sitting in things are or leaning
on or expanding on things your
dad bills and he also worked for
the LFC for approximately five
years if I understood correctly
so my goodness this is goes back
a long way thank you for that I
I know on your dad is is now and
in better hands in haven't but
we just wanted to acknowledge
him and of course technology for
your work thank you very much
thank you David for telling us
thank you center I started off
my career at the at the
roundhouse is a page for less
used in many many moons ago.
Goodness yeah that's that's a
long time all right well thank
you very much and we have
Senator Gonzalez and then we
have Senator crystal diamond on
the list Senator Gonzales thank
you madam chair and also
Installations to David again
enough for.
Working in in the being selected
as the director for the E. R.
B..
Madam chairman of the.
The the the so we have to one
percent.
And.
LFC has one percent for this
year and one percent for twenty
three.
So given us a total of the three
percent.
C. has one percent this year and
next year by law.
Plus LFC are added one percent
and Senator Stewart has a bill
to add another one percent by
statutes would be two percent
increase next year under the LFC
recommendation.
So madam chair that would the
new before at the end.
It's only three and senator
Stewart's bill originally had
for so this gets one step closer
to the four years since our
students Original Bill three of
the four would be in with the
LFC recommendation.
The very well thank you just
wanted to see of Representative
partly because of I was still
looking at I didn't realize it
was a three or the four.
Thank you very much thank you
senator thank you David
all right senator crystal
diamond thank you madam chairman
and thank you gentlemen for your
presentation going back to page
three on your leadership I was
happy to see Deming's merry Lou
counting on their serving your
vice chair she's a long time
champion for act educators there
in southern New Mexico I did see
that you have a vacancy here is
the governor appointee how long
has that position been vacant.
Madam chair and senator diamond
I believe that it has been
vacant sense I will last I'm
sorry have I I do not know
exactly I.
It's been less than a year I
know that but I just
one of our staff members right
you can tell us.
Yes can you hear me yes.
Thank you since last.
I'm sorry it's disappointing
that teachers are being deprived
of a voice in opposition I hope
to get it filled soon thank you
guys for presentation.
Thank you Senator you've got
thank you very much for our I
don't have anyone else on the on
the list here so thank you very
much for your presentation for
you were David do you and your
staff are.
Are going to move on to a public
education public employees
retirement association and we
have again
Connor and David Abbey director
LFC director and Miller again is
presenting at the House
Appropriations.
And we have great Trujillo here.
The chief investment officers
will that's great.
And the well started out and
then we'll go to Mr Miller and
Mr Trujillo.
Congratulate the the.
Twenty twenty there increased
contributions to the fund and
that helped.
And it was C. it's it's also
page one it says benefits were
reduced for new employees and
the call was reduced to better
reflect actual price inflation
and that helped
Sustainability has been
challenged this is really
important as a result of changes
made to budget and fund
performance has struggled if you
look at attachment one.
It maybe look at page four and
parents returns are shown in the
first co the the both Mexico and
again fifty percent just average
ninety nine is worse than what
is the best but for almost every
period parent has lacked the
investment performance the LFC
had a.
A hearing on this to my in June
and had some conversation about
this and I think the the new
directors really attentive to
this and will be trying to
improve this but they're still
pretty significant consequences
of under performance and
investment and I I think it's
fair to say governance remains a
major challenge for the
authority witness several bills
this year that make adjustments
to governments you know there's
been little discussion about
dysfunction and conflict among
board members and that's
certainly cannot hope to have
the.
Kind of the difficulties with it
is time for the investment funds
is lacking because of the budget
the the differences.
To be minor the state of for
personal service and benefits of
sea and executive both recommend
the same amount and then the LFC
is slightly lower contracts of
course.
The agency has a has the
opportunity to come back and get
a budget adjustment request if
needed to get the contractual
services funding that supports
their investment management
contractor so with that I'll
turn it over to Mr Miller first.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I don't have too
much to add to their overall the
executive recommendation is
increase of ten point four
percent for FY twenty three well
the LFC recommendation is an
increase of one point six
million for four point three
percent and in the entirety of
that difference is just for
asset management fees and so
with that I'll turn it over to
the agency thank you.
Thank you very much Miller all
right David welcome thank you
for coming great I'm sorry Greg
Greg I'm so sorry it's still the
universality with great if there
is yes of course your staff
member Kristin right thank you I
thought that right thank you
madam chair great to do with P.
R. A. executive director as of
October or I believe September
of this past year with me is
Christian but I lost use our
interim chief investment officer
and I also have our acting board
chair Frances page with us our
legislative committee chair of
the birth or maintenance and of
course treasury Cambridge serves
on our board as well.
Thank you for that grant.
Before we get to into the book
of the presentation madam chair
just want to make the committee
aware that this is a celebrating
our seventy fifth anniversary
this year for was funded or
founded in nineteen forty seven
to seventy five years of paying
benefits to of to the government
workers and am very proud of
that it's.
Couple just quick highlights
from this past fiscal year we've
closed and all time high of
seventeen point six billion
dollars in our investment fund
we are at risk right of return
of twenty four percent and Chris
and we'll talk more about that
later on forty seven thousand
six hundred and seventy nine
active members three hundred
thirty five of participating
employers throughout the state
of closing in on forty three
thousand retiree and benefit a
new ten so we currently pay we
paid out one point three billion
dollars in this last fiscal
year.
And we had a funded ratio of
seventy one point four percent I
do want to note that this is our
first actuarial valuation since
the passage of Senate bill
seventy two that passed in the
twenty twenty legislative
session sponsored by Senator
when you know it's that's an
increase from seventy point
three percent the year before
our amortization period is down
to seventy two years last year
that was at a hundred and six
years in the in the is Senate
bill seventy two is going a long
way to address or or funding
issues it is a six year
implementation so we are now in
year two of that but we will
come back to this committee and
share those results and as of a
this nasco UA ation we are on
track to hit a hundred percent
funding we're shooting for in in
the next twenty five years.
You're you're thank you for.
And as Mr Abbey mentioned as far
as our appropriation request it
is a bit higher in contractual
services B. because it does
reflect the higher fund balance
if you move those out of the
equation it's about a two
percent increase over all of our
other category of those look
like a rather large increase
well but that's a result of
moving money from one line item
to another at the direction of
DFA.
I do want to just inform the
committee there was a bill that
passed last year Senate bill
three fifteen that had to do
with transferring
some state police members that
weren't in the state police
planned into that planning
grandfathering previous time
from twenty fifteen forward we
did receive an appropriation of
two point four million dollars
last year however the cost was
five point one million so we are
asking for the additional amount
to make that funding told him
that that would be three point
three million dollars.
And with the madam chair I will
turn it over to Christian.
Thank you for your presentation
thank you for accepting the
position full time and
permanent.
Kristen thank you madam chair
members of the committee can
everyone hear me okay wonderful
thank you so much for your time
today my name is Kristen but and
I might be a new face to some of
you maybe not so much to others
but I have been in New Mexico
para for almost eight years at
this point and serving as deputy
chief investment officer for the
last five years or so and you
know I really want to start with
I would say maybe not a story of
struggle but a story of progress
of the fiscal year twenty twenty
one was a very strong year for
every pension plan and market
participation of these really
strong absolute returns was was
there for every plan for us we
did see a strong increase in
market value of three point five
billion year over year and more
importantly as we think about
our mission time members trying
best activities funded fifty two
percent of our one point three
billion dollar benefit payments
for the year so very strong cash
flow there generated by the fund
when we start talking about
performance and effectiveness of
infant implementation I like to
break it down into three
different components the first
is our mission to our members
and the way we do this in New
Mexico parent is first and
foremost how effectively are we
achieving our seven point two
five assumed rate of return not
just year over year but over a
longer period and as you can see
on slide five there's a very
strong absolute returns here you
see returns and almost all time
periods of over that seven point
two five percent return so when
we look at our scorecard and
check the health of our funds
that is the first thing we look
at and we're we're quite pleased
and so then the second is how
effective are we participating
in the market and really the way
we measure that is just like any
other pension plan you heard
from our of our peers ERP we
have a policy portfolio the
board assesses the landscape
governs and IPS for us an
investment policy statement and
we are then tasked to implement
a policy for full.
Your policy benchmark for that
period which you can see it
which we've provided as well
we're meeting our expectations
there are we do we do believe
that there's room for
improvement as we continue
across you know this year and
into the next and really that's
a function of active return we
want to take a more active
return to exceed that policy
portfolio and then the last and
I certainly wouldn't say it's
the least important but I would
say it is certainly the third
component to effectiveness of
measurement is gearing Kings so
I want to be very clear here and
you all know this but each
pension funds difference health
of the pension plan the
constituents of that pension
plan they're funded ratios are
different and that requires
every pension plan have a
different strategy some are a
little bit more concentrated
summer a little bit more
diversified.
And really what you're seeing in
our peer rankings when you look
on accident absolute return
basis such as the info that
director Avid gave you total
return high level we are below
our peers but when you look at
those plans that are in the top
twenty percent and then you
compare the volatility they took
for that same time her isn't
which is yes they're also the
ones that are taking the most
risk so when we when we look at
your rankings and when we
present hearing kings to our
governing bodies you all
included we encourage you to
also look at the level of risk
that's being taken for the unit
of return achieved and that
tells a very different story for
the one year period for us I've
read on a risk adjusted basis
when compared to our peers we
ranked in the top twentieth
percentile of all national
appears for all long time long
term horizons we went relevant
rates well above our median and
that really shows the careful
prudent approach to
diversification we are really
trying to take appropriate
levels of risk and achievements
commensurate around amount of
return
I'll stop with that and just the
last thing I would say is
December's as we continued into
the new fiscal year we continue
to see strong performance driven
by market participation as well
as active management we are
estimating that will closed
December at about a sixteen
percent calendar year to date
return that is in excess of an
equity market that returned
about fourteen percent globally
for the fiscal year today we're
looking at about a six percent
return so far that's about three
hundred basis points in excess
of an hour quarter over quarter
expectation when compared to R.
seven point two five assumed
rate of return the last pieces
were outperforming not policy
portfolio by close to two
hundred basis points so do you
see as we go into a new quarter
were seen market volatility
creep into the space what you're
saying is that diversification
is actually helping us
potentially paying off.
And we are we continue to stay
pretty pretty strong and held to
that investment strategy of
diversification and prudent risk
management because as we come
into this new calendar year what
we see is we are seeing market
uncertainty we are seeing
volatility and we're seeing geo
political risks and our staff
and no other staff will be able
to to appropriately predict that
or time that so it really is
going to be important to
diversify across all economic
regimes so that are planned to
continue to steadily compound
well for each of our members
I'll just end my comments by
saying that not only am I a
member of this plan but my
family is as well and the
solvency of this plan and the
prudent nature of these
investments are quite personal
as well I hope that my son will
also be able to participate in
this plan into the future full
stop that cannot give it back to
create.
Mr Chairman just to wrap up the
final slide we're talking this
past year we paid out one point
three billion dollars a budget a
ninety two percent of that does
stay here to retirees living in
New Mexico and we do just have a
a graph and you can see why
County how much federal pays
into into each county in the
state with that Mr Chairman
we're happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman of the I
also like to congratulate Mr
Trujillo for the position.
Also for your hard work.
You know I just have one so at
the very beginning where we have
all.
You know it being funded at
seventy one point four percent.
And so what was it before that.
The the previous fiscal year
Mister chairman Senator Gonzales
was seventy point three percent.
And so it was about a percent
increase and and as I noted this
is the first a valuation here
after the passage of Senate bill
seventy two.
So Mr chairman the director to
do you feel that.
We'll continue climbing or.
You Mr chairman and the Senator
Gonzales yes and I did included
in this a presentation but happy
to come back our long term
projections twenty five years
out after the passage of of
Senate bill seventy two
Within the twenty five year
period so of one year of
experience in the we are
trending in the right direction.
very well the the last part of
Mr chairman of when you provide
us with that map by counties not
much goes into it
that's really nice.
This presentation.
And his presentation okay.
Very well I'll look for it
that's really nice I I really
enjoy that thank you thank you.
Any other questions.
I see none Craig let me ask you
I mean those.
Pair can still have structural
changes made to it and we do get
in trouble of that.
Only option that the pair has
exhausted its structural changes
like E. R. B. as really
exhausted structural changes
the.
Senator Munoz Mr chairman of
that is that is correct I do
think the the reforms done in
Senate bill seventy two will do
the job obviously there is if if
we need to go another route you
know that is always an option.
You know we have we have several
bills that are that are
affecting the judicial
retirement.
what I want from you is if we do
the the judges and I think
they've cracked member wrong we
booked thirty into the the
judicial retirement this is
judicial right thirty million
dollars what what percent change
what thirty million dollars make
on that I.
Mr chairman I I'd have to get
you the exact number on the
percent change but that that
thirty million dollars
appropriation is it is
significant to puts the that
plan on two hundred percent
funding I believe by about
twenty forty maybe even a little
sooner and I I don't have in
front of me but that is part of
a the FIR for that bill and I'm
happy to send it insured with
the committee and I'm asking the
same question on the magistrates
retirement the number of
magistrates are so low I don't
know if we can sustain that
fund.
Right now there by itself that
that fund may need to be moved
into state general.
in order for to survive.
because magistrates are so small
The volatility in the market
that I think we're going to
start seeing these time starting
to see my portfolio thirty last.
is going to change the structure
how we act are you gonna be to
those changes I know their long
term investments probably never
have seen it the market like
this maybe in your lifetime
so how reactive are we going to
be to not see that three point
five billion dollars of gain.
Mr chair I'll turn that over to
a Christian tend to.
Mr chair members of the
committee I think that's been
our primary focus to be honest
with you is we do anticipate
volatility we do anticipate
uncertainty and so we've focused
mostly on diversification of
risk across economic regimes
that's been occurring for the
last five to seven years at this
point we are not equity
dependent so we were likely one
of the lowest allocated stocks
investors that you'll see in the
market we have a very large
allocation and relatively large
compared to our peers to
inflation sensitive assets to
assist us in this anticipation
of rising of inflation what
we're already seeing and feeling
and then we've got a sensible
risk reduction a range portfolio
that is it's situated on the
short end of the duration Kerr
we are not taking during.
So all that sent what we're
doing is we're bouncing to head
each of the risk that we're
seeing in the market I can't
tell you that we decided to do
this on you know Gen one when we
started seeing the volatility
commenced market we've been
doing this for a while now
because we anticipate that.
Market regions will change still
shift in our eyes our biggest
risk our growth rates and
inflation and it is our goal and
our mission term members to
balance those risks accordingly
so that the funds can perform
decently in any any period.
That being said we shop our
portfolio quite consistently
what we know as we probably take
about sixty to seventy percent
less of the market risk of the
portfolio if a market is down
we'll be down but I'm certain we
will not be down as much as our
peers or as our benchmarks and
it's all to continue to preserve
that study compounded wealth of
the funds and then for my next
question how well did you Board
comprehend what you just told.
Mr chair members of the
committee I hope they all would
be able to come up and let you
know maybe not in this technical
but I hope that I'll be able to
let you know that we are
diversified that we're not as
risk seeking and that we are a
little bit more conservative are
pretty in our approach to
deployment.
Then great my next question is
What is our cost because they
see a timber sent eight increase
in the in contractual services
which is all management fees
what's our total costs and
management fees and there's the
chairman of the board behind
you.
And so what what is our total
cost and why did we see an
increase in in in fees when we
should be paid a net of all fees
right do we do that with I'm
sorry after freshman its
business that I've been gone for
pensions.
Investment so we have all page
ninety three Mr chairman.
It's forty I'm sorry miss but
page property of going through.
Mr chairman of the Christian
answer that as well as our fees
go.
Mr chairman members of the
committee it's a great question
and cost is though is one that
is it's a strategic initiative
of ours for the fiscal year we
paid about ninety three million
in investment management fees
that equates to about forty five
basis points and has been pretty
consistent over the last three
to four fiscal years and further
to that when you compare that
serve various it's quite low so
we've done comparisons within
our in state peers and are lower
than them but also the national
comparisons as well we see that
our cost of investment is lower
so in the grand scheme of how
effective were being I think
cost competitive competitiveness
is certainly one that we can
hang our hats on.
And then the cost of fees plus
profit sharing rate of eighty
six point ninety three if I'm
correct can do the math that way
Mr chairman members the
committee yes you are correct
let's also remember that that
profit sharing and that twenty
four percent return that's all
it it's all embedded in the
twenty four percent that we're
reporting to you that is our
gross is our net if you return
on gross if he was closer to
twenty five percent or so thank
and then you guys ask for
increase in person for half a
percent we had a balance there
why why and why did you do to.
Mr chairman that's to cover a
this is gonna be the third year
of the increased contributions
for Senate bill seventy two so
that actually covers the
contribution that's please to
schedule to go into place.
But you have that you haven't
sixty thousand person six
hundred fifty thousand personal
surplus.
I I don't know what that dollar
numbers do you I don't know if
the top of my head Mr chairman
but we did have a surplus in
person we did lose some a fairly
high level positions this past
fiscal year so so the vacancy
was a little bit higher but the
those those salaries were
somewhat higher salaries in our
in our agency so that that is
why we had that kind of surplus.
I think that's it for me.
Right I think to hold on one
second.
Representative Mr chairman I'm
sorry.
These.
Want to add anything real quick.
She coming.
Senator can sit.
It's on the TV in the front.
Your reference thank you for
your parents no one is looking
at about
one.
Members are either Qalinge hello
friends best fastest.
hi myself Senator reinvent the
new program efficient.
We're.
Thank you I am very aware of
support.
Percent.
Again his which is.
Are you
Here's the kind of phone is.
Position home.
Do we grow during games are
going to win the game every time
mentioned that we have a fund
that strong stable.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman appreciate
it thanks for watching out for
the parents it's been a battle
so great thank you.
You on the Senate Judiciary
bill.
Thank you.
Thank you have a.
Our GST secretary are you with
us.
If you want to.
The moderator one.
Thank you Mr the.
Well let me director Avid
started and then we'll go to you
I just need to double check that
you're with us Garcia great
Davis.
Mr chairman GST has a purpose.
Of the page three summarizes
some of the differences the big
challenge I think prepare is
health benefits they have not
been increases.
In several years.
Health care inflation is take a
toll taken a toll on the.
The the fundamentals of the
health benefits programs on page
two it shows that the
legislature's had to make the
number of one time
appropriations to cover
shortfall in revenue because
premiums have increased you know
the general Medicaid medical
inflation runs at higher than
the general rate of inflation so
five percent or higher in recent
years when premiums for not
increased of the requests into
the general fund to cover the
cost of the premium shortfall.
Of course the general fund
employees only account for about
a third of total employment.
None general fund state agencies
count for approximately another
third and then finally about a
third of the participants in
health care or local governments
and other entities so let's see
they face a shortfall for FY
twenty one that I think you'll
hear about more from the
secretary of the minute that is
growing the LFC recommendation
to cover the shortfall includes
a ten million dollars
nonrecurring appropriation
contingent on the matching
participation from the local
government participants as far
as the other programs their
detailed on page three.
It looks like the total general
fund difference.
For small.
Pretty small if.
Page seven of your hand out it's
only a hundred and seven
thousand dollars difference with
the LFC slightly lower than the
seventeen million point nine in
the executive seventeen point
eight for LFC after all most of
the programs in this department
operate off of enterprise
general fund revenues again on
page two those details
differences are detail by
program I think there's a
recognition from both the
executive and the LFC to the
need to boost up at facilities
management which has been pretty
pretty lane to lane in the last
few years so with that Mr
chairman Mr Miller.
Thank good afternoon Mister
chair members of the community
and this is Simon Miller analyst
at the FAA
so for the FY twenty three
budget recommendations like the
the state they are very similar
there's less than one percent if
it's between that and in terms
of the general fund the
executive recommendation is
slightly higher than the LFC the
LFC recommended general fund
increases seven two percent.
well the LFC recommends the
general fund increase of six
point six percent and majority
is different states for person
in the facilities management
division
and as deviate touched on
the
Health benefits appropriations
that that's all nonrecurring
stuff and the I. on the
expenditure side of health
benefits the expenditure growth
has been to excessive I believe
that the remember remote room
last last fiscal year is about
three point nine percent but
without premium increases the
firm has a dictated so with that
I'll turn it over to the cabinet
secretary of the department of
the General Services Department
thank you Mr Miller I want to
correct you so you're saying
because you said LFC and at some
point for it and LESC it is six
point two so symbol the
executive this one correct yes
the people think I'm not
listening I'm listening go ahead
yes.
Mr chairman members the
committee thank you very much my
name is John Garcia secretary
designate the General Services
Department with the Rodriguez W.
secretary
that in in quite a long time a
lot of agencies and it is a
pleasure to work with her again
and also with the days of my
move on these are initiated
services director
Budget staff and the all the
administrative duties of thank
you for the opportunity
opportunity to present is German
I I'm a newly hired in here a
couple months now.
Excited about getting
confirmation and the this is my
third shot at the at economic
position I was very past
ministrations also
economic development secretary
for
Services Department where the
related back from state
government let me say that
really we're the janitors
Department panics printers
partners limitations of plumbers
construction managers
you know holler folk said behind
the scenes and in many aspects
we do have a fair lawyers and
accountants but everybody here
is yes the estimate is providing
the absolute best service to our
fellow stages packed that's
really what we do really here to
support those folks and they are
our customers we maintain office
space contractor good services
provided play health coverage.
Projects and supply hundreds of
leading.
Also helping with the climate
change issue I.
Beginning to end and working
towards making a state of more
energy efficient.
Carport solar and pushing like
the look and feel for the for
the motor pool I got a couple
months ago and I sent the
coolest thing about this place
is is that services are middle
name
because there's not a lot of
people.
You know
Department it's a lot of
attention but without us a lot
of the others don't run well Mr
Chairman representative of our
budget general fund
overview center so our transfers
and most of our budget ninety
six percent as stated Mr Adams
said in a price bump on then we
will be us and hopefully to get
support for the.
Mr chairman I'd like to just a
few of the highlights of the
offense and also in on the tail.
for program support we've
established a pretty strong
media and social media.
relatively new state government
where people are really coming
online and I think we have a
really good act social media
campaign
were collated the climate action
team on on state initiatives
towards a trying to make
ourselves in more energy
efficient and the the only
climate issues
we have limited share the asset
management module to manage over
a million in state government
assets under purchasing you want
to take it was file system for
submission is postal
Of when it comes to dating
additionally the little engine
that could and little engine Hey
state government
it's a really small group of
folks
and in the long run it is large
projects including all the pages
you all deal with on a daily
basis and they deliver on a
timely
faces well and I I really.
It is any not able future for
what is.
And maybe getting more online
it's not just.
For Tatian.
Quite thirty five point
individuals in addition to the
hybrid SEG.
we opened thirty all electric
vehicle charging station
currently working with DOT and
the federal government on
coordinating a charging stations
around the state largest
geographic State and one of the
smallest population so we've got
a challenge to get those
attorney stations out all over
the state we've implemented GST
has happened for all the others
are clearly.
And we still have an airplane
and still fly students the next
school in line individually
there on a regular basis and
that is a true fact is the some
of the doctors would not be able
to get to the four corners of
the state the.
If it were not for
transportation of with the state
money
as I heard from Mr at risk
management this is our sins but
there we get it one minute I
health care purchasing and
raiment the mobile health plan
partners began offering
supplemental coverages such a
saliva catastrophic illness
protections.
we've tried all public buildings
insured by
visiting indigenous buildings
valued at over eight million
dollars and the yes one
qualified on this for the past
five years for the property
casualty casualty team
We've got the right information
system as well
but
so is the management of the
person I think there is a
project Montoya building kicked
off in June and July twenty
nineteen it encompasses thirty
one buildings totaling one point
seven million square the
regarding realized by me and the
savings from that.
It also.
I'm primary at forty four
thousand square the starting to
schedule for completion soon and
this storage facility in Santa
Fe obscene and
started it's got to be a budget
in mid February
last night the security master
plans to diary all of our Santa
Fe buildings and we are working
aggressively to try to get all
those buildings you know and
also landscape program a and
there's a big challenge for
those of us that.
Mr chairman
members of the committee.
We have very package can see
them on some of the projects
forward projects
I'm proud of this department
they.
We've been here for months I
can't say these programs
which challenge in November a
new a new secretary the goal is
to try to include improvements
in our process is in our system
is and yeah we do no tension
about management funding I'll
just addresses briefly Mr
chairman this point is that
the fund is out of balance it's
a very large fund I I agree with
the added that in place.
Have really affected fund
consider million and it does the
some of those funds to be a
little higher than CPI when it
comes to affecting
It they cannot sell at this
point you know I'll just tell
you in speaking with the
governor that the conversations
we had.
What happened last year two
years ago we've been dealing
with it is about ten percent so
maybe up to twenty percent some
of our buildings are full.
Eight so we do have a lot of
people out
and a challenge for us is to
keep our state employees and in
fact the challenges try to make
as many of those years were
permanent.
It is time combined with our
employees a of the way and not
have turned over
it governor of would like to
introduce suggested that with
that in mind surplus that we
asked to the support for
a supplemental to to cover the
deficit this year and I will
assure you as having we are
working and will be of coming up
in the plant I just that helps
so in the future
you can get the rest with it the
very costs and expenses to go
see.
Mr chairman that's what
presentation of that questions
thanks for the opportunity
presented.
Director Avid.
Thank you Mr chairman very
briefly on page ninety six of
volume two there's a reference
to a procurement and LESC didn't
of valuation agency Micaela
Fischer this is the but two
thirds down the page and it was
a progress report on previous
evaluations and it found that
previous findings had dressed it
it the and included calls for
repealing some widely used
purchasing exemptions that
circumvent competition and that
a guard rails to the use of
state price agreements which are
really proliferated in recent
years the report also found the
state is likely over spending as
a result of management decisions
by the staff and including a
growing number of sole source
purchases and
So Mr Chairman the LFC had a
proposed bill and I think
Senator Campos has that bill
along with senator Tom and so
hopefully it may require message
but I think it does provide the
opportunity for savings and
hopefully they're building up to
address that legislation thank
you Mr chairman Senator done.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
some questions about your
governance as well specifically
on risk management division are
those are those appointments
appointed by the governor.
The board formed.
Mr Chairman
no they're expected by who
should be on on the on the
committee.
Your advice report as an and
when was the last time that they
met and when is the next time
that they'll meet.
Mister chairman Senator I I
don't know the answer to that
question but I.
Thank you do you know how often
they're supposed to meet.
Mister chairman Senator anyway.
This is the only.
Could you please send an email
to confirm that they only once a
year and when the last time they
were scheduled to meet in the
next time schedule to meet
please and then I just have one
question pretty basic disagrees
page two of the LFC report says
the legislators made some
special supplemental
appropriations to fund an
address these deficits but no
premium increases were
implemented and so the shortfall
process my question is why.
Yes.
Mr chair Senator.
The implementation eight point.
At this point the help that it
might not be in the best
interest at we do not do salary
increases to messages you send
in the
in the previous meeting I asked
the governor called and the
agency that wasn't
good.
And so the the problem seems to
continue Mr chairman I also see
on here that despite making
thirty two million dollars and
nonrecurring appropriations for
the health benefits
you guys are projected projected
thirty five million dollar
deficit at the close of FY
twenty two.
My question to that is basically
how how can that be why once
again it seems like there might
be a mismanagement of if the
legislators trying to fix your
problem but there doesn't seem
to be the same sort of
initiative from your from your
and can you address that Mister
chairman Senator at that was
taken at a point in time and
when that was produced I'll
defer to W. secretary.
More the Mister chairman
Senator.
All of this.
That was certain point in time
we take our regional estimate
estimated our project is twenty
four point nine million
will be what comes to fruition
Starbucks shortfall in that.
Mr chairman I think.
Attention to page six because
this is an updated projection
the chose now they're looking.
This is dated last week wanted
but now the projected shortfall
looks like it's forty nine
million this this information is
from the department it's
worsening.
Mr chair Senator.
Two point.
She.
The expenses are much higher in
the members.
We
thought but.
Like I for most of our insurance
providers but all the providers
are saying and that I will go
back down.
Representative January and were.
It's just a straight line
projection point in time what we
share projected.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm a
little confused because the
projected deficit that we're
presented with this actually
even worse is as recent as last
week by an additional ten
million dollars I guess my point
being here is confused with
these numbers but looks like the
legislature has made some huge
investments to try to fix these
deficits.
With without a whole lot of
effort by by your office to do
the same so I'll continue to
look at these money these monies
and I'd like to visit with you
offline to get the details of
how how this is so bad and why
it continues to frankly get get
worse Mr chairman.
Mr chairman Sierra of course who
after the conversation.
Senator Diamond let me shed some
light on that for for twenty
through twenty two we've picked
up those premium increases
correct David and what the
failure to increase premiums we
picked up the fair so if those
employees and there's even I
think one member and there's a
lot of misspelled these a lot of
county governments and city
governments that aren't picking
up their share the state has
picked up those questions to the
tune of twelve to fifteen
dollars per year and so at some
point those employees or those
city county whoever's on on GST
Health Care I'm gonna look at
their health care policies and
state will.
I never saw an increase for
three years and they're gonna
see an eighteen percent increase
I'm just using round numbers six
percent a year and they're gonna
say I saw an eighteen percent
increase my policy because the
state has picked it up form for
the last three years the GST and
executive don't begin to start
to trigger those increases.
Those people are going to look
at their policies and say I'm
out of here I'm gonna go
somewhere else my health care
costs is too high for me to
continue working because an
eighteen percent increase on on.
Roughly just save a hundred
thousand so let's just say fifty
thousand salary is nine thousand
dollars how is an employee
making fifty thousand dollars
going to come back and say I
have a nine thousand dollar
health insurance costs increase
because there will be a day of
reckoning at some point in so
how do you how do you do that if
the executive is not gonna start
to trigger small increases or
poor partial increases in the
cities and counties are not
going to pick those up and in
cattle growers to the bowl
weavers association to whoever's
on that list and we have the
list and LESC maybe we can get
that list David force but until
that happens there will be real
sticker shock in their May be
mass exists and because people
say where do I where I come up
with nine thousand dollars only
make fifty thousand dollars a
year and Mr chairman when can we
expect the executive to traffic
trigger those increases.
You have to ask the director and
the deputy director of the
executive even can we expect
those to those increases to be
triggered sooner than later.
Mr chair Senator I'll tell you
what you can expect that in two
months and and I do know that
this is a priority for for this
using the governor
I have experience working with
self insured vehicles in the
past and so there are things we
can do and will do to try to
address that I can not Mister
chairman Senator tell you when
looking at those Representative
what they're going to be
currently we're looking at up I
know we're in the situation
we're trying to find out what we
can do.
The LCDs with the for the
employees as well as the whole
planet Ezzell so I would expect
Mr Abbey director.
These are going to go up and Mr
chairman you are correct that is
something we do not want to take
a shot for members or more
employees in the in the pool but
it is the chairman Senator I
will tell you that we will be
working on a plan and we will be
presenting it to the governor
and then into the legislature we
probably won't be doing in next
twenty days.
Distracted every on that point
and then thank thank you Mr
chairman.
And it's not just local public
bodies which are being
subsidized it's non general fund
agencies so for example that the
Human Services department in the
health department many employees
are paid by federal funds.
And so when premiums are
subsidized the general fund is
also subsidizing the health care
cost of federally funded
employees and even non general
fund other state funds like the
highway department employees
with the game and fish
department employees and I think
once you get a whole like this
obviously have a sticker shock
problem when you try to fix it
but for FY twenty three where
the compensation increases are
going up seven percent S. and
least time to get a start on
fixing and not maybe not so
little ones but to get a start
on when those compensation
increases to comic because again
the general fund.
Is is only.
About a third of the employees
who are in the pool paying
paying for a third of the place
so the so subsidies are
expensive and if you don't if
the if the money's not.
Available to the other general
fund who is covering it will
schools are you know non state
agency of recipients of general
fund appropriations covered.
Thank you.
Question from other committee
members.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr chair and I notice
in your pictures here you've got
Senator.
So
Rooftop solar in.
So record for each.
And I just wonder what do you
figure the pay back on those are
how long will it take to pay
those off.
Mr chair Senator depending on
which particular project
usually enter your five years
six.
How big a project is where it is
but the return B. R. Y. of the
five year.
So you get of a five year pay
back on that and so what do you
charge.
How do you relate that to
charging your car do you do
right you when you say pay back
so are you using that for car
Chargers are just a general a
utility bill of your.
Mr chair Senator that that is
actually goes back
in.
The state financial savings.
You know for the project itself
so the rate that we use up
energy costs and lower.
So so you're you're you're using
like a net metering system.
Against the utility.
Mr Chairman Senator it's similar
to that house.
Okay.
I was wondering one of the
things.
What is the cost of your ongoing
construction this year or are
you building this year.
Mr chair Senator of the roughly
eighty million.
What what do you see as you bid
those projects what's the
escalation cost how much more is
it costing to build.
this year than it did two years
ago or one year ago.
Mr chair Mister chairman Senator
right now it's a moving target
because the costs have gone up
so much for construction lumber
steel all those things that are
going
if we turn it I don't know what
I say I could probably.
Senate.
Over the last year just cost
loans that's in the trailer in
the.
So on that particular deal do
you put riders on your on your
of contractors contractors but
riders on the are are they hard
bid contracts tell me how that
works for you.
Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator it really
comes.
As for proposals
that range in the proposal that
allow certain allowances for
increases and nobody caps and
and there have been in the past
project.
That have been you know exceeded
the range so late in the we have
a I thank you funding for the
post.
Mr chairman that's some
questions.
Any other questions.
Mr secretary let me.
Just out of curiosity since
center would started down this
road so if there's a charging
station and it's a GST or state
vehicle when you plug that into
the charging station DO count
for that amount of electricity
to that vehicle as an operating
expense how do you account for
that.
Okay Mister chairman Senator it
it's hard right it's a huge part
of those in New Mexico.
For
else pays a regular rate would
gas the billing.
Not I get that but you got
operating costs on each and
every vehicle in the state and
has a certain ID number so
that's electrical vehicle.
And it's plugged in the charging
station do chart do you charge
those hours that car was there
charging on its.
On this bill or are you just
completed in its entirety I just
kind of an odd question.
Yes yes we will send.
Thank you know Mr Secretary what
I'm more concerned about is that
people are gonna get sticker
shock we decided quit
subsidizing.
The health care premiums.
That's the biggest factor for me
I understand us picking up some
of those costs during the
pandemic as nobody was working
in and people were on I I I am
more afraid of people looking
back three years or five years
from now the same never saw
these health and sure increases
on on my policy and in them
being very angry about what's
going to happen
I think that we don't need
legislation I think the governor
can automatically
Put those increases in their
however so slight for her
whatever she determines but.
If you can imagine that you walk
into your employment one day and
and they hand you and you health
care costs and said you're
you're cost over three year
period to eighteen percent
it's a little troublesome for
people on on what they're going
to decide what they're going to
pay for their health care
putting their kids through
college everybody budgets in so
that's my number one concern.
And how we move forward
I think the other thing is you
know GSD we've been through some
pandemic stuff and we may have
to it some of it has to be
backed bill because we don't
cover every single base and so I
think we'll we'll talk to the
the other secretary on on how we
do some of those rex the DFA
secretary and what those actual
costs were my other question to
you is out of capital outlay.
State General David you want to
give me that I asked David give
me the number for on spent
capital money for statewide
projects that has not been
expanded through STBs in in
David we know that number close
on page sixty nine we have the
total unspent which is one point
eight billion excluding public
school capital outlay which is
another four hundred million or
so.
So the total two point to two
point three billion unspent.
of the one point eight billion
shown on here and then there's
detail by agency on the
following page.
Quickly I was told about a
billion is just to be certain of
the the general general fund
maybe four hundred million.
And then general obligation bond
three hundred million or some
will confirm those figures but
that's personally what we
believe Mr.
And so Mr Secretary there's a
lot of statewide capital that's
on spent.
Have you and I know you your
new.
In the W. secretary at and she's
been there for a while she's
been kind and every agency how
do you propose to get that
capital.
State and moved on some of it
has been already bonded some of
it has not been bonded yet and
so how do we propose to to move
that capital Ford.
Mr chairman of.
The facility's Management
Division is.
Madam honey date was given the
state's.
For example.
General obligation call center
does it.
Our capital projects
director so that in the.
Get projects here minutes
the legislature's administrative
around the.
She's she's pretty awesome
issues are peaceful release
statewide pricing agreements
whatever she needs.
Projects were I think the what's
the balance on my.
No problem.
Seven zero we.
The other.
Somers.
To the.
Several hundred million dollars.
Probably have he.
Senator but Canadian STO.
My number was all the tunes
Philippine David was talking
about all agencies which would
regulate some of those
overseeing contracts to our of
peas or through
price agreements so so there's a
large number so maybe you and I
in the DFA secretary I to get
together and see which project
you're gonna expand which one
you're not going to expand which
ones are going to be in the cost
over runs because when people
say well look at the legislature
they got two point three billion
dollars and US bank capital that
that's in the economy how we
gonna get that money out there
in the even more importantly to
me is that the project was
funded at one million dollars in
roughly we have a.
This call the eighteen percent
average is what I'm looking at
increasing construction costs
how are you going to fund that
project if we don't have the
funding correctly and that's
going to be a key issue in the
capital bill that projects that
whatever it's for conditioners
for H. fax for prisons whatever
it is we need to make sure that
that funding is correct as we
move forward in a maybe taking
some off and we authorizing some
and so I want you to begin to
look at those costs and the cost
overruns that may happen so that
we have that the correct number
to get those projects moving
today I heard I heard one in one
in four children in New Mexico
as one parent that's not working
doesn't have a job well.
You guys can help do that
because construction pretty much
all hire anybody in the
beginning to get stuff done see
can be part of the equation to
help us lower the unemployment
rate I get more people in there
and make sure that we can get
capitol moving can get capital
moving with the right dollar
amount in that you guys can do
that Mr secretary you.
You have any disagreement with
the.
No look forward to actually look
at it over that conversation so
I think we should send lease
comes to.
So yeah that would be no problem
Sir okay I just.
We got to be ahead of the game
if we're not ahead of the game
we're gonna lose in in New
Mexico always seems to the
struggling in so let's let's fix
some problems that we can fix
there may be winners and losers
in capital but that's kind of
the way it is and sometimes
things happen to fix other
problems and that's just where
it goes I don't see anybody else
with any other questions.
Yes Mr secretary.
One thing that know although
although and
I have been around and I.
I was where you and Mr coming
from on that respond and I'll
surely it is a priority here the
department for the
administration and the we will
look at it you know best
practices will look at what we
can do in light of the situation
And also what's best for please
so I can tell you that it is a
priority in the but right now
we're working with what's
allowed in statute and with
those folks that are in the pool
There.
To the people from some of those
station all it's just a matter
manages to pull in whole so I
just want to focus on getting
that straight.
Yeah and Mr secretary that's not
that's not for that's the people
they're getting their health
care benefits from the state I
mean that that's the people that
are going to get hit with the
cost increases which I think is
completely unfair to them if
we're picking it up for three
years and and then all the
sudden they seen eighteen
percent increase that's the on
fairness and I'm worried about
if there was a short term short
term situation where we covered
it for a year or year and a half
I completely understand that
would agree a hundred percent
during that during the COVID and
shut down but to continue it
makes it even harder for those
adjustments and in so well on
that but you know what are
people's biggest expenses in
their life you know homes their
health care right it kids
education those are the biggest
things in and all use me for an
example of my kids are my health
care policy.
And so my wife worked at the
schools and it was covered to
the schools but if if I was a
state employee and had two
children and three children on
my policy and then then someone
increase in in three years and
never could get the total cost
covered I I'd be a little bit
nervous about my health care
because.
During the COVID.
You know what is everybody
everybody goes to the hospital
everybody's everybody's doesn't
know what symptoms they have if
it's a flu if it's a cold if
it's a cough
in so that that's my main
concern I'm more concerned about
people being being treated
fairly and and so that they know
what's happening with their
health care costs of bank in
thank you it's not lecture it's
just a matter of fact for
everyday life people that they
have to face that situation so
we haven't done it for we
haven't done it for teachers we
haven't done it for a lot of
other state agencies higher ed
PD me so.
It's kind of a little bit unfair
but I guess it's for life I
thank you Mr secretary
appreciate it Ellen join the
conversation about capital in
the how we move this forward but
it's just the treatment thank
you for your time thank you W.
secretary
You can get a real LFC budgeted.
Hello we got a real budget LFC
analysts we got a real treasure
in the room.
Mr treasure you have brought the
the have brought the you brought
everybody back into the room to
hear your presentation so you
must be a popular guy this is.
You want to go ahead and I'm
sorry.
Imagine.
Go ahead and begin.
Sure thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer I am I am an
economist over the LFC so we
haven't seen you before that's
who I am I am taken over so from
is mail order as so you'll see
me every time study here and
then also joined by Simon Miller
at the DFA thirty discussing the
state treasurer's office at the
agency code three nine four.
You can find the documents in
the LFC volumes on page one
ninety three in volume one and
volume two there on page one
thirty four.
And I will just get started and
handed over the Senate Miller
and then pass it over to our
treasure to my number to discuss
the HSD
so just quickly going over the
budget.
Passed over because the general
fund increase of six hundred
sixty eight thousand and fifteen
point six percent increase
largely to implement the launch
of the working safe program I
will leave that I I compared to
really describe in detail
the LFC recommends a flat budget
for contractual services all the
executive recommends a seven
point five thousand or one point
eight percent increase over the
fiscal year twenty twenty two
operating budget.
I do want to note that because
this is here twenty two request
for the working for a program
are mostly non recurring start
up costs and working state
program has a launch deadline of
July first twenty twenty four
which is fiscal year twenty
twenty five those the recommends
four hundred thousand dollars
special appropriation to cover
these costs rather than
including funds in the base
budget.
Both LFC and exec recommends a
forty nine point one thousand or
one point five percent increase
for personal services employee
benefits to cover
hiring and retaining talented
team members.
The LFC recommends a sixty
thousand dollar or nine point
one percent increase for other
uses most if I. T. expenditures
to protect against cyber
security attacks the executive
recommends a hundred twenty five
point two thousand dollar R.
nineteen point one percent
increase over the twenty twenty
two operating budget so I'll
pass it over to fund Miller DFA
if you have any additional
comments.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee I won't take up too
much of your time your energy
much rather hear from the
treasurer the knee so at the LFC
recommendation is two point
eight percent general fund
increase the executive
recommendation to four point
seven percent general fund
increase so over the
recommendations are very center
and with that I'll turn it over
to our treasure the strike here.
Thank you Simon can you all hear
me with this mask on I'll try to
use my outside voice it's been
it's always wonderful to work
with from Rick Simon I'm
Jennifer's new hi Tom we don't
always agree but they do it with
such a smile on their face that
it's just it's just pleasant to
work with.
I've got
three kids.
Have you passed the law there
you see on the front page is a
picture of the state treasurer's
office we've been there many
many years I'm starting my
eighty year not locations.
And so I will ask you again why
am I paying two hundred twenty
five thousand dollars a year
taxpayer money to rent an office
space.
That's the reason for
procurement I hope you will
eventually get to building on
executive office complex we're
all of our agencies are together
I'm on page two I've got my
executive staff these are the
people that actually do all the
work in the treasurer's office
they make me look good.
Some of them are on the call
right now
my deputy treasurer Sam Collins
Claudia me hope and we'll
continue program is on the call
along with the chair of the
working state program so if you
have questions I can now turn it
over to them I didn't really my
chief financial officer is also
on the call.
I'm.
I'm very proud of I can't tell
you how proud I am have these
people the experience that they
bring to the treasurer's office
and the work they do is just.
On page three
we have some of the highlights
and accomplishments I'm just
some of the teams that our
assets to record levels were
over nine billion dollars for
handling the state's finances
professionally as my deputy says
no news is good news when you
don't see your name in the
newspaper hi I'm able
administration and that's under
the direction of the other about
this she's been done she started
to treasures office and twenty
seventeen
We're hoping will reach one
thousand sometime this week.
On the next page.
Well let me talk a little bit
about
The able accounts they're tax
free savings accounts for
individuals with disabilities
there's of the numbers that we
had back in June but the
percentage of increases just
keep going and I choose to the
leadership of the other benefits
on page slide four on page four
we we talk a little bit about
the.
As you can see there it's in
bold no findings in the state
treasurer's office on a report.
I'm we have L. G. I. P. is
maintained its highest rating by
standard and poor's a triple
eight that's the fifteenth
consecutive year that we've had
that.
I'm then we talk a little bit
about the work in state program
and that implementation is
underway
the reason why you pass that
back in twenty twelve.
Twenty twenty was that sixty
seven percent of New Mexico
private sector workers have no
retirement savings.
House bill forty four acted in
twenty twenty established a
voluntary state sponsored
retirement plan.
In New Mexico just became one of
only twelve states leading the
way in helping private sector
employees provide retirement
savings options for their
workers and we still have a
launch date of twenty twenty
four I'm there on that page or
slide five responses I
working for a bill
I am notices Senator Padilla has
gotten just a little grayer now
than when he was in twenty
twenty where we took that
picture.
And it's still just a slam and
that is the everyone.
I'm.
I'm working state board of
directors.
I'm I've got pictures of them as
well.
Two of them were appointed by
meet the state treasurer's
office but the others were
appointed either by the speaker.
President pro tem for the
governor so this is a well
rounded group of individuals
very experienced and working
very hard on our behalf to
Make
a reality in New Mexico.
I'm gonna read about some of the
numbers and that's on slide
seven LFC recommends four
hundred thousand dollars for a
special appropriation not the
six hundred thousand dollars
that we're asking for here so I
will be probably calling you all
individually trying to get that
money up a little higher.
I'm not.
Page eight
We're going to use some of the
funding for
first of all if you
implementation of the
administration of the work in
state programs.
Sixty thousand dollars of that
is for I. T. to acquire new
service software subscriptions
and hardware warranties as we're
all going through and we've all
read we're the county Bernalillo
was attacked by cyber had a
cyber attack our public schools
we work very diligently in the
treasurer's office protecting
nine billion dollars of your
money and we don't want to have
any kind of a
difficulty with cybersecurity
issues.
On slide nine we break down what
we're containers asking for
wider asking for the money
Representative program
consultation marketing an
average investment consultation
we need to have the
professionals because they're
working state program does not
require the employer to be
involved in this in any way
shape or form the employer on
the test to do is set up and the
rest the responsibility falls
on.
I'm in the last line is contact
information for me
right now all right now my
biggest because I haven't seen
any legislation introduced and I
just thought perhaps maybe the
chair might have done this and
that has to do with the Supreme
Court decision that came out
last year late last year and I
have to do with the
constitutional protections of
your body good how money should
be appropriated by the
legislature
we work together I was named and
that is a real party in interest
that was the only reason why the
treasury had to brief the
Supreme Court.
I did take the position that the
legislature should appropriate
the money's in the reason why I
did that is in the constitution
it specifically states that the
transfer will not pay a warrant.
With with monies that have not
been appropriated by the
legislature.
So following the supreme court's
order and their respect DFA I'm
waiting lady transferred funds
that were covered by the right
and the order.
I'm still didn't know about it
we didn't find out about it into
late the next day.
Then there's a perception out
there that the state treasurer's
office controls all the money
spent.
I every state agency and that's
just not true that's not
something we do in the state
treasurer's office we don't have
the technology nor do we have
the capacity to do that and you
have the Supreme Court has
ordered it says that I am
responsible for all money's
going out.
They have to be appropriated by
this body before I can pay so
putting me in a situation where
I can't pay.
I don't even know the DFA has
sent out money literally until
the next day is not something
that we feel is in your best
interest in this particular case
it was only two hundred sixty
nine thousand dollars to pay
offender in Virginia it was
electronic transfer that money
went out literally when they
authorized.
I'm more concerned not with my
DFA does its work somebody in
DFA might do on their own.
if this would have been a half
million or two million dollar
general let's send this out
electronically the treasurer
won't find out about it by then
already in the Cayman Islands
that spurred by there's me and
unfortunately
our job is to protect the
taxpayer my job specifically is
to protect the public and all of
our jobs collectively I think
our to our to protect the public
perception that we actually know
what we're doing and there are
actually protecting.
And so do not turn it back on
the chairman.
Only kidding that I was hoping
you would find a bill rate
I was kidding with tongue in
cheek I really thought that the
legislature would have done
something these are committee
members
shares of.
Committees also entered into
this along with two body two
members of this body but there's
no legislation filed it gives
the treasurer
the opportunity or the ability
to do my job.
Which is to be a banker so my
ask here is if we need
additional million dollars.
We need to take that share
programs that we currently work
under which is called the
treasury module I share and
bring it up to date and give me
the authority that I need
to see real life transactions
just like your bank guns if you
write a hot check your bank
knows and they don't.
He didn't get intended rate but
I don't have that authority nor
do I have that capability so
this researchers peanuts I think
I need another million dollars
and the reason why I say I think
I do.
Our staff went out and just
asked do people and we started
with the people that put it on a
national program five years ago
almost six years ago now
We had.
If I can use that term but they
won't braid state richest
conversations they went anywhere
from just less than a half a
million dollars to four million
dollars of what upgrades I would
need to my system.
So we thought we'd ask for a
million dollars issue and come
back next year if we need more
we have a better idea of what we
need to do.
And the reason I was
complimenting Senator Padilla
earlier was because I was hoping
he would just make a motion to
approve the treasures are
crossed
somebody second how to split and
we won't have to worry about
this anymore I am and just for
your application.
Senator David and I've been in
Senate committees where the
chain before even sat down has
made a motion to approve my bill
and I'm smart enough not to sit
down and just wait for the
committee to vote then I ladies
and so I hope that happens to
you more than once where you Sir
not in the Senate here because
it's just a wonderful feeling to
know that they understand what
you want I can give you what you
want without you standing up
there making a fool of yourself
and begging for.
That's all I have Mister
chairman thank you thank you
we'll take center for the off
the list.
The ex members question I know
you for let me let me first say
something and ask you a
question.
Can you not issued warrants a
put a hold on warrants until
they've been roof review isn't
there a place to put a hold in
the treasurer's office on all
warrants issued.
I think the easy answers now it
would be humanly impossible for
my office to do that on a day to
day basis because of how many
warrants we we have how many
accounts we have with the
current technology that I'm
working under them that's not
a warrant warrants that are over
five hundred thousand or two
hundred thousand again it's
something that happens almost
everyday so it's it's quite
difficult but in this particular
case that I gave the example
coming out of the FAA it was an
electronic transfer.
That money went immediately.
Thank.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr president thank you the
presenters and one thing I
learned to Mr treasure along the
way.
One thing I learned is to
treasure along the way I was
just when your bills in great
shape to start talking I mean
that's that so it took me a long
time to learn that one and I
just am so grateful that you
have been our treasure you're
doing so much wonderful thank so
many wonderful things for us I
do want to talk just a little
bit about the work in state
program I'm a little concerned
I'm just rules I'm I'm a little
surprised at the six hundred
forty two thousand dollars it's
going to be needed to to manage
the program and you did sort of
break it out which I thought was
very good
I have I did have a great
conversation with Claudia
recently because like last week
and and we talked to the board
chair as well when I I you know
we're at the this is a dollar
and cents Canadian some not
gonna get into like policy
exactly or or whatever on that
one but there's already some
significant changes that are
being thought about being
brought to the legislature in
the programs I. even up and
running yet so I guess I'm a
little concerned about that do
you wish to comment on that at
all or one of the key elements
that I think you know I left it
we refer sort of back and forth
you and I am on the voicemails
last week is the mandatory
verses the voluntary
requirement for this program the
one of the ways that we sold
this to our colleagues here than
the legislature
partner with Senator Tallman on
different things like a from
this bill that was my bill
originally and I said no I want
you to do it and he was real
happy to do it.
And we told folks that this
would be a mandatory thing at
all and I'm very concerned about
that right now we as you know
when you were for your time and
this and that the only thing we
have in this legislature's our
word and we talk calling
something I want to make sure
that we follow through on that
because I would hate for my
colleagues to say one thing to
me in one committee and
something else in another
committee and then take it back
in the you can how that goes but
what we're we going with this
program right now it's not even
up and running it we're making
some really significant sweeping
changes to it.
I'm sweeping changes in and if
you don't mind Senator just for
the other senators here in the
room that I have not had an
opportunity to talk to Claudia
more to learn Hochman they're
both on the call so I will if I
could his **** the chair Lynn
Hoffman to answer your question.
I appreciate that Mr treasure
because they were fantastic
about taking time to meet with
us are both working really
really hard but I really would
like to hear from them because
this is a pretty big stick he's.
Sticky wicket if you will.
I'm gonna call.
Yes.
and sign unable to start video
but if you can hear me.
The.
We can hear you land to go
ahead.
Thank you thank you for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator thank you for your
question all I would like to.
That is why we are where we are
and it is from the mission that
the legislation passed in two
thousand twenty address and that
was provided to take proactive
steps to redress the state.
For private workers who have
almost retired state.
And at that time there was no
immediate access research
regarding the design and
implementation of programs work
in the state of conceptual.
There have been done by the task
force I.
This is Kaylee ma'am.
We had a word have.
Senator fifteen moms all you
need to research not only to
develop the in need that are New
Mexico workers employers but
also to understand the tail the
program nationally that are very
stages implementation.
Programs on operating out of the
troubles that are initiating and
the more more joining us across
the country
Is programs with the exception
of New Mexico are requiring the
employers to take.
This tool the date for their
employees by registering was
organising and rolling there are
police.
Once again active traders the
program participation remains
under the control of the
individual workers they have
the Senators loans to increase
He spent on all other states
press.
Circumstances require so there's
a lot of pollution we're looking
we do need to make this
successful the lawyers private
sector to take that step.
All registry you rolling the
workers committed to cessation.
There is only one is
the research center included the
murder Austin college we.
Could start only that.
One is that in a long time a
politics.
Police level we sent you one
percent participation mall New
Mexico police.
And after ten years we would be
fortunate to see twenty four
cans.
That is.
Senator body of work we're
gonna.
I I know you got we're gonna
push through some time here
Mister chairman I just hope that
we you know wrap our hands
around.
Allowing the program to work you
know before we make these rather
significant sweeping changes I
think it's it's good I heard
twenty four hundred potential
members within ten years the
call we had last week unless I
miss heard was forty four
hundred and that to me just
that's a pretty good success
rate read out of the gate so I'm
hoping that's will do with this
but on the funding I I guess
that's an awful lot of money for
a program of that is and I'm I'm
all about is the sponsor of the
program I wanna make sure this
thing works and everything
I just need some more
information I guess to figure
out where we're going with this
two hundred thousand dollars for
marketing and outreach that's
great I'm hoping that's to reach
employers to let them know about
this program this is going to
help employers be an employer of
choice they can choose to do
this for not at the moment and
that's how we keep it thank you
Mr chairman I know we want to
move on to others thank you.
Thank you Sir Senator Steinborn
and and we have one more agency
in in this time and I actually
don't have a question I wanted
to learn more about this program
I still do I looked it up online
and all all keep research and so
thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr treasure
thank you for time here today I
I do want to know people people
no if they don't know this and
members of this committee there
was a point in time in New
Mexico under different
administration that we had no
money in our bank account.
And there was a decision to be
made by the treasure do you
write checks for the stop
people's payroll.
And and he made the right
decision lot of people don't
realize that there was a point
in time the more Martinez
administration where we were in
there negative in our case.
And so as an elected official
sometimes you stand up for
people in New Mexico and do the
right thing even though it could
spell trouble in a lot of
different ways but that's one
thing I don't think people know
that you need to be commended
for is there was a point in time
in New Mexico and I believe
twenty sixteen twenty seventeen
when when that did happen and to
take the brunt of some of that
is is very incredible as a
single person doing that for the
entire state so I appreciate
that I know you want a lot of
money but we do have a lot of
money but I think the governor
spent a lot of money and and
we'll see what happens and
Senate finance as we move along
and we'll make sure that simply
is not the room in your budget.
Was senator and I'm still
waiting to hear from you that
you're going to get some
legislation drafted to make
I convert type three with you a
hundred percent and out all
begin that drafting process of
your staff hold on to the right
so we'll get you and Dawn I know
you have a another meeting that
you're dying to get to before
the five o'clock hour but it
does need to happen that's why I
ask you the questions is there
any way to put a hold on
warrants issued or transferred
that they have to be prior to
twenty four hour period for the
treasures review to authorize
and that may help that may not
I'm looking to that Mr chairman
and get back to percent more I
know that if I go to a different
bank that I don't think it
regularly or I get a check from
out of state company there's a
whole put on my account or those
dollars for up to three days
until that transfer is been made
even though the institution
transfers overnight they can
still be pulled back and so I I
think that's something that New
Mexico needs to look into so we
don't get our ourself we don't
have a public official getting
arrested or taken to court for
making illegal transfers which
hi happens more often than you
know and I know and that anybody
else wants to know but we should
really look at those dollar
amounts of thank you for your
time here today appreciate you
being in person Jennifer thank
you are you the next age are
there thank you guys.
And we're going to hear all
about up in smoke and that for
the next thirty minutes.
Go ahead hi Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Gonna go over agency for twenty
and that's the regulation and
licensing.
The
Department.
with me here today is the
superintendent Trujillo I
believe she's on and then or a
or executive analyst is Donna
report Rivera.
Well you can find the LFC budget
narrative and right up involving
two on page one fifty six.
First of all the primary
differences between the LFC and
Executive recommendations were
in the cannabis control program
and also the executive
recommended establishing a new
Separately budgeted manufactured
housing division.
In total the executive would
increase general fund revenue to
the Department by sixty percent.
well the I LFC recommendation
increases revenue to the
Department six point six
percent.
there are minor differences
between recommendations and
other revenues and fund balance
revenues.
Given relief three million in FY
twenty two funded vacancies LFC
increased personnel costs
spending two point six percent
the executive recommendation
would increase personal costs
bending nearly twenty three
percent with a one point two
million increase in the
manufactured housing program and
three point nine million in
cannabis control program.
The executive recommendation
recommended recommendation for
the construction industry
program increases funding two
hundred twelve point nine
thousand and would separately
budget manufactured housing.
LFC increases funding for the
construction industry by a
hundred thousand and did not
support separately budgeting
manufactured housing.
in cannabis control the
executive supported a one
hundred and thirty two percent
increase in revenue including
six point five million from the
general fund.
The LFC recommendation supported
a one point four million
increase in general fund revenue
to the program.
also cannabis control was six of
fifteen FTE currently vacant LFC
recommended two point five
million less than executive for
personnel costs LFC is
recommendation would
sufficiently fill an additional
six Bacon sees the executive
would feel about thirty five
vacancies on that program I'm
with that Mr chairman I'll pass
it over to the executive for any
kind of.
If they want to go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Donna that in the budget that is
for more than finance.
We know Google of important
points that were perhaps
overlooked
one thing that I'd like to point
out is that.
This is the Senate recommended
separation manage housing in the
increase of additional positions
for both construction industry
housing because of the
substantial increase in
development and construction
from state and even with the but
and agencies there is still
there may not have sufficient
but there is actually a
supplemental requests this year
for this particular position
because the position
Like to point out is that.
The other divisions in
particular.
Programs for the office of the
superintendent LFC
recommendation.
Uses from current operating
level the by twenty two percent
general fund the difference is
in.
The
Awful.
Division the reduction is also.
Substantial is there reducing
the general fund in the current
operating level
I'm not sure exactly why
Mr chairman.
To secretary you Mr chairman.
Madam secretary go ahead and
proceed.
committee members.
To be here today have the
opportunity to present our
budget is possible that I can
share my screen.
yes the zoom operator did you
learn to share the screen.
We noticed that you did have
three representatives up on
their.
Budget hearing in the Senate.
That may not play well.
Mr chairman I apologize.
Background.
That I see the good
Representative every once in a
while at the gym.
Early in the morning.
What I think you have that
capability ma'am madam secretary
thank you for director yeah.
Okay I don't see.
On my sorry thank you.
Thanks.
We do have your present we have
a presentation from our of the.
Thank you Mr chairman so I I
just there's a couple of things
that I just want to highlight
the to have a long day but I
appreciate you taking the time
to listen to us first of all the
the our budget there was a
little confusion about reversion
of thirty four million dollars
those are fees that the
department collects so we need
to deposit thirty four months
last year because four million
dollars back into the general
fund as fewer versions some of
our.
Fees we collect are non
returnable numbers means that
this is required to be reverted
back into the general fund.
we did have a like a general
fund rivers that was funding
that was provided by the
legislature of the four hundred
thousand dollars plane that you
detail as we go forward in the
process of going through our
audit and looking at why was
that and then as high as it was
discovered it was a hundred and
sixty seven thousand dollars
that was actually
miscategorized it was these
rather than general fund and are
working with our products that
corrected now which would mean
that we reverted to one hundred
thirty seven thousand one
hundred thirty five dollars
during last fiscal year we also
collected in FY twenty one ten
million seven hundred twenty
eight this non returning teams
we have a total of three hundred
and seventy staff as of today we
have twenty of those
we have.
In addition to the twenty thirty
positions as a result of going
house to a rapid higher and some
really amazing efforts that are
richer Department division
directors have you done we have
thirty pieces we started within
the next couple of weeks.
So.
Recommendations to see is a
total of fifty million dollars
and the LESC recommendation is
total of forty three.
What we could have the increase
the last for the cannabis
control division we really ask
for Levin point five percent
increase over FY twenty two it's
important to note that FY twenty
two was a little bit less in FY
twenty one and that was due to
the request to reduce our
projects and then there was
increased during the session.
So this is our strategic plan
and the areas that we're going
to focus on we'll be focusing on
budget and fiscal responsibility
we're gonna be focusing on
community engagement to try to
break down barriers to licensed
we've already taken some steps
in that direction eight
eliminated the feeding that
barbers and cosmetologists for
pain when they rented the who's
inside of an established limited
is that seven thousand eight.
We're taking a look at every
single unit is charged and
comparing that with the statutes
and ensuring that we're not
charging for things we don't
have authority for.
We're also going to focus on
consumer education we've
expanded we've we've created
last New Mexico program that
reaches out to you cannabis
entrepreneurs
to expand that and look at other
options for how to help
entrepreneurs manage their
businesses were collaborating
with the economic development
department the small business
development centers and various
other agencies we also focus on
human resources and Mr chairman
this is something that you spoke
about when we presented in front
of the LESC committee and that
is how do we recruit and retain
our please how do we develop a
career ladder formalizes
succession plan as our our long
term employees retirees and
younger ladies from related to
those positions we really as I
mentioned earlier we're doing a
lot of different things like
racing all of our employees are
committee point ensuring that we
bring people in the highest
level possible based on their
experiences education we will
continue to look at that from a
strategic matter we're also
continue focusing on information
technology which includes
putting more and more of our
license types as online
application renewable.
we are going to pharmacy
operations we really are going
to implement a continuous
improvement strategy I'm sure
this is the other department and
to make sure that our customer
service is always.
So one of the areas to focus on
is the financial institutions
division we did ask for an
increase in.
somewhere in the neighborhood of
about five hundred thousand
dollars you'll see that on the
river three million nine hundred
ninety two thousand eight
hundred and thirty dollars back
to the general fund most of what
we're asking for that but it is
going to come out of other other
funds that are not.
The the four thirty eight point
three is our three million three
point nine million we're
actually putting back into the
fund the reason for this is a
number of reasons right now
we've got twenty one thousand
three hundred sixty four
licensees across twelve
different.
And
that's about one for every one
employee for every six hundred
sixty seven institutions very
difficult for us to really
regulate and receive those
institutions with that many
financial institutions per
person you see that twenty
twenty actually just had a
little bit under fifty thousand
so the license types of throw
staffing has continued to grow.
This year the performer last
year we perform seven hundred
and thirty three cents to
process and I.
in this industry compared to
six.
Twenty.
Our staff is doing more we're
working on ways to make them
more efficient and reduce travel
time specifically.
On this of on the right those
would like to create we'd like
to create to security
cybersecurity positions for
making decisions for mortgages
positions the reason for that is
the Conference of State Bank
supervisors C. as the last
the state on probation we have
sixteen open recommendations I
would close we have a level
below the average number of
recommendations of honor
licensing jurisdictions around
the country is I so we're
waiting we really need to
improve the delivery of our
services.
Hi this is needed to hire some
qualified examiners understand
cybersecurity as we all know
there's a lot of.
Concerns about online.
BeiGene online transactions and
we need to hire at least two
people can really focus their
attention on helping to by banks
credit unions other.
Attentions on ways to protect
themselves from cyber security
issues we also has the racks is
that we do not have.
Examiners to lead the
examinations that they're
they're requiring us to do
we have on average around in
this eleven were to designers we
have six but we do believe that
we can increase for that will
meet the standards required.
We have some challenges in
hiring people in this industry
and the reason is because they
need to hire qualify so we're
looking at some ways to help
build that career ladder so that
we can have individuals coming
in can you make sure resources
training and and we can bring
them up to the standards that
they need right now the rate
that it was received by
central's doing examinations is.
Over the industry still has
already agreed to help us look
at how do we increase that
across the spectrum of the
employees financial institutions
and please come.
Looks.
Yeah.
We now this one's not quite so
rosy you'll see the see IT put
in six million dollars to the
general fund for the reversions
but they need someone but we
need the nine point five million
from the general fund in order
to hire additional lines would
like to have
we are looking at dividing the
manufactured housing.
This is the reason for that we
even started this process is
because in two thousand and
nineteen Senator Wirth and then
Representative Martinez
sponsored house bill forty nine
it.
This.
It is act that formally combine
construction and manufactured
housing to have a decision or
after one division.
The practice but this committee
and twenty nineteen affected
divided into divisions in order
for us appropriate be able to
monitor the expenses for each of
those divisions and to report
back to the legislature the the
actual cost of implementing the
requirements for each of those.
By the projects will be very
helpful for us
Increase the construction
industry budgeted very modestly
ask for an additional two
hundred and twelve thousand
dollars that would give us the
ability to higher positions but
we did not decreases I was
going.
And so here on the.
Did you see that we're asking
for one point four million
dollars from the general fund
the twenty five thousand is from
high federal money and we're
asking for going to Senate three
hundred thirty nine.
The LFC recommendation did not
have any other that can so
effectively not increase the ID
and not funding this tree house
in the street the limited amount
of increased a lot will not
cover more than it is.
Use of the numbers for FY twenty
two and on the number of
inspections for FY twenty two
they're very significant.
The
Control on there is minor
differences between the
executive recommendation and the
LESC recommendation hello we are
looking to hire one additional
person to the policy analyst to
make sure that we're seeing her
with the federal and state laws
in regards to the E. and other
tobacco products.
And that Mr chair over I have to
say on W. us right next I also
have on the line see I director
Bailey manufactured housing
director Charles see can you
just control division director
Thompson and have the answers to
these acting director more as
well as our general counsel
Mr chair but
Super.
Members can control madam madam
superintendent could you have
your staff email us a
presentation we don't.
We don't have that presentation
so we couldn't print it for our
members to the overview and and
and the so we only have one
screen and before there are
doing it Senator Woods age it's
hard to see that screen.
And so
Thank you Mr chairman I will be
happy to Senate especially for
Senator I I think we'll blame it
on Mr Ramos for not doing that
sentences portion of the
presentation.
Mr chair I'll take.
Members of the committee thank
you so much for the opportunity
to be here today explains this
as brief as possible when
talking about the Kandace
control Division budget it is a
very high stakes Division when
it comes to insuring that the
health and safety of New
Mexicans is is is is is what
doctor and the executive
recommendation really represents
what we need to ensure that we
are.
Reading units in the staffing
that's necessary to ensure those
health and safety requirements
for New Mexicans but also ensure
that we have a licensing
structure that provides entry
into pop way for New Mexicans
into this industry which has the
potential to create eleven
thousand jobs and is expected to
be million dollars in revenue to
the state and so the we can see
on the screen and that the the
difference between the executive
recommendation and LFC
recommendations is difference of
about five million dollars in
general fund and that five
million dollar differences
really difference in ensuring
what we look at and what we need
to create a function compliance
unit and functioning licensing
unit as well as ensure that the
legislative requirements for
social equity economic justice
and diversity within the
industry as well as the training
requirements for putting on and
training license training
training in the licensing
requirements are met out you
know the LFC budget
recommendations built around the
comparison of the alcohol
beverage control division as
well as the department of health
medical cannabis program Mr
chair members of the committee
that's like comparing apples and
realest you know the idea of a
beverage commission doesn't have
Division doesn't have a
compliance unit two at they
don't regulate licenses from CD
sale as is required of us by
statue and through the rules
that we developed again to
ensure that we're meeting the
critical health and safety
requirements that we need to
ensuring really that we don't
see analyst at market come up or
with the rise of this this is
new industry at the department
of health medical program only
really oversaw thirty four
licensed licensees we're now
have already issued three
licenses which include nineteen
producer licenses nineteen my
producer licenses three
manufacturer licenses and twelve
retail licenses in addition to
read licensing the third for
initial.
medical cannabis for producers
that we had initially so we have
essentially nearly triple the
industry and the producers are
there and not viruses
specifications on additional
support in the compliance unit
again to ensure that these into
that we can provide adequate
regulation it it makes a
necessity for occasional staff
within our licensing unit to
ensure that individuals
conducting get kind of guy to
access to licenses that New
Mexicans especially our micro
are micro licenses they have the
support that they need to
navigate what can often be a
complicated industry for the
initial entry way and so that is
that reflects that's what's
reflected within the executive
budget is is making sure that
these issues critical components
are adequately funded in a way
that we feel the need to be in
in a way that I think you
Mexicans expected to serve and
so that is that's that's a brief
overview and our answer any
additional questions.
Thank you Mr chairman that
really
We really concludes our budget
boards and commissions division
has not asked for any additional
funding it is important to note
that they no longer oversee the
doctors of osteopathy which is
about a hundred and ninety
thousand dollars we didn't
reduces by that amount so
there's a slight increase this
year reports and commissions we
are doing some really
We're we're taking some steps to
ensure that the health licensing
has to support it need to have
in order to provide better
customer service and we're
looking at a variety of other
aspects the securities division
as you see right here the
reversion there actually to see
that our agencies that reverts
to most two general fund a
little over almost twenty one
point seven million dollars is
what they refer what we've asked
for and that is not much
different.
The LFC recommendations are not
hard alright we do have an
average vacancy rate of fifteen
point twenty nine percent but as
I mentioned earlier we really
taking some some very aggressive
steps to get our opposition
still and we're we're right
about eighty percent right now
and with that Mr chairman we
stand for questions thank you
Senator Steinborn here your
first on the list thank you Mr
chairman.
Then record I actually have to
run off I I would request you
give in give me a call in the
next few days we could chat
about a few things.
Absolutely thank you thank you
very much
thanks and
Specifically Mr chairman I'm I'm
curious number one how you feel
about the issue of a public bank
is far as the receipts of all
this money.
just as a vehicle for deposits
or way to how that incorporates
in with all your other
regulatory activity with banks
so this is something I'd love
your opinion on that and realize
your oversight role for banks
and I anyway I had a few other
issues but I'll talk to you
about a offline so thank you
madam chair Madam director thank
you for your cell number yeah
and I think I emailed you I
think madam secretary so you
could just shoot me a note.
Mr chairman I think I'd real
quick Mr chairman when we
anticipate that.
Recreational cannabis will go on
sale.
Are you asking me that question
a.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
a we haven't made a final
decision.
About.
But we do have to do a million
April first.
Thank you appreciate it I'm done
Mr thank you I don't see anybody
else centers here has some
questions on center Padilla.
Sorry about that I mean I read
Senator thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I was just
curious about the
Of the banking examiners
to look at cyber security.
Do we have any issues with
banking security today I mean
what we need these examiner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator the the industry does
have a lot of protections in
place but it is important when
we're looking at St charter
banks and state for credit
unions that we have someone who
is available to provide the
resources to ensure that they
have access to it this is a
national issue that is happening
all around the country that
oversight
regulators are being asked to
ensure that people have access
to appropriate cybersecurity.
Mr chair in in secretary I'm.
My concern here is that we will
then have somebody this is yes
you are good even though they're
not good.
In in that's simply a.
Away for the banks to protect
themselves because they can go
then go back into the state said
we did everything right even
though the banks knew they
weren't doing everything right.
In in what I would rather see is
that the banks.
In credit unions anybody else
that's in it regulated by if I
do.
Take care themselves I can't
imagine a bank.
Not doing everything they can
today I can imagine the.
Credit union not doing
everything they can today.
And so I'm concerned that when
they're asking about something
they're simply asking so that
they are not sued when something
doesn't go right they can turn
to you and say well you said it
was O. K. therefore we're exempt
from.
From any other kind of
liability.
So that's my concern about that
and I also don't think that I
don't think there's any bank or
credit union in New Mexico
that's not taking this very
seriously today.
And doing everything they can
and I'm concerned that this
becomes counterproductive
because then they can say well
you approved it.
So that's my.
My two cents worth thank you Mr.
Response yes please.
Okay.
it's hard to tell when I'm not
there in person
so this is a national training
program that examiners have the
ability to get the training that
we need to do exactly the in in
examinations to ensure that
thanks to happen we would not be
in the position to say that
everything is set for credit
you with those optional
responsibility that we have and
the council Conference of State
Bank supervisors when they put
the state on probation this last
year indicated to us that we
absolutely have to make that
part of our examination as we
look at the state chartered
banks.
So Mr chair what is what is that
examination then look like.
Mr chair.
Senator may I have acting
director more respond to job.
Thank you.
We're actually one of only two
states in the nation.
Yes I would.
You will they are.
the options for.
they have systems in place they
are.
One of the laws program.
Followed by the financial.
A group of financial regulators
XP it is.
Federal reserve offices.
CDC all of them together is
program.
White and therefore that is what
we will look at this like for
what we do
is make sure that their
underwriting of loans and making
sure they're accounted for the
past that's what so you know.
No matter what you expect the
would fax and that's what we.
Okay Mister chair Secretary I.
I understand that but I also
cannot believe that there is a
bank anywhere in America.
It's not taking this seriously
with or without a regulator
telling them to take it
seriously.
I also can't imagine that
there's a bank anywhere that
doesn't have cash management
that they're taking seriously
with that without you expecting
them.
In so.
I the more bureaucracy simply
means the more cost to somebody
now if there's a reason for
I'm not opposed to all
bureaucracy.
If there's a real reason for if
if we have people that are not
making legitimate loans are not
qualifying them purpose it.
A properly then I believe that
but I just do not believe that
there is a bank in America not
just New Mexico that's not
taking cybersecurity absolutely
seriously with that without the
help of a bureaucrat telling
them they have to.
So I understand that somebody
you know above are pretty great
said that thou shall do it.
Hello Mr chair.
States.
We're still sovereign over the
federal government no matter
what the federal government says
so I believe we can do what we
want to do.
And I know that you have been on
would you call it
It needs.
Your blessings to protect
themselves they will do so by
themselves thank you Mr.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the presenters
instrumentalist in the
settlement superintendent I I
you know I I just wanted to lend
my support to the separation of
the State ID and the
manufactured housing division I
think that's an excellent move I
I'm not quite sure why they were
put together to begin with so I
think that's a good move on I
think the the governor staff and
folks are working with you to
get that done the new budget
that's available you kind of I
stood up there quite a real
quickly on the manufactured
housing I don't expect you to
put it back up would you mind
sending that to me I just think
that's an excellent movie that
you're making there and I'd like
to see the the budget that is
that becomes the new division I
guess the standalone
manufactured housing division
just to to take a look at it do
you feel but but the question I
have for you is do you feel the
budget that you're coming
forward with that that is been
recommended is adequate to run
that new division.
Mr chairman and senator it's
very nice to hear your voice yes
we do believe that the budget
request that we have from
executive recommendation you
actually support us to hire
three additional employees to be
added to the field so that we
can get inspections done quicker
and that's really important for
manufactured housing I will be
happy to send you the slide
presentation we just emailed it
off to that the committee
at.
support and they should be able
to get it out to you Sir.
I appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman and and superintendent
also very nice to hear your
voice on sponsor co sponsor when
you were in your house in the
house days but the again think
it's a very valuable I mean that
that's a housing solution for
people here in New Mexico that
that's what they're able to do
but also these these are turning
into really like nice Wellings
and so I think I think that's
really good that you're making
that decision to separate those
two would love to see that data
thank you Mr chairman that's all
I have.
Thank you and the other question
Senator Rodriguez.
Mr chairman I don't have any
questions that I I was
presenting the bill so I didn't
get to say this earlier but I
wanted just to thank you
superintendent Trujillo for all
your work and of course to
director raise and all your
staff you know when we first
started this venture we realized
it was a huge one and you know
we need to be prepared to fund
fund this this program
adequately if we want to
expected robust system that will
generate the revenues that we
expect otherwise we're always
going to be looking back and
thinking what happened this is
not what we expected so thank
you very much for your
continuing to to work towards
making this the best program
that that we could ever have
thank you bye bye thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you madam superintendent I
do have some questions why it
was the cost for cannabis
license our plants reduce the
plant the reduced when you told
the legislature that you're
gonna put the plant.
Cost at this at this cost and
then we budget for that and and
do revenue projections whose
authority and why was that push
forward.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I'm gonna let secretary answers
that question but it was
something that was very thought
out and a lot of.
So one of the.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee the changes in
plant how and the with both done
after listening out of taking
stimulus isn't public comments
throughout the rule making
process you know it would be
remiss to to note that director
Tom Stanton Division were able
to meet the Legislative will
requirements by the January one
deadline and and do the process
will be open and transparent
rulemaking process where we
Committee everything ranging
from you know levels but
including the cost of the plant
costs as well as the as the
plant numbers and then into the
U. us to to to to to insure that
we have adequate supply we
really do that I we felt that a
a plant increase was prudent and
in order to encourage
participation in the industry
make sure that that equity
remaining across the spectrum
when it came to the producer
numbers that we could that we
could and had the opportunity to
modify we felt that the plant
plant costs reduction has also
created yes Sir Mr Chairman is
also important to note that the
legislature fix the top amount
that the but integrated cannabis
licensee would have to pay a
hundred twenty five thousand and
so the only way that we can
continue equitable reflection of
ensuring that the marketing of
large amounts of their plants at
no cost we reduced it down to
you to encourage higher growth.
Well they thoroughly confuse me
there.
No cost at all of their by
animal over the wall or how
that's working that may need a
little further explanation but
maybe not here there did you
have something that.
Mr chairman and if you know I I
just received this data today so
I don't get a great chance to
analyze it super carefully but.
I I did receive thank you from
the department from the
department of.
Each licensee with a list of how
many plants there licensed for
right so just to kind of a back
of the napkin type the analysis
on this
you know holding those there's a
few producers that are licensed
that you know if.
The rate the fee on all of their
plants to be above that two
hundred fifty thousand dollar
threshold anyway holding those
guys steady I think the the the
fees as when they were sent to
ten dollars per plant the would
have been bringing out about one
point five million in revenue
the when the fees were I
recently two five dollars per
plant that brought us down to
about seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars annually
and they the fees can go all the
way up to fifty dollars to the
cap on that statutorily set a
fifty dollars that could bring
in possibly enough to fund this
entire expansion that the
executives talking about was
about five point eight million
dollars I know I know we're
talking about that two hundred
fifty dollar cap in there but
when you hold up to fifty dollar
cap two hundred fifty thousand
dollar cap.
Flat for those few producers
that can actually reach that
amount of production.
Are we could still bring in that
amount of revenue to operate
this program.
Mr chair Senator it's actually a
hundred and twenty.
Is a hundred.
Okay.
I'm I mean the the problem is
you tell us one thing and we
budget for that and then I'll
send you there there's plant
cuts into the market cost cuts
into the market and then that's
to help more the market start up
but we also heard the same
scenario with him the imposed on
to be the big boom in in the big
grow in the big robust as we're
gonna have him everywhere and
have napkins New Hampshire to in
in P. C. are not case ever get
better soon not state the.
The one it is but and it never
never came to fruition we've
spent I think in our budgets
about five million for TRD to do
this
we spent about five million for
you guys to get off the ground I
realize you know.
it's an industry that's across
the US and is going to grow or
may not grow but I just don't
know how many people are gonna
really go there because the
medical marijuana everybody that
one of the license seem to have
got a medical license and now
have a recreational and and it's
going to be interesting to watch
if the contractors came in and
said are permitting fees are too
high we want to reduce them and
I brought three hundred
contractors and and said reduce
our fees like you did for
marijuana what would be the
agency's response.
Mr chairman that's a really good
question I I will just point out
that this year we only had three
point three million dollars to
start the program because we got
seventeen one one point seven
and special appropriations in
the four point one nine nine
four four million one hundred
ninety nine point seven
was actually given to department
of health and we sent back to
them of that money twenty two
million five hundred and six
point five dollars which only
gave us the three point three
million dollars to get a program
this is different this is not
like the construction industry
you have if you have the
capacity to throw twenty
thousand plants and you multiply
that by five dollars a piece
that's a hundred thousand
dollars and so then you have the
seven hundred and seven thousand
five hundred dollars fee on top
of that and then if you have any
number of promises which allows
and dollars apiece you Max out
of the hundred and twenty five
very very quickly and so when I
talk about those industries
those larger producers actually
getting many many the ability to
grow many plants for free if you
charge the full amount and
actually currently those don't
get up to that amount you're
gonna make those can't get up to
the hundred and twenty five the
more per plant and when we
looked at how much cannabis is
actually going to be available
for the market come April first
and not just the first of may
first June first July and every
every month thereafter we did
have some concerns that the the
producers were not rationing
their plan and what we what we
learned this is the reason that
they are is from the costs
associated with that and so.
To try to jump start the market
ensure that medical patients are
protected and have access to
adequate supply that they're
allowed to purchase under the
department of health rules and
that that supply was dwindling
down by commercial we made a
decision to to allow.
Right now but it reduces the we
don't believe reduction about
the is going to make a
difference of the seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars we
believe that it will encourage
more Perot versus last for a.
Yeah and and just to kind in
this conversation.
On our page one sixty three of
our LFC racks it shows a one
point four point one nine nine
seven it doesn't show
transferred to another agency
so I guess Eric we need to
either fix that problem or
something so we have the correct
number in the book.
Let me go to the mobile home
division Mr chair at go ahead
yeah that's that's on one one
sixty four the next page over
you'll see it other financing
uses is the two point five
million transfer.
Over to D. O. H. okay.
Okay so I did it on the same
page and so that's what for the
confusion.
My understanding and and just so
I know the manufactured housing
is never been separate before
but then there was fees taken
from us manufactured housing to
see ID prior to offset those
costs however the fees in
manufactured housing division
gonna be used and you ask for
one point five million dollar
increase
if manufacture was standing on
its own before.
And we make a new division which
I don't agree I don't disagree
with it's how we
How we move forward in those
fees and and where the fees
gonna vote the most.
Thank you Mr chairman that's
that's that's actually something
that we're going to take a look
at this next year I did mention
earlier presentation that it
does appear that manufactured
housing and construction
industry is not necessarily
completely in their fees
covering their expenses they're
not reverting back to the
general fund and they're feeding
on maxed in the mouth but it
actually takes us to to provide
the services that were required
to provide and so it is my
intention over the course of
this next year certainly after
the legislative session starts
will begin this process of
looking at the fees but the two
things that we have to make sure
that education money one is that
this is absolutely affordable
housing and we want to make sure
that we're going to propose to
the legislature and increases
the that it's not going to harm
individuals access to affordable
housing we also want to make
sure that as harming the ability
for smaller businesses to you
know open up and expand here in
Mexico so we'll be looking at
those factors but we do want to
take a look at and you to see it
will have a better report for
the legislature during the next
session as to what are the
actual costs and what do fees
actually cover in is there need
to potentially see well and then
superintendent I don't think you
can disseminate between what's
the low income home and what's
that the non low income home on
your fees because it's it's a
basic inspection for either or
and so I I caution you on that I
mean the fees are what the fees
are in in people don't get a
reduction because they're
building a thousand square foot
home or they're building a five
thousand square foot home.
there based on the costs so I'd
caution you that the
manufactured housing.
Go do need to be separated I
mean there was two to three week
waits on on inspectors and one
inspector was covering we know
half the state in there was an
inspector cover the other half
and and so clean I have had
those conversations as you move
forward
I think it's critical then our
construction industry division
to make sure we have the
inspectors there I will push for
more FTEs for C. ID so we can
get those inspectors out there
because everybody knows.
Albuquerque may have their own
local inspector within their
city but us for us in rural and
we have an inspector in that's
based out of Los crucis
electrical inspector David has
to service over city you're only
allowed inspections on certain
days Tuesdays and Thursdays and
Thursdays and Fridays are what
those two days are and they have
to travel out with their list of
inspections well you never know
what's going to happen
inspection somebody misses
something somebody does
something and then we got to re
inspect and then there's an
additional fee to re inspect
because something happened so
we'll be watching that
cautiously as we move forward
but I do think the agency needs
a lot of help to go to Senator
is question on banking that
association of that agency
that's request requiring us to
do that as a federal agents here
what agency is that.
Mr I'm gonna let
acting director more respond to
that.
that is the conference
association of all state
regulators that.
Overseas based mortgage
companies and and all of the
multitude of financial
institutions and so there are
certain standards because we do
have those institutions across
state lines there's that.
We rely on and we must also give
for that issue our nation's and
for us she's so it's a way to
make sure that we have.
This.
this actually going on and that
we can rely on one another for.
At eight.
And and I would imagine that if
the banking industry
really needed this that they
would go ahead and add fees or
figure out how to pay for those
inspections but I don't see him
anywhere I haven't had a
conversation with the bankers on
them requiring a no senator Byrd
sits on the bank board I've sent
quite a few bank boards in I
know that nobody's saying oh we
gonna have these inspectors in
the state it's an association
that has no authority over the
state even though we want to
comply so associations we can be
members are in good compliance
and not be the odd ducks but I
would recommend that you get
with the bankers and ask them
how they're going to pay for the
service need for their audits in
order to conduct this new FTE
because that's the that's the
ones that do charges for we get
a monthly statement whether
electronic or paper for five
Bucks so they do have plenty of
room I just haven't heard that
conversation and I don't see it
in the banking world so that may
be a new issue we need to circle
back around
thank you guys for your time
today I appreciate it
Thank you Mr chairman for to
continue talks thank you.
members were
Get into the look I o'clock hour
there's a few of you that I need
to see in your junior money
there's a list right here that
needs to get passed around so
you do monies and I know we're
gonna be in in the morning thank
you guys and the some long
hearings in in I appreciated
that we are going to be moving
pretty quick in the next week
when the house bill two comes
over with amount of bills are
coming to provide.
Thank you thank you very thank
you guys have a good and.
