to ensure that we have a solid
budget and then likewise, the
Senate Finance staff.
Or providing you all with the
necessary support to make these
critical decisions as we move
forward. So, um, Mr. Chair,
today, um, before you, the
Senate Finance Committee
amendment for House
Appropriation and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 2, the General
Appropriation Act is a balanced
budget that maintains robust
reserves and limits recurring
spending to ensure sustained
growth can be maintained into
the future.
The proposed state budget of 10
billion,795269.
$1200 represents a recurring
growth of 6%.
A growth rate that can be
maintained for years to come.
That is in line with the state's
projected revenue growth.
We also maintain the committee's
um commitment to 30% reserve
target with $3,252,500,000 in
reserves to ensure the budget
can withstand any potential
economic downturn.
In terms of recurring, our
general fund recurring costs
increased by $23 million
compared to what the House sent
over.
Which gets us right on the
committee's target recurring
revenue growth of 6%.
We use both general fund and
other state funds to deliver
substantive uh investments
throughout the state, starting
with education.
In terms of education, we fully
adopted the reforms of the state
equalization guarantee formula
that funds our school.
By adding over $76 million above
the increase that the house
provided to fully fund an
expansion of the unit value for
secondary education from 6th
grade through 12th grade.
This is funding that will
critically enhance our school's
ability to deliver a career
technical education, provide
additional support to students
and ensure our middle and high
schools are properly funded, so
they have the opportunity to
innovate and staff up to
increase the state's graduation
rates and ensure the success of
young New Mexicans.
In terms of early childhood
funding, we increased early
childhood investments in
childcare, child breeding and
travel supports on top of what
the house sent over.
We also insulated the base
budget of the agency for
childcare assistance,
pre-kindergarten and early
childhood, Medicaid from any
general fund volatility that may
occur during the coming years.
CYFD building on the
appropriation from the last two
years, Senate Finance added 27.8
million over the next two years
to meet the requirements of the
Kevin S remedial order.
And to fulfill the mandates of
legislation that are moving
through the legislative process.
This funding is achieved through
the government results and
Opportunity Fund, also known as
GR to ensure there's
accountability and transparency
behind us for compensation and
benefits statewide, we maintain
the 4% salary increase for all
state employees.
Educators and higher education
staff.
We also expanded the state
employee group health insurance
benefits so that the state
covers 80% of state employee
health insurance premiums and up
to 100% for those making below
250% of the federal poverty
level and for our National Guard
members.
These changes also set the state
on a trajectory to stabilize the
health insurance premium
liability for the state.
We also provided funding to
raise the pay for the lowest
paid court employees.
As for non-recurring, let's
focus. This is the session of
behavioral health. So in terms
of behavioral health, Senate
Finance added an additional
$61.5 million to fully fund the
the behavior health package,
also known as Senate Bill 2,
for a total investment in
behavioral health and housing of
$280 million.
We also made an initial $100
million down payment to the
Behavioral Health Trust Fund and
appropriated 50 million for use
during fiscal year 2027 for the
items identified within regional
plans related to behavioral
health as mandated within Senate
bill.
3.
For community investment, Senate
Finance added $25 million or
sorry, $20 million to the uh
rural healthcare delivery fund
to promote the expansion of
healthcare in our rural
communities. We also added $65
million for road maintenance
across the state, and 12 million
for rural air service statewide
to ensure we maintain the
momentum we have in building up
our state's infrastructure.
We also appropriated funding
from the Community Benefit fund
for grid modernization, advanced
energy, EV school buses and
infrastructure, economic
development, workforce
development, adult education.
Community energy efficiency
development block grants and
made appropriations through the
Innovation and state government
fund to 8 different agencies to
innovate and master plan over
the next 2 years. We also
provided an initial infusion of
50 million for the natural
disaster revolving loan fund to
help our communities recover
from fires and floods. And
lastly, uh, the Senate Finance
amendment also focuses on public
safety.
Senate Finance added funding for
the statewide case management
system for district attorneys,
funding for the public
defender's department to improve
and recruit, uh, their
recruitment and retention and
funding for the AG for training
and legal expenses. I will now
hand it over to uh Charles to
follow up.
Mr. Chairman, I'll just go over
a couple of things. So you have
before you the committee report.
With the Senate Finance
amendment.
In it
I'd like to turn your attention
to page 88.
This is the medical assistance
program.
And you can see there.
Under item 1C.
Other
In the federal funds column, 8.6
billion plus the
Other state funds in general
fund give you $11 billion.
Plus the administrative cost
just above it.
Going out and Medicaid alone.
Mr. Chairman, then I would like
to turn your attention to page
179, right above where it says
special appropriations.
Age 179.
Right at the bottom, grand total
fiscal year 26 recurring
appropriations 10.6 billion.
So Medicaid alone is larger than
your entire general fund budget.
This budget contains recurring
spending when combined with
Section 8 of
Over $33 billion.
To take care of all of the
different facets of uh
government from Medicaid to
schools to higher education.
Early childhood, uh, the courts,
public safety and the like. So
significant amount of funding is
being made available for uh
needs throughout the state.
The bill, as Adrian also
indicated includes significant
non-recurring items as well as
multi-year pilot projects.
That if they work, uh, could be
built into the future recurring.
Um, budgets
The fact that you've got this
revenue surplus is allowing you
to not only take care of today's
needs.
planned for the midterm, and
you've set aside again with like
the strategy of the behavioral
health Trust Fund.
Uh, setting aside strategies for
dealing with the long term. But
with that, Mr. Chairman, I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Before we go to questions, you
know, this doesn't get built
very easily.
Process starts April or May when
we start going through LFC
August, it starts tightening up
September, October, November,
December as we start hearing
agencies. And so what the LFC
staff rise and including you
John LESC too. You guys rise and
so we know who you are in the
room and
I just want to thank you guys,
but your computers down, there's
no need for them right now.
I just appreciate all your guys'
hard work, your dedication to
the state and nonpartisan way
that helps us create a budget
that hopefully we can get
support on both sides with.
Um, it makes a difference to the
lives of people in New Mexico,
what you guys do. You may not
see it, you may not hear it, but
those of us that go to the
grocery store and get eggs at
the $9 carton aisle.
Uh
Do appreciate that and and so
just, I just wanted to know that
you're appreciating the state
and we thank you for what you
guys do, Charles.
We'll go to uh Adrian and our
staff.
Niko, Viviana.
Who else is here?
James.
John Phelps.
Phelps, we appreciate you guys
cause there's, it, it, it runs
through the session pretty
quickly.
Well things change really
rapidly in this building,
especially over the next couple
of days, uh, putting this
together is not easy in wrapping
up the numbers and making
adjustments. So we appreciate
you guys too, and thank you.
Adrian, thank you.
Questions from committee
members, Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you, chair. I have a
couple of questions. Um, well, I
mean, I'll just start with is,
is a director Sal Lee took us to
page 179.
I mean
Right there, $14 billion
you know, with everything going
on in Washington, uh, that could
literally tank New Mexico right
there if that money is, is taken
out of there. So that, that can
you give us a little bit of any
sort of guidance whatsoever,
where our, our pockets of money
that are kind of available to
fill that gap if that starts to
think on us.
It's gonna be devastating if any
of these cuts that we're
thinking about happen actually
do happen.
Um
So Mr. Chairman,
Your first
A place that
You would look to would be
keeping your reserves at 30%.
That's
One of the rationales for that,
and you've got a number of
different
accounts that make up the
reserves. Some of them are more
flexible than others to get at.
But
The budget reconcili
reconciliation that came out of
the House, the Senate has not.
Um, done the same one yet.
But that called for essentially
12 to 13%, the biggest portion
of it was 12 to 13% reductions
in federal aid for Medicaid.
That would equate to about $1.1
billion.
Uh
That would be very difficult to
Backfill all of that, there need
to be a a number of strategies
to figure out how to mitigate.
Uh, if they were able to achieve
those kinds of significant
reductions nationwide. I think
this will be one of the first
order of business on LFC work
plan for the interim is really
monitoring this and coming up
with.
Strategies to prioritize and,
and come up with ways to, to
mitigate it, in fact, um, those
kinds of budget cuts. Well,
thank you, chair. I'm gonna just
go through a slew of things just
real fast, um, so we made some
pretty big decisions in the 1st
30 days of the session. Uh, we
have a crime package that we
passed a health package, etc.
Uh, how did those fare in the
final analysis. I think we
talked about, you know, having a
billion dollar um fund there for
behavioral health. I think if I
was listening.
well enough, it, it wound up
being 100 million, a 10th of
that, is that true?
Mr. Chairman, that's correct,
um.
You've essentially fully funded
the entire behavioral health
package that uh developed.
Uh, and I think there's funding
available for the next year and
then
You know, there's ways to fill
up that permanent fund over
time, uh, the spin off.
And then Mr. Chair, uh, Senator,
the one thing I would add is,
uh, think of that payment as a
down payment for FY 27.
So what happens,
there's that guarantee, $50
million for the next tranche, so
that way when the locals come
together and actually implement
Senate Bill 3.
There's money they're ready.
And waiting for them.
And then chair, you know, one
thing I don't remember if we
talked too much about this, but
so we talked about our federal
matches and this and that, I
mean, so are the, are the, the
local governments having to
match the dollars that the state
is giving them or are, are these
simply state dollars that are
going to be
For all of these, these
purposes. So Mr. Chair, Senator
Padilla within Senate Bill 3,
the intent is for the regional
plans to get created and ideally
you would leverage local money
if they have it.
That's not always the case
throughout all parts of the
state.
So it, it very much will vary.
But the idea is state is
investing money and it's there
waiting and ready to be
deployed. And then so I heard
about behavioral health would
have been Penny also we, we
absolutely have to have it, so.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, that's
one of the reasons why our
public safety, including money
for the district attorneys,
money for the public defenders
and the AG.
And then chair and and uh the
presenter so then ECECD and it's
additional distribution or it's
additional funding levels, how
did they fare?
So Mr. Chair, but yeah, um.
So you will actually hear that
Bill after this, and this budget
is designed based on a
distribution from the early
childhood Trust Fund.
Of half a billion dollars. The
house sent over that bill with
only a distribution of 400
million.
And with the expenses and um the
increases and a few swaps to
insulate the department. That's
how we get to the half a
billion.
And then on the uh tax package I
know that we still have to go
through that whole, you know,
generation or whatever, but what
is left in the, in terms of
capacity for tax reform, tax
cuts, tax credits.
Every kind of tax you can
imagine, Adrian,
so in terms of the tax package
from the get-go within the LFC
framework, uh, the capacity was
0.
Right, so if there were, if
there was gonna be a tax
package, they would have had to.
Generate revenue in order to pay
for any credits or deductions or
any of that take place?
Uh, house tax actually just in
the last half an hour passed the
bill that would do that.
Um, and then, uh, what's what
wound up in or available for
road maintenance of existing
roads, not new roads
$65 million.
With a guarantee of at least 10
million per district
transportation district. OK. I
thought I had heard 70 million
maybe.
5 million here, 5 million there,
you know, uh, 65.
OK. And I know a lot of people
have questions, chair. What
about trade ports? Did, did, did
the trade ports uh survive
through the swimming through the
building. No pun intended.
Uh, Mr. Chair for the uh trade
courts that survived. It came
over at 90 million in order to
make the capacity and numbers
work that amount was reduced to
50 in talking with the economic
development department, they are
ready to deploy upon signing um
20 to 25 million, leaving some
capacity so that way over the
next year or so, they can try to
deploy the rest, but 90 million
was too much.
And so there was a huge
announcement. I was a part of it
in the beginning or really
toward the middle of the session
with regard to the uh new folks
that want to come in to set up
shop um at the Borderplex in
southern New Mexico. What, what
sort of incentives, credits
deduction, what wound up being
available to them?
And you'd have to give us exact
amounts, but what, what do you
think, what are they gonna end
up being able to utilize for
those, those types of economic
development projects.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so, yeah, that's
actually the project that I'm
referring to. It's ready to
move.
So the 50 years. And then what
about uh last one is on the
quantum physics, uh, the quantum
stuff that we introduced early
on.
asking for 50, I saw it fall as
low, or then it was 48, then it
was 24, and then I heard it was
back at 48.
What wound up being available to
that crowd.
Uh, Mr. Chair, in terms of the
quantum, that's a fun that you
will will probably hear just
passed the Senate tax. It's
house.
20, and that fund landed right
at 40 million.
OK. Um, based on estimates of uh
the proposal.
To leverage federal dollars, the
application from the National
Science Foundation just
reopened and the estimate that
New Mexico needs to be able to
put forward to be competitive is
ranges anywhere from 25 million
to 42.
Mill. So you're putting 40
million, so that way you're on
the.
And Mr. Chairman, you've got a
couple of other appropriations
that would appropriate that
would support um
Space and operation as well.
And then chair, this will be my
last question. I ask this every
year when we're at this stage.
Are there funds that we have out
there just, just simply are, are
dormant. It may still have
monies in them that we could
simply move to something else
and you have any, any thoughts
on that?
You know, there's
north of 300 funds. It's, I
think was the last number I saw.
Are there any that are just
simply sitting out there that we
should just sunset and move them
into something that actually
works for us.
Referring to the early
childhood, not that one, Mr.
Chair.
That one's actually working very
well for us, as it turns out,
and we should leave that one
alone, Mr. Chairman.
Let it do its work.
There's a number of those that
we monitor throughout the year
and you've appropriated money
out of some of them.
Well then, while we're on it,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll,
I'll just take that open door
and walk right through it then.
I think it's very, very exciting
that we have uh the 300 million
that seeded the early childhood
education trust fund and, you
know, north of 9.2 billion is
the last, you know, thing that I
heard. I think it's very
exciting for the people of New
Mexico. I think it's very
exciting for our children, and,
you know, it's, it's doing every
single thing we wanted it to do.
It's only doing it a lot faster.
We should be very proud of that.
Thank you, chair.
Sinnerstein.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Question
what are we gonna be voting on?
Are we gonna be voting on this
today? We're voting here in a
few minutes.
OK, so.
I want to ask some questions
real quick first, Mr. Chair. Um,
Given what's going on federally.
Charles forgave the view both
answered this already.
Do we have any contingency
language beyond the normal bar
authority kind of language that
allows the executive to move
money around if God forbid floor
falls, not that I think that's a
good idea, because we can always
come in a special session, and
there was a lot of available
money, you know, out there that
might be an invitation to
inappropriately spend money. But
did we add any language?
Just because of the circumstance
we're in federally.
No, because the federal
uncertainty is so great, um.
That at this stage, I don't know
even how you do that.
You know you've got 2.
Yeah.
Reconciliations that have come
out of each chamber of commerce
that are vastly different than
they've got both agree on in
order to do this process.
Uh, there's
still dispute about whether the
Senate can even do it in one
bill versus uh having to have
two different ones. They've got
a window of opportunity.
Uh, and they've got to figure
out how to find
The savings targets that were
laid out in them that are to be
determined later.
So there's too many unknowns to
try to put contingencies to
allow agencies just to move
money around and then do all the
work that you've done.
And Mr. Chair, uh, something I
would add Senator Steinborn also
in putting contingency language
if we were to do that, that
would signal to the feds.
Oh, we're prepared on this
front. So go ahead and cut and
we don't want to put a target on
our backs.
There you go. Um, so some
specific questions on the
uranium cleanup. I know that we
had $50 million in the House
budget.
To clean up abandoned uranium
mine sites, and uh these are
generational.
Social injustice.
Lands that have been just the
first time we put $50 million
and we have 1000 abandoned
uranium mine sites, 1000 non-ban
non-abandoned, no, non-uranium
abandoned other contaminated
sites. How much of that money is
in this budget.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cha, Senator Steinborn, uh,
20 million. So we reduced it
from 50 to 20.
I'm disappointed in that.
Um, and I haven't, yes, go
ahead, and Mr. Chairman, you
also reauthorized the
appropriation for the same
purpose because they couldn't
spend it.
Now, Mr. Chair.
Charles, I, I, I'm aware of some
money that's used as a match for
Superfund.
And I don't know if that's what
you're talking about. That's the
only other money I've been
shown, and the Superfund match
is different than these these
sites which are not super fun
sites.
So, with all due respect, and
it'd be happy to be shown
something different, but um I've
heard that quoted and, and when
we looked at it, that was just
$2 million for Superfund, which
is so, but I just want to say
that I'm, I'm, I am disappointed
in that.
Also, I, you know, I know I'd
heard that it's one time money,
but we just heard about another
appropriation that was for
multiple years. And so why are
we gonna?
Attach those strings on a one
year string for something that
we know by definition take more
than one year.
So just the approach.
But I'm glad we have 20 million
in it. I mean, that's, that's
still huge. Um, it's a start.
It's gonna take a lot,
obviously, a lot more than that.
started to get a good start with
it.
I do have a question on, on our
funding for our universities.
Um
Is there a kind of a
differential with giving money
to UNM and a recurring basis,
but the NMSU and non-recurring.
Any truth to that, like maybe
the athletics program or
Um, Mr. Chair Steinborn, uh,
within this budget, there is an
appropriation for $3 million on
a recurring basis for uh the
University of New Mexico and 1.5
million to NMSU in a
non-recurring basis, given the
difference in status. I'm sorry,
and why would we, why would we
treat them differently? Why
would we get?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that, that was
the will of the subcommittee
that would obviously is an NMSU
guy, Mr. Chair, I, I, you know,
I know that there's a lot of
You know, there's some hate
going on and sometimes against
some of our universities, and I,
I feel like uh
I just not really down for that,
treating them differently. So
I'll just say that.
Um, Miss. Cha, I just want to
say this, and I mean I said this
the opening day of the session.
Um,
I think a budget like any other
bills should be transparent,
should be open to the public
before we vote on it so that we
can flesh out these kinds of
things.
So it could be posted online.
Um, cause I think it's, it's
just
I think it, it should, these are
billions of dollars of public
money for everyone to be
clamoring for information,
ourselves included to be seen it
for the first time and then
being asked to vote on it. It's
just we, I think we can do
better than that in the budget
process. I'll just keep bringing
this up because I think next
year there's always a new
opportunity to do it better.
I think we're always fearful
that people were gonna say,
well, hey, this isn't right.
Well, that's the whole point,
you know, is to get it right.
And uh
Make adjustments. It makes it
harder, but you get it right and
the budget should be equitable.
They're transparent because it's
everyone's money.
So with that, I mean,
appreciate some of the things
that I was interested in being
addressed.
Um
Some of them aren't at the level
I would have liked, but I mean,
I think that's also in the
budget process. People don't get
100% of what they like.
That's we do have to have a
balanced budget. So we all
recognize that.
So, any rate, um, that's all I
have for now. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Any other questions centerwoods?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm wondering about uh
How much money did we set aside
to the General Services
Department on future civil
liabilities.
The
Have that hanging out there and
we got.
Any money set aside for that?
ster chair.
Most of the funding for that
liability fund comes out of
agencies recurring budgets.
There's charges against how many
staff they've got.
Those were
Their premium increases were
built into a lot of the
agency-based budgets, and then
you added a 17 million.
To further supplement that to
make sure that liability fund is
in the black.
At the end of next year.
OK. And, and so most of it is in
agency premiums. Yes, sir, Mr.
Chair.
The
Tell me a little more about the,
the fair plan. How did we end up
on that? How much should we.
put into that program.
Believe it was $10 million Mr.
Chairman. Uh, that includes the
fair.
How much
10 million.
A notice in the budget here we
have 16 million under the
healthcare authority for the
Relief for the homeless.
Was, was that in a, a particular
bill that's, that's on page 264.
On the bottom of the page.
I just wonder if that was in a
particular bill that we did that
or was that just the will of the
committee?
Is this for the
Which one is it?
It's on page 264.
Oh under the healthcare
authority there.
Yes, these are um part of the
department's.
Um, new Medicaid waiver and a
mitigation strategy.
Is to not build all of those
things into the base budget, but
see how they work first.
Uh, through the grow, through
the grow, and then figure out if
you wanna.
Build that into the base budget
if there's an attempt by the
federal government to
Retract the approval of those
waiver programs and it's easier
to
Reduce these in the future then
if it's coming out of the base
budget. Yeah, I noticed there's
12 million and
This chair noticed there's 12
million and federal dollars
there, correct?
OK.
Thank you chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Truhill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, um, for presenting this. I,
um, I'm wondering in response to
what we've already kind of been
talking about.
Um, in regards to the issues
that are happening at the
federal level. It was, uh, I
just found an article in Santa
Fe, New Mexican earlier today
that the regional farm to food
bank program has been canceled.
Um, it ends, uh, you know, the
end of this fiscal year.
And I'm wondering, and I'm
desperately trying to look and
see what we've got in here for
food banks. Where can I find
that?
to see if they're gonna be OK.
Um, Mr. Chairman, there's a
3-year plan in the grove, uh, to
expand the capacity of food
banks and in the early years as
well as
Provide additional food, um.
Where they think that they can
make a significant dent in
hunger in New Mexico and.
You've made the money available
to see if we can accomplish that
as a state. OK, thank you. And
Mr. Chairman, I, I do want to
say thank you, thank you.
Thank you for increasing the
value on the 6th to 12th grade.
That was a really important
priority for me and I'm excited
that we not only raised 6th
grade, but we raised 6 through.
I appreciate that. I just wanna
say thanks to the staff for
finding the way for that to
happen.
Um
Superintendent Bailey is
probably not going to be happy
with me for pointing this out,
but I do have a question. On
page 251, uh, numbers 9 and 10
are for the regulation and
licensing department for
compliance officer, officers.
Vehicles and equipment for the
cannabis control division, and
it's one amount and then number
10 is for law enforcement
officers based upon House Bill
10 which just passed off the
floor today.
And then if you look at page
264, it's got the same thing.
Got two lines for the same thing
with different you're in the
section of the bill for the
multi-year pilots and so those
are appropriated in FY 26 in a
separate appropriation in 27 and
28. And the reason for
Setting the bill up for that is.
In the past you have been doing
big multi-year intentional, um,
Appropriations that the
executive was artfully vetoing
to spend it all in year one, and
this makes sure that all that
money is coming in.
And FY 26 and then it can go out
in 26, 27, and 28. Mr. Chairman,
thank you for that. He won't be
upset with me.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
also to.
So many individuals, you know,
involved with uh this process
um.
You know, all year long, though
many thanks and many hours that
are spent.
Um
Mr. Chairman and Charles.
If you have the information find
and if you don't, but uh, do we
know where um?
Oh, it's now with the oil and
gas leases are there at the same
level from last year. So, Mr.
Chairman, this is a
One of my favorite fun facts.
When I
Go talk to community groups and
the public.
You know, up until about 2016,
2017 for like 40 plus years, New
Mexico would produce about 70
million barrels of oil a year.
Almost like clockwork.
And we were writing the price
boom and bust during that period
of time.
Last year, New Mexico produced
700 million barrels of oil.
And that is projected to
continue to climb through the
end of the decade.
Not without bumps, potentially,
and that's why you have 30%
reserves, that's why you're
Trying not to blow through the
surplus all at once, you're,
you're easing into a 6%
recurring growth rate.
Um, so we're in, uh, the midst
of a production boom, the likes
of which we've never seen
before.
Hello, Mr. Chairman, the second
part is um.
Do we know the number of rigs
that we have today.
I would need to check on today's
red count, but we've been
running around a little around
100.
A little bit more than that.
Very well again thank you to all
of you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
where he went in compost.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, members of the Senate
Finance Committee, of course,
uh, April and May on the work
plan was being developed and uh
we stayed focused, that
definitely was a a plus in
dealing with resources, and I
really applaud, of course, all
the people that have been
involved in that, that's very
important for us, uh, a couple
of things and what people I
don't believe have the full
handle of and uh Charles, this
is gonna be to you, so Mr.
Chairman, uh, to start out with,
uh,
It is a conglomerate about how
much money do you think we have
all in total, uh, dealing
directly with, uh, with, with
state resources, with federal
resources, with taking care, if
you will, of the needs of
people uh throughout the city of
New Mexico through uh through
our state government.
Mr. Chairman
You have over 37 billion when
you combine all of the.
Non-recurring and
special funds.
So, Mr. Chairman, and, and again
I hope that the general public
heard that there's $37 billion.
That are coming into the state
of New Mexico and there to help
to take care of uh so many of
the needs of the underserved and
that proves one point as we go
forward.
That we definitely continue to
plan, but our resources do go to
the people and to their needs
here in the state.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, and of
course to the to the paddle
that's before us when we talk
about the ING and the SCG. If
you can give me an idea because
oftentimes as we deal with
planning, uh, we need to know if
you will what the uh ING is
gonna consist of as well as the
SEG. Can, can you give me at
least in brevity, um, but both
of those, uh, particular areas,
one for higher ed and the other
one, of course, for the uh
secondary institutions.
What, what that seems to be at
this point, or is it still being
worked out and if this was
Excuse me, to go, to go through,
um, at least give me a um a
ballpark figure in terms of what
we, we can take a look at for
the future of our educational
systems.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, the SCG.
And including transportation, so
public school support.
is up almost 8% in this budget
to 4.67 billion.
Higher education, uh, overall,
including ING is up almost 3%.
So, Mister Chairman, and uh
again to the panelists as we go
forward, uh, you can start to
see that uh there definitely are
the needs when we talk about
healthcare, education, when we
talk about the economy, when we
talk about the needs for for
people moving on then to uh
salaries for our teachers and
also for public employees, uh,
can you give me an idea in terms
of
Give or take the, the net that
people are gonna be taking home
and the participation that we
have when it comes to helping
them with their healthcare costs
as we move forward in that
maybe.
To disaggregate now, but
is uh
At least we can start to break
that down and give people a bit.
idea that it will not be
concerned about, if you will,
uh, percentage in terms of uh.
for their, their salary.
Um
Improvements, but also we're
very concerned about uh
You know,
able to take care of their
family's healthcare as they move
forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So you've built in an average 4%
increase for all public
employees, including.
Teach, state employees and the
like.
We've got a couple of uh
agencies and a couple of types
of employees that have targeted
increases above that.
Uh, so the lowest paid for
employees is a good example.
And for uh
State health
plan.
We've got a, a bill
funding to to make that bill
hold.
For the state to
Uh, increase its contribution to
healthcare costs to 80%.
to German and
get into the
and Charles as we go forward.
In all reality with the
resources that are out here.
Are we gonna be
able to
get those dollars spent as we
move forward and I know.
Uh in the past years we've had
those reversions that.
continuously surface uh and good
planning, it means.
that those resources will
the door
To
He attended
but
our
Prepared, if you will, then
To try to expand these resources
in general corporations Act as
we move forward.
was a major focus by both
committees on ensuring you're
appropriating.
Enough that can get spent, uh.
In the next year and a half.
Uh, or have a multi-year actual
spending plan.
Uh, to, to give some assurance.
activity of
LFC during the interim is
continuing to monitor.
Not just whether an agency
spending it, but is it resulting
in something better for New
Mexicans at the end.
So, so Mr. Chair, and again.
just move
forward.
Uh, in terms of supplementals.
deficiencies over the years, we
continue to go ahead.
see that as a
As request items, if you will.
For
fiscal year, uh.
For resources and of course
The current year.
Like, yeah, we we're gonna be
doing good.
I.
What does that mean
It's not only
budget that the way that we're
going to be
Spending these resources
throughout this year.
I already heard from the uh
Uh
fund, if you will.
It
that accountability
transparency, so if you could
just tell me a bit.
understand
How are we gonna be
Situation as we move forward
throughout this fiscal year.
So Mr. Chairman, you have.
Uh, over 183 million in
Um, special and efficiency
appropriations built into House
Bill 2, the largest of which is
for
State health benefits program
trying to get that in into the
black.
Um, you, again, you're building
in significant.
Premium increases that the state
general fund is or the
Not this year, but the state
general fund ultimately will
bear using other state funds
that are surplus this year.
Um
To help get that um program into
the black, they're still gonna
need to be a lot of cost
containment and work on
potentially planned design
changes um for that particular
entity.
Uh
There was an agreement between
myself and
Uh, secretary probes to.
Only in extenuating
circumstances, uh, basically put
a a bar moratorium in place for
the 1st quarter, so that we
don't see what we saw this last
fall where agencies were
Overspending their personnel uh
category and then needing uh
coming in and asking for you to,
to backfill that with
supplemental so close monitoring
of
Agencies operating budgets and
how those are being deployed
will be necessary this next
interim as well. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much to
the panelists to you, Charles,
as we're going forward on page
134, and I just have two
specific questions. One is gonna
go ahead and be in regards to
the um Department of Finance
Administration sales directed by
the Secretary of Higher
Education withhold from an
educational institution or
program with the higher
education department places
under enhanced fiscal oversight
program, a portion up to 10% of
the.
institutions, uh, uh.
Basically programs general fund
allotments, so, so, Mr. Chair,
and uh and Charles as we've gone
forward, how many times in the
past uh budgets has has this
been utilized, you know?
Mr. Chairman, I can't think of a
time when uh HED is withheld.
ING transfers, though they have
put a number of institutions
under enhanced fiscal watch
because of
Um, uh, fiscal challenges.
So, Mr. Chairman and, and uh
Charles as we go forward, they
have been placed, if you will,
uh, under that fiscal oversight,
but in all reality, um, they
have not been penalized the 10%
or up to the 10%. That's
correct. Thank you very much.
And then the last question that
I have specifically to, to the
budget is on page 227.
And uh it's there towards the
bottom and it's in regards to
the $750,000 that
Uh, will be utilized for uh the
transference, if you will, of
some of the institutions, uh,
possibly to other institutions
and uh I, I've been questioned
on that quite a bit and I just
want to know, Mr. Chairman, and
uh Mr. Sali into the any other
individual can help us to, to
answer that. Uh, what are the,
the institutions uh being
considered to possibly move um
to yours.
institutions into four-year
institutions, more for the
oversight, so in other words,
it's not to go ahead and be
become alarmed to indicate to
people that uh these
institutions will be closed
down, but it'll be to assist
them so that they can become
stronger, Mr. Chairman, uh, Mr.
Sali, do you have any idea what,
what that might be?
Mr. Chairman, uh, 2 community
independent Community Colleges
come to mind that have struggled
with their finances and
accreditation.
Um, over the past 5 years, and
that would be Mesa lands and
Luna.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much
for all your hard work and of
course as we go forward, um, Mr.
Chairman, the whole key is gonna
be the accountability and the
transparency, and thank you very
much for your leadership as we
work throughout this last
interim to go and get to where
we're at today. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Mayors of Senate
Finance Committee.
compostent brand.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and and.
Um
I want to first thank both of
you, you know this has been
a very new experience for me.
Um, I, uh,
I've been up here for 13 years
now, but I've never served on
this committee, and it's like
learning all over again.
Um, so, you know, it's kind of
like my first year up here
drinking out of a fire hose.
Um, but both of you have been
extremely patient with me and
all the staff, and so I just,
that's the first thing I want to
say is thank you. I think I
understand the budget more than
I ever have and Charles has been
trying to get me to understand
the budget for years now, so,
um, you know, I've always kind
of been the pain in the, you
know, what on the floor, and so
I, I appreciate the uh the work
and the collaboration that went
into this. I'm really looking
forward to the interim as I get
to to see the starting of the
process and and watch it as it
goes through, uh, Adrian, you
know.
You worked with me almost every
day of the session, you're
probably a little tired of me,
but just, you know, helping me
to understand where things are
so I can relate it back to our
caucus, and I, I just can't tell
you guys how much I appreciate
that.
Your work in staff and honestly
the chair has been very patient
with me.
Uh, and so I, I first just
appreciate all those things, a
couple of things in the budget,
you know, I, I came in.
Um
You know, I've only voted for
one budget in 13 years.
So, um, you know, it's, it's
actually a pretty, pretty big
thing if I'm considering voting
for a budget.
Uh, and I came in really looking
for, you know, what do I do as a
ranking member of finance, you
know, do I, you know, do I even
consider voting for a budget. I
really feel like
Yeah, I don't like everything in
here. Some of the things I don't
like the dollar amount, some of
the things I don't like the
language on, but yet there's a
lot of really good stuff in here
as well.
And as I look at it just like
Senator Trujillo said, you know,
the SCG.
Uh, revamp and getting, getting
it actually funded.
Um
Yeah, those little things I
would have done differently and
LESC has a little smile on their
face cause they know what I'm
talking about.
Um, and you know, we can work on
those things if if this change
doesn't really help and, and
really secure CTE because I
really believe that's where we
need to be going.
Um, but we did some things for
CTE as well.
And so, you know, we, we funded
the education things. I believe
it a pretty darn good, good.
Level
Um, we continue to raise the pay
for our teachers to keep them
competitive and actually be.
Uh, the best paid in the in the
area.
Um, our, our kids have got, uh,
should have the advantage when
it comes to our teachers, um,
now we need to start really
Holding accountability.
In our schools and that's
something I'm gonna be looking
at for the next couple of years
is how do we hold them
accountable now that they're
receiving the money that they
need.
And want
How are we gonna hold them
accountable?
Um
On page 186, there's there's
something that's still, um,
bothers me, and that's uh number
40.
Department of Finance and
Administration for $110 million.
Adrian, you know, I've brought
this up several times, um, and
it's not.
It's not as much as the 110
million for these purposes. It's
the way that it's that it's
really worded going mostly to
Albuquerque.
to Donana County.
So it's, it's really set up to
where $90 million are up to.
He's gonna go to Albuquerque and
Las Cruces.
Out of 110 million.
It's kind of like the rest of
the state doesn't exist or have
these problems, and this is
money that's dealing with.
With housing issues and um
homelessness and
Behavioral health facilities and
services. Um, those are all good
things.
But
You know, I, I've driven around
Santa Fe a little bit.
They've got that problem here
too.
And there's other communities
all over the state that have
that problem.
And yet we've
Pretty much, you know.
Restricted that money to those
areas, and I know, you know that
that's
That that that's something we've
talked about and it wasn't
something that the committee
agreed on, but I just wanted to
let people know that.
It's $110 million in here, but
it's really flagged for two
communities. There's $20 million
so less than 20% of it is.
left to be spent by the rest of
the state even though population
wise, those two communities make
up about
35% of the state.
So that, that gives me a little
heartburn.
But if that's the only thing I
can really find to pull
heartburn out in here, uh, then
this is a budget I can support.
I'm sure there's other things in
here I could find.
We've talked about several of
them.
But I really think the the the
pluses for me.
Outweigh the negatives, uh, for
this budget, and I think we've
done a good job as a committee,
so thank you Mr. Chairman,
really appreciate your
leadership. Thank you, Senator
Padilla for a 2nd time.
Thank you, Chair, and I'll be
pretty quick then. um, so chair
and uh it was a discussion
earlier in the session that CYD
was kept flat. Now we've had a
lot of CYFD legislation, myself
included Senator Trujillo and
others on this committee, uh,
how did the CYFD wind up in
terms of
Net increase, decrease, where,
where are their funds now?
So CYFD is a really good example
of using the grow as a strategy.
As an alternative to increasing
their base budget. You've
increased their base budget
significantly.
For many, many years.
That those resources were never
deployed in a way that got
effective outcomes. You've
continued to fund them, but
you're funding them through the
multi-year grow appropriations
for all of their caseworkers
they're asking for you even
included.
Foster care rate increases, uh,
so section 9, you'll see a
litany of CYFD appropriations
for protective services. But
with those, Mr. Chair, I'll be
one year appropriations,
2 or 3 years, so I really want
them to be able to start really
long range planning. I mean
that's how they truly get
traction. And the other thing is
that gives you a lot more
transparency. We gave you X
amount.
To go on higher case workers,
where are you at with hiring
those caseworkers and what are
we doing when it comes to
caseloads. That's kind of
central to the Kevinness uh
settlement.
You know, we gave you money for
training your workers, where are
you at with standing that up
versus putting it into their.
Base budget, it's just a a big
block grant that is very
difficult to track.
OK. And then uh on the community
benefit fund, uh, Senate bills,
I think it's 48 and 49. Did
those get any?
Anything put into those, those,
uh
Lines in the budget. Yes, you've
got a, a fund transfer into it,
and then a whole bunch of
spending coming out of it. So
you'll see that in section 5,
mostly, um, where.
And it will come out as other
state funds. Thank you.
Inendo.
Just, I think Mr. Chairman on
the uh
There was a 3, I think 50
million in uh in the 30 million
in the Indian uh PD.
So that's, that's been over 3
years, is that, is that correct?
OK.
So, uh
Other than that, I do just wanna
uh thank, this is my first time
being on this committee. I've
been on the tax side of things
for the last 48 years, really, I
was vice chair and uh chair and
uh got to see at least a budget
from that perspective, but I
think uh serving as vice chair
of the Senate Finances, you
know, really good experience as
well and get to see the whole
makings of uh of the budget, and
I really appreciate, you know,
the entire staff of, of both LFC
Senate, and everybody that has
really uh helped.
of us guide us through this
process and uh make us
understand how all this stuff
works.
Uh, and so appreciate and thank
you Mr. Chairman for
Allowing the city many of these
committees as well and uh cars
and uh Adrian.
And all your staff that that
we've called on to to really
just help us and guide us and so
forth. I appreciate it.
Mhm
Thank you. We'll just
buy some.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Oh
Um, I'm on page 225 at the
bottom, um, entry 272.
Um, Adrian, can you tell me a
little bit more about that and
how that language, which I don't
remember seeing quite laid out
this way before. How is it
related to Senate Bill 48. What
does that mean exactly in
relation to adult.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Senator Tobias and, so item
272 on page 225 is for adult
education programs and basically
this uh.
Program is going to be funded
through the.
Which basically means that for
those adult education programs
that are going to receive money,
they have to engage with the
community first to be able to
structure those programs in a
way that benefits the community.
So there has to be, yeah.
Community outreach.
Expanded.
OK, and if Senate bill 48 for
some reason does not pass, Mr.
Chair, does that affect
This in some way.
Um, Mr. Chaser Tobias and yes,
so any appropriation that's made
with contingency language
because that bill hasn't come
through yet. Um, if that bill
does not pass and gets signed by
the governor, unfortunately.
To those contingencies, uh, and
can you give me an indication,
Mr. Chair, of what type of
adult, um, program.
Give me an example of
What would be in this
descriptor.
What, what kind of community
outreach program with that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Tobias,
and so the adult ed program
could focus on anything from
literacy through.
Any, you know, uh, GED.
training, etc. So it, it's very
much varied Senate Bill 48 has a
provisions training and
education.
That is right, so it's, it's
fully broad.
So, Mr. Chair, it's not 100% um
determined upon climate type
education for adults that can be
more broad than that.
Wonderful. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sit in there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I just, I, I want to echo the
The statement that Senator
Brandt said and, and you guys
are so patient. Of course, I
haven't been here forever and a
day.
Um,
years old
And nobody ever gets tired of
me, so those two statements I
disagree with him on for sure.
No, I do, I, I appreciate um all
the patients from, from your
staff, Adrian and and Mr.
Chairman and everybody on this
committee is it works hard on
this and um.
Sometimes we don't agree on
certain things, but we, we
definitely work with it and, and
I think it's one of the
committees.
That, that I have seen at least.
Um, we really try to work
through those differences for
the better of New Mexicans, um.
And there's so much money
involved. But I do, I do want to
say, you know, there's a few
things in here that are, um, a
little cloudy, and I'm gonna
make sure that the public knows
that, um,
It's an ongoing process. I know
that we're going to vote on the
budget today, but I, I have a
feeling we're gonna be working
on it tomorrow.
The next year.
So, um, it's kind of a never
ending thing, but I do
appreciate everything that you
guys have taken the patience and
the time to work with.
Me and Tobias and mostly.
Thank you.
I thought you're gonna highlight
something.
Mm. Transportation, but
Well, we'll just start right
there, you know, the house
didn't moved all the
transportation money and we had
280 million set aside for
transportation. They wiped it
out completely.
Uh, they threw a billion
dollars, $1.5 bond package at us
that wasn't funded correctly and
was going to be funded the
general fund. There's no way the
general fund can fund $110
million a year annually with
roads. Uh, so that's when the
bills we're gonna hear today.
I mean, the house did their, did
their job, um, they did a little
more than their job and we had
to trim that back.
Um, we had to fix the problems.
Uh, Senator Trujil to your food
bank issue, Senator.
Uh, Adrian and I went to the
Roadrunner Food Bank. I don't
remember what month it was.
Some
And, and they told us they could
end hunger in New Mexico for $30
million.
And I took him up on that.
And so it's about what, 1110
million a year?
Allow them to build that up.
But that really intrigued me
that they could in 100 in New
Mexico, so we're gonna have to
rely on them as they build up,
you know, you gotta buy
warehouses, you gotta build
trucks, you gotta get the
delivery system. That's one of
the things that that keyed into
me, but some of the hardest
things you do in, in
appropriating money is, you
know, you gotta pick and choose
at the end of the day.
And, and I'll pick people over.
Animals and
I mean, we increased the foster
children, uh, reimbursement
rate. We know we have issues in
CYFD so anything we can do to
help those children.
It it is very keen and so we
have to make tough decisions and
then they, not everybody likes
it. I don't like it sometimes,
but.
That's my job.
Senator Smith was named Doctor
No.
And I think he was labeled
wrongly because somebody's gonna
make the decision.
And somebody's not gonna like
that.
in that
becomes the bigger problem as we
move forward.
Um
4% pay increases for employees.
This is our one year we had 6%,
we've increased employee pay
every year for the last 4 years,
Charles, maybe 5.
And, and so we brought up those
pay. We've adjusted the payment
bands, we're doing case studies,
uh, are, are benefits to the
state of New Mexico for
employees are the rich, almost
the richest benefit across the
United States. You can go on
vacation.
And be building vacation days.
That's how bridge that benefit
is.
Uh, so we've taken care of our
employees with vaporcent
increases. The exact cause the
situation to happen and the
governor can call me about it if
she wants, but when we hit
COVID, there was no increase in
health benefits costs. That sent
us into a spiral.
And we can never get caught up
if there was a 10% increase one
year and we didn't do that. It
was a 20% increase the next
year. We never caught up, and we
subsidized cities and counties,
they better be listening.
To the tune of about $30 million
a year for the last 3 years,
Charles. So $90 million to city
counties where their health care
benefits.
Even one bull evil person in the
stadium in Mexico I don't know
who he is, but he's got health
care benefits by furnished by
the state of New Mexico.
We've
tored up a lot of cities and
counties and the healthcare is
gonna be the greatest cost that
we're gonna have.
Over the next couple of years.
Um
We know that's the biggest cost
to households.
Uh, and we're we're on the path
to fix that.
Um, we added.
It's not our military, it's our
National Guardmen.
To be eligible for health care
when we did that.
That's a good thing that you do
that. Those are the guys that go
out during the floods and the
fires, and they're the first
ones there.
And, and so we took care of
those as New Mexicans.
But
When you look at the budget and
you say all this, you know, this
is a 10 point.
I know 200 is the last number.
There's no change because it's
in the couch in my office.
Uh, 10.79
$billion billion budget.
In in New Mexico is starting to
write science itself.
We, we went a little overboard
in the beginning because all of
a sudden we had all this money
and and we needed to figure out
how to spend it and we had never
really recovered from.
9 to 16, and, and, I mean, in 16
for those of you that weren't
here.
The treasure should have went to
jail and thank God he he didn't
because we didn't have a penny
in the bank.
He was writing hot checks left
and right, and so all these
state employees are sitting out
there. I mean, he wrote you a
check, and nobody could cash
when we got into that situation,
but we made sure that you guys
got paid.
Uh, we weren't gonna do that.
And I mean, those are the
situations you need to remember.
They're we're in a cycle.
It'll always change, something's
always gonna be changing in the
economy.
Uh, whether their politics or
world events are going to change
our budget, uh, uniquely and
drastically rather quickly.
one world event can change the
price of oil in the matter of
hours.
And and we could be back here in
3 days trying to make those
adjustments.
Um
37 billion in funds.
To in in somewhere in our banks.
girls we're at.
Mr. Chairman, those are all the
appropriations.
Mm
It's all appropriation 37 words
all different funds.
We, we
We're all cautious of what's
happening federally, but
You know, if any of you hadn't
played 52 card pickup, come back
to my office and I'll show you
what it's like.
But we don't know what's gonna
happen and, and how do you draw
the ace of spades to figure out
where you should go.
Or what should you move, which
card should you move to the next
place to figure out that we
can't figure that out now.
We don't know what it's gonna
look like. We don't know what
the, the congressional
delegation or what's gonna
happen in Washington, and we
can't be reactive to what
they're.
What they're doing. We have to
be reactive to what we're doing
here today.
With the state of New Mexico.
With this budget,
Um
We
Maintain what we have.
We've slowed growth, we know
that we can do 6% through 2030.
Uh, for 5 more years, it's 25,
yeah, 5 more years, 6% annually.
So agencies need to realize.
That
It's gonna get slower and slower
and slower.
So don't plan for big expansions
next year.
Don't plan on asking for more
money because we're gonna start
tightening.
Uh, and we'll know in October
we're really going to start
tightening if they ever pass the
federal budget. I don't think
they passed one in how many
years, Charles.
Uh, I can think of maybe 2 in
the last 20 that they've passed
on time.
So we don't know what that's
gonna look like in in hopefully
October will
We have a view of it in, and
we'll be close to the session.
Um, but if cuts come.
It's not gonna be, we're gonna
raid every single fund in New
Mexico.
And we're not gonna raid the
reserves.
Cuts are gonna come through
agencies. It's gonna come across
the board evenly.
I've been through this before,
whether it's a 5% sandy or 70%
standing, uh, you're gonna,
we're gonna start to see those.
The federal cuts come, so.
Don't think that we're just
gonna rob every kitty we have to
save everybody in the state of
New Mexico. No, everybody's
gonna, gonna participate because
if we don't do it.
Methodically
And we don't do it across the
board.
If we got a hit from Medicaid.
We have $3 billion in reserve
that would last us 3 months.
If Medicaid was hit.
That's the reality of, of what
we're hearing in the
conversation, so.
Agencies be prepared.
Something happens.
Everybody's gonna do that.
I, I can honestly say, you know.
As the chair of LLC for the last
2 years.
New Mexico has set itself up for
the future.
Charles, we've taken now money,
we've invested it, and by 2030
that now money will be equal to
oil and gas revenues.
If you want to diversify
economy, that's the way you do
it.
You take now money, you put it
in funds, and you fund capital
outlay with cash.
For the first time I've known
maybe 20 plus years, New Mexico
is going to get an increase in
their bond rating.
And that's because we have
targeted where we wanted to go.
We have
Watched our growth in New Mexico
and we put money away for the
future.
There's no better scenario that
I could.
But die tomorrow and, and they
said, what's your legacy?
Well, in 2030, you, you will
have more cash on hand than,
then you'll be getting from.
I love to tell my kids that
story, that's like the trust
fund forever.
That's what New Mexico has, is
they set themselves up for the
trust fund forever.
Uh, if they maintain it.
If they don't rob it.
If they watch it fiscally.
It will be here if we long into
the future.
I don't, you know, tell of see,
you know.
We're all in a learning curve
each and every day.
I told you guys before the
session and, and be prepared for
a session you've never seen
before. I think that rang true.
You smiling and shaking your
heads, um, but the session's not
over yet, you know what happens
at the end.
I appreciate you guys. I
appreciate everything you do for
us cause without you, we don't
look good.
Without you, the state doesn't
look good.
Without you, people don't get.
And people don't get healthcare
needs uh across the board with
the LFC staff.
Adrian Luco, Viviana, James.
belts, John.
Thank you.
Because you make this office in
the Senate Finance run is
smooth, smoother than a clock.
It just purrs right along, um.
Never seen us hit an obstacle
that we can't overcome.
Uh, that we don't navigate
without blowing up because I've
been here when things have blown
up. I've been here when budgets
were done in the middle of the
night and we left because they
couldn't come to consensus.
Uh, and, and it's change.
Uh, I really appreciate that.
It's a new area.
my committee members, thank you.
It's a hard thing to do. We
always don't get along and we
always want our little, our
little, our little bucket of
rocks that we want to take home
and, and, and pass out to
everybody and say we did this
and we did that, but we all
worked together pretty well in a
nonpartisan way.
I, I haven't seen this ever, uh,
this year, nobody raised their
temperature. Nobody threw a fit
about what they did or didn't
get.
We all worked like a well-oiled
machine and, and that's what
Senate Finance should look like,
and I appreciate that support
and that helps do that, so.
With that can have a motion for
a you pass on houseboat too.
Uh motion by Senator Padilla,
second by Senator Gonzalez. We
can Calderon.
Senator Brent, Senator Brant
votes yes.
Senator Senator Camposses
Senator Lanier.
Yes. Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes yes, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes no
Senator Tobiasson. Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes no. Senator Shindo
Senator Shino votes yes. Yes,
yes, we have a Du pass 9 in the
affirmative, 2 in the negative.
There's 9. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
First of all, thank you to the
staff.
Uh, I mean, really, um, your
professionalism.
Uh, Charles, you're focus over
the last few years on
performance-based, um,
investing, um, you're at work,
Adrian on behavioral health, you
know, it's superb.
And know that, know that this
budget is built on your
professionalism and um
And it's there. So my no vote is
not against that.
Um, this budget is filled with
so much incredible stuff. It's
great.
Um
As I am really bothered though,
Mr. Chair, by, by, by kind of
what felts like punitive
treatment towards my university,
the differential. I can't sit
here and kind of like look the
other way, um.
I think that's really
unfortunate. I, I would actually
like us to fix it.
frankly, on the Senate floor as
an amendment.
Um, I think we need to treat
people equally.
Um
Number 2, I think it's wrong to,
to not have an online document
that we can properly vet, like
any other bill.
Or that that the public can
properly that and give us
feedback.
Furthermore, have it at least a
day in advance in case there's
errors.
Um, to be given something, take
it or leave it up or down and
not be, you know, literally be
imagine being given a 300 page
book and say, OK, what do you
want to vote on this? We do that
with no other bill. It's kind of
It's just not acceptable, like,
we should, we should have this
online, we should be able to vet
it properly.
You know, I agree decisions have
to be made, but
Not like that. There, there
should be one final step here.
Do it right. And uh and yeah,
then tough decisions that have
to be made because as you know,
Mr. Chair, lots of people won't
necessarily be happy with those
decisions, but at least their
voice is heard and they're given
that opportunity and
And maybe even a final amendment
process like the Senate used to
do.
Um, so, you know,
I just can't kind of support
that. And so that's why I'm
know, Mr. Chairman, but
appreciate everyone's good
advice to to talk to the
president of NMSU and see where
they're at with athletics. Uh,
there's no process is perfect.
Uh, for us to do this online
would just be, I don't know, I
don't even know how you'd even
start that process, I mean.
The scans, the changes, the
things that have to happen would
would not be, uh, I don't
believe you are here this
morning when we went to
executive, we came in late when
we went through the entire bill
before we came to this committee
and so uh with that we have a
few pass motion, Senator Woods,
what do you tell him?
Get out of here
Uh, Adrian is representative.
Coming up to the Senate House
Bill 71.
If not, I'll come up and do
both, right?
You're in a chair, Senator
Shindo.
71, right?
Mr. Chairman, yes, we're gonna
do House Bill 711.
I don't know if the Kelly you
want to sit right here next to
me.
You're, you're, you're with me.
You have been
summoned.
We do have an amendment, uh, Mr.
Chairman. OK, if you guys can
keep it down as your way out,
appreciate that. You can throw
the hammer at him.
All right. So we'll go ahead and
uh move on to House Bill 71 as
amended. Uh, we do have an
amendment.
Committee members.
Mr. Chairman, House Bill 71
increases the amount of
distribution from the early
childhood.
Early childhood education
program fund.
And from the early childhood
education care fund.
I have some
discussion.
We have a motion to move the
amendment for discussion
purposes by Senator Gonzalez. I
have a second, Senator Woods.
In the opposition to the motion.
You know he's slow down. You
gotta let her catch up.
Oh, you are ready, OK.
I'm sorry
This
Senator Gonzalez in motion.
We
Yeah, for discussion purposes
only.
And then uh Senator Woody. All
right, we're back on track.
Sorry.
All right, Senator, go ahead.
Uh, you want us to just, did you
move the amendment amendment has
been moved for discussion
purposes. OK.
Mr. Chair and Senator, the
amendment takes in, there's two
revenue streams that distribute
into the early childhood fund.
Uh, it takes 50% of each of one
of the revenue streams.
At least 50% of the other
revenue streams feeding the.
the year, but I'll have to
Explained amendment for it and
they're transferred through 2029
and 2030 and
then that triggers them back.
Uh, at 2030 to the early
childhood Trust Fund and it.
2020
year in.
And the balance hits 10 billion.
There is a trigger if the fun
drops below the 10 billion, it
pulls cash back and.
Anything I missed.
A little.
Just a little bit.
You'll need to know everything.
Uh, Mr. Chair,
fill in the gap fill in the
gaps, um, so with this amendment
does, it removes the House floor
amendment that capped the
distribution from the early
childhood trust fund at 400
million and reverts it back to
its initial version, which was
500 million. Um, this is what
will enable the budget to be
balanced. And in terms of the
distributions of revenue streams
being split, one of those
revenue streams is gonna be
split 50% going into
the Medicaid Trust Fund and the
other one into early childhood
and the other revenue stream is
split 50/50.
Early childhood and the beavi
Health Trust Fund. And this is
only for 3 fiscal years, fiscal
year 26, 27, and 28 in fiscal
year 29, those revenue streams
start going back into early
childhood. And then the trigger
that the chair was referring to
is basically saying if at any
point because of a market
downturn or anything else.
The balance of early childhood
drops below whatever balance it
happens to be at the end of the
current fiscal year.
Those revenue streams, the money
flows back into early childhood
to balance it back up.
And there's also a reporting
requirement on all the money
that would flow out of early
childhood that the state auditor
will now be in charge of uh
providing to the legislature to
ensure that every dollar spent
from this.
Right
Representative
No
OK. All right, we'll go up to
the audience. Anybody in support
of this amendment?
in opposition.
OK, uh, committee questions,
Senator Padilla, I just real
quick and share and and uh
chairwoman uh.
And he goes, did you, I was
doing 9 things up here. Did you
tell us how you felt about this?
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and, uh, senator, um, you know,
I'm.
I, I am, uh.
Concerned because we made the
deal with the house that it
would go to 4. of course, I
always want the highest amount
for, for early childhood, um, to
be able to spend the way they
need to, so, you know, so I feel
a little conflicted there. Um,
we did want to put stri stricter
um reporting in there.
Um, at the end of the day,
I can, I think that
The money is not coming out of
the corpus.
And that was the big thing to
protect. Um, I think, um, we
continue, Mr. Chairman, to be a
target for being raided.
And so by doing this, I think
this helps families um and
support systems around those
families, um, and so I'm, I'm
Uh
Totally happy, but I, I think
it's, it's a solution.
And then, uh, did you, you went
to the audience?
Uh, yes, I did. OK. On the
amendment, but not on the bill.
We're not on the bill yet. OK,
that's all I have then on the,
OK, so Senator Woods.
Mm
You wanna go ahead and move it,
um.
We are moved for discussions
now, we're back on the committee
for questions on the amendment.
So if I can get a motion by
Senator Woods.
Right.
22 by senator uh Gonzalez.
Any opposition?
Brent's not here, so let's still
vote.
Or, no, no, this is an
amendment. So no opposition to
the amendment, OK.
You think so? OK.
All right, real cool.
Senator Brent.
Senator Camposin compos notes,
yes, Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes,
yes, Senator Padilla.
Then Paia votes no, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes no
Senator Tobiasson Tobiasins,
yes, Senator Trujillo.
Inner Trujillos yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes.
Senator Shandon,
yes votes yes, Senator Brown.
Senator Brandt votes yes.
We have adopted the
amendments.
I don't matter when I'm out
here.
Yes.
Better sports, yes.
OK, so
8 to 2. OK, OK, it's been
adopted. We're back on the, on
the bill.
Uh
Anything else?
Nothing.
On the bill
You're gonna go to the audience,
OK, so we'll go to the audience.
Any anybody here in support of
the uh House Bill 71 as amended.
Anybody in Zoom?
OK, that's
Anybody in opposition?
You know oppositions, OK, all
right, committee members.
Move for motion for Du pass was
did you have a question or
was that a motion, I was just
gonna say there's nothing to be
sad about having $9 billion.
In an early childhood fund. I
still remember us voting.
To take the money out of, you
know, for the constitutional
amendment and so the fact that
we've come as far as we have is
absolutely amazing.
And quite honestly, um, the
services that we provide in a
lot of variety of other
different ways helps families
too, so I appreciate you saying
that those wraparound services
are just as important to our
families, so thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. OK, we have a
motion for new pass for Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Dubai.
room.
Senator Brandt.
Yes. So boats, yes, Senator,
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalezia, Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla
Senor Padillas, Senator
Steinborn. Senator Steinborn
votes yes. Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Tobias Sibozia, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes, yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes, Senator Shendo. Yes,
uh, Shindo votes yes Senor
Munoz.
Munoz votes yes, you have a do
pass 11 to 0.
Yeah.
Thank you. So we'll move on to
Are you in the hospital one.
45 as well.
Chairman
Yes
House Bill 145. I'm looking for
an updated FIR.
You don't see
have
I have an updated FYR. We do
have an amendment, Mr. Chair,
so.
145 is the house send it over to
100.
10 million of general fund
appropriated to do 1.5 billion
in bonding.
It's created a deficit for us.
We figured out a new way and so
with that we'll stand for
questions.
So we have an amendment, right?
Yep, you have the amendment. We
stand for questions. OK, so
we'll go ahead and have someone
move the amendment.
end of
It's motion by Senator Brent,
seconded by Senator Padilla.
All right.
I'll have my Wednesday dream
explain the amendment.
Go ahead.
A, uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so the amendment
basically pays for the $1.5
billion.
$1.5 billion dollar bond package
that came over.
Um, so what it does, it
increases the weight distance
tax on just
trailers, not on buses, uh, by
35%.
It also increases the
registration fees across the
board by 25%, and it also
includes an EV surcharge that
mirrors the similar surcharge
that this committee passed two
years ago, um, with all those
components together, it would
pay for roughly 80 to 90 million
of the 110 million um
But
Unfunded liability that was sent
over. And then from our
understanding and discussions
with DOT, the remaining piece
can be paid off using federal
dollars. So it's fully funding
the actual package, uh, the
amendment also includes language
that would require DOT to space
out the bonding and instead of
spending it all in one year. Um,
so there are some fiscal
controls, meaning that in year
one, for example, they can't go
over $290 million in bonding,
and they have to maintain an
average level of 290. So say one
year they do 100, next year they
could do 400 and it balances out
to the 290. Um, so that's the
intent. Make it last for a
while.
And then the other piece that's
in there is we struck the
amendment that house
transportation put in and
rewarded it to make sure that
instead of
Um, DOT reporting on what they
bonded. Now they're going to
report on the front end. They're
going to tell you what they're
planning on bonding. So this way
there's legislative input in the
process, um.
And if I miss anything, uh,
secretary Ser is here to to add.
Yeah, that's good.
You want.
Um, Mr. Chairman, no, I just
want, I want to thank the, the
chairman and others for not only
trying to create the authority,
but to create the revenue stream
for the debt service, but Adrian
did a good job summarizing the
amendment.
OK, great.
Mm
Thank you Mr. Chairman. So I, I
do have a question, of course
we've seen it for the first
time. Um,
So, Mr. Chair, sounds like
we're, we're increasing
registration or increased fees.
This is the right word here,
registration fees. Is it for
every car?
Yes.
OK.
The secretary, if anything needs
further explanation, please add
it, OK?
Um, now we're adding an extra
fee for just electric and
plug-in vehicles on top of those
fees, right?
And what is the rationale for
doing that, Mr. Chair.
There has never been a, a fee
for electric vehicles cause they
don't.
Burn gas and so they pay no gas
tax and so that is the secretary
explained the mileage.
So we've done, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Steinborn for uh a
vehicle that um performs at 22
MPG on average, drives 15,000
miles a year that roughly they
contribute $120 a year in fuel
tax and therefore if you own an
electric vehicle, that's roughly
what you're not contributing,
what we've done.
Um, to, uh, support and continue
to support EV adoption as we're
phasing in that 120 fuel tax
replacement over 3 years and so
for plug-in hybrids, it'll
increase 2040, and 60.
Uh, through 2028 and then um
likewise with the full plug-in
reaching 120 in 2020.
Thank you, Ms. Chair. Well, you
know,
There again, you know, it'd be
great to have a little bit of
public comment on this because
there's some people in the
audience that might very well.
have an interest in this
amendment, um.
But I mean, I can appreciate,
let, let me just ask this
question, uh, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Secretary, uh, so we, right now,
um,
The road fund, is that, is that
what cars and fuel it's helping
to go towards the road fund. Is
that the deal here?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
portion right now of vehicle
registration fees do go to the
state road fund. The way the
amendment is um
Written is the 25% increase on
registration fees will
materialize uh entirely to the
state road fund.
And sorry, so Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair and and Secretary. So are
you saying that all this revenue
will go to the road fund.
Um, Mr. Chair Senator from the
25% increase to vehicle
registration fees, yes, and for
the EB surcharge as well.
And is this, uh, again, sorry,
the justification for doing this
extra fee for electric vehicles
and plug-ins. Is that because
they're not
Those car owners are not
additionally contributing to the
road fund through purchase of
gas.
Mr. Chair, that's exactly it.
And, and what calculations, Mr.
Chair, led you to those numbers
that calculation of what was
inappropriate.
Additional charge for eBays and
plug-ins.
Sure, Mister Chair Sanders, so
that's the estimate our, our
economists can provide the
average fuel economy for cars in
New Mexico, which is about 22
MPG. And so we use roughly 15
miles per year, then the
calculation of equating that to
how many gallons of gas
purchased per year, we'd arrive
at $120.
It's all I have for now, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Um
Senator Brent.
They is chairman and uh I do
have a couple of questions, but
I did want to also say on the,
on the EB thing that.
That was Senator Tollman's bill
almost every year that he would
bring that as someone who drove
a Tesla.
Saying that that he doesn't
really contribute to the road
fund and what we know is that
EBs are about twice the weight.
Because the batteries are so
heavy and so they actually cause
more damage to the roads.
than a regular vehicle does, and
so I think it's more than fair
for them to pick up what
they're, you know, not getting
in.
gas and then you know there's
some people like me that have a
truck that I drive occasionally
that I pay way more into it.
Try to balance that out with my
car and my Honda, but.
Um
We all drive on the roads and we
should all be helping to
maintain them.
So I have no problem with that.
Uh.
Like I said, it's something
Senator Toleman, I hadn't even
thought about it until Senator
Tollman brought it up years ago,
so, um, so I'll invoke his name.
Um, I wanted to know on the
weight distance.
Um, how does this compare with
the states around us.
Um, or we getting
higher or we pretty much in the
average range or
Where are we at with that Mr.
Chairman Senator, it's a great
question, and
It's difficult to do an apples
to apples comparison because
states address a weight distance
in a very different way. For
example, several states
surrounding us instead of
charging a tax per mile driven,
they charge a higher vehicle
registration fee in the state.
We've actually worked with the
New Mexico Truckers Association
on this amendment and on this
percent increase. They've
actually asked us as a, as a
measure in, in their measure of
support.
To study whether or not it
wouldn't be more efficient to
move away from weight distance
tax and actually into that space
adopted by other states where we
would just charge an increased
registration fee for them. So
we're actually gonna spend the
next year determining if that's
a more efficient model while
still ensuring this revenue
stream sustains itself moving
forward.
Uh, thank you. I appreciate that
answer, and I've never been a
truck driver, so I don't know
how this works, so do you like
report in how many miles you
typically drive in the state and
then you pay that for my own
senator every, every month or
every quarter you report your
weight distance and so it's
miles you traveled in and the
weight you had on your trunk,
there's a multiplier that tells
you the rate you're paying for
the miles in the, in the way.
And so the other way that would
work then would be a red but
that's not just if you're
registered in the state, right?
That's even if you're driving
through the state on I.
in the state and then if you're
passing through, not all of your
truck stops at the port anymore.
OK, yeah, I just didn't have any
idea how that works, the BP.
Thank you for that. Appreciate
it. So um.
Now the other question I had is,
um, who determines what roads
will be.
fixed with this and how that
money is spent.
Center in the amendment, uh,
they will come in from the LFC.
With a list of roads.
And LLC can either adopt that
budget or not adopt that budget.
We looked at how we could.
List roads, uh, every
legislators got roads in their
district. I can point to 123.
Or by all 11 of us have been.
Have a road issue and, and so
we're trying to figure that out
what
We could not tie the roads to
the the bond pack.
And we could not, we thought
about sending a letter saying.
Here's a letter from LOC with a
list of roads from every
legislator that our priority in
their district and these are
what need to be targeted.
That wouldn't work either.
Adrian and his.
Idle time, figure out a way that
if we bring them in front of
Elves.
they bring the recommendation
package.
Then we can either uh not adjust
that, see where they're at.
You're only gonna be limited to.
I will tell you a story that
when we're doing this and we
just wrapped this up yesterday
yesterday morning with the
executive. We found out that DOT
sold a bond package, not the
secretary, but a prior
secretary, sold the bond package
for $200 million at 1.5%
interest.
And then came back and said,
I'll take the 5% interest if you
give me another that's 3 times
what the market rate is and so
we had to figure out how to
I will tell you I also learned
that there's a lot of local
roads.
That that DOT has said, OK, I'll
help you with and and everything
and have committed to some of
them.
The one in Las Unna, which is
amazing to me, will be the
longest bridge in the state of
New Mexico, longer than the
gorge and houses.
And that project is $173
million.
In the local community is the
one that wanted that developed
it, and now they're short $25
million.
And in this package.
It says.
No local roads only state roads
can be bought.
We have to start protecting
where our agency is because we
haven't been able to get them a
revenue stream.
We've never been able to pass a
gas tax since I've been here 16
years.
Every time it comes up it it we
can never pass a gas tax.
Senator Gonzalez has been here
longer than me. I'm not gonna
say that you said that last time
I said a for, you said a
four-legged chicken and I got in
trouble.
and so
We have to figure out how we're
going to fund DOT correctly.
This will alleviate a lot
overruns.
Job costs, how much money do I
have in in if cars have become
more efficiency that more
efficient dropped and robbed in
the legislature has never
stepped up to the plate.
Just take the tough vote and
say.
This is how every other states
funded.
Um
But we are gonna, we're limiting
the amount of bonding capacity
uh that they can do.
So that will help trigger that.
It takes 3.
From conception to to
construction.
And that's just a bit it and so
3 years to get these out for
approval.
Uh, as we look at that, so.
How we're gonna handle local
roads will be an LFC discussion.
How we're gonna get all the
members to to say where they're
really oatmeal discussion, so.
That's the best way we figured
it out.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator and secretary. It's
good to see you.
I just want to say um.
I bought a Tesla in April.
This last year and I haven't
pumped gas since.
Not one.
Not once have I pumped gas.
And um
My stats show that I've saved
just under $2000.
By charging
And I charge at home the bulk of
the time.
We had P&M come out, they gave
us just under $700 to in stock
to help with the installation of
the charge port.
Outside of our garage.
We'll get a $3500 rebate when we
file our taxes this year.
At a $7500 rebate from the
federal government.
I charge from 10 o'clock at
night till 5 o'clock in the
morning. It's plenty. I can go
to 100% if I want, but I usually
go 80%.
Believe it or not, our, our PNM
bill actually dropped $20 a
month, so I'm saving on gas.
I'm saving on electricity.
New Mexico has done a tremendous
amount to help my family get to
the point where we can drive an
electric vehicle, and I'm
grateful.
So the 80, 100 and 120 probably
get quoted in the paper as being
hard hearted, but I'll accept
that.
I think it's my contribution to
the roads that I get to drive
on.
Um
I will say, I'd love to have
your help in figuring out.
I've seen other states, Arizona,
for example, has an EV license
plate.
I want one.
One EV license plate.
I'm gonna pay that little bit
extra. I want to EV license
plate. So maybe coming to you to
try to figure that out.
Georgia sponsored.
We call it the lightning.
And then, and then I also would
love to work with you to figure
out how do we get charging
stations at our rest areas.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Steiner for
second time.
You, Mr. Chairman. Yeah, um, so
I've been since the amendment
started, Mr. Chair, um, and I
know we've got someone whose
hand is raised that would like
to give some public comment on
the amendment, which would be
good. I
Have been sent some reports from
Consumer Reports talking about
fees on EVs, and they're saying
that uh that that type of a fee
is kind of punitive and not
necessarily going to save road
funds.
But could, you know, adversely
kind of target that sector a
little bit.
And that and that concerns me a
little bit. I mean, I, I
completely share the goal of the
bill, and I can
Even share the goal of like
having them.
Pay a little more. I just don't
know that that number is the
right number. Don't know that
it's not the right number.
Where I, you know, I wish there
was a
I don't know, maybe a little
more thought or discussion on
this.
But I think it's a policy
matter.
And not, we want people driving
EVs, and we want roads, and we
have a problem because obviously
roads are traditionally funded
through fuel.
But that doesn't mean that you
don't move towards EVs. That
doesn't mean you
You know, you, you slap on a big
uh, pardon me, a big tax on EVs,
not that $100 is a big tax, but
not everyone's buying a Tesla,
right? With all due respect.
Uh, that's kind of a higher end
you
not this one.
But, you know, a lot of, a lot
of the, a lot of EVs that are
gonna be costing less. So I
just, I don't want to be
disincentivizing that market.
Uh, because of this imbalance,
so um yeah, I'm I'm not sure how
I feel about the amendment, Mr.
Chair, but I, I think
I, I don't fundamentally
philosophically disagree. It's
just.
Kind of a number.
But
Yeah, I don't know.
Just want to put that out there
that, um, we'll go to the
audience.
I the
Gibson.
All right.
In a motion by Senator Brent to
adopt the amendment.
of
Second
Uh
he's gonna go to the audience
after the amendment is adopted
to the bill.
OK, all right. Any opposition to
the amendment?
OK
All righty. So we'll go to the
audience.
Um
On the bill? Any anybody in
support of the bill.
Anybody in opposition of the
bill.
We have opposition
We support. They just moved
around for some reason.
Uh
Are you opposition? OK, good.
the
Members of the committee, thank
you. I'm Camilla Feibelman with
the Rio Grande chapter of the
Sierra Club. We have been before
you.
We are a known stakeholder in
the question of surcharges.
And each of the last 2 years,
the question of a surcharge has
come at the last minute, unknown
to the stakeholders.
The bill last year to pass an EV
tax credit.
Had a $50.
B for Rhodes from EVs, which is
around the amount that consumer
reports most EV drivers drive
very few miles and are not
impacting the roads. There are a
very small amount of cars on the
roads, and the whole point of
the low income drivers into the
EV realm where they can save
money on maintenance and on gas
by charging at home. So let's
have a process and a
conversation about an easy road
fee and do that with all the
stakeholders involved.
Thank you.
Mm
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, I'm Tammy Velorn with
Western Resource Advocates. I've
been driving an EV for quite
some time and I definitely want
to pay my fair share into a road
fund fee.
But $120 is not my fair share.
If you do the calculations of
what folks who are driving
gasoline vehicles pay for a very
efficient gasoline vehicle,
they're gonna pay $22.37 a year
that's based on 15,000 miles
traveled and if you do it with
the most efficient, um, average
efficiency, sorry, the average
efficiency, it's $51 a year.
There is no justification for
making me pay more than folks
who are driving gasoline
vehicles in a state where we are
trying to incentivize gasoline
vehicles. Again, I want to pay
my fair share. I don't want to
pay the equivalency of a large
truck that has 22 MPG or less.
So we, we just ask that we've
agreed to $65 in the past, we
agree to that now. I don't know
anyone that doesn't want to pay
their fair share. We just don't
want to disincentivize.
people from switching over to
EVs. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Alex Shoubanks. I'm with the
Southwest Energy Efficiency
Project. I just want to echo.
But my friends in the room have
said, um, the fee being
discussed is punitive, um, and
there's really no, this is not
the right time to disincentivize
people to make the switch to
electric vehicles and um uh we,
we oppose this. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Carlos
Mautes. I am the state director
for Green Latinos. We would
really like to oppose this bill.
We don't think that this is a
fair fee. We think that we are
disincentivizing electric
vehicles at a time when we
really need to be incentivizing
them. We really do hope that you
do not pass this bill. Thank
you.
Yeah
Mm
And you
OK, all right, OK.
Mr Chairman, I was wondering if
we still have.
A tax credit for electric
vehicles.
Purchase of electric vehicle. I
wanted to go to the audience.
Those are in support. Oh, I'm
not done yet with anybody?
Anybody wanna speak up since we
allow the opportunity to speak.
Go ahead. Come on up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, members of the committee.
I'll just be brief. Um, Rebecca
Rus, infrastructure advisor with
the Governor's office. Um, this
is a bill that the governor
backs and we've worked really
closely with leadership both in
the House and in the Senate and
here with, with Chair Munoz on
these amendments and the bill as
a whole. We think this is a
really critical step forward for
all the reasons that have been
discussed in the opening
remarks. Thank you.
Thank you.
Senator Woods.
Mm
Oh, go ahead. I didn't see him,
sorry, hiding behind George.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, my name is
Eric Martinez on behalf of uh
Mesa del Sol Development Group.
We strongly support this
legislation. It's another tool
in the toolbox to help
supplement uh critical
infrastructure for economic
development throughout New
Mexico. Thank you.
OK, all right, Senator Woods.
So Miss what the question I
have, you was on the tax
committee for many years and
Do we still have uh a tax credit
to purchase EV vehicles like I,
I believe.
We'll let the, I think we do
have, still have a credit,
right?
Mr. Chair, I believe so. The tax
credit adopted two years ago for
EVs and as the senator alluded
to earlier too, that's can be
coupled with a federal tax
credit as well.
So it's pretty, it's.
Do you remember how much that
is.
Senator Trujillo
for the federal and the dealer
is able to take that right off
before you even pay, um, the
3500 for the state, they didn't
have it set up. I don't know if
they do now, um, but we'll get a
tax credit that we can apply to
our so all total, what is that
math wise, help me out here.
$100,000,000 plus a rebate to
have um uh
Uh, you know, we paid, I think
we paid a little over $700 for
the charger to be installed on
the outside of our garage and um
PNM gave us somewhere between
$6000 and $700 of a rebate to do
that.
It came out and fixed our, um, I
wasn't there when it happened,
but they fixed our meter, uh, so
that as long as we charge
between 10 and 5, I believe it's
3 cents a kilowatt hour, which
is less than half.
Uh, thank you very much, Senator
Trujil.
And a rest my case, I guess.
Mr. Chairman, if I could just
go ahead, senators.
My car did not cost more than
the average electric vehicle. In
fact, it costs less because we
shopped around and the car
dealers have.
At that time lowered the cost,
and so I don't want anybody to
think that I'm some wealthy
person.
We paid a good price for a good
vehicle.
I don't, I'm not trying to say
that you're a wealthy person.
All I'm saying is, is.
Is that
There's pretty good.
deal that state and federal
government gives.
On a purchase of a of an
electric vehicle and it sounds
like the electric company's
given a pretty good deal on the
electricity, so.
I mean, it's, it's not like
we're trying to cut anybody out
of buying an electric vehicle
here.
Through the registration fees,
so sure, that's all the point I
was trying to make.
Thank you. All right, thank you.
Uh
I but I have a question, uh, the
chairman or, or, um.
I know that, uh, just real
quickly, I know we always
quoting, you know,
Uh, the data all come from the
city about 15,000 miles.
Folks in the rural areas is not
uncommon for us to travel 45 to
50,000 miles.
A year.
That's a lot of tax money.
You know, that we put in.
And on top of that, a roads are
so bad.
You're changing tires.
The shock absorbers, your
struts.
And everything else, so you add
all of that.
So
You know it's, it's hard for me
to feel sorry because we don't
have
electric charging stations out
there for us to even buy
anything.
So, I think going forward, we
ought to get data from the rural
areas as well.
So that we can really look at
the entire picture of what it's
really costing rural folks too.
As opposed to just always
looking at, you know, metro
areas and looking at their data
in the 15,000 mile average.
Because it's not working out
there in the rural areas that we
think it would.
Let me make some comments
earlier, I think I don't know
anybody in here that is driving
an electric vehicle and probably
my entire district.
There's just no
You know, nothing out there. So
anyway, I just want to make
those comments because I think,
you know, we all want to pay our
fair share, and I think uh.
I think the real folks are
probably paying more than their
fair share.
So just wanna make that comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
with that,
What's the
OK, motion by his chairman.
I can buy Senators.
We're called.
Senator Brent.
Um
Yes. Senator Brandt votes yes,
Senator Compos. Senator Campos
votes, yes, Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalezia, Senator
Linier Senator Lanier votes,
Senator Padilla. Senator
Padillas, Senator Steinborn.
No
Senator Steinborn votes no.
Senator Tobiasson, Senator
Tobias in votes, yes, Senator
Trujillo. Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Sendo. Senator Sendosia, Senator
Munoz.
Yes. Senators, yes, we have a
due past 10.
Mm
Thank you.
um, we're adjourned.
Morals mean is that the call of
the chair we're trying to figure
out where we're at with Bill. So
uh we're at the call of the
chair for the meeting tomorrow.
