The taxation and revenue
department.
And.
Mr chair members made money this
way from.
Designated corporate finance
ministration.
And I'm use my lotus you chief
economist for the legislative
finance committee.
Okay
good good afternoon my name's
Leo that fell in the chief
economist for DFA.
Mr chairman and members the
committee I believe there is a
long agenda before you today and
I wanted to gauge the chairs
interested and abbreviated
version of the macroeconomic
Economic slides okay so
typically I would go through
slides one through.
Twenty three.
Twenty two no I'm sorry thirty
one.
And I can I can give you a very
high level summary of all of
that it's an overview of
macroeconomic conditions for the
global the US and the New Mexico
economy and the short story
which some of you've already
heard the longer story LFC and
other places is that not much
changed in macroeconomic
conditions between our August
estimate and are December
estimate in twenty twenty two
estimates for employment job
growth inflation things like
that stayed relatively unchanged
but we did change significantly
was the forecast in oil markets
and to a lesser extent and
natural gas.
The oil market forecast the
price of oil that was forecast
for the budget year an outward
was brought down somewhat but
counteracting that the
production volumes were
increased for New Mexico and so
when you put those two things
together one would brought the
decrease in price to bring down
revenue increase in production
would bring up revenue and in
total we're adding revenue to
the forecast and secretary
designate Propst can walk you
through the general fund revenue
outlook.
Chairman of the committee will
start on page so slide thirty to
forty minutes.
There is one thirty one.
You the person.
Mr chairman the December twenty
twenty two consensys General
Fund forecasts has improved over
the August twenty twenty two
forecast by nine hundred twenty
eight million in FY twenty
three.
So one point one billion in FY
twenty four and one point two
billion and FY twenty five.
In FY twenty three the increase
over the August forecasts is
driven primarily by general
sales and income taxes while oil
and gas revenues are captured by
the excess reserves.
And as we all know Mr chairman
in FY twenty three to increase
over August forecast is also
driven equally by general sales
income taxes and oil and gas
revenues and increased the land
grant permanent fund transfer.
Going to slide.
Thirty three.
This is think I'll skip over
most of this Mr chairman but
you'll see under the total
recurring revenue line item in
the in the top graph there the
increase in FY twenty two was
nineteen point seven percent
increase in FY twenty three
eleven point four percent.
to increase and FY twenty four
it is well I'm point three
percent and a projected increase
in FY twenty three is eight
point one percent.
This highlights the current
disk looted during the previous
line Mr chairman but the two of
the bullet points at the bottom
I would note and participate in
the December twenty twenty
forecast.
FY twenty three over FY twenty
two sixty six sixty six percent
of our current general fund
revenue increase comes from
direct oil and gas revenue.
And in the December twenty
twenty two FY twenty four over
FY twenty three sixty eight
percent of recurring general
fund revenue increase comes from
direct oil and gas revenue.
With slide the thirty four.
highlighted four twenty three FY
twenty three general fund
recurring revenue estimate is
estimated to increase by eleven
point four percent as was noted
on the previous slide and FY
twenty three general fund
reserves are estimated at a
little over five billion dollars
or sixty point five percent of
recurring appropriations of
course that's before you take
any actions during the current
legislative session in FY twenty
four the FY twenty four general
fund recurring revenue is
forecasted to go by grow by
eleven point three percent
versus FY twenty three and of
course the number that we've all
been talking about and reading
about to allow us to couple
months new money for FY twenty
four is forecasted to be
approximately three point six
million dollars.
I think slide thirty five
generally of replicates previous
slide so go ahead and skip to
the general fund reserve
discussion on slide thirty six.
FY twenty two general fund
reserve balances or three point
two billion or forty three point
three percent recurring
expenditures and as noted FY
twenty three general fund
reserve balances are estimated a
little over five billion
dollars.
The you know Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
executive budget recommendations
is to have is to have a reserve
Alfa reserves of approximately
of thirty five percent and FY
twenty four.
On slide thirty seven items that
this committee is is well aware
of there are risks to any
forecasts.
As I said in the house
appropriations and finance
committee Mr chairman I'm used
to bringing you actuarial
projections for public pension
plans.
In a prior life and I always
noted when I did present
actuarial.
Projections for public pension
plans with the one thing that's
certain about a projection as is
going to be wrong.
Nobody has a clear crystal ball
there are significant risks out
there that this committee is
were well aware of well aware of
their issue to a political risks
such as the conflict going on in
Ukraine there are risks to oil
and gas prices there are risks
continuing from inflation and
supply St supply chain shortages
when it same time Mr Chairman
there are some potential upsides
to the December forecast that we
may not be able to accurately
project such as the fact that it
does seem like inflation is
starting to tame somewhat of the
labor market is performing
better than expected and supply
since Torrez seem to be abating
to a certain degree.
On slide.
Thirty eight them we use moody's
to help us identify some of the
major risks to this to the
December forecast spike in long
term rates fed policy.
or something else which may not
take much given the fragility of
the economy also I think one
could argue that and and to a
certain extent Mr chairman
members of the committee given
all that has happened to the
economy over the last three
years our economy has been
fairly resilient.
One slide thirty ninth Mr
chairman I think this is a.
May not last night over cover
but it is important slide as you
know Mr chairman as part of the
consensus revenue forecast
process we do a significant
amount of stress testing it's
important to understand not what
what can happen not only during
the good times is this committee
is well aware but also what
might happen in down times
you'll see on the right side of
this page we have several
risk scenarios we generally
percent of to you one is a low
oil price scenario that's the
bottom one you can see the
impact to of the forecast the
the middle boxes a moderate
recession scenario and the top
box is a particularly good K.
consider.
Under the local low oil prices
the general fund recurring
revenue could fall by from the
baseline by approximately four
hundred million in FY twenty
three.
One point six billion and FY
twenty four fourteen of losses
of two billion through FY twenty
three and up low oil price
scenario Mr chairman members the
committee has oil about in the
mid thirty dollar per barrel
range.
As we all know Mr chairman very
sensitive to New Mexico's
revenue is sensitive to an
energy downturn and a national
recession of finance.
And all of that highlights the
need to be cautious as we go
forward and build a budget
during the current session.
One slide forty Mr chairman the
the general fund revenue trend
revenue versus a ten year trend
you'll see that once we get up
to you're twenty twenty FY
twenty twenty two
the
Revenue breaks pretty
significantly from of the ten
year trend for FY twenty three
the general fund revenues or
above the ten year trend by one
point six billion for FY twenty
five by two point five million
overall Mr chairman and members
the committee New Mexico's
general fund revenue average
annual growth rate is
approximately six percent that's
from two thousand thirteen to to
two thousand and twenty two the
trend for those years.
And.
I think it really is finally Mr
chairman members of the
committee on slide forty one.
Driving the general fund revenue
above the ten year trend
increase increasing the risks
are severance tax revenues and
federal of mineral leasing with
that Mr Chairman I think we are
done with the formal part of
representation and and ready for
any questions.
I'm sorry Mr chair members of
the committee I'm gonna be
sticking to the LFC brief which
looks like this says money
matters at the top.
The secretary did a great job so
I'm just going to highlight a
couple of graphs here.
On page one at the bottom right
hand corner of that brief is the
make up of the change in
recurring revenues that's right
there's two sorry sorry for the
people on the thicker one that
says general fund consensus
revenue estimate at the top.
This.
Just yes.
The ground state page now the
chart at the bottom here is this
an illustration of what
secretary designate props was
talking about and that's really
that sixty six sixty eight
percent coming from direct oil
and gas related revenues so in
this chart here it's the make up
of the growth in your revenues
in FY twenty three and FY twenty
four in FY twenty three you can
see the red in the purple bars
are severance taxes and federal
royalty payments of these are
direct oil and gas payments they
make up a secretary Prof
mentioned about two thirds the
same can be said in FY twenty
four but it's important to see
what makes up the rest of that
growth in in FY twenty three
that's the solid blue line it's
a dark blue and that's gross
receipts tax I'll show here in a
second most of that is also
coming from oil and gas so
really you have well over eighty
percent of your FY twenty three
growth coming from that industry
in in FY twenty for that green
chunk is making up the rest of
the growth and that's coming
from it says interest here
that's investments about half or
more than half of that is that
really childhood Trust Fund so
the early childhood amendment to
the land grant permanent fund
one point two five percent so
that's not real economic growth
the other half of that green bar
is coming from investments made
by the state treasurer's office
which can be very volatile in
response to interest rate
changes by the federal reserve
so again another eighty percent
of growth in FY twenty four
coming from very volatile
sources and that's just a word
of caution from your costs.
If you'll turn to.
see here I'll skip over to page
six.
Of this brief.
You can see the the gross
receipts tax growth in twenty
three over twenty two and you
can see it's very broad based
but certainly the majority of
the growth is coming from mining
oil and gas and the two pie
charts on the left here showed
the growth the estimated growth
in gross receipts tax by county
and two thirds of the growth is
coming from Eddy and Lea
counties in FY twenty three and
almost three quarters in FY
twenty four so that just goes to
that point that gross receipts
taxes very ball tile and also
relying on the industry.
if you'll turn to page seven
just briefly these are the five
year average mechanisms that
have helped you all insulate the
general fund from oil and gas
flexibility those are starting
to shrink in their efficacy as
those averages go up the five
year average protection shrinks
over time so we're getting to a
point where we expect those will
no longer be useful in in
stabilizing the general fund
here shortly I just wanna make
that point I think lastly here
well maybe second the last on
this one I want to point out on
page nine.
On page nine there's a chart at
the top showing general fund
reversions and this just shows
the the real really dramatic
increase in FY twenty twos
reversion so these are
appropriations made to agencies
if they're unable to spend them
they revert to the general fund
in most cases and we saw a large
increase in twenty two some of
that is from our but but about
two hundred seventy million is
on related to federal funds so
this is something that we are
watching closely because it
seems that agencies maybe
struggle to ramp up spending in
twenty two commensurate with the
appropriation growth so that's
something to know.
And lastly if you could turn to
page.
The the fourteen the long term
outlook that we did for the LFC
and for rest step in June and in
October the top chart on the
left here shows our long term
outlook for oil and gas related
revenues you can see we expected
peak here at by about FY twenty
eight and then plateau for
several years before coming back
down in the long term and that
will become and a drag on the
general fund revenues.
And with that Mr chair I'd like
to point you really quickly to
the other money matters hand out
the much that one that says
general fund revenue tracking.
And this report is something
that all of our agencies do
monthly and in between these
quarterly revenue estimates that
we update you all we're tracking
those revenues monthly and so
this is something that you can
find on our website we're happy
to provide you individually so
that you can keep an idea of
where we might be headed for the
next revenue estimate our
revenues coming up for the
coming down.
So I'd really like to point to
page three.
For.
Secretary Schardin Clarke
mention this in in her
statements that are production
for both oil and gas is
exceeding our expectations so
the graph here at the top those
solid blue lines show where we
expect they would be you can see
at the right side of those
graphs the exceeded our
expectations already in the
first half of this year and then
prices is there at the bottom as
secretary Schardin Clarke
mention this just visualizing
for you all natural gas prices
have come down substantially
from where we thought they would
be in December so that's you
know directionally telling you
all that revenues related to
that source are likely to stick
to decline to a lesser extent
oil and then of course there's
some offsetting between
production gains and price
declines.
And lastly this page right here
it's the monthly revenue
tracking if you.
You if you're interested it
breaks out revenue line by line
and then on the far right column
it shows you the dollar
difference from the estimate so
you can see if we're beating
expectations with your TV or
personal income tax and then the
bottom lines are in pink there
and so that's really the
takeaway here where the little
less than one percent above
where we thought we would be
from the December estimate so
revenues tracking about maybe a
little strong the tracking about
where we thought we'd be in
December.
That Mr chair I think we're
ready for questions.
Question from committee members.
Thank you Mr chair with maybe a
question for secretary designate
props or anyone and I'm just
looking for the chart is one of
the first chart he presented
there was an aspect that said
that the estimate did not
include gross receipts tax
increases in Eddy and Lea
County.
And I just didn't know.
Surprised me a little bit
because most of this increase is
coming from and the only County.
Right to the page thirty two.
Chairman Alan.
Photo responding.
Mr Chairman Senator Steinborn so
I believe you're referring to
the table on the executive
presentation slides thirty three
and those two footnotes there
what those sixty six and sixty
eight percent are telling you
are if you look at the table
above the eleven point four
percent growth in FY twenty
three over twenty two and the
eleven point three percent of
growth in FY twenty for over
twenty three sixty six and sixty
eight percent respectively of
those gross are being driven by
direct oil and gas revenues
those would be slightly higher
if we included the Associated G.
R. T. from and in Lee County.
So the the the growth rates are
just tracking those percentages
are just tracking direct oil and
gas revenue contribution to this
growth rates.
Thank you Mr so it's a little
but we have a substantial gross
receipts tax increases from
those counties as well right.
So yes Mr Chairman yes.
So but the oil and gas increase
also controls counties doesn't.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn yes the majority of
oil and gas production is coming
from and in the county.
So Mr I mean that that little
copyright is a little confusing
maybe it shouldn't even be here
because the oil and gas increase
comes from Lee County at the Lee
County and then of course was in
gross receipts tax so it's just
kind of giving the impression
that this increases and tied to
those counties and it is I am I
wrong in that so I.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn so the the the overall
general fund recurring growth.
Includes general sales which is
that first row and that would
incorporate
G. R. T. growth rates from and
into the the
the footnotes are just meant to
stipulate how much direct oil
and gas has contributed to those
growth rates eleven point four
eleven point three percent.
Thank you thanks Mr.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
good afternoon to everyone
cabinet secretaries in our staff
and of course here your staff to
let me today thank you for your
work I I do have one minor
question perhaps maybe do
secretary probes tear on your
presentation and I guess I was
just thinking that oil and gas
revenues were we really could
account for just say forty five
percent come into the general
fund would come from the oil and
gas revenues but this here is
sixty six percent the share of
the revenues on page thirty
three US secretary Probst thank
you for for accepting the the
position at TFA a lot of work
but there's on page thirty three
it says that the forecast for
the fiscal year twenty three is
that sixty six in that forecast
paperwork is that sixty six
percent of recurring general
fund is actually from the oil
and gas industry and so then I
look at twenty four which is
what we're working on now and
that's gonna be Sixtyeight
percent then you look at the
chart on thirty three which is
where we are and there's a in
twenty five is it really going
to drop it is that the
prediction now because we're
looking at total grand total
revenue in twenty four it was
twelve percent percentage change
and now in twenty five would be
eight point one I'm reading it
correctly or is it something
different here thank you Mr
chairman Senator Rodriguez and
may be able to help on page
thirty three the the footnotes
about the sixty six and sixty
eight percent increase that is
basically saying that in for
example in FY twenty three and
twenty four sixty six percent of
the increase to the revenue
forecast is attributable to
direct oil and gas not that
sixty eight percent of all the
revenue is directly attributable
to oil and gas so of the upward
revision to the forecast.
Two thirds of it is due to
direct activity in oil and gas
and another third is due to
broad based things and the L. G.
P. F. constitutional amendment.
And then to question about FY
twenty five
so basically this is year over
year growth in revenues in the
general fund so for FY twenty
three grand total revenue sorry
let me focus on recurring
revenue is is supposed to grow
by eleven point four percent
another year of strong growth in
FY twenty four of eleven point
three percent and then FY twenty
five it's still going to grow
but by a lesser amount of eight
point one percent yes thank you
thank you Mr chairman that you
know Stephanie and thank you for
that but I see the the four
point difference in percentage
that seems to be pretty high I
mean every gonna drop that much
or is it maybe not as much as I
think in dollars but to me it is
from eleven percent or twelve
percent down to eight point one
in one year Mr JP thank you Mr
chairman and senator at Regus I
would say historically eight
point one percent is still very
strong growth historically we
would probably find that general
fund revenues growing more like
maybe four percent per year so
it's still very strong
reflecting mostly activity in
oil and natural gas revenues.
Thank you for that explanation
one more point Mr chairman is
and Stephanie thank you for
responding to this but since
this has to do more with the
forecast that we're looking at
and that's for the sixty eight
percent would come in you know
it's it is the fact that we use
forecast as we all know to
determine what we're going to
have in the budget to be able to
allocate and so
it seems to me that we may have
to likely take this number for
what it is and Sixtyeight
percent if it's part of the
forecast enemies that's what
we're going to use assets is
signing up the source to
allocate the the budget in so.
In my mind I'm thinking are we
really Sixtyeight percent of
revenues because they're going
to come from oil and gas in the
projected forecasts and so
that's a lot that's a high
percentage you know and I'm sure
the numbers are correct from
what you're what you're doing so
now that I appreciate you but I
guess I just thought wow it's
it's higher than what we thought
in the past yes my maybe thank
you and Mr chair and Senator
Rodriguez on the LFC brief the
bank one on page twenty one this
might be what you're thinking
about as well this is the
reliance the total reliance of
revenue on the oil and gas
industry and you're right it is
that we're estimating about
forty percent forty percent so
that we the reliance yes ma'am
this is the forecast in this is
the what we are talking about
with the sixty six and sixty
eight is only of the growth so
only of the growth year over
year is related to oil and gas
that makes sense is there some
of the growth from what we have
now versus the growth I get it I
thought it was from the whole
thing that was in the spring
okay no worries thank you I I I
understand what you're saying
appreciate it that's all I have
Mister chairman thank you
Senator Woods Senator so in in
center.
So Mister chair.
Sixty six and sixty eight
percent is rebuilt the
changeover.
Year after year.
So.
These and all that other good
stuff we talk but once in
awhile.
I am really concerned you you're
not talking much and maybe you
are and and not come in late to
the ball game and I apologize
Mr chair
but are you also allowing for
some some losses in gross
receipts due to a recession in
this Mr chairman and senator
with if I may part of the slides
that I skipped over in the
interest of time at the
beginning
Primarily slide for talks about
what the baseline forecast
anticipates in regard to
recession and we're in a unique
position where we have these two
major US forecasting services
moody's and IHS Markit and
they're split on that at the
time this estimate was made
moody's was not anticipating a
US recession but I. H. S. Markit
was anticipating a mild and
short recession and so the
estimate is a blend of those two
things but certainly a US
recession is a downside risk to
forecasts would be kept in mind
for reserve sizing and and
decisions sure we're going to
split down the middle man
correct and and the economist in
the group looked Mr chairman and
senator was that both of those
data sources and work both of
them together into the modeling
for this point estimate.
Okay but.
We've got to get some work okay.
Thank you Mr everybody thank you
Mr chairman thanks for the
presentation Mr Torrez on page
one of your money matters
speaker I think you said that
the
The money coming from the land
grant permanent fund is going to
wind up going into the what's it
for the for the interest call.
Why was it categorize their and
not.
Maybe in the severance area why
was that decision made to put it
there.
Mister chairman Senator Padilla
all of our our investment
accounts the land grant
permanent fund the severance tax
permit funding the state
treasures investments are
categories categorized as
investment earnings or interest
earnings and so because it's
coming from the land grant
permanent fund that's how it got
lumped into that bucket and Mr
chairman we is this legislation
needed to move it to ECECD for
utilization or is it
because I know that there's
there's a this there's a piece
legislation that's calling for
appropriating it wouldn't just
simply the way the legislation
was passed the way the voters
approved it the way the Congress
you know allowed or whatever
with our authorization whatever
why isn't it just wrecked the to
that area why do we have to
appropriated.
And Mr chair Senator buddy I'm
sure DFA will have a of
perspective on this as well from
the LESC perspective I think
it's that the funding mechanisms
that currently exist only really
operate in that you know
structure for public schools and
so this adding a new beneficiary
sort of creates a new wrinkle
that requires some ironing out
with legislation and we've
certainly heard from the state
investment council as well that
they would like that guidance as
well since this is sort of a new
thing that's happening there
isn't a set path for it to flow
to without some sort of
legislation that could provide
guidance.
Thank you Mr chairman Danny
others want to comment or stress
test coming I just want to add
to that this bill recommended by
LFC has more to do with the
accounting for the money the
report it is given to kind of.
Go right to that area of those
account for when you see in the
future revel Reports this bill
will help and I can Mr chairman
will those revenues or that
those dollars go into the trust
fund or will they go directly
for actual operating every year
so we'll just have to be done
every year Mr chair.
Mister chairman Senator by the
it I believe as soon as the
statutes that don't have to
revisit that every year just
checking on that and then on the
Mr chairman and I think it's
also Mr Curtis on the job.
For that so I can see a fourteen
footer the lights appear that be
great
So in the pool or expected.
That's what it's been laid out
there I guess today
so on the left hand side you
reference these two charts here
and we see significant drop off
in about the thirty two time
frame.
Just curious I mean we we keep
saying this you know we I
thought it was going to be at
that you're gonna St something
more like twenty seven or twenty
eight what causes you to to tell
us that in such a dramatic drop
off there what what what are you
using to make those decisions
there Mister chairman Senator
buddy that's an excellent
question we did a full hearing
you know morning on this during
the summer there during the
interim and we use a lot of
sources we use Rystad energy
which is an energy analytics
firm used by a lot of the
industry we use moody's we use a
firm called I. H. S. Markit so
they all have different forecast
that potentially could have the
oil peak starting in FY twenty
eight to FY thirty two so we we
take basically the average of
these forecast develop this kind
of forecast that we were showing
for you here we're also looking
at their price expectations as
well converting that into a
revenue and that's what's what's
from here.
Yes yes Mr chair and David
reminded me or or director Avid
reminded me that because of
fracking the way that these the
production curve on these wells
within the first three months
they're producing a peak and
they declined very quickly so
with a decline in drilling you
can quickly see your production
fall thank you however turn the
light on I really appreciate it
thank you
thank you for that answer
because I I I've sort of seen it
all over the place I'm trying to
figure out like that is a very
dramatic obviously so so Mr
Chairman you know work will
careening at what we know is
there we we're just headed this
ninety miles an hour about how
fast I try chairman drives like
fifty I don't know
So we're here to get this thing
that we see this consensus
revenue summary here is that we
have we've put a couple of
things in place over the last
decade to fill those gaps I mean
would you truly predict is going
to have are we do are we in a
position to fill these gaps on
current the current pace of
spending is what I'm the most
worried about because then all
of a sudden we're gonna have to
go into some really meatball
surgery if you will when things
really drop out from under us
but did are the protections are
in place going to fill the gaps
that we know we're heading
toward right now.
Mr chair and etcetera but yeah
if I could get you to turn to
slide thirteen a page thirteen
one one further back and a
director Avid want to follow up
on this as well this is been a
large part of the LFC
recommendation about how do we
turn now money into future money
and it's it's sort of the result
of this analysis that you see at
the bottom of the page here and
this is your recurring revenues
minus your recurring
appropriations and based on that
outlook and so this was done
back in June so of course
spending would be higher given
the latest you know blueprints
that have been put out but you
do see in the outer years maybe
a shortage of money get based on
the revenue outlook and the
spending outlook so you know how
to looking for ideas on how to
turn some of this excess this
windfall revenue now into money
later is is certainly a good
idea and and then Mr chairman
and I'll just be my last one I
think
we we did a few things over the
past decade like the the rainy
day fund representative for the
label senator Levin yeah I got a
few other things one of those I
mean are those position to do
even better for us down the road
or we can continue to see what
they do for us today and it just
seems like do we need to be
doing significantly more to fill
what we know is going to be a
giant boulder in front of us.
Mr chair Senator the I think
secretary Schardin Clarke wants
to win but out of both just
quickly say that the the.
We need a fund is more of a one
to two to three year tip it's
it's to cover here in general
fund in the case of a short term
deficit not a long term but
things like the early childhood
Trust Fund certainly would be
helping towards you know moving
that boulder as you said because
they would provide perpetual
distributions and on that page
fourteen as well there is
another scenario that we looked
at where we you know.
Held.
The oil and gas revenues in the
general fund FY twenty five
levels you invest the excess in
the severance tax permanent fund
and all of a sudden you have a
graph that looks like the one on
the bottom here where you turn
revenues into perpetual revenue
sustainable growth going into
the future.
Madam secretary thank you Mr
chairman thank you Senator
Padilla
just to add to it it's math said
I agree with everything he said
what hasn't come up is just the
importance of setting reserves
at a prudent level
other states can get by with ten
or maybe fifteen percent
reserves but due to our reliance
on this volatile energy related
revenue
you know I've I believe DFA in
our last presentation mentioned
executive targeting at thirty
five percent reserve and I think
that's fairly well in line with
the LFC budget recommendation
and the stress test really has
the purpose of illustrating why
it's necessary to target such a
high level of reserves and the
warning I think that the
consensus revenue estimating
group is is giving through these
charts that show you know every
year out of five years that we
continue this unprecedented
historic boom in oil production
and price those five year market
averages protect us less and
less and so they've been very
effective for building the rainy
day fund building the early
childhood trust fund and that's
wonderful but unless there's a
statutory change to continue to
protect and every year that goes
by and then finally will be at
five years of boom production
this five year average is no
longer take the windfall revenue
off the top anymore and then
we're back to relying upon
reserves like we did before
those were in place.
Thank you Mr chairman so so
again on the reserves though
that's a current year and next
year so that's a short term
health
but just just to cure it so on
the the early learning in the
early childhood Trust Fund I
mean is it doing anything that
we didn't expect it to do I mean
we're expecting it to grow we're
expecting it to continue to
protect the money's going to
find this part of our state
government services that we
offer is it is it doing
something that it's not expected
to do.
Yeah.
Well that's why and that's why
I'm that's exactly why I asked
the question big Mr chairman
because I don't think that fund
is doing anything that we don't
didn't design it to do so I
don't know why we're wanting to
go and you know put our hands in
there so thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you what is.
Mr chair.
I'm gonna try to faces question
because.
I think I know the answer but so
I'm going to try to faces
question Mr chair.
Now when we talk about.
Forecast revenues.
We're talking about future
money's coming in.
And then.
Were riding a budget.
On.
Future revenues so we're
appropriating money that's not
in the thank you at.
That we expect with our best
guess that we're going to have.
So if we say did something like
appropriate a hundred percent of
our expected revenues.
Our bank account must not be
able to stand that if revenues
don't come here and get close to
what I think and talking about
Mr chair.
I'm not gonna answer that
question.
All of them answer that
question.
Mr chair Senator Woods I think
we're all nodding in agreement
maybe that copy out being that
reserves would be there in the
case that and.
And that's probably the best
case scenario for not
appropriating a hundred percent
of our best guess.
Because we could be off thirty
percent.
And the state treasurer.
Would no longer be able to
write.
To cover our warrants that we
give.
And that is a legal close we say
that we have we can't spend
money we don't have we can't
manufacture money.
Mr chair at thank that close to
get wrecked.
Center if you remember a couple
years back in the prior
administration we actually
couldn't cover awards in the
state treasurer should stop
issuing warrants or checks but
he chose not to even though
her bank account to run in the
negative so that's that's an
older cautionary tale may I ask
you guys one question.
In in all of you've done this
chart or not.
In the next couple years how
much more reliant having become
an oil and gas per year.
And I'm looking that PED
secretary right behind you
because.
I want to get guests like is the
you know currently or what forty
three years.
Getting close supporting Mr
chair.
Senator I and oil and gas in a
three year scenario we come from
thirty eight to forty in and
we're gonna come in the next two
years sixty six percent of this
increase so roughly one point
nine billion dollars came from
oil and gas no other whether
other resources we had to rely
on the increases on the other
side so we'd be only spending.
One point two million dollars I
think in point one roughly thank
about three point five so one
point six and and so the only
spending one point six billion
dollars that's where the state
sustainability is.
Right so how much more reliant.
In percentages every we come on
oil and gas over the last.
Years and into the into the
forecast to twenty five.
Mr chair I'll point you to page
twenty one and this is the chart
but I think you're looking for.
And.
And it's the chart at the bottom
of the page and you can see from
twenty two you might have been
around twenty eight percent and
to twenty four you're getting
close to forty so maybe twelve
percent more line and I will
point out the dotted red line
shows how reliant the general
fund would be if without the
five year average is and you
would have actually hit the
fifty percent mark in twenty
three if if those in existence
in a secretary Schardin Clarke
mentioned those are going away
so over time those those lines
will converge and you'll you
know if we put this past twenty
four you probably be getting
closer to fifty percent.
And so before we come there next
revenue forecast I want this
chart.
With that percentage in fact for
future the right take your eight
percent increase over and over
time right forty three percent
eight are forty percent of the
of the percentages four three
point seven.
And so that that's what the more
increase Alliance on guests from
that's a scary scenario and in
New Mexico is how we realized we
are from one industry.
It's scary because when cuts
come.
Senator Steinborn is here and
incentives all this incident
Rodriguez and the.
Hello Center was here and on
line.
Ten I mean those are Laos those
are.
No pay ladies work with no pay
their.
And not fun.
No that's not my goal my goal is
to set the state up so we don't
have to deal that whether we
take more money right now.
Now money for future money is
the best thing that the scenario
that we could ever do have LFC
rectus putting a billion dollars
in the from the fund.
What's now money in the future
money but we're impatient in New
Mexico and a lot of people have
little other planes that doesn't
really help set New Mexico for
its future.
Let me let me ask you one thing
how much you know how much
reliance in and how much to put
in the forecast like on
electrical yes be able change
overs and and that are you are
you putting me that new
technology that's reducing the
workforce right working from
home produce workforce.
More lexical vehicles and gas
powered vehicles I mean that is
a big push class yes including
the forecasts are you putting
that in some way.
Mr chair yes the short answer is
yes we look at electric vehicle
sales or or really DO T. helps
us look at electric vehicle
sales especially when it comes
to things like the gas tax
forecast the the road fund
forecast we we are taking that
into account I would say more
long term though it's how does
the energy transition at large
change the demand for oil
globally and that's more of that
long term forecast showing the
the peak in the decline of oil.
Other countries are using all
right now so they're dependent
on our own to change I think is
a major ninety percent of New
Mexico or more oil is exported
it's not used for consumption in
the US correct Mr chair the the
outlook for oil demand peaks
much sooner in the US and in New
Mexico than it does for other
countries I think that's the
point that staff and and so
their demand in other countries
we always remain high in if we
have the.
Mr chair you know I another
thing just to to keep in mind
one when it comes to the road
fund forecast and gas tax and
all of those vehicle related the
other thing that we don't talk
about as much is just the
increase and general fuel
efficiency of cars over time in
those probably have a that has a
bigger impact on road fund
revenues and and gas consumption
in New Mexico than to do
electric vehicles at the level
they're being driven now.
The you know it another thing to
just reflecting on you know I I
started as an and comments in
the consensus revenue estimating
group I think nineteen years ago
and it was we were only thinking
about when oil oil reserves be
tapped out and of course we're
incredibly wrong about that with
the
introduction of all the
discoveries that have been made
since and in the Permian basin
but now we have to think both
about production declines as a
result of geology and and what's
in the ground as well as
reducing demand you know by
adoption of other climate change
strategies and things like that
so there's both the supplies run
out and the demand right now but
your point I think you're right
that other countries will
continue to demand for oil as a
fuel longer than we might.
Mr chair director Avid was just
pointing out to me that we have
electric vehicle sales happening
on tribal land and they are
exempt from motor vehicle excise
tax so what should be a goals
may not contribute from from
those sources to the road fund.
Yeah we know they don't I think
center Thomas trying to compel.
I mean the the the problem is
you know you and and god blesses
Senator Smith right he rode the
roller coaster near the Taylor
but yes or no and was good or
bad right.
We ought to be smart enough to
figure out how to level this off
and so we don't have to tell
anybody know that we create
stability across the board.
Right.
So we can do what every member
lives in a different area right
so we can try to do some good in
every single area and this is
our opportunity and then and
then I'm sorry Mrs but if we're
gonna pass it away.
Then it's going to be our fault.
When it comes to making cuts if
you want to go in there and you
want to increase whoever's
budget by a billion dollars or
five hundred million and we get
no return on investment New
Mexico.
We've we've done ourselves a
disservice and this is one time
that I don't know how
opportunity only knocks very few
times right and you their bold
and brave enough to take it for
you run and hide and you let it
go by and and and I think this
committee right.
Should be bold enough to take in
and do and and maybe make some
hard decisions for the future
but for now you know but for the
future.
Because.
So those of us who are here when
you go back home in and I
remember this very distinctly my
wife is a teacher and they were
talking about lay offs in they
had work certain days with no
pay and everything else.
We're scared.
The state I think can't afford
what I have right now I can but
if you take days away from me
and I still have to go to work I
can go find other jobs the place
in income.
Then.
It got tough and got tough for a
lot of people and we don't need
to do that anymore we need to be
the state the city no no to
everything but we can figure out
something we work in the future
so.
When you come back to the
revenue forecast one thing I do
want to do with is I understand
stress testing very well but a
lot of people have a confusion
with the financial markets right
you know if this happens a
market thank you give me a high
medium and low in and what it
looks like you have.
Natural gas continues its two
seventy nine today that's what
I'm looking at my phone you know
it's up but it's one of those
it's can give all too involved
to so one of the prime sectors
that we're gonna see right in it
recession because the European
markets changing all that
natural gas is going the
European market of the Chinese
market in so.
All the key factors I think we
can do a better the way we
figured out if we separate
himself I think that's going to
be key as we move forward in in
specially working background
February what for for a revenue
new revenue forecast.
On the Thames aren't it's around
the twelfth.
So that that's gonna be key key
is revenue forecast right
they're probably gonna held at.
G. R. T. everything's up but
when you're relying on on two
counties in the entire state
right to bring you forty percent
of your budget and they may have
the largest increase sixty six
percent to sixty percent
increase in a one year.
of the budget is just.
That's pretty amazing but it's
also an opportunity so.
Real quick this is a common Mr
chairman and.
I think it was set up.
LFC earlier this month last
month yes in the same chart if
this chart right here continues
and thirty two we cross the line
a budget we won't have the money
from oil and gas and it's not
coming back the line was
designed to come back up like
has a past its down it will
never come back if we're not
smart enough as the chairman is
said to put a billion or billion
billion and a half away to shore
up those
needs that we will have not just
in the next few years one in ten
years or twenty years we do that
if we don't put it in there now
to start generating an interest
to have the money to build this
budget would take budget that'll
probably be by that time almost
twice the size and will have to
cut every agency will have to
cut jobs I mean this state would
will be in dire straits I can't.
Express the alarm enough for
this committee this legislation
this year to do something
significant with these what this
overage and make it pay for some
long run New Mexicans deserve
that.
And if we're not smart enough to
do that folks we should be here.
This Mr Chairman there's more
thank you Mr I'm gonna just pick
up where you where you all are
going can ask a question or two
Mr chairman so and I know that
the LFC has proposals put a
billion dollars into the
permanent fund so along these
lines to you all when we look at
the need for replacement revenue
from oil and gas going down.
it sounds like I mean we we talk
about diversification and we
have hopes and dreams about how
we can do that three things that
are.
That we that are guaranteed it
sounds like the permanent fund
revenue maybe the closest thing
to guaranteed replacement income
opportunity that we have.
Is that a fair statement.
Mr chairman and senator
Steinborn I can start with that
question and I I agree with you
that you know the way that this
was structure the way it's
supposed to work is that
gradually over enough decades as
oil and gas revenues decline
interest earnings increase to
take their place and so for that
to happen the corpus has to
build of the land grant in the
severance tax permanent fund and
you have I I agree with you.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I
would maybe cop I I would agree
with you and and add to that
that the current balances are
likely not enough to overcome
the declining revenues you'd
you'd have to make additional
distributions likely in order to
to get that benefit so with that
being said Mr chairman I agree
with everything my colleague
here is that I mean and what you
said I think for us we don't
talk enough about this and it
would probably be real helpful
to see a chart in a scenario
that says if you put this amount
of money over the next five
years here's how we will then
save off that cliff in be able
to use that to sustainably fund
state government because we very
well will be in that situation
we may or may not have other
economic sectors that are
replacing that revenue
collectively no one industry
going to do it
and everything else we're doing
as a state to sue so important I
mean dealing with poverty and
you know everything is super
crucial to this to helping with
this left so I'm because I agree
I mean this is this is the
opportunity and we have one
opportunity to get it right like
you said Mr chairman we squander
the money if that option goes
away and so
I would love to see more
scenarios on how much would be
needed how much revenue that
would spin off that way we could
organize around those goals
rather than look at it like.
You know we're not spending and
I'm only all kinds emeritus to
the bank legislators don't
really understand.
I don't understand it so that
the my request Mr thank you I
think we have a chart where the
billion dollars putting in the
and the pages David.
That would cover your
presentation.
That gentleman and to your
question.
A million dollars in in three
years on average of six seven
percent returns gives us five
hundred million annually in your
claim that's a big chunks of
thank you guys for your
presentation.
We know iron my clothes for
Wednesday.
Your anybody's coming from
Gallup or make sure they bring
is Popeye's chicken.
Is a are you in this.
Mr chairman and interest of time
ago.
I'm very pleased to present the
executive budget recommendations
to you this afternoon like with
the last presentation I don't
think I need to spend a lot of
time on administrative fee for
lot about it and you will be
spending a lot of time as a
committee on HSD budgets and
executive budget recommendations
over the next twenty to thirty
days or so
but I am very pleased to present
to you today
with my friend and colleague Mr
Abbey will present the LFC a
recommendation.
As you know Mister chairman I've
been on this job for a grand
total of twenty one days so
there's a lot that I don't know
as I said to.
House provisions of finance the
other day sitting next to Mr
Abbey to get the encyclopedia
Britannica with them and you get
the cliff notes with me so
anything that I can't answer
today Mr chairman members of the
committee we will certainly get
you answers to.
And I also have as you know.
This group of talented analysts
that work on our state in your
state budget division at the FAA
some of them are here today some
of them are covering other
committees but they will also
help me in any areas where I'm
not able to to
You thank you can you pull that
might be a little bit closer
they're saying they can't hear
you.
Well
there on the web at that
question.
One day they can see as the next
day they get here so Mr chairman
you have a presentation for our
we'll get our arms.
Our point presentation was
little before tennis.
As we've been discussing for a
last half hour so Mister
chairman this year.
Presented executive and the
legislature with a historic
opportunity for change in New
Mexico.
By providing strategic and
meaningful investments in
programs and initiatives that
help people across the state.
but also to take into account
the many concerns that were put
that pin expressed by committee
members to make sure that we are
spending the the money that we
have wisely and to the extent we
can preparing for future on some
of that money may not be
available.
Current spending Mr chairman.
the executive budget includes a
reserve target as I mentioned of
nearly thirty five percent from
the previous target of thirty
percent.
There is we do recommend an
increase in spending of
approximately twelve percent
eleven point nine percent which
is nine point four billion.
I think Mr Abbey will confirm
that that.
Recurring spending
recommendation from the
executive is not far off from
what the LFC is also
recommending I think the
difference is less than the
forty million dollars.
FY twenty two total general fund
ending reserve balances for
thirty three point two billion
as you know or forty three point
three percent of recurring
appropriation.
Going on to the high level of
for the executive budget of
executive budget has.
K. through twelve education at
three point nine billion higher
education at one point two and
I'm not going to go through all
these are you you can read as
well of the public safety at
five hundred twenty four million
and
Judicial at three three hundred
eighty two point one million
dollars.
For K. twelve early childhood
education
some highlights there.
Extend in class learning
executive budget includes two
hundred twenty point one
dollars.
Additional teacher planning
collaboration time forty one
million.
high quality daycare which
executive feels is extremely
important to to some of the
goals that we have set for
ourselves in terms of education
of a hundred and twelve point
six million and the continued
expansion of early childhood
home visiting forty point four
million.
For higher education the
executive budget includes a
hundred fifty seven point four
million dollars for opportunity
scholarships that is an increase
over the previous fiscal year it
was something that the
executive.
Budget highlights and then to
the governor and DFA feel
strongly about in terms of
taking that program the by all
measure has been very successful
and continuing to expand it and
make sure that option is
scholarships are available to
students who need them adult
basic education at eight point
seven million
special schools eleven and
eleven point the second budget
includes eleven million dollar
increase
and on to humans and health and
Human Services.
Madam chair and members of the
committee of executive budget
includes sixty seven point eight
million for Medicaid provider
reimbursement rate increases.
Of five point eight million for
school based health center
expansion.
And a new New Mexico includes a
five point five million dollars
to the settlement Mr chair
members of the committee for New
Mexico senior care giver support
program.
For public safety the executive
budget includes.
two point two million dollars to
create the first hot shot crews
in New Mexico.
includes
Two point eight million for
modernizing the law enforcement
academy and two point three
million for staff for the new
forensics lab.
Compensation Mr chairman members
the committee again the LFC and
DFA recommend recommendations
aren't too far off on this but
the
Executive recommends a four
percent increase for all state
employees as well as a four
percent increase for public
school personnel and executive
is also recommending
an appropriation of a hundred
million dollars to offset the
cost of insurance for a public
school personnel as well.
When Mr chairman we estimate
that for an individual a public
school employee that could
result in as much as ten
thousand dollars a year in
savings for that school
employee.
On nonrecurring Mr chairman we
have the second budget has two
million dollars general fund non
recurring expansion expenditures
and a hundred forty million
dollars and for our for a funds.
On the economy Mr chairman and
members the committee the
executive budget does create the
land of enchantment legacy fund
and funds at a seventy five
million dollars we do present a
proposed Mr chairman tax rebates
with the estimated the impact of
a billion dollars some water
infrastructure improvements at a
hundred twenty eight million and
local cop Economic Development
Act funding at thirty five
million but also highlight the
last when Mr chairman we know
that many members of the
committee we know that many of
the committees your communities
are eager to access some of the
that's the federal resources
that are out there but often
time lack matching funds to do
so the executive budget would
set aside a hundred million
dollars for matching funds for
federal and frustration for
structure projects.
Public safety the executive
recommends a hundred million
dollars for law enforcement
recruitment funding we know this
continues to be a challenge for
communities throughout the state
in terms of recruitment and
retention for public safety we
also include four million
dollars for law enforcement
survivor benefits and I believe
for the first time as well Mr
chairman we include the same
amount for firefighters survivor
benefits as well.
On housing.
the executive budget.
Includes a ten million dollars
to the cost connect grant
program want to highlight that
and also ten million dollars for
home ownership down payment
systems.
Health and Human Services Mr
chairman executive budget
includes investment of twenty
million dollars for the case of
a dressing or dictate any fund.
A two hundred million dollars
for the rural health care
delivery fund I priority for the
governor as well as twenty one
million twenty four twenty one
point two million for
The
Statewide food initiative.
And for K. through twelve
education additional fifty
million dollars for extended
learning opportunities and
executive budget community
school initiatives let me point
five million and an educator
fellows program at sixteen point
nine million.
And I believe Mr Chairman
finishing up with higher
education members the committee
the executive budget includes no
thirty two point five million
dollar endowment for the school
of medicine facility at UNM as
well as a seven point five
million dollars appropriation to
the Burrell College of
osteopathic medicine for
outreach minority students
services and to assist with
financing is an expanding
graduate Medicaid medical
education programs Mr Chairman
those are the highlights of the
executive budget recommended
recommendation again a little
over nine million dollars and
recurring expenditures with the
thirty five percent of projected
a reserve and happy to answer
questions Mr Chairman.
Thank you Mr Chairman said.
I'm glad you have our budget
documents LFC is recommendations
in front of you I think in the
coming weeks you'll find staff
presenting on the budgets and
you'll find reason to get in
these documents again again
especially the appendix which is
right for it.
Volume one.
Is the
Summary of state policy issues I
I would recommend if if you have
time on a weekend trying to read
this if you have time to hundred
fifty pages of reading.
Public education higher
education early childhood
assessments volume two I don't
recommend you read that so.
Sliq.
The encyclopedia it's the
wikipedia of state agencies
issue here agencies you will see
some discussions in the
narrative about key
administrative and budget issues
facing the agency but it's it's
a nice reference work and then
finally following three if the
work she put in rules just for
example take a look at page four
and I slightly misunderstood the
question about what would happen
to a billion dollars invested
today in future terms and we'll
get that but here on page four I
think what Senator Padilla also
once it's if we make these
longer term investments how does
that compare to available
revenues well this only goes to
FY twenty six we need to take it
out for their we know we're
worried about oil and gas
production and a full enough in.
Five to eight years falling off
sharply.
And so will need to take that
forecast out further we had a
hearing on that and so we're
sitting in September but if this
is worth some more work this
this report is chock full of I
think what I think of important
tables.
Enrollment growth declining for
higher ed on page one fifteen
don't worry about jumping around
but balances of.
Of of all the funds in the
treasury that you'll find handy
from time to time of square feet
per student for Iran as they
come in and ask for more
buildings how many do they have
what's their condition so chock
full of important stuff.
On the back page of this handout
we have.
we lost it no.
A little bit of an order of
protection orders page eighteen.
And this is our analyst list
with their phone numbers and
what responsibilities they have
and it's almost as good as
having vine three with all the
table so if you'll get a live
operator to explain you need to.
Senator Williams introduced the
LESC version of the General
Appropration Act you on the
house side that will also be
introduced by Representative
Dixon you have the governor's
abbreviated budget
recommendations it'll be house
bill two individually so the of
having the LFC bill as it has
all the language and all the
details and all the performance
measures you gonna wanna look at
the by the way also employee one
I didn't mention you have a
report cards for key agencies I
think almost necessarily for you
for your volunteer legislature
you need to think about your
budget development process is
sort of an incremental budgeting
process of look at the executive
recollect at the LFC reckon try
to reconcile the differences.
And that's how consensus is
typically a forms formed but
along the way don't lose sight
of the fact this government
working we is it accomplishing
the things that we wanted to
just picked my mic.
Many.
Program page one eighteen the
value of the slim document.
This the Medicaid budget in here
under home visiting.
Only have.
How New Mexicans on Medicaid
eighty percent of the babies or
on Medicaid were born only half
of them are getting a well baby
visit on time we're paying for
it we're not getting what we pay
for so the very important to
keep attentive to this
performance status you go along
even though necessarily you
gonna look at these differences.
No there's a memo from our
staff.
We maybe you can give secretary
Propst another copy there's he
had one before.
And I I don't think I'll go
through the text but let's start
on page five.
This is a combining statement of
sources and uses it combines the
revenues and spending from the
general fund and then shows the
reserve position.
So here's the big picture.
Hundred thousand foot view of
the differences between the
executive and LFC recommendation
one seven.
Recurring.
The executive.
This.
Preliminary comparison.
Thank you.
Senator Wirth.
One seven.
LFC set aside one minute one
million dollars for tax
recurring tax changes executive
at five hundred million however
if you look at one forty one.
The executive had a billion of
rebates.
And LFC has sort of a companion
amount of five hundred L.
million LOC did not make
specific tax change
recommendations that's that was
more the is the duty of the
taxation revenue committee and
Senate finance and former Senate
ways and means committee some of
the things about talked about on
tax changes you'll hear a lot
about our lowering the gross
receipts tax anti pyramid in.
Making the personal income tax
more progressive at the lower
income ranges were working and
middle class folks are.
And maybe even a some more money
for the road fund that's
recurring change year after year
in recent years we've just
supplemented with nonrecurring
revenue so those the tax change
some of the big items but course
you look at many others.
Secretary of Propst already
mentioned on recurring LESC line
thirteen are only forty million
dollars different that that's
good news that means you don't
have to slog through the details
of many of the smaller agencies
to the extent your you think one
or other of the recommendations
as in the ballpark forty million
is less than a half percent
spending that's pretty good news
that the totals that close.
More challenging is the
nonrecurring online thirty three
what we call specials and
supplementals the back of the
bill most of the General
Appropration Act is recurring
appropriations for agencies and
section four from page five to
page two hundred or so.
One ninety but beginning in the
back of the bill sections five
and six are the.
Operation from non recurring
general fund revenues and effect
coming out of reserves the
executive has recommendations
the total two point two billion
a little bit more in the LESC of
one point two billion so the
executive is more than a billion
dollars higher no recurring
appropriations so non recurring
recurring pretty close
nonrecurring quite a bit
different and so in ordinary
here when there isn't a lot of
revenue then a lot of excess
reserves special appropriations
could be in the range of fifty
to a hundred billion hundred
million fifty million two
hundred million and this year
they're one billion to two
billion.
So I I know of from the
leadership of both committees
there's a recognition it is very
important to spend more time
looking at those nonrecurring
differences than usual and when
you see the different sheets
that hello seen DFA staff
prepared we bring your committee
for the first time will show the
special appropriation
differences in the back of those
packets age you hear from
agencies then we go on one
thirty five we have capital.
The executive said set aside a
billion that's the two fifty in
the seven to fifty in line
thirty five LFC has six hundred
and fifty million for capital in
eight thirty five and thirty
six.
Certainly there.
You are waiting hopefully not
very long to get the executive
capital outlay recommendations I
can I know it is going to be
very hard for members to make
decisions about special
appropriations.
From nonrecurring general fund
without knowing what the capitol
menu looks like you've got the
LFC recommendation you're you're
gonna want to see the executive
recommendation as soon as
possible.
By the way on Capitol.
It is nice that both the
executive and the LESC didn't
recommend capital outlay
appropriations from severance
tax bonds with the exception of
the year marks and that's nice
because it is exaction exactly
actualizing this claim up how do
we make no money future money.
That's hundreds of millions of
money that will be borrowed and
we won't be paying debt service
and instead those things that
one of going to debt service
we'll go to the severance tax
permanent fund.
And produce future revenue
gradually over time according to
the funding formula for the
severance tax permanent fund so.
And by the way I think about the
challenge of.
Dealing with the volatility of
oil and gas not is just one
thing but a full menu we talk
about a toolbox of budgeteers to
help balance things and that's
adequate reserves adequate
diversified revenue sources
sources which we don't have.
Forty to fifty forty percent of
our revenues are from one very
volatile industry so it's a good
thing we haven't but in terms of
a goal of having diversified
revenues we don't have it so you
know other tools haven't tax
stabilization mechanism so.
let's see going on the LFC
recommended in line thirty nine
assume you know sort of
mentioned a billion dollars to
the severance tax permanent fund
for the for the theme of making
no money future money and
finally taking the took twenty
tobacco permanent fund out of
the General Fund center Hickey
introduce that bill either today
or Thursday that's three hundred
and thirty three million let us.
It's it's a more honest
accounting of where we're at if
if the phone has the name
permanent fund on it it's not
great to have a permanent fund
used for general fund liquidity
in case we have a fiscal crisis
it it's hard to view that as a
source of drawing down of
spending when we can't pay our
bills so that's a little better
counting it also allowed the
tobacco permanent fund to be
perhaps invested to generate
higher returns in the future by
putting more into stocks rather
than fix fixed incomes of lower
rate of return.
So the LFC has reserves of
thirty percent the executive we
show about thirty three percent.
Next page is.
Section for recurring
differences between executive
and the LESC not just public
schools.
If you take one forty seven
which is for schools that
reasonably could belong in line
eleven with public at so
throwing that in there the
difference is only sixty million
public schools not terribly far
apart higher it is the biggest
difference the opportunity
scholarship.
And that's a.
That's an recurring a hundred
and thirty million dollars in
round numbers of differences in
recurring LFC has a significant
amount of non recurring so
that's both the need to
reconcile spending and recurring
versus nonrecurring.
The the executive has
substantially more for their
food initiative in line twenty
one.
The executive has
The executive an LFC have
virtually the same number for
early childhood education when
you combine other recurring
general fund recurring the the
executive as a special request
of a hundred and thirty two
million which is almost exactly
the section for difference so
the dollars are right there are
some important differences in
how the money is used.
But anyway that that needs to be
given a lot of attention then it
some of the other differences
like Medicaid forty million
CYFD the dollar differences are
smaller when you adjust this is
general fund only so when you
adjust for other state funds or
federal funds they'll be much
closer.
So a handful of big things heavy
lifting required on your part
with HSC and all the legislature
to to find the right approach
but many other agencies not too
much think about the courts and
only three million of.
State engineer and is the.
Thank fireman I'm I'm proud to
say the LFC is actually higher
than the executive and the
environment recommendation which
after many years of members
being concerned that we didn't
we need to make a stronger
effort we've listened carefully
to that and similarly with state
engineer the LFC recommendations
higher again we you know we know
that is very important to get
into the details but at least
when the numbers are similar it
allows you to kind of think
about moving money back and
forth between some of the
different colors to achieve your
priorities.
compensation LFC is five percent
for all employees executive has
four percent the LFC also has.
Fifteen to twenty million in
individual agencies for targeted
raises for for high demand
professions high vacancy
professions like state police
nurses forensic scientist at the
lab so for.
Next you have the differences
between every single agency
which will go through and then
beginning of pages page eleven.
Eleven to fifteen this details
the special appropriations of
greater than five million the
differences there are over three
hundred request for special
appropriation they came in on
November first by law ordinarily
the budget process is to spend
have LFC I have hearings awful
on the agency requests that come
in with September first and here
on.
November first over three
hundred request came in some
came in late for large amounts
of money that we're not
accustomed to dealing with our
central ready to support for HSC
incentives to spend more time on
these there are over three
hundred but the top.
Seventy of seventy of are
greater than five million so if
you focus on these bigger ones
that's a way to kind of talks
with the small stuff look at
these bigger items and and I
don't think I need to go through
it and much detail but at the
right time you what I'm sure
you'll be spending more time on
some of the bigger special
appropriation opportunity
scholarship the hunger because
of.
A fund to provide to school all
intervention on the spin off
revenue LFC has forty million to
the water Trust Fund OFC has
about the same amount for the
tobacco funds so it's a mix of
savings and spending in multi
year spending and housing is
another one so you want to spend
more time unusual than usual on
these items.
The.
That completes my presentation
Mr chairman thank you.
Question from.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon David thanks for your
work.
Secretary Probst I just a quick
question the loop the up
programs for the homeless and
comprehensive framework that
we've been talking about for a
long time we need to provide
substance abuse behavioral
health mental health and Lincoln
to housing for example the
linkages program we understand
the with HSD for those that
don't know we understand the
governor's recommending twenty
million non recurring money but
the LFC we don't have anything
recommended we have one million
in the HSD budget which is.
Gosh I'd say about a hundred
percent increase from the
current year but it's a million
in the LFC and clearly linkages
is recurring but as the governor
did and LFC is done in other
cases sometimes if you can make
a multi year appropriations away
to take nonrecurring and convert
it to a special term purpose and
that's where you gonna need to
get into the details to figure
out the right way to do that.
Thank you for that David but I
guess what I'm trying to allude
to here is that the fact that it
is a fact that there's so much
need for recurring services to
be able to plan with
nonrecurring dollars to provide
services for these individuals
if we're going to reduce the
problems that we have it all
with homelessness and provide
that comprehensive system
doesn't happen on every
nonrecurring basis these are
needs that not only are constant
but they continue to grow and
and I just wondered if maybe
somehow we can revisit go back
in and look at this all together
to see what we can do to make it
recurring if not the full twenty
realistically if it's not the
full twenty at least a good part
of it so that we can try to
leverage this but we've got to
come up with some recurring
money for these so again there
is one million.
And and I I think this is a good
time to make a point I wished
I'd made earlier we know we have
a lot of needs in our state.
I don't what was a constant
theme in LFC last fall as we put
the recommendations together was
trying to find the right balance
between addressing needs and
being realistic about the
agency's ability to spend money.
And you'll hear as you go
forward lots of conversation
about they can see rates and
they're high they're eighteen to
twenty percent the funded
vacancy rates or about ten to
twelve percent.
And LFC recommended more funding
in many many agencies to reduce
vacancy rates but you look at
and they did the legislature did
the same thing last year but in
fact employment has only risen
about one percent in the year
and the the this is worth
thinking about a lot it's the
reason you're having these
hearings on capital outlay
because of the challenges we've
got a lot of money but we're
having challenges getting the
money out the door whether it's
supply chains for contractors to
be able to buy the materials to
do the work whether it's the
ability to hire construction
workers or whether it's the
billing to hire lawyers today
the attorney general's at H. is
is that HSC pass for sixty more
people.
When you think about we are at
full employment in New Mexico
four percent unemployment the US
economy is at full employment
three and a half percent
unemployment and we're gonna
find it increasingly hard to
grow employment or not even lose
employees at the pay levels we
have so leading back to linkages
it LFC a week ago today miss
Micaela Fischer head and in our
staff presented a memorandum on
the housing initiatives of which
we recognize linkages as one and
they report able to spend all
the money they had last year so
you want a balanced thinking
about need which is great
against ability to address the
need which is pretty limited in
the current economic condition
thank you thank you for that day
and I did read the report we did
together actually and LESC thank
you Mr chairman but I guess one
of things that we had
appropriate approximately five
million dollars approximately
the year before last year we
appropriate other five million
that was a total of ten that's
what they have ten million
dollars is what they've had well
less what they've used for
vouchers for people on section
eight programs and to help them
get into apartments rent and
providing comprehensive services
when you think about it it's
really not a lot compared to the
need we have and so I'm just
trying to figure out a way for
we can do this comprehensive
wraparound system to finally
Medicaid this problem I know we
won't wipe that out at least not
in one year but we can reduce
that and so I just thought maybe
we could talk about this more
but thank you will be a free
visit I'm confident you spend
more time on that and thanks
direction will be part of that
I'm sure thank you very much
thank you when that's all I have
Mister Senator it's.
Got a question
Is required.
With with Representative we've
got maybe one sixty one.
Show that the the twenty two
reversions is three hundred
fifty million dollars.
Then we talk about.
Increasing.
The budget.
Of eleven twelve percent ten
percent whatever you said it was
and so.
If we don't have anymore let
spending the money.
We're going to have you know
seven hundred million dollars of
that will be spent.
We talk about.
The change.
So how Mr chair.
Pretty good silo I mean it's
good way to.
To the store money but also it's
good way for money to fall off
the edge of the table.
So.
Am I looking at this right Mr
chair that.
That if they didn't spend the
money sure no no there's all
kind of reasons they didn't
quite get it spent I mean this
is a a cumulative of all of
these different agencies and
funds and all this kind of
stuff.
But if something happens and
they don't get to spend again it
but Fund doubles.
And then we add the percent
increase.
That we put on a budget.
So you know.
Is there any comments on that.
Please Mr Chairman someone's
look at one sixty one and.
A handful of agencies accounted
for an extraordinary amount of
these reversions so if you look
at the line well it's it's
agency code six thirty sixty six
million that's HSD that was
because the enhanced after the.
Of the health department had
sixty two million for the
corrections had forty six
million and so these
extraordinarily large numbers
are sort of.
Nonrecurring unusual because of
the flow of money because
because of the pandemic so I I
don't think you're gonna see
reversions continue at this
multi hundred million dollar
right the other hand I do expect
them to continue at a you know
historically reversions could be
in the fifty to a hundred
million dollar range I don't
think they'll be higher higher
than that because of the reason
you're flagging agencies
appropriated money for contracts
or.
Supplies or hiring people that
they are not able to do because
of economic conditions separate
from the federal funds pouring
in so we'll see lower numbers
than last year but higher
numbers than three to ten years
previous.
I'm just trying to get in the
mind Mr chair and director.
That.
Three hundred fifty million.
And then we were appropriate
state that we keep the budget
flat.
That means that agency is got
not all agencies but these
agencies has got three hundred
fifty million.
In a bank account they didn't
spend from last year.
If we didn't increase at all.
And I'm probably thinking of the
wrong to send seven hundred
million it's only three hundred
fifty million and so because
they're not going to give it to
him twice even if they spent the
same amount of money.
They would revert less because
they wouldn't have the federal
funds causing General Fund the
state when those budgets were
developed in twenty twenty two
there wasn't a recognition of
how much nope those budgets were
appropriate twenty twenty one so
for FY twenty two there wasn't a
recognition of how much federal
funds would pour in for the
pandemic so they could spend the
exact same amount but they were
Burt less because they wouldn't
have the same general fund going
forward as they had during the
pandemic.
A budget has spending for the
various categories and it has
revenues from the general fund
federal revenue and other state
funds so the the federal revenue
in twenty two will be
significantly less than the
federal revenue twenty one for
these handful of agencies that
have extraordinary windfall.
Okay understand what you say in
the like Department of Health is
got a huge amount of federal
money comes in.
That's not accounted for.
And our staff we actually do
little money laundering.
Got you that's a bold statement.
Well that.
make a list.
Senator Padilla and then Senator
Diamond.
And then Senator Steinborn.
Us thank you Mr chairman to just
to get on the right of
reversions on page one sixty of
the spiral bound
So on the let's see here.
Before you start that simply if
you remember every agency came
back and said how we want to be
back or in two thousand eight
two thousand seven levels right
all of a sudden we get in there
and then agencies can spend the
money.
And so now they're saying what's
the right dollar amount Senator
quite.
Thank you Mr chairman so all the
way at the bottom there thirty
seven eight hundred state
personnel office five hundred
eighty five million referred in
FY twenty one another one twenty
nine in FY twenty two that's a
that's a five hundred eighty
five million have a bill.
All that's thousand okay that's
still a lot of money what what
it for these
it just their office didn't have
the help they needed and that's
for the sixty nine or one
hundred and ninety eight days of
waiting to fill a position comes
from even I think that numbers
wrong three hundred fifty
million one sixty.
In total but a certain
percentage of that was federal
money okay we're we've gone
from.
The version so that could get
three fifty two the state
personnel office which is four
lines from the bottom of the
previous page a budget is only
four million so yeah the revert
to twenty percent of the budget
it's a large percentage of their
they had huge vacancy rates in
course again these are the
pandemic years the telecommuting
years the years that they were
challenged to hire anybody they
don't have an HR are for
themselves okay thank you Mr
chairman that's just want to
point that out and then on page
on the the LFC handout Mr
chairman and David that you were
reviewing slide eleven there
Broadband line fifteen.
So you've got a hundred twenty
three mil that is
Less than the Executive
recommendations.
What one of the big difference
there are you know we we go out
and.
So the LFC recommendation has
significantly appropriation of
probation at a party come in and
been counted on and even thank
since most of these
recommendations were made.
Hundred million more federal
funds came was committed to the
state that's not reflected in
either of these so the LFC
recommendation assumed that it
was possible to reduce that
there's hundreds of millions in
the treasury that have been
received for this purpose that
are not been spent plus this
hundred more that's likely to
come in.
So I think the LFC believes that
we allocation of those monies
can go a long way to address the
needs of the executive flag with
additional money.
You Mr chairman but so I just
want to you know remind the
committee we set up what's
called banner with that's how
the name came out officer
broadband access expansion it is
a ten X.
leveraging of of dollars there
with federal monies from FCC
USDA and and those organizations
that the plan I feel very good
about the direction that the
broadband offices going mail
going and they have their their
their plan in place that
submitted it they've done all
the research in the state to
link up to the federal
requirements for where things
are where they aren't I'm just I
hope we're not cutting your nose
off to spite our face here by
this hundred twenty three
million could easily come in
turn into eight nine hundred
million to help us in this very
critical area now the plan is
put together got to give them
the money to do their work so I
I I I we're not done yet
obviously with the budget but I
hope we'll do some more work in
that area there thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair.
And I I actually have kind of a
follow up from what Senator
Padilla was saying his concern
about those missing matches
stated on your on your hand out
here if I'm looking at the
recurring only specific to funds
to state engineer office
recurring quite similar from the
twenty eight but then when we go
back to these one time matching
funds there's a significant
difference even more than
broadband executives
Representative recommending two
hundred eighty well LFC
recommendation is thirty four so
my cross reference that with
with Mr press presentation of
his one time proposals and it
looks like a lot of those
matching funds that would make
up that two hundred eighty are
to match federal funds for what
we know we're very necessary
infrastructure pro program so
I'm I'm not always opposed to
spending money if we're spending
the money wisely so of that two
eighty do we have an estimate of
if we could get a federal return
of even a dollar for dollar or
wanted to that's still by
investment so let's look at page
one twenty eight of the LFC
recommendation and here's fifty
million for the state engineer
applying three.
This was back to my point it is
very important to put specials
and capital outlay were
appropriations side by side and
it also have a clear idea about
how many years in advance we're
setting aside funding for
LFC and Mr chair of the state
engineers office spent a lot of
time with an ad hoc work group
and and I think LFC is hit the
right buttons on items to fund
and I think you'll find that
some of the differences how many
years ahead are we setting aside
funding for especially for the
lower Rio Grande and then also
when you look at LFC capital
you'll find that also making up
a chunk of that.
Okay thank you Mr chairman my
question would then go to
secretary Prost what do you
propose and why do you need two
hundred eighty million dollars
in the state engineer.
If I look if I look back at your
side so you're telling us
because a hundred million of
that we'll go to infrastructure
programs with matches.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and Senator Diamond
are you're looking on page.
I'm looking on your slide
presentation of page twelve.
You left a hundred million
dollars the executive request
for matching funds for federal
infrastructure projects I'm only
assuming then.
Back on the on this.
The grant I'm assuming that
those would be within the state
engineers otherwise what is that
two hundred eighty million.
The.
The executive two eighty LFC is
thirty four.
Who's with me.
I think it's hard to get into
the details on these without the
subsidiary worksheets I think
it's appropriate to flagman
Representative your for your
priorities but we are still in
the process of date we're
waiting for the capital from the
executive and we're trying to
cross prepare spreadsheets that
both consolidate the specials in
the capitol you've seen with the
LFC we have fifty million for
water which isn't in the sheet
because this is general fund
only in section five the capital
for LFC is in the capital outlay
framework sponsored by
Representative Lente.
So you just we've got to find
ways to come consolidate the
funding for some of these
programs that are in different
sources okay I guess that and
Senator Diamond certainly and
I'm sure the strategy will as
well commit to getting you
something that.
Bring it all together sooner
rather than later thank you and
I guess Mr Chairman just as a
follow up with what Senator
Padilla was saying is if if
we're if there's an opportunity
to double that money or triple
that money we certainly need to
know about it that's certainly
money well spent so thank you
guys both thank you Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr chairman quick
question for you Secretary
doesn't props The New Mexico New
Mexico senior care giver program
this was something that the
governor mentioned in our state
of the state a year ago.
Could never track it down don't
think we funded at this is for
people being care givers of.
Like their family members
basically I think that's what it
is and there's a lot of interest
in it could you you don't have
to answer it now I just love to
learn more about the program.
Because I know there's a lot of
support for it and you can speak
to it now to if you look.
Every.
sell your call chairman of that.
Okay and that you know that I.
Thank you and what what the
program is and who is funded
through and just like to learn
more about thank you that's all
I have.
Hello there some key differences
I think we're gonna have to
figure out what the executive
right and and spending limits
and and how we can all that mean
executive just got reelected but
she's in four year term most of
us in the legislature been here
a long time we have watches
right.
And so how how do we.
This opportunity and Senator
Gonzales been here thirty eight
twenty six thirty.
Twenty.
Twenty years and he's never seen
an opportunity like this to
really set things up and I think
in the executive I don't see any
future planning which every
executive one spend every penny
that they can get their hands on
Republican or Democrat in the
way they want to spend it but I
I think there's some key
recommendations we're gonna have
to come to terms on saying how
much we can put back in the
permanent fund for the future of
what we're gonna book to offset
what we're taking out so the
permanent fund remain stable.
how we set up more funds at the
early childhood trust fund for
cap that one in creating new
fund in order to to hold off on
this when we get to forty three
of fifty percent reliance on oil
and gas.
And that's that's in danger
scenario to being that it's like
a.
When the office lead COVID
you're only gonna go through the
drive through and there's
nothing else available so I can
get tougher tough.
It will have a lot of work to do
and so many have a lot of work
to do.
In what we agree on and when we
don't agree on exactly.
Hello thanks our priorities and.
Thank you guys for your
presentation.
I know the secretary of the next
I know he's got some extra money
is back parties won't give up.
Since you are sixty two percent
of the budget education for four
forty five.
Fifty three.
Fifty three retirement yes the
common Mr chairman I want to
thank Mr Abbey for going
through.
What all is in each one of these
thank you very helpful we can
have someone so that he knows
one morning we can have Adrienne
them go through the books and
and and and give you detail like
I think it's very important that
we learn sections three four and
five of the of the house bill
two and now they come together
and where you're going to put
stuff in the section of bills
and and so I think that's very
key.
I mean it action eight director
Avid.
Senator sure want to section
nine and house bill two.
Yeah.
Question which is.
Gross.
One of the items need to
This.
In their recommendations so far
hopefully you'll see some a
couple of.
We're gonna start is Charles
winter you Mr rules will go
through this presentation for
you to provide context the
two budget.
So it's important
Background information about how
we fund schools and that what
we're seeing from a performance
standpoint and then there's a
big policy proposals that you'll
have for you that are gonna be
tied specifically the pleasure
of talking.
Thank you Mr chairman my name
Salem the LFC public education
analyst and they're working from
this presentation on go to the
first section and then hand off
to the rest of the panel.
So on the first page there's
some key terms for those of you.
heard all these acronyms and
jargon then program because you
value some definitions for you
to go over of any of these
become confusing or you can stop
me and I can explain this in
detail.
Thank takeaway here is that the
formula that schools receive for
their operational dollars is
mostly driven by student count
if you turn with me to page four
of the slide.
Is a very simplified overview of
how the funding formula works
and how you get to that state
equalization guarantee
distribution also referred to as
SCG.
On page five we've broken down
for you the biggest piece of
this SCG formula and as you see
the largest blue part of that
pie is basic membership counts
so your enrollment please here
schools talking about how they
might be losing funding it might
be because their seen declining
enrollment numbers in that case.
The thing on to page six under
funding trends just wanted to
give you a high level overview
of the history of funding for
the last two decades you'll see
there is a huge uptick in
funding from the fiscal year
three to fiscal year seven.
Right before the Great Recession
and then funding sort of flat
line then.
And really up ticked after
fiscal year eighteen which is
when the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit
ruling came out and so you'll
see both an influx in federal
revenues from pandemic relief
and also state investments and
like secretary Steinhaus mention
earlier.
Public schools represent forty
five percent of the general fund
budget and we ended with higher
education at eleven percent they
represent over half a few
general fund appropriations keep
in mind over this period in the
last ten years in Rome and for
schools has been sinking and so
you're increasing public school
funding at the same rate that
the population itself is
declining.
Alliance on slide seven you'll
see funding transfer school cash
balance or operational reserves
statewide in there used to be a
cash balance limits.
That before two thousand eleven
but after those repealed you'll
see that those balances have
since grown to about seventeen
percent of the program cost for
fiscal year twenty to.
So in page eight wanted to move
a little bit into some of your
student outcome data as you know
on the recent national
assessment of educational
progress which is the longest.
Paired of tests that we have at
the national level New Mexico
has ranked last fiftieth in
reading and math tests for
fourth graders and eighth
graders
of our state owned state
assessment has changed I three
times in the last five years and
so it's been very difficult to
have an apples to apples
comparison on the progress or
changes that happened since that
time and as you know during the
pandemic with school closures
the state did not provide those
assessments in FY twenty which
is why you see that gap in
performance for that year.
And turnover chose to go for the
rest of the presentation
Mr chairman a couple of other
takeaways from the student
outcomes chart so you'd seen
some pretty steady increases
under the park but still only
about you know thirty three
percent of students
demonstrating you know
proficiency in reading
one of the things that if you're
intent on trying to change where
we rank nationally.
We have to have faster growth
than everybody else and
everybody else's up also
improving their
you know literacy levels in
other states that are literacy
levels not only have to continue
to keep pace with that but but
improve at a
Seeing with student performance
longitudinally but in terms of
our high school graduation rates
you know only about a third of
kids are demonstrating a
proficiency but yet we're
graduating about seventy seven
percent of students from high
school so there's some concern
about it whether or not we're
really career and college ready
when students are leaving the
other thing I'd say about the
graduation rate if we wanted to
get to the national average it's
a little less than twenty five
hundred students that we need to
graduate you know on time and
once you spread that across even
just some of the big high
schools in our urban areas
that's not a lot of students per
high school so it's really a
manageable growth target if we
were to want to change that on
page ten we've done a lot of
research and education area
taking our schools that are
performing at a very high level
but may have a lot of students
from low income families are
learning English what are they
doing differently then their
counterparts who have a very
different student demographic
and one of the common things
that we find our a lot of it is
doesn't even have to do with
money
just to do with expectations and
I'm interested diversity and
equity within their schools the
other thing that are
characteristics is the basically
the school is rolling all in the
same direction it doesn't matter
which text books they use but
those teachers and third grader
all focused both horizontally
with their other appears on what
they're teaching and they're
focused on ensuring that they're
preparing the kids for the
fourth grade standards as we
move forward the other very
common characteristic is their
data driven focus as an as an
organizational cultural element.
What we find when we look at
schools on page eleven.
So these are two different
cohorts of the same students
over time and what I research
has been finding pretty
consistently is in general
students are making about a
year's worth of academic
progress each year they're at
school no surprise that's
actually how the schools are
designed you learn the third
great content and then you move
on to fourth grade one of the
challenges is how many students
are showing up very far behind
two two and a half years in
kindergarten making that year's
worth of growth but then when
they're in third grade they're
really not at the third grade
content standards are being able
to demonstrate that these
cohorts are actually making some
improvement over time between
fifth grade and eighth grade a
larger percentage of our
proficient.
Slide twelve really demonstrates
one of our big challenges as a
state and and something that the
court also was central to the
court ruling on school finance
and that's our achievement gap
when you start controlling for
Economic background in language
status they're very very big
differences in performance so
kids who are not lowincome
in about learning English are
performing at about you know
fifty percent proficiency rate
which is what you see with some
of the higher performing states
on park over.
for kids that are on free and
reduced lunch coming from low
income families you see a market
difference about twenty five
percent drop in kids that are
both learning English and on
free and reduced lunch.
Virtually hardly any of them
were able to demonstrate
proficiency so and the big
numbers for eight these cohorts
of students are most of them are
from low income families and in
a large portion of them are also
learning English so that's why
you see our scores so the level
out there about a third.
And that's also one of the
reasons why there's so much
discussion on page thirteen
about available learning time
again if we're trying to have a
system catch not only catch kids
up and put get them ahead you
don't have enough time to cover
the content standards both
through that remedial work that
you need to do in addition to
cover all the content standards
and the content expectations of
what we want kids to know and be
able to do yes dramatically
changed over the past forty
years
just even in the last ten to
fifteen years with the common
core standards where we expect
kindergartners not only to be
emerging readers by the end of
kindergarten that's a very
different expectation of their
society had for kindergartners
of fifteen years ago or twenty
years ago so and if they're
showing up two and a half years
behind it's a challenge so most
coming from low income families
New Mexico as some of the
longest summer breaks and we
know that the impact of being
out of school in the world
We know that the additional.
And we know that there are
benefits from having more time
it's not more of the same it's
more of something better you get
teachers more time to delve into
a broader and more complex
curriculum more time for
feedback to students to improve
more time frankly for enrichment
language things to celebrate our
culture
and boost engagement and also
more time for teachers to
collaborate slide fourteen the
school finance lawsuit
this is a a ruling that is
rooted in evidence based
interventions to get better
results the court made a causal
link between the activities and
funding that are going on
and educational outcomes and say
you're not providing enough
evidence based things that work
evidence based strategies for
getting student outcomes at a
sufficient scale statewide to
get those outcomes so student
outcomes are your true north if
you really want to figure out
how to get out of this lawsuit
they can give you an idea about
is it fifty percent good enough
as a seventy five percent
percent proficiency good enough
we don't know the court didn't
say but we know better student
outcomes and linking the student
outcomes to the inputs into the
system of high quality teaching
extended learning and and pre
and appreciate the like are
really important.
Slide fifteen.
And as a response to that that
ruling you've been as a
legislature and the executive
hyper focused on I'm trying to
find things that are going to
get better results ensuring that
we've got a high quality teacher
in front of every classroom in
the state ensuring they have
enough learning time to cover
the content standards and help
kids catch up in the where we
need them to be ensure that
districts have enough money for
the kind of wrap around supports
things like tutoring after
school programs school social
workers so the teachers are
doing social work they're doing
teaching and social workers help
with the kids with their social
emotional issues in school as
well as with non school things
that might be causing a barrier
for those students and making
sure that we're sufficiently
funding instructional materials
and access to technology.
Likewise the court charged PED
with ensuring compliance on the
part of the districts with some
various acts that you've put on
the book including the bilingual
Indian Education Act Hispanic
acts.
Page sixteen this gives you the
framework that LESC has been
working under
to try to make sure that those
inputs that are being funded are
going to lead to better outcomes
it's really those four planks
that you see there.
Important to how these things
roll out on a slide seventeen
this is a nice slide that we
stole from PED
and that is thinking about what
is in the domain of the
legislature should versus PED
should verses the destruction.
You know the legislature not the
implementers here the funders
are the policy makers
oftentimes you'll get request
for things that are really in
the domain of PED or the school
districts and so we try to put
these things into these buckets
to help figure out who's
responsible for for doing what.
Slide eighteen this gives you a
table of where the big money has
gone since the in the state's
response you've poured money
into the educator quality bucket
mostly through just rate
increases you for triple to the
at risk index funding that's
sending extra money to districts
that have a higher proportion of
students from low income
families and learning English
for those wraparound services
you funded a substantial way
extended learning opportunities
through K. five plus an extended
learning time program as well as
so much so that every single
high poverty school has access
into the budget today to K. five
plus that once it.
The challenge is that nobody
wants it or very few want to
and.
If we look and slide nineteen.
We're finding that when school
districts take advantage of this
money and are starting to stack
pre K. with a K. five plus you
know more learning time in the
early grades that were nearly
eliminating the achievement gap
and some of the data that we've
had for kids they got access to
both of those
the kids that didn't get access
to those which the vast majority
in the states are falling far
behind their peers who did get
access to it so you funded it
we've had challenges with the
roll out in the up take a look
about half of the students in
the state or in one form or
another but very few are in the
K. five plus the thank you see
that because bang for the Buck.
Teacher workforce been making
progress on slide twenty with
reducing what was then a five
percent vacancy rate
making sure that we had more
licensed teachers in front of
our students.
And slide twenty one gives you
an idea about some of the
compensation increases that
you've been making not only to
raising the three tiered
salaries but then the
compensation increases are about
about that you know there are
teachers that we're getting
upwards of thirty percent
increases in this year's budget
alone because of the actions
that he took last session.
So there's a couple of slides on
twenty two and twenty three
these are really in the weeds
and I won't get into them but
they're going to be too big
policy issues that are going to
be tied to the budget before you
one doesn't necessarily relate
directly to those inputs I
talked about under Martinez
Yazzie and getting better
outcomes that are important
component of compensation and
that is how we fund teacher
health insurance cost and who
pays for what I will say that
this
this health plan along with the
the state employee and local
governments the state employee
to local governments health
plans and solvent are ready and
the
the public school employee one
is heading that direction so
this is may just be rearranging
the deck chairs on who pays for
what but there's larger solvency
issues that need to be dealt
with with both of those plants
in and of themselves and then
the extended learning proposals
that you have directionally all
three are very similar
there's some details that will
need to be worked out but all
three are seeking to provide the
kind of flexibility that school
districts are asking for
while increasing the
expectations for the amount of
learning time that students are
getting and doing an incentive
based waivers as a mandate and
so with that Mr chairman I like
to turn it over to secretary
Steinhaus and serve with.
One of the with the new deal
with this chairman members of
the committee good afternoon you
have got an incredible amount of
information in front of you so
I'd like to try to bring it down
to three critical points the
first one Mr chairman members of
the committee prior to the
pandemic our New Mexico schools
were on track K. three three
plus was working and the
pandemic happened and now you
don't see it yet in the data our
schools are back they're on
track they're doing a good job
out there in a lot of it has to
do with the investments that you
have made in our schools and so
as we bring data to you you're
going to see that our New Mexico
schools right now what's going
on in our classrooms is on
track.
My second point you've invested
a lot because of the Martinez
Yazzie
lawsuit and deputy director
Charles Lee just presented that
to you you've done your part and
I thank you for that and I
acknowledge that it's now our
job the public education
department to work with school
districts to make sure they
implement that so that's point
number two point number three I
have never heard anybody say
this but let me try to give you
a new idea the what in the house
so the what there's pretty much
agreement between L. E. S. C.
LFC in the executive under the
governor's leadership on what
needs to be done we need to
improve student achievement we
need to close the gaps we need
to improve teacher quality
there's pretty much agreement on
that where you're going to see
differences is how we get there
so the what there's agreement
the how there's some
disagreement and so Mr chairman
I I prepared a small packet of
information for you and I just
like to talk about one page in
that package it looks like this
it says critical items missing
it's it's on the very back of
the hand out that you've got and
senator Munoz Mr chairman
members the committee I'm
guessing that
When you're having to build a
budget you're gonna say Mr
Secretary okay we've got LFC
budget we've got under the
governor's leadership and
executive budget.
And what are the you're looking
to get everything that you ever
do get everything you want but
what are the critical things
that are missing today in the
LFC budget and the first one is
your house bill five from three
years ago you passed a really
good bill accountability that
require school districts to
write it education plan and
submit that with their budget
it's a good bill it's good
legislation is having an impact
in schools we don't have the
money to implement this next
year so that's two hundred fifty
thousand dollars not much money
the second one that's not in the
budget was a week ago LFC did an
evaluation and to school
districts very well done great
recommendations one of the
recommendations was for the
public education department to
by the canvas module.
And that's for teacher
evaluation that's not in the LFC
budget for some reason so we'd
like that to be added on the
next one is Michael credentials
were moving from a new way of
getting teachers to move from
level one to level two and this
is working really well for us.
The five twenty licensure holder
so in Senator manos is district
are we have teachers who are
approved by tribal leaders as
language and culture teachers
and etcetera Gonzales up inTaos
Pueblo and this year you
appropriated about one point six
million and that's been so well
received we've got more requests
for the five twenty certificate
holder and then the last one is
a piece of the disagreement on
how one of the house to get kids
to show up to school attendance
because we can't get kids to
school we can't get this all
done so if you find feminine
hygiene products to for our
female students out there they
are going to show up to school
at a higher rate and so those
are just a few of the budget
items that we would ask you to
add into house bill two and you
build that.
And with that Mr Chairman I'm
happy to answer your questions
and let director Dr going Perea
Warniment co.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for being
patient with me what a coughing
fit I think I'm covering from
bronchitis.
I won't spend too much time you
have a packet.
That
looks like this
you don't need to spend too much
time on it just has a list of
the L. E. S. C. endorsed
legislation as well as the a
high level that came out of the
legislative education study
committee this year as you know
the Legislative Education
Committee budget is simply a
budget that's representative of
the priorities from that
committee.
I can say that I was very
pleased with the partnership in
collaboration with the
legislative finance committee
staff we work really closely
together they've been wonderful
over the in terms in meeting
with me and our team our budget
you'll see is very closely
aligned and in terms of some of
the high level priorities.
I would just want to point out
for things from the perspective
of the Legislative Education
Committee just for your
consideration.
The first is educator assistant
Education assistant salaries
that is a piece of legislation
and that is has already been
dropped it's being carried by a
number of representatives
right now the minimum salary for
educational assistance is twelve
thousand a year.
Shocking.
Educational systems are vital
component of the work force in
New Mexico
so the proposal for the
legislation is to raise their
minimum salary salary to twenty
five thousand a year their
fundamental piece particularly
supporting our special education
students.
that's one thing
the second is recognizing the
career technical education
budget that is been was
recommended by the Legislative
Education Committee
We heard resoundingly across the
entire state every
superintendent every
administrator principal cause
wells to caters particularly
high school educators the
critical need to support career
technical education
again I can't say enough about
our partnership with the
legislative fight in staff
we have recommendation in terms
of capital outlay to support
infrastructure for career
technical education but you also
notice that there was a
recommendation of four forty
million to support CTE including
for work based learning for
students
and then the third I'd like to
talk a little bit about.
Recruitment we've sort of
mirrored but also had a higher
recommendation I think in the
end the executive in terms of
educator recruitment
fundamental issue in New Mexico
so supporting that and then
finally adjustment but noticed
the differences in terms of
funding and learning time but
again is that just going
director deputy director so a
lot of alignment.
That.
Thank you Senator Gonzales.
Thank you Mr chairman I was the
one that started coughing first
and Senate to.
thank you to all of you well if
you have really brought a lot
to.
You know what we're doing and
what's being done at all.
Channel so you brought up
something really interesting.
The end of when you're looking
at.
You know being in whatever our
ranking fifteen behind.
When you compare to what's
happening in other states on
their game.
And we're expecting our students
to.
Bring that part of what they're
behind.
Now is there.
Anything that has been done to.
Just as an example.
Say that you do have a students
say two years behind.
What would it take to bring to
that level of.
Being.
In grade level.
So Mister chairman Senator.
Part of the design of the
stacking of pre K. with
K. five plus and the extended
learning was between those three
funding strategies you're buying
an additional two and a half
years of learning time over a
student's academic career to
give the system enough time to
help close those gaps if you
combine that with a greater
percentage of really top notch
educators that are consistently
getting consistently getting
more than a year's worth of
growth that can close that gap
as well but what we find often
in schools is you might have a
really great second grade
teacher that's hitting it out of
the parking catching a lot of
kids up to where maybe they need
to be but then by the time you
get to third and fourth grade
you may not have a strong of the
teacher in fact kids fall behind
and so making sure that you know
each successive grade level that
you've got everything in
alignment
to really hit it out of the park
by the time that they graduate
but the more learning time
combined with really high
quality educators which we don't
really frankly have a good
system to tell you
which educators are hitting it
out of the park when it comes to
that that was part of the
recommendation for that can the
system is we've got all the
components of it except for the
peace that links the students
of outcomes with the teacher
evaluation.
Mr Chairman.
And.
With what has been the response
from Charles.
Take for example if you have a
class of twenty.
And you're looking at say again
that two year.
But then with this twenty
students.
One is absent ten days one
twenty days one is up some
thirty days.
That's a heck of a job to try
that to the to work you know so.
You know in fairness to that
teacher.
You know in fairness to the
system.
You know all that's a hard one.
Mister chairman Senator you're
correct that absenteeism you
know logically impacts of
student outcomes and we can
totally see that in the data in
the LFC recommendation for the
new K. twelve plus program that
would be extra funding for the
districts to focus on making
sure that
we're getting students engaged
in attending School as extra
money for the districts and that
funding component in addition
for the time the teachers need
for their professional work in
order to talk about how students
are doing in their grade levels
but also enhance their own
professional development.
Very well thank you to all the.
Thank you Mr Senator this.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your presentation glad
you're all so together and all
this stuff
the governor's proposal and it's
my legislation that we're moving
forward with called on the it's
universal free breakfast and
lunch to is it in the LFC
recommendation anywhere in is a
categorized as recurring or I
know it's in the governor's
recommendation but.
So
Mister chairman Senator it's
there is a special appropriation
focused on insuring that the
meals that we are serving our
high quality for seven and a
half million
there are some discussion and
LFC about the the ability of
school districts to do universal
school lunch now and draw down
federal funds and so that's
something that we would look to
be supportive of for districts
to do as well as grants to be
able to enhance the quality of
the free lunches.
So Mister chairman so is it
seven million the LFC is
recommending or is it the full
thirty that the executive is
requesting part of that thirty I
believe is to equip some of the
schools with with the capital
things are going to need to be
able to to deliver these meals
Mr Chairman some senators seven
half okay so I know it's very
early and we need to figure that
out that the the recommended
amount is thirty so we have to
get our hands around that as we
move forward so thank you and I
know the governor's food and
nutrition advisers here as well
maybe we can talk through that
sum greater detail before we.
Let it settle.
Yeah I think we have the
governor's realize all bring a
school lunch one day.
This case like before we make
somebody else do that.
Well it ourselves.
Mr chairman I agree and that's
that's the whole reason we're
coming for this thing this year
a large component of these
dollars all legislative bill
right now if we want to but but
the good news is that the plug
strong portion or large portion
that is going to be to buy from
local farmers and ranchers so
that they're putting fresher
food on the table in the lunches
are not just because we get to a
live doesn't mean it's a healthy
lunch and this is one of the
best ways to Christian and so
we're gonna see that will
debated discussed and I look
forward to everyone's feedback
given funding will just get
schedule I.
We should do that down the line
for the kids and see how really
good their meals and then we'll
see if we like their medicine or
from what they want new
medicine.
Senate say have Senate bill yes
as on an analyst appearance by
Senate finance for lunch.
Do it in this Mr chairman I
would recommend that B. as
elderly filtered or school for
violating Montessori who really
set the standard but yes set the
standard the bar is high there
they have a little garden and
greenhouse and have a lot of
local food so they're doing it
right so if we could just expand
that statewide I think we'd be
in good shape you're charged
for.
Thank you for the presentation
not on page nineteen of this
slide.
So
We're it's talking about the
extended learning time and of
course I represent a very rural
district and so there are some
concerns about the extended
learning time some of the
concerns that I've heard is more
is not better Charles can you
talk about the research a little
more that the court found these
programs really contributing to
better educational outcomes
better academic outcomes where
was the research done and to do
you anticipate there being any
need for modifications in rural
school districts because a lot
of those students may be
traveling and extended time on
the bus is there a time when the
extended learning could
potentially negatively impact
learning outcomes so Mister
chairman Senator there's a huge
body of research on extended
learning through appreciate.
for our own homegrown K. three
plus there was a randomized
control trial over five years
that found positive outcomes
particularly just extend the
school year not operating as a
summer school and there's a
large body of research out there
generally around extended
learning as well charter schools
have been a leader this
nationally it's not often a key
reform element that states look
to because of it how expensive
it is and that's one of the
unique opportunities that New
Mexico has right now with our
revenue is that the way that
they are that is a serious you
know option in terms of
micro districts and forty
districts and transportation
issues
there's a number of them the
other thing to to keep in mind
is to differentiate extended
learning which would be the new
K. twelve plus under the
multiple proposals maybe name
something different as an
inducement to extend the school
calendar from the eleven forty
requirement.
So under
both proposals there's a lot of
districts that are are creating
a me both and some might need to
add instructional time to meet
the new eleven forty proposal
but that's also keep in mind
what the superintendents have
been asking you to give them
flexibility to do over the last
three years to say don't make us
do a full twenty five days give
that to us and and latest you
know be flexible about how to
implement that I suspect
politically that you're going to
need to come to some
accommodation for micro
districts maybe that are high
performing he can demonstrate
they're going to get good
results with the available time
that they've got today that they
don't have huge achievement gaps
and that's something I'm sure
you're gonna get a lot of
different proposals for what
that might look like thank you
Mr chairman Charles Allen so
Charles do you see the that
academic improvement even if you
had just a teacher who may not
be necessarily a high quality
teacher are we still seeing
those
improved academic outcomes
regardless of so the teacher
it's Mister chairman Senator
that's what the data are showing
you on that graph on slide is
basically the combination of pre
K. and work the same.
And.
If you combine that with making
sure that the students are
actually showing up for school
you'll get an even bigger king.
Thank you Mr chairman so that
brings me to the question about
let's see I think one
W. secretary Warniment on your
items critical items missing
from the LFC budget the last one
three million for feminine
hygiene products to address
absenteeism I I know that the
first request was for five
million and I'm just wondering
why the three million was
decided upon instead of five.
Mr Chairman said I have that's
actually the slide the king for
the public education department
and I think as the executive
went through to balance the
budget what's available I think
it move from three million from
five down to three that's my
understanding of Mister chairman
Senator Hemphill incidentally
actually staff at the
legislative education study
committee have studied this and
you'll notice that in our budget
recommendation we have one
million dollars because we have
a body of research in terms of
the amount of money that would
be needed across the state to
actually fund these products
including menstrual cups I'm
associate also having an
sustainable element in that so
our recommendation
recommendation is slightly lower
but and we have some a brief
that we could find for you and
Mister chairman Senator turn
your attention to slide seven
and wonder why school districts
are not already providing this
much needed health
Much to the service for the
health needs of their students
when they've got over half a
billion dollars in cash balances
for early talking between eight
and three million.
No they would withhold other
health students that they needed
why were the with holding this.
Thank you Mr chairman and when I
apologize and you're you're no
longer the deputy secretary.
but last question is on page
twenty talk about the teacher
workforce ratios of teacher and
student ratios what about what
are we seeing and special
education because I know the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit was
really targeting at risk
students students with
disabilities what are we saying
in terms I know when I first
started teaching back in the
nineties the specialist looked a
lot different than what I was
saying when I left full time
employment around two thousand
thirteen specially classrooms
essentially look the same as a
generalized classroom they there
was maybe thirty students in
there and I really felt like
that was not what was intended
to be special education because
a teacher really wasn't able to
give a lot of individualized
support to the substance what
does the special ed classroom
look like now across New Mexico
I'm sure that it varies a bit
better we really targeting
reducing those teacher student
ratios and special education.
I'll jump in there and then turn
it over to my fellow colleagues
Mister chairman Senator what
we've seen over the last twenty
years is a is a market shift and
I think one following the the.
Policies that the state wanted
of having fewer kids in
restricted environments so more
kids are showing up in in your
A. M. B. level
You know funding categories that
means that they're integrated in
into the mainstream classrooms
with the kind of pull out
support that they might need so
fewer kids and their own self
contained classrooms where
you've got a self contained
classroom for very high needs
students those are going to be
usually pretty small
people tier ratios I think the
the area that you might be most
concerned about is what that
looks like for classrooms where
you've got a lot of kids with
behavioral health issues and
whether those class sizes are
are too large and I haven't
teased out to see what what
those look like but they're
going to very depending on the
size of the district and the
size of their student population
needs so it might look very
different in Albuquerque verses
Silvercity.
Mr chairman Charles are we still
seeing a lot of like
full includes our full pullout
for children with disabilities
in the behavior around like a
behavior modification classroom
I know that.
That had been tried in some of
the districts that I haven't
seen it done really really well
and I'm just wondering if that
still a model that's being used
and if there are some districts
that are using that and it's
you're actually seeing positive
outcome.
I can answer that but it see if
anybody else Mister chairman
Senator Hemphill there are steps
that does still occur actually
pro probably pretty broadly
across the state in terms of
efficacy of those types of
problems programs I would say
that that is questionable based
on the training of those
teachers to actually deal with
and have behavior interventions
that are appropriate
particularly an exclusion but I
would also say that it's also
true for general ed classrooms
for teachers as well as you well
know
one thing that we know at this I
hear this specifically from the
director of special education
the public education department
special ed teacher or special ed
students our general ed students
first always right so having a
policy in budget that actually
knowledges that gets at that I
think something we would all
support I'm gonna quote sunny
here and this is really
important I think in this
discussion
study says something that I
think is really critical for all
of us and that is do we have the
right teachers in the right
places at the right time and so
one of the things that we're
dealing with the state is a
supply and demand issue of
teachers in understanding
whether or not we have adequate
teachers as opposed to just
simply saying we have a vacancy
issue
we also have to deal with
enrollment we have to right size
we also have to I think think of
broadly in terms of innovation
why is it that we only have one
teacher for classroom.
Good point Mr Chairman go ahead
secretary Senator do to add what
you just heard very briefly as a
trend over the last five years
you see a decrease in pull out
programs.
An increase in the number of
educational assistants in the
classroom that are trained in
special education services if
you go to the night early
childhood center just down the
street to our New Mexico teacher
of the year she is there in a
fully inclusive classroom about
six of the ten students in that
classroom have an I EP and she
has two full time educational
assistance and one of the
educational assistance because
of the I. E. P. one of the
children has a little pocket of
words for one of the children
that visually needs a card to
learn and that's what you see
increasingly going on in New
Mexico schools we're not
anywhere near where we need to
be excellent.
Mr Chairman would any of you be
able to provide me some
information about the research
on feminine hygiene products
reducing absenteeism and other
states that may be doing that.
Yes Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman if you
have a comment thank you first
time or did you have a question
because time Senator person
thank you good because I know
you wait you might ask before
and I've.
Okay whatever Mr thanks members
chair I just have a few
questions but I'll ask you to be
concise just in the interest of
time I there's a few proposals
which are great to see show up
and I'm not sure if they're in
the budget or not says hoping
maybe LFC and the department
could speak to maybe they're
both they're maybe they're not
there a lot of so I just want to
ask about a few questions state
school school safety funding I
saw ten million dollars in the
PED I assume this means for
retrofitting for.
School safe technology I know
that that is important can you
speak to that anybody Mr
chairman if you like once we
wrap up with questions we can
transition to go at a very high
level through the differences of
the recommendations and that
might answer that question is.
We're not done yet we still have
all right so that's one thing
important me I'm sure all the
best number to vocational school
programs I saw fifteen dollars
on this sheet.
For next Gen career technical
education zones I didn't really
know what that meant
Some really curious what we're
doing with vocational training
are we.
What are we doing with that so
we'll see that in the
recommendations from the LFC for
career technical education as
well okay cool let me in
different places and at
different amounts so but
directionally very similar.
We'll get an answer that perhaps
someone can take me off to the
side just answer these questions
for me number three school based
health centers I'm really
curious do we.
have like social workers and
every school.
Not every school Mr chairman and
school based health centers
receive funding in two areas one
is through the health department
and the LFC is got three million
dollars going to expand the
number of schoolbased health
centers there and then they bill
Medicaid and so you don't even
see the federal funds that are
flowing back out to to those
particular centers on any of the
sheets Mr chair is set a goal to
have social workers and every
school is that part of a school
based health center or as a
separate.
Mister chairman Senator I would
say it's related because there
could be things that a social
worker can do through the school
based health center for
behavioral health related kind
of interventions but you could
also have just a regular school
social workers help connect
children and families to other
services within the community
for just basic of things as they
show up to school without a
jacket
they they're not attending
school and you can go to home
visits to figure out what's
going on those types of things
that would be independent of the
school based health center.
Thank thank you Mr what I I
don't know what Ellie SC's
feeling is that the department's
feeling is about that seems
awfully important for all kinds
of reasons to want to speak to
the Mr chair Senator Steinborn
yeah it's it's fundamental to
it's a critical thing for the
students particularly seeing
what we have out of the COVID
nineteen pandemic.
Of one thing in the L. E. S. C.
budget recommendation we agreed
completely with our partners in
the LFC around supporting
residencies for principles as
we've done with teachers but we
also have a slightly larger in
amount in the L. E. S. C. budget
recommendation to support
residencies for counselors and
social workers because that's a
workforce need in our schools
right now.
Secretary you must be to yes Sir
Mister chairman Senator board
the executive does have a
request to expand school based
health centers in New Mexico
schools because they're working
I'm just down the road at Santa
Fe high school we've got a
school based health clinic and
then your question about social
workers I would put that in a
separate area there are many
schools in New Mexico that have
social workers that don't have a
school based health clinic and
the need for social workers is
increasing in New Mexico
schools.
Thank you secretary well
everything we've heard about the
pandemic and the effects on kids
mental health is coming crisis
stage so.
Yes is pretty vital you can't
learn if you're in crisis if you
can't come in so anyway I I know
near and dear to my colleagues
are here so but anyway out so I
love to learn more about that
whatever we can do to support
that I can do to support that so
I have Mister chair thank.
Thank you again I just have a
couple of maybe one comment and
then another question okay and
what left to the state in my
mind through all of this
discussion that we had today
much importance of everything we
spoke about but when you first
said that our educational
systems truly make twelve
thousand a year this is gross
pay correct so that means they
make like eight seven or eight
thousand a year and thank you
know please go ahead Mr chairman
Senator that's the minimum
salaries yes okay and then you
mentioned also that and I think
Charles mentor somebody maybe Dr
Stein state house here at some
time there may be two
educational assistance in a
classroom and that just really
shows the great need there is
there and it but in looking at
the whole thing you look at a
teacher to educational
assistance and the total cost
based on what we pay at a
minimum salary is still not very
much in other words to
educational assistance twenty
five thousand dollars is what it
costs the state because at a
minimum salary of twelve
thousand the you know one of the
biggest issues we've had is
vacancy rates right trying to
retain bring Ginn recruit
encourage incentivized whatever
else we need to do to keep our
teachers here and get more to go
to school and become a teacher
and
I guess one of the things I I
see is although these are
assistance they're still in the
educational field and we need to
set a standard and in try to do
better so I'm very happy that
you're looking at what the
request is to increase it to
double basically twenty five
thousand minimum salary so thank
you for that and then thank you
Dr Steinhaus also for that but
let me just mention this on the
school based health centers.
the school based health centers
have always played a key role in
in schools as we all know
preaching to the choir here but
also in those rural communities
where we have very limited
resources compared to the urban
areas and you know I see that
they play even a bigger role and
now with the pandemic and even
before that but with the
pandemic it really brought to
light the great need that exists
there and happy for requesting
three million dollars Charles to
to increase school based health
centers in various areas I think
it's badly needed but there is
one deficit and that is that we
do not have school based health
centers
better codified staff.
If they can be wiped out any
time.
I mean I can't imagine anybody
would come in and want to do it
but politics are politics and
changes or changes and so we've
seen bigger things happened to
it's it's been crazy so I guess
one of the things is that I see
missing carriers that we need to
codify those in statute to
ensure that they are protected
and I have a bill that I'm
working on now to try and do
that so I work together with all
of you to see what we can do to
just to ensure that they're safe
and kept and make sure we have
them on going on a permanent
basis that that's all I have
Mister chairman thank you thank
you for your responses and are
think you are gonna have several
is going to kind of wrap this up
real quick you have one quick
question we're kind of wrap this
up so we can get out here before
question Sen.
This relationship between
truancy and graduation rates.
Yeah no no you don't graduate
this wonderful.
We will take you Mr.
That was.
Better study that will in just a
little bit.
I'm glad you can see were closed
and we're at with the budget not
real far off I don't know you
know sit here thinking and
thinking about
how we can't run our schools
some system by lawsuits right
whether Josie Martinez or
there's any lawsuit word is and
I think we're running up an
escalator well the escalators
going down.
In run this crash course with
client population increasing
dollars and there's no point
where the director is going to.
Changed you know that point
where that trajectory is gonna
change Mr Secretary mean.
At some point we got to.
Read the bottom soon placing
goes up.
Mr Chairman yes and hi in
previous at the
the report that just came out
last week called kids count and
it is showing little tiny places
where New Mexico is growing
faster than the rest of the
country and I look forward to
sharing that with you at an
appropriate time.
And then just be interesting to
see that and I mean the you know
my and and speak as a parent
right when you have a good
teacher in the classroom.
Everybody knows that in town
right every kid every person
wants that kid in that classroom
and that teacher's classroom
right and so you know you're
good teachers are and then when
you have a bad teacher everybody
knows right I will admit that
when I had kids I had a bad
teacher home room teacher we
switch schools.
Mr Chairman do it right it's
it's our kids education and we
switch schools and and I I don't
know how we fix that but that's
another issue the one concern
that I really do have is this
eight American language and
culture teachers I'll tell you
why.
Is there is native American
teachers that have certificates
and degrees right and in some of
these cultural and language
teachers are not degree.
And so they go in the same
building right.
And one teacher spent whatever
under education is as I can and
hearing else in these language
and culture teachers are not
certified in the schools you
don't have a license bill
everything else in there getting
the same pay.
And it creates it creates a an
issue mmhm culture right
I went to school for four years
and the government teaching
degree and now I could just and
language and culture speaking
Navajo in in and they're getting
the same pain is creating a
little bit rub out there where I
live and then the other thing
that I'm seeing in that same
scenario is is parents are
putting their kids in those
classes thank.
You may want we want it but the
parents are putting the kids in
the class is there for you know
you're gonna stay in math and
you're standing there should
really more than taking that
cultural class and and it's a
parent's choice what class our
kids take at that age right.
So that's another issue
I see a program thank you for
your close.
Some members of the government
and I am actually rang up the
escalator.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for signing up.
Miss Miller you're next right
Senate we're gonna try to be
quick to run through this and
Senator Steinborn had some
questions yes I'm on one of the
questions you had is is I think
LFC recommended twenty five
million dollars for school
security.
Yes C. O. C. also put money for
school security correct me if
I'm wrong is like seventy five
million but it's it's kind of
sad to see an executive
recommendation right R. N.
agency agency or even LFC
without school security can
that's the number one issue
that's kind of setting where.
Mr Chairman thank you very much
I'm joined here today by Simon
Miller from DFA we'll go over
the public school support and
relayed the appropriation packet
really quickly so it can get to
questions
let's go ahead move to page for
the packet will have a high
level and we'll talk from there
very quickly.
Few key items on your SCG
recommendations starting online
for just gonna highlighted
several of these the LFC
recommendation online for
includes thirty two million for
an at risk index increase.
Lines five through eleven are
your extended learning K. twelve
plus enhanced extended learning
recommendations from the
executive and LFC.
Line twelve that your average
salary increase four percent
from the executive and five
percent for LFC.
Of course online twenty another
big differences the employer
health contribution rate
increase for both
recommendations and.
I'll turn over CENIC as of the
comments in the section Mr chair
members of the committee good
afternoon again my name is Simon
Miller I'm an analyst at DFA
like my boss said means the
similar situation I've been kind
of the cliff notes Sonny is the
encyclopedia
this is my first you're covering
education so anyways looking at
the SCG recommendation sunny
covered covered everything at a
high level
one of the biggest changes in
the executive recommendation is
the new
anymore instructional hours
increasing that to one thousand
one hundred forty and the other
big change is for health
benefits
under the the governor's plan
yeah there's ninety two million
in the SCG to
shift more of the cost of health
premiums from the employer or
sorry from the employee to the
employer under her plan the
state would cover the first ten
thousand dollars of every
everyone's premium and then
sixty percent of premium
expenses after ten thousand
dollars so what that comes out
to is
the a typical level one teacher
that gets insurance through PSI
a would see annual savings of
about four thousand dollars and
I think my boss at ten thousand
earlier he payment say four
thousand.
I referring to your boss Moines
probes yes.
I work with that Mr chairman of
the I. T. exemption alligned
thirty four This Is Your change
in SCG over.
Fiscal year twenty three with
the executive coming at one
hundred sixty one million or
four point four percent and the
LESC coming in at two hundred
forty six million or six point
seven percent.
Moving down to line.
Forty three This Is Your
transportation appropriation
you'll see increases from both
recommendations the executive
include some from the public
school capital outlay fund and
then moving down to line.
Fifty three fifty four this is
your totals categorical
appropriation subtotal.
Which comes out at sixty eight
million for the executive about
forty nine percent increase from
the prior year and seventeen
point five million from the LFC
at about twelve point six
percent over the prior year
that's mostly coming from line
fifty two
Percent if yes for the comment
on the section thanks honey
Mister chair members of the
committee one of the biggest
differences between the LFC and
Executive recommendations for
the categorical appropriations
is that the executive included
seventeen million from the
public education reform Fund for
attendance interventions last
school year he was about forty
percent of students were
considered chronically absent
meaning they missed more than
ten percent of the days
so the executive included
seventeen million for that
purpose.
Thank you Simon if I could turn
your attention to page five
starting from line sixty one to
seventy seven this is what's
commonly referred to as below
the line appropriations which
our department appropriations
the biggest difference is that
the executive recommendation
includes funding from the public
education reform Fund which
we've denoted you can find the
lines that these appropriations
are located in.
For the LFC recommendation and
and the executive recommendation
the investments were mostly
increases to early literacy
online sixty one.
School leadership training
online sixty two and teacher
residency programs online sixty
eight and I'll turn this time
into the as of the comments on
the section Mr chair no
additional comments on the
sexual.
I'm moving on your grand total
online eighty nine for all
public school support related
appropriation.
Is four point zero seven billion
for the executive which is a
five point one percent increase
and four point one four billion
or six point eight percent for
the LFC this only includes
general fund appropriations once
again and only recurring
appropriations in section four.
Moving on the rest of the page
lines ninety one through one
eighteen these are general fund
nonrecurring appropriations
mostly recommended by the
executive I'll turn of the Simon
if it wants to point out any
items from this list.
This.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
it is the executive is quite a
bit higher in nonrecurring
spending
some of the biggest differences
are that are the executive
included thirty three million
for special education
interventions in programming
that wasn't included in the LFC
recommendation
one of the other big difference
is is that the executive
included sixteen point eight
million for the educator fellows
program and that was included in
the LFC recommendation.
And.
The other big difference is that
the executive included about
sixty million for before school
after school summer and summer
programming and tutoring where
is the LFC recommendation has a
twenty million for that purpose
so forty million dollar
difference there.
And back to you soon thank you
Simon and I would like to point
out for Senator Steinborn the
executives requests for career
technical education is on line
one of seven from the general
fund.
And then when you turn the page
to.
The public education reform Fund
you'll see the LFC
recommendation for career
technical education is on one
thirty one it's also fifteen
million but it's from the reform
Fund instead of the general fund
in this section.
A few things I'd also like to
highlight on the last page page
six one one twenty six the LFC
recommendation includes a
hundred fifteen million to K.
twelve plus expansions.
And to also answer question Mr
chair on the.
Seats in security
recommendations on the very
bottom around line one seventy.
This is twenty five million
that will be distributed to
schools for security and
infrastructure improvements and
then seventy five million for
CTE pre K. and general
maintenance infrastructure
altogether that adds up to about
a hundred million dollars which
would be for me lately
distributed for those purposes
so to answer your questions on
those pieces that's the line
that
we are considered.
And I'll turn it over to Simon
if he is in a closing comments
but and like draft up here Mr
chair members of the committee
no additional comments but happy
to answer any questions.
Senator Steinborn you have.
Thank you this is helpful
that sounds like we're obviously
as the legislative branch
inclined to go with a hundred
million dollars school security
number or something close to
that.
So supposed to the ten million
on them
I still don't know what
What a up forgive.
The career technical education
zone is.
How that translates to
occasional training could you
someone just explain it real
quick.
Mr secretary Mr chair Senator
Steinborn it's the term is
innovation zone and it's going
into our schools and giving
teachers a way to innovate come
up with new ideas about how to
teach career technical education
and it's very similar.
Just a different word does that
help.
This chart the secretary does it
does I'm wondering does that
result in a.
Some sort of a
a springboard into vocational
training instead of going to
college or is it just a a class
doesn't necessarily lead to that
pathway Mister chairman Senator
it goes beyond just a
springboard it actually gives
the kids those licenses like a
plumbing license.
And they can go straight into
the work force that's what this
design is thank you Mr Trickett
someone just give me a little
more information about that
later just about what the
programs are what they look like
where they're distributed.
On chat to do a lot of work but
would love to learn more about
that.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Mr so thank you.
Thank.
I think it.
One question.
I lost where was you and.
What is the youth in the the
below the line spending right on
page five nine sixty three
eighty right.
Yes Mr chair what is a post
graduation pathway initiative.
Mr Chairman seventy six that's
the executive recognized me
later.
Along with
Youth in film initiatives two
hundred ten thousand.
Mr chairman so.
Those last four actually out
state lines seventy two seventy
four seventy five seventy six
and seventy seven those are
House Bill junior appropriations
that are booked as recurring by
the executive and included as
the operating budget for PED
they're not recommended in the
executive for LFC proposals for
fiscal year twenty four.
So do we need to come back in
the some of the that reoccurring
up for today they funds were
never used in reoccurring money.
Give us Mr chair members of the
committee those funds have been
budgeted this year up I don't
have the information from me in
terms of how much has been spent
we can get you that information
but like sunny said that funding
it doesn't continue in to FY
twenty four in either of the
recommendations.
And Mr chairman the LFC budget
guidelines did look past
analysts to look at.
Programs are demonstrating
evidence of improving outcomes
and tied to Martinez Yazzie
findings also there is a
consideration that if you look
at this list is a hundred and
seventy one items and the
department has to administer
every single program so there's
definitely a consideration of
you know does the agency itself
had the capacity to flow out the
funding and oversee all of these
programs as well so those
consideration in these
recommendations.
I think Senator Steinhausen Act
have and this conversation right
the circuit we can't manage it
you can't completely can do it
now's your chance to get rid of
it in order following you in the
call in as you start to turn
that WHEELAND Kong so just
remember that if these programs
and I guess give Celeste in
identifying specifically of how
much of the news that much has
been used and in do we need to
make him go away and so you can
become more efficient all called
that because issues logging down
the wheel.
Right it's called Greece when we
all need to be spending faster
and so we can clear these up
below the line and I mean if we
remember.
Years ago and they're different
ministration and that the exact
put stop below the line it was
nothing but bloody war right and
now we have blow the line again
spending at a lower level but
nobody's squawking about it so.
These are where the usually
emissions from the governor and
in the no holds barred they can
do whatever they want with it so
some of the stuff I want to it
is not good news let's get rid
of it
this is a priority for them.
Any other questions from
committee members.
I think thank you for
presentation thanks for your
time.
So I did have staff start
looking at school so plan on
next week sometime we'll try to
figure out when we're gonna come
off the floor and maybe we'll
have the state police are maybe
the PT secretary join us and and
school lunch and the we'll
figure out what Munoz are having
and will surprise some school.
Will stand by the will stand by
the trash cans can see how much
that school lunch goes in the
