Really
I have uh.
Very cool handouts.
They're on their way up here
because people thought it was
the, oh, there they are.
So shall I begin?
Yes.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, since
Bill 48 is um
Uh, the 2nd bill and the 3
bills, I'm trying to do uh
relating to climate.
Uh, this is the most fun, um,
because it creates a community
benefit fund.
Um, if you look
Mm
Can you pass this one out?
We have that one,
you don't, you don't have this
one.
Get
Yeah.
Because we don't have it.
The reason I want you to have
this is this this explains the
whole deal on the backside.
So the community benefit fund is
designed to help communities all
over the state.
Uh, lower their greenhouse gas
emissions through a variety of
ways.
So if you look on the back of
this, this lays out the
different funds.
Uh, it's, it's designed to help
people in their communities, uh,
lower greenhouse gas emissions
or mitigate in some way a
climate issues that they're
having in their community.
It's designed to strengthen
communities and get people um
into jobs that they want and to
uh lower greenhouse gas
emissions. It's really the uh.
The purpose of every one of
these 3 bills in the trio that I
have.
So
If you look on the back.
Uh, increasing grid capacity and
modernizing our grid is very
important for communities around
the state.
We passed our community solar
bill and we can't really even
get on the grid with community
solar because the investor owned
utilities don't have the
capacity to let them on. So all
over the state, we need
electrical infrastructure, grid
modernization, uh, sites that we
can put up electricity, oil and
gas needs that too on the
eastern side of the state, so
the 100 million
going to innert is going into
the grid modernization fund.
That son already exists, um.
48 sets out parameters for how
you use it.
Uh, Secondly, also to M nerd is
a grant program for energy
efficiency and renewable
technology.
Uh, that's the best bang for the
buck is to just get more
efficient electricity.
We have a good program called
the the 3rd 1, Community energy
efficiency Development Block
Grant, we passed that about 3
years ago. That gives funding to
cities and counties.
Uh, municipalities to, uh,
weather wise, low income housing
to uh do energy efficiency with
appliances for low-income
housing, um, all of these
brands, uh, hold on one second,
Senator, uh.
There's no sound on Zoom.
just
Right now.
all over
We have a script right here.
Members of the public, please be
aware of Senate Finance is
experiencing technical
difficulties with the webcast,
you can always join our Zoom and
webinar.
At our webinar ID is
81696207177. Alternatively, if
you go to in in New Mexico NM
legis website and click on
committees, and Senate Finance,
you will find a link from the
Senate Finance guidelines and
the agency hearings that has a
direct link to our webinar, our
Zoom details are available
daily, uh, and our, on our daily
calendar. So if we have
technical difficulties, the
webinar ID number is 86.
96207177.
Senator Stewart, go ahead and
proceed. I think we have that
covered.
Alright, so, um, if you look
again in the listing of what's
in 48.
Ah
Uh
The, uh, new grant program, 50
million to Department of
Transportation is for electric
vehicle infrastructure, uh,
bicycle and pedestrian
infrastructure, uh, getting
people onto trails onto bikes,
e-bikes or bikes. That's what
our communities are asking for,
uh, certainly a part of
transportation projects of the
Department of Transportation is
asking for. The next one is the
uh state supplemental land and
water, outdoor recreation act
where the funding would go to,
um, again, this is for reducing
impacts on our environment,
agriculture and public health.
Uh, the next one is to the
public schools facility
authority and that's for the
electric vehicle buses that
districts want and the
infrastructure, they have to put
in first before those electric
vehicle buses will work.
Uh, the next one is the economic
development department, um, they
have ongoing projects related to
lowering greenhouse gas
emissions, um, I think that this
part of the bill was uh taken
out in uh
In the house and that funding
sent directly to the economic
development, um, and then
finally, workforce solutions for
uh expanded worker training.
So that's a very quickly what it
does, um.
We, we have people from all over
the state that are interested in
this, uh, and let me show you
one other thing.
This that you passed out is
showing you projects county by
county.
That relate to.
Uh
Right one here.
That relate to energy
efficiency, transportation,
clean energy, or grid
modernization.
You see, we just try to find
these projects that were
unfunded, so this is just really
a sample. It, but it's $1.3
billion that people have asked
for around the state.
Uh, San Juan and Bernna Leo are
the highest amounts, but San
Juan is still dealing with the
uh loss of the power plant up
there, uh, PNM is in the middle
of putting renewable energy up
there, um, but these are project
examples that people want
funding for all over the state
that the community benefit fund
could be an answer to.
All right, I was ready to do
38242 1st, so it's kind of a
rough entrance with 48, but I'm
ready for questions the shorter
you are, the better off we're
gonna be. Uh, we're gonna go to
the audience and support. I'm
gonna try to take 3 because it's
kind of late, 3 in support, 3 in
opposition. We have 1 in
opposition on Zoom and we have a
lot of supports we'll take 3 and
support, we'll start with Zoom
1st 3 in support.
48
OK, we'll go to the audi.
just 3 in your line up real
quick.
One minute a piece.
When I started singing rosarira
so me and brother somoso
so unal members in
industrious incluendo elcas
petrolio.
Los immigrants and Mexico
and represent the ento de la
Los immigrants and Mexico
and represent the ento de lass
Los immigrants and Mexico
and represent the ento de la
Hi demand industries.
Yes tamos puestos and we are
willing to continue
contributing.
Necessita mosque
Necessitamos
we need to be taken into account
when opening opportunities for
jobs in emerging industries.
And to do so, we need support to
have access to training for
these types of jobs.
We ask that you allocate funds
to the apartment
ervius.
The Apollo integral computation
spend transported
The Apollo integral computation
spend transport
The Apollo integral computation
spend transported
or spends
The Apollo integral computation
spend transport
or in spend
but uh um.
Ainduloquepien
Ainduloquepieniatias essebe
cuarenta yocho Diagonal cue.
Uh, yeah, I.
You're gonna have to shorten it
just a little bit though.
Got to go fast. Good afternoon,
Mr. President and members of the
committee. My name is Mirella
Rivera, and I'm a member of
Somos Pueblo Nido, which is a
statewide organization with
members in 8 counties working in
many different industries such
as oil and gas. Immigrants
contribute greatly to New
Mexico, although we represent
10% of the population. We are
13% of the workforce. We work in
high demand industries and we
are willing to continue
contributing. We need to be
taken into account when opening
opportunities for jobs in
emerging emergent industries,
and to do so, we need to support
uh the support to have access
to.
training for these types of
jobs. We ask that you allocate
funds to HED for the creation of
these programs, especially in
rural communities, and to DWS
for comprehensive support
services such as computer and
transportation stipends or
stipends to take, take time off
work to retrain in these
industries. Therefore, we ask
that you support the initiatives
SB 4849.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Travis
Kellerman. I'm the senior
climate policy advisor for the
governor, and I stand here in
support of the community benefit
fund.
I want to talk about something
that hasn't been discussed as
much. Yes, this is about climate
change and then taking climate
action, but it's also about
setting up some significant
private investment in New
Mexico.
So I know as a former clean
energy developer that for every
$1 you invest as a government,
$3 to $7 come in from the
private markets to complete and
expand projects that are
developed, some of these areas
of investment are exactly in
that model and they'll result
in.
The potential for billions in
investment in this state. So as
federal support waivers, we need
to step up as a state to
continue that advancement and
grow a new economy in New
Mexico.
On the jobs this bill creates,
there's jobs in clean energy and
emissions reduction.
There's jobs in energy
efficiency work. New Mexico is
#2 in job growth and energy
efficiency.
Last year, the governor executed
and executive order.
On creating thousands of new
apprenticeships to create a
climate-ready workforce in line
with our commitment in the US
Climate Alliance.
These
po s ition s the jobs are going
to be created under the
Community Development Fund
aligned directly with that
executive order.
So let's bring more private
investment and new jobs to the
state. I stand in support and I
urge your support. Thank you.
Hi, good afternoon, my name is
Lauren Bernalli. I am from a
small community outside of
Shiprock, New Mexico, a place
called Sereacan. I am Navajo.
I'm Keanni Ashihi Adoda
Chanella.
New Mexico has a long history of
mineral extraction with
operations ranging from uranium
and coal to rare earth minerals
that disproportionately impact
indigenous communities. These
extractive industries have
historically forced the
indigenous indigenous peoples
and local communities to step
away from traditional land
stewardship, environmental
preservation and sustainable
community practices.
Generations of mineral
extraction has just erupted the
cultural and ecological balance
that defines and solidifies
mankind.
It is important that we move
toward a clean energy for this
area, particularly in San Juan
County.
The results of polluted water,
abandoned infrastructure and
communities left behind without
the means of fully restoring
their lands and the cultural
connectedness has been
devastation.
Governments must put in place.
Good policies, laws, and
enforcement measures to prevent
companies from violating rights
to clean and healthy
environments companies cannot
have free reins to ruin the
environment, disrupt the
ecological balance systems here
and to continue to prey upon the
most impoverished people in New
Mexico which are Native
Americans.
With the 340 million directed
toward communities to
disproportionately affected by
that have been
disproportionately affected by
the climate change SB 48 would
fund land restoration, clean
water initiatives, renewable
energy projects, and other
efforts to reduce long term
environmental harm.
Again, I ask that you pass SB
48. Thank you.
I think you will go to Zoom now.
Take 3 and support first.
Rein support.
Anita, are you there?
Anita, are you there?
And, yeah, this is an Edith.
I think you are muted, Anita.
Hello, are you able to hear me
now?
We're not able to hear you, so
let's go to the next one.
Sophia Jenkins, are you there?
Yes, hello. Can you hear me?
OK. Um, good morning, chair or
afternoon, chair and members of
the committee. My name is Sophia
Jenkins Nieto, and I'm here on
behalf of Yeca. Yucca strongly
supports SB 48 and 49 helps
because they helped build the
kind of future young people want
and deserve. A future that is
sustainable, just, and rooted in
community well-being. We want a
future where our schools, homes
and communities are powered by
clean, affordable energy where
families don't have to struggle
with high energy bills, while
fossil fuel corporations profit.
As
48 expands access to energy
efficiency programs so that
working families can lower their
costs while reducing emissions.
We want a future where our air
is clean and our neighborhoods
are designed for people, not
pollution. For our public
transportation systems, bike
lanes, and pedestrian
infrastructure make our cities
healthier and more accessible.
SB 49 invests in clean
transportation and
infrastructure, ensuring that
schools, towns and tribes had
the resources to transition away
from dirty diesel fueled buses
and combustion engine vehicles.
We want a future where our water
and land are protected, not
sacrificed, where we don't have
to fight to defend what should
already be safe.
This bill directs funding toward
conserving our natural resources
and ensuring that New Mexico's
land and water remain intact for
future generations.
We want a future where workers
are supported and communities
are thriving, where we're
investing in new industries that
create jobs without extracting
and polluting. SP 49 funds
workforce training training for
non-extractive industries and
ensures that workers in oil and
gas have pathways into clean
energy, sustainable agriculture,
and other regenerative fields.
We want a future where our state
leads with courage, where we
don't just talk about climate
action, but actually fund the
transition that we need.
This bills in an investment in
the world we are fighting to
build. Yucca urges lawmakers to
pass SB 48 and put public public
resources where they belong and
to our communities, our future,
and the solutions that will
create a just and livable New
Mexico. Thank you.
It
The
Victoria.
Uh, Victoria Macias.
Hello, can you hear me?
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee.
My name is so una
intercessor hold on one second,
Victoria when they're
translating back to Spanish. I
know how that works, but if you
wanna start again and let's see,
make sure.
My name is Victoria Alarcon
Masia. I'm an advocacy fellow
with the CAIA Project and SAMIA
action.
Today, I'm also speaking for the
38 organizations around the
state supporting these bills
will representatives of those
groups raise your hands.
We are here today in strong
support of Senate Bill 48 and
49, a critical investment in
both our climate future and New
Mexico's economic resilience.
This bill is more than just a
climate initiative. It is a
blueprint for future proofing
our state's economy by creating
meaningful job opportunities for
our youth.
By prioritizing these
investments, we can build a
stronger, more sustainable
economy while empowering the
next generation with the skills
and opportunities needed to
thrive in the clean energy
transition.
I urge you to support Senate
Bill 48 and 49 and help secure
more just and prosperous future
for New Mexico. Thank you so
much for your time and
consideration.
I think you will take one more
since then.
OK,
let's take the two in opposition
and we'll go to the audience
for.
In opposition.
Mhm
Jim Winchester.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, Jim Winchester
with the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, um,
this bill is $340 million of
taxpayer funded uh money to pick
winners and losers in the energy
market, um, $40 million to
diversify away from fossil
fuels, um, I think if we really
want clean air, the most
effective, proven option is
clean burning natural gas. Uh,
$50 million
reducing combustion engines when
EVs aren't selling. A 25 million
to train workers for
non-extracted industries at a
time when we need workers for
the oil and gas industry are
state's top employer with high
paying jobs. So we stand opposed
to this because it's simply too
much money with too little in
return. Thank you.
Thank you.
Duval, Westfall, are you there?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
committee Duval Westfall with
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce were in strong
opposition to SD 48.
The bill is so broadly drafted
that it seems like a waterless
ship adrift. The definitions of
project categories seem likely
to allow almost anything to fit.
Is that what the legislature
wants to do, spend $340 million
on projects that may or may not
contribute to anything, to the
goal.
And second, as a consequence,
the bill has no measurables, no
way to know what the outcomes
are and whether the taxpayers
got their money's worth. These
projects should have to go
through the same rigorous
examination and oversight as the
growth project.
And finally, this bill comes
with that $340 million price
tag.
Every year.
This isn't a one-shot deal. With
all due respect to the sponsor,
this bill doesn't strike us as
being anywhere near fully baked.
It's a prime candidate for
interim study. Thank you. Please
vote no on SB 48.
Thank you. We'll go to the
audience, anybody in opposition.
We'll take 3 at the most.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the committee. I'm Ashley
Wagner, the vice president of
government affairs for New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
We represent over 200 member
companies.
Nimoga opposes Senate bills 48
and 49 because we cannot
responsibly support making a
pledge of nearly half a billion
dollars to a community benefit
fund when there are multiple
bills introduced with the
intention of shutting down the
oil and gas industry.
Which accounts for half of the
state's budget and over 100,000
direct and indirect jobs in the
state.
We cannot have it both ways. We
cannot continue to inflate
government programs without
having a way to pay for them.
In addition to the state's
budget, the industry provides
millions annually in charitable
giving and purchase goods and
services from local vendors.
The oil and gas industry
continuously shows a strong
commitment to the state.
New Mexicans need the state to
maintain fiscal stability. If
there is even a 3% decrease in
production due to the many bad
bills we've seen this session or
other outside forces at $65 per
barrel of oil, it would equate
to over $350 million loss of
revenue to the state, about the
same amount that would be
required to fund SB 48 and 49.
Further, without the oil and gas
industry, the various special
funds we have would never exist.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, madam, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Mike Miller. I represent
the Permian Basin Petroleum
Association. We stand in
opposition to Senate bills 4849.
1st of all, the bill represents
a significant allocation of
taxpayer dollars, 340 million
without clear enforceable
accountable accountability
measures to ensure effective use
of these funds, the broad nature
of the projects outlined in the
bill leaves too much discretion
to administrative agencies
raising concerns about
oversight.
Second, the bill prioritizes
aggressive climate change
initiatives that could have
detrimental economic effects on
key industries in New Mexico,
particularly the extractive and
energy industry.
The bill's emphasis on
transitioning away from fossil
fuel revenue lacks a realistic
plan for replacing the economic
contributions of this sector.
New Mexico relies heavily on oil
and gas revenues for education
and public service, and this
bill does not adequately address
how the state will offset that
loss. Finally, the bill requires
community engagement. It does
not provide a clear framework of
how affected communities will
have meaningful input or
recourse if projects negatively
impact their livelihoods for
these and other reasons.
We oppose this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. We do have an
amendment.
Senator Stewart, you wanna
have a motion to, to, to
Motion to discuss the
Mhm
Emotion discuss man, I have a
second.
Senator Woods second the motion.
Any objection to the motion
seemed none. Senator Stewart
tells Meerman.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I think this
is what you're doing in here.
This takes section 2, from the
bill strike section 2 in its
entirety.
It's the transfer.
OK.
Questions on the amendment.
none can have a motion on the
amendment.
And motion by Senator Trujil.
Seconded by Senator Padilla.
Any objection to that motion.
and have amended bill. uh
questions from committee
members, Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Welcome.
Welcome everybody who came to
our committee today. Appreciate
it.
So, you know, I like uh the um.
The intent of this for sure, of
course, and
You have one question on the
projects eligible projects on
the transportation as it relates
to electric bikes.
It's kind of a little niche
question here. Um,
could theoretically a community.
kind of a two part question.
Could a community use this fund,
the $50 million that would go to
DOT to purchase electric bikes.
For a
Immunity or even tourism
outdoor.
by kind of a program.
Get people off cars, get them
outdoors.
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator, you
know this is designed to really
be flexible for communities. So
if the community wanted to spend
money like that they certainly
could do that.
OK
So I put that out there for
communities and DOT.
That are listening today.
I
it's great yeah. Also, you know,
our Constitution does allow
The use of obviously support to
indigent populations and with
the high cost of fuel
transportation, rising rents,
you know, I had a bill a few
years ago to actually a grant
program to provide
Electric bikes literally to to a
certain low-income people that
might be qualified. I thought
it'd be great for everybody, but
then I was told all the
constitution limit limits it a
little bit to indigent. I throw
that out there as well and I, I
don't know, you know, it's
I'll just throw that out there
as well. That might be another
program.
The community could could
venture into, but I want to ask
a kind of a finance committee
related couple questions which
is
I do think, you know, the issue
of are we getting our ROI? Is it
hitting its intended target of
climate reductions for this
amount of money.
Is there any reporting back to
like the LFC on
Are these programs being
affected?
I think, I think that'd be a
good thing.
Uh, senator Steinburne, if
you'll look on page 4, section
D, um,
And see the Department of
Finance is where the funding
will sit. Actually, the funding
goes 34 funds go to Mner one to
PSFA1 to economic development,
one to workforce solutions. But
on D is the requirement that the
honor before December 1, every
year.
That you have a project that you
receive funding from the
community benefit fund. The
administrating agency, who
whoever got the funds shall
submit a report to the
appropriate interim legislative
committee with progress or if
appropriate, final results of
the project. And any other
information the committee
requests.
So that's the evaluation
process. OK. So I need to look
this over closer and I'm sorry I
haven't. I think it would be
really good, Mr. Chair, if
somehow.
All this data rather than an
interim committee getting, you
know, a million projects if
somehow the LFC were to
consolidate this into having
some real meaningful program
evaluation. So that might be a
good amendment down the line if
that's not here, just so it's
kind of coalesced into a
Uh, more effective review kind
of thing, but I'll look at the
language again, sorry, I
haven't. The other thing I want
to ask is about the recurring
appropriation because this is a
lot of money obviously, and it's
nice that we have a lot of money
right now. What's the trigger
like making that recurring and
is it really kind of optional as
funds exist.
So, Mr. Chairman, this is
non-recurring funding.
Not recurring and in spite of
what the FIR is saying this is
coming from non-recurrent
funding in the budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
Protem for clarifying that
because, you know, that's what I
thought too. And then when I
heard
You know, I see the FR. It says
recurring. I was like, oh, you
know, it's a prepriator you kind
of have to.
That your head because that is a
lot of money to commit off the
top, you know, and obviously
circumstances change.
So, but I completely support it.
I don't know why anyone would
oppose, you know, moving to uh
green clean New Mexico.
And growing renewable energy,
growing the outdoor economy, um,
the outdoor economy and other
economic sectors. That to me
seems like a win-win. I mean, we
are an energy exporter, and I
would think that the energy
producers of the state would
understand that that's really
where the revenue comes from is
exporting not.
That as we make New Mexico
greener that that really impacts
them in a negative way, but
nonetheless, the choice, thank
you for the bill. Thank you to
everyone who worked on it.
And I, and I'm gonna look at
this kind of reporting
consolidation piece, not for
this committee necessarily, but
maybe
We can think of a little tweak
that.
And Mr. Chairman Senator
Steinborn, uh, I read interim
legislative committees LFC.
True,
that's true to be expending, so
I think this is sitting in the
LFC's daily. OK, good point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Senator Badillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, uh, Madamin, uh, you know,
when the folks were talking
about your bill a little while
ago, they were saying lack of
oversight, lack of
accountability, uh, can you walk
us through the oversight and the
accountability and how this is
gonna look because yeah, it's a
lot of money, but I, I don't
know you at all ever to come
forward with anything ever for
any reason without oversight and
accountability. So can you tell
us a little bit more about that?
So Mr. Chairman, there is a
requirements on how you get
these funds, um, they certainly
start.
page one.
Showing
What funding you can get for
what project?
If you look at me on page 3,
this requires that
That proposes to meet the
requirements.
Shall either.
Number 8 small letter a document
that two meetings regarding the
project were held within the
community affected by the
proposed project.
Except comments address concerns
and shows notice of meetings was
provided to overburden
communities. So those are the
communities that are a little
more struggling that uh tend to
be in these areas where we're
Excluding air, land and water,
so they want projects to clean
up their neighborhood, etc. Now,
you don't need to do that if you
have B, which is a community
benefits agreement negotiated
with those communities that are
impacted by the project.
So, uh, it, it continues, um,
you have to have a plan for
outreach to the overburdened
communities to encourage them to
participate.
Uh, see, uh, talks about that
it's the Department of Finance
and administration and
consultation with M nerd.
Um, develops or identify a dated
tool that uses a data sets to
identify these communities.
Uh, and then under D is what I
just said to Senator Steinborn
that um each year uh project
receives funding.
Uh, the administrating agency,
whoever is all that out, shall
cement a report to the
appropriate interim legislative
committee with progress or if
appropriate with the final
results of the project. So, um,
it's designed to be nimble.
So that we can get this money
out now around the state for
these communities that are
begging us for project money.
I mean, these are examples of
projects all over the state that
are shovel ready that are ready
to go.
Most of them have come from, uh,
Uh, counties or, or cities and
uh not funded, uh, because, uh,
we didn't have money for it.
So it's the reason we have 4849,
49 is the uh funding mechanism
and that we're gonna table here
in a few minutes and 48 is
laying out how you get the
project, what you have to do to
get it, where the money is
housed, etc. so it's, it's
designed this way so that we
don't spend 2 or 3 years trying
to apply for projects.
Uh, so this is easy to get
well-defined and nimble.
Thank you, chair, and I really
appreciate you adding that.
Oversight and accountability and
what this so so not my primary
swim. I want clean air and I I
want to be able to live my life
and you know, but not my primary
swim la. I know that, you know,
of legislation that I carry up
here, you know, I know this is
one of your key swim lanes. So,
so Chairman and and President um
give me just a very quick
overview. What's a small,
medium, and large project gonna
look like a specific project.
Can you just give us that kind
of color to what we're talking
about here.
So, Mr. Chairman, um,
If you look on the back of this
page, 7 million for a solar
technician apprenticeship
program.
Or displaced workers in San Juan
County.
If I was in charge of workforce
solutions like that.
Um
You see the grid modernization,
rid modernization is going to be
expensive.
And the funding in here for
electric infrastructure is
certainly not enough. I know
there's several other bills
dealing with electrification and
mod uh um modernization.
Um, so certainly they need
modernization software for
Central New Mexico Community
College.
Um, so, uh.
Transportation, 1 million for
repairing or reconstructing West
Brasher Road in Chavis County. I
live in Chavis County, but
people who live in Champas
County are pretty intense about
trying to repair that.
Um
So that's a.
Yeah, and I appreciate that. I
just wanted to get an idea of
what these projects actually.
are what they look like, um,
what about on the energy
efficiency piece, um, would
mobile power plants be something
that this might be.
Something that these monies
could be used for. I'm thinking
like electric school buses that,
you know, they, they sit idle
for 20.
Hours 22 hours a day, and they
could certainly be used to
charge them with low cost energy
overnight off of wind or what or
maybe not solar obviously, but
wind, and then, and then you use
that in the highest period of
the day during the day, and they
could actually power maybe an
elementary school with their
local, with their area school
but is that, is that something
that you could perceive as being
used for?
Um, Mr. Chairman, yes, I mean.
The reason we haven't detailed
in here what it's for is just
for that is that it depends on
your community, it depends on
where you're at, depends on what
you're trying to do, and so, you
know, yes.
Because
That follows the uh requirements
of the bill that's for
electricity, uh, you're trying
to either do more efficiency in
your electricity or trying to
increase grid capacity,
resilience, reliability through
grid modernization, we need all
three of those.
So
Right. Well, thank you, Chair,
and thank you for adding the
oversight and accountability
discussion. I'm really glad we
all got to hear that. And then
what these projects actually
look like. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you. Thank you. We're
gonna try to speed some of this
up and just limit everybody and,
and make sure you have
questions, like 5 minutes,
otherwise you're gonna be here
till 7 o'clock tonight, so let's
try to gain some efficiency send
near your next.
I have the official time so
don't make me roll it. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Welcome, Madam President. All
right, so
My big issue here is
This body has gutted San Juan
County.
We have taken away our, our
power plant.
We have made it easier, more
efficient to drill in Texas.
So we
We are totally opposed to this.
Completely we're not opposed to
electric vehicles were not
opposed to the environment.
But we are opposed to losing
jobs.
We've got to bring something
home.
We, we've got to get something
back. So now you're trying to,
you're taking even more oil and
gas.
Take it out of the system.
The profits that we that
The state gets from oil and gas.
We're gonna reduce that. I mean,
we just passed one yesterday
where we're gonna increase the,
the royalties and, and things
but 50 million, I can't even
remember the numbers kind of run
together. 1.3.
Well, a billion million.
You know, so, so my issue is, is
not necessarily
Your intent of the bill.
But I really have an issue with
how this is gonna play out, the
340.
Um, million a year.
I, I think you understand kind
of where I'm coming from.
I'll let you come in.
So, Mr. Chairman, this is not a
year.
It is non-recurring funding in
spite of your FIR which is
calling it recurring.
So, um, and secondly,
You know, the funds we have in
the general fund aren't all oil
and gas about 30%, but it's
significant, and we're grateful
for it. I as an educator, very
grateful for what we've been
able to do for education.
This is for your community.
Your community wants $7 million
for a solar technician
apprenticeship program in San
Juan County. E&M is about to put
solar up there, try to replace,
do partial replacement. We all
want to work on the San Juan and
if you look at this, San Juan
has 29 projects they've
requested at a cost of $111
million. We can't do all of
those, uh, with this bill, but
we could certainly do
significant
amount.
uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. That, that's good.
Part of the San Juan County
problem though is the reason we
have so many projects.
is because we've been gutted.
We've lost jobs.
You know, you, you try to do a
gap fill that didn't really work
out, um.
We get 400 and
And almost $410 million from oil
and gas right now for our
education or.
higher education in our county
for all of that.
But I think this bill
jeopardizes that amount.
Not only does it jeopardize, but
what jobs am I gonna bring to
San Juan County if this bill
passes, I, I just give you the
same answer you've requested job
training in San Juan. This gives
uh $40 million.25 million
dollars for worker training,
uh, the request that we did find
from from San Juan is $7 million
to set up a solar technician
apprenticeship program.
San Juan, I believe, is moving
into a creating good jobs,
training for workers who, who
want jobs in the renewable
energy industry, mine
reclamation, you're doing that
up there, uh, certainly even
our, our.
You know, our, our community
colleges have all kinds of
technician jobs. Uh, so a
technician programs, uh, so
yeah, you need job training, you
need this bill. You need funding
to do this. And this doesn't
take a penny away from oil and
gas.
Mr. Chair, but you're, you're
losing sight of the fact of why
we've had to diversify.
To this.
It, it wasn't Samon County's
choice.
When, when this body took away
our power plant that we had to
figure out a way to diversify.
To me, this is just the next
step in that.
Not only have you taken away our
power plant, but now you're
gonna take away our small
businesses as far as our small
oil and gas.
Industry because the big ones,
the big ones can survive. We
understand that.
But in San Juan County, we have
a lot of um
Private small oil companies.
And, and we're gonna be driving
those out.
Of our county they're they're
gonna have to go somewhere else.
And so, you know, you're 100%
right on the job and, and how
we've diversified.
I, I commend everybody in San
Juan County, you know, we were
forced to do that and I think
we've done a good job.
But at what point do we have to
plan our feet and go, OK, you've
got to quit doing this to us.
And I think this bill is just
the next step into taking just a
little more of the cheese away
from San Juan County.
Mr. Chairman, I just don't see
it like that. There are 29
projects that you all asked 111
million this uh.
Bill would go a long way towards
helping you on some of those
projects. It doesn't do anything
about taking away any oil and
gas. You're gonna have oil and
gas for many years, but they
doubled their production in the
last 4 years. I mean, this has
nothing to do with that issue.
Let's double it in the next
year, Mr. Chair.
Let's, let's double, let's
double our oil and gas
production in this next year.
Mr. Chairman, this bill doesn't
say you can't do that, doesn't
do anything.
that production or any of that.
So this bill will not hurt.
Nomoga any of the oil and gas.
All the ones that stood up and,
and or against this, it's not
gonna hurt them. They're just
Mr. Chairman, this puts money
into the communities around the
state to do projects.
Electrial electric electricity
infrastructure, mod, uh.
Modernization uh grant programs
for energy efficiency, renewable
technology. Um, we have cities
and counties that want to do
solar, they could use this
funding for that.
Um, Department of Transportation
projects, uh, state supplemental
land and water outdoor
recreation Act we have.
of communities around the state
that wanna use funding for this
rodeo grounds, a bike paths,
walking paths, swimming pools,
60 million is for the school
buses that goes to the public
school facility authority, uh.
Districts need money for
infrastructure, um, they can use
that, so.
I mean this is a jobs bill and a
project bill and it's designed
to meet unmet needs from all
over the state.
I don't know why they don't like
it, you think that, yeah, I, I
get why they don't like my first
bill that you haven't heard yet,
but this is money for our
communities to do things that
they want to do for health
issues, mitigating wildfires,
uh, look at Ruidoso and Calf
Canyon. Those folks need funding
to do projects to
If their forest back.
to build some of those in that
infrastructure that's been
ruined, redo so now with the
flooding of Roswell with the
flooding. I mean, this is
designed to be a nimble fund
that money going to the
communities to deal with these
issues.
But we're, we're just gonna have
to agree to disagree. I just,
Mr. Chair, sorry, I, I
I respect you. I, I look up to
you. I
Um
I just, I cannot see.
How
We've done all of those things
you listed.
We diversified. We put in solar,
we've, we've done the trails,
we've built boat ramps. I mean,
we have done everything we
possibly.
Can think of, not that we could
do, but that we can think of.
And
Economic development still has
not came. It has not brought.
Brought that economic
development there yet.
We need.
Jobs. We need people moving in.
We need
We need concrete.
Things
And
You know, electrifying the
school buses and things. I
don't, I don't know that that's
gonna help San Juan County. I
mean, we, we don't make our own
electricity.
So it's a cost to us. That's why
we have to
You know, try to get supplements
and, and work so hard. But, but
I appreciate you coming in today
and I, I appreciate your
opinion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Let's make sure we get it short
and make sure we get questions
Senator Trujil.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Protem for this
bill, bringing it forward. Um,
we heard a presentation just the
other day and it might have been
yesterday. I'm losing track of
days, um, that talked about how
economic development is really
tied to the quality of life in a
community and this really
addresses that. This really
helps with the quality of life.
I mean, I, I listen to what you
said. I, I read through this and
it's like,
Bike paths, you know, uh,
electrical, uh, grid
modernization. We all need
access to more electricity. It's
not just for charging cars. It's
for AI. It's for all of the
things that we need more
electricity for. We need more
electricity when we build more
communities, more houses, more
activities, um, so this really
fits in line with that and I
appreciate that it's along that
line. I just have a couple of
questions, um, uh, about the
actual language.
On page 1 of 48, it says um the
Department of Finance, so that's
great. I get that they're gonna
administer the fund. I just want
to make sure that I'm reading
this correctly. Money in the
fund is subject to appropriation
by the legislature to fund
projects that will. So we're
gonna appropriate the money,
we're not gonna approve the
projects, correct?
Well, Mr. Chairman, the projects
will have to be approved
eventually. I mean by the
legislature, Mr. Chairman, uh,
not but by uh department of
finance, yeah, OK, that's, I
just wanted to make sure I was
reading that correctly.
And then
The last question is in regards
to page 3,
line 23, the community benefits
agreement. I noticed that
there's not a definition of
that. I understand what it is,
and we do community benefits
agreements. Is there any place
in our statutes that defines
Immunity benefits agreements.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, we're not sure.
OK, um, Mr. Chairman, and then
that just kind of leads me to my
next thing, and I know I said
one more question, but this will
be the last.
This
And doesn't give DFA authority
to draft rules for the
implementation, and I think
there's a need for some rules to
define some of that stuff.
Um, the, how the pro, you know,
I just think that that would be
a good addition to this. I don't
have an amendment for you at
this point, but I think it could
be added and it would make this
um workable for them to be able
to adopt rules that
Explain how things will work.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator Trujillo,
so the reason that DFA doesn't
have the rulemaking authority in
here is because the
appropriations, even though the
fund is going to be housed at
DFE. If you notice in Senate
Bill 49, the appropriations
literally go to almost every
agency except DFA. So having
rulemaking within an agency that
isn't really gonna be the one
sending out the money doesn't
really make sense.
Senate Bill 48 is the pass
through. It's the carrot, right?
It's the landing place for money
and then you all in appropriate
from there, and it provides a
certain parameters and guard
rails that um the pro 1 was
describing, and then it'll flow
to whatever it's supposed to
flow.
And in once it flows, that's
where the rules.
Get
Uh, instituted and the
parameters of how the
appropriations will work.
So, and Mr. Chairman, so most,
most of it goes to inert.
You know, one chunk goes to
transportation PSFA.
And and EDD and workforce
solutions. So they all have
rulemaking.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Madam.
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam
President, um, now bear with me
cause I'm about to date myself.
When I, I was excited about the
idea of an e-bike actually. I
have friends that ride them all
the time on the trails, and they
keep inviting us, oh, get an
e-bike, get an e-bike, and tell
I saw the price tag and it's
about what I spent for my first
car. Again, I'm dating myself.
So
I'm looking at this.
The concept I understand. I
really do understand it.
I'm looking at the
practicalities, even in my
district in the Northeast
Heights. There was a company
just a couple of years ago that
came in with the electric bikes
where they sit a cluster of them
on a corner. They put some by La
Cueva, they put some by Smiths,
they put them around the whole
area.
It was a disaster for that
company, like an absolute
disaster. Um, so I'm wondering
one.
How many people even in
Bernalillo.
are going to buy an e-bike.
I know that maybe my district
might have the largest
concentration of electric
vehicles and still it's not.
A huge percentage of people
buying them, and I'm hearing
that the manufacturers are
saying they're losing money.
Manufacturing these electric
vehicles now and
The market currently in New
Mexico as a whole is only
demanding about 4% for electric
vehicles.
So
I'm looking at some of these
things and I'm, I'm curious how
How can this support the average
New Mexican who
Their annual income is the
lowest, I think, in the nation.
How can this help them afford
some of the really
Well things you're talking about
here when right now they can't
afford it. Is that gonna change
for them in some way?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, you know, we,
we say EV bikes, electric bikes,
but you can't find it in the
bill.
I mean, it's an idea that some
folks have had, but.
It's, it's part of the package.
Um, I don't see communities, you
know.
Trying to get a little bunch of
e-bikes. I just don't see that
happening.
Uh, communities want.
Better jobs. That's the
workforce solutions, um, they
need electric infrastructure to
do a whole variety of things.
That's the mod grid and the uh
The um
The grants for energy efficiency
and renewable technology. So we
talk about e-bikes, but I don't
see them as part of these
projects, really.
And they could be, but, you
know, this, this isn't trying to
give everybody an e-bike. This
is trying to let community uh
deal with the issues that
they're dealing with now, um,
redoso Roswell.
Uh, have Canyon. I mean, these
are communities that are really
hurting now and need all kinds
of things. So that's what I
think this is going to be going
for.
Mr. Chair Adrian, did you want
to say something on that, Mr.
Chair, I can give you two
practical examples just to like
ground it, right? Um, so in
Centerville 49, 1 of the
appropriations would be for
seed, the community energy
efficiency Development Block
grant.
Which literally goes to low
income households to be able to
update their infrastructure. So
for example, there are heat
pumps.
Right? So it's like, here's
money to help you pay for your
heat pump. So that's like a
practical example. Another one
would be, for example, the $100
million to the grid
modernization.
Right? That's $100 million that
won't come out of a hike in the
utility prices for the
ratepayers by modernizing that
electric grid, right? So it.
Within each one that there's
ways that it impacts everyday
New Mexicans and it'll help them
directly. Uh, it's just a matter
of, you know, sifting to it
through it.
Thank you for that and Mr.
Chair, um,
Madam President,
I can't remember who was here
talking to to us maybe economic
development. We've heard so many
groups come in and departments,
but
What stuck with me is they were
talking about the need to
modernize our grid, which I can
appreciate, and they were
talking about site readiness to
attract industry here,
especially AI and quantum
physics which require an
absorbitant amount of energy
like we've never seen before,
um.
But there was a woman that
clearly stated.
Um
That the ratepayer would help
pay for that. The ratepayer, the
ratepayers in all of New Mexico.
And when I look at my electric
bill for my home.
It has easily doubled in the
last 10 years.
Yet at the same time PNM has
been telling us that their
energy is like half coming from
solar fields.
Maybe a little from when, but I
think mostly solar, so uh.
Again, it's the practicality of
Where's, where's the reality and
where's the reality for the
average New Mexican and then
especially I'm thinking of our
friends on the reservation. I'm
thinking of our friends in rural
communities in mountain towns
who are seeing
There's a lot of this that just
isn't.
Work for us, and that's, that's
my concern is the real
practicality of the numbers and
then
You're saying this is a one time
ask.
What happens a year or two down
the road.
Where does the money come from,
especially when I'm looking at
so many papers here.
Oil and gas.
Has given Bernalillo County
2,376 million $958,245. I,
that's, I'm shocked at that
number and I'm thinking, if that
goes away over the course of
time and we shift all of this
focus to really truly
renewables.
How, how are our communities
going to survive. Is that, is
that kind of revenue going to
come from these renewable energy
jobs in new technologies and
opportunities, that's, that's
what I want to see to feel
really comfortable saying, oh my
goodness, this is a lot of money
we're spending now and where is
the 2 billion plus going to come
from just from my county alone.
kind of hard to answer that
question. I don't really know
where you're going with it, you
know, I just go back to my
answers. This bill doesn't do
anything to decrease the oil and
gas money going to our counties,
you know, uh, yeah, the moa
stands up and said, oh my God,
the sky is falling, the sky is
not falling, the sky is filled
with oil and gas, double
production over the last 4
years. So I, I don't understand
that point of view, so
So, uh, you know, this.
This to me, and, and I was
remiss in not pointing out that
uh I think it's at least 3 of
these funds are over a a
two-year period.
Not a one year period.
Um, I forget which ones they
are. We can find that 3 or 4 of
them. So, um,
I'm not, you know, I mean, we'll
see how it works. If we pass it,
if this moves forward, um, I
think we're gonna see
communities that uh really step
up and start doing projects that
they need to do to, uh, for,
for.
For what they want.
Uh, so
You know, I, I don't have an
answer for your 2 million to the
counties. I just don't think
it's a problem. Well, and I, I
kind of wrap up, sun's gonna go
down on this.
We can have one. OK, so, um, Mr.
Chair, Madam President, I think
just where I'm going is um
I'm just a numbers person. I'm a
data person. I'm a, do we have a
really strong strategic plan and
we do, do we know the mission?
Are we going to fulfill the
vision and it's 2 billion, not 2
million. I wanna make sure that
I said that correctly.
Where is that money going to
come from, so that when my
constituents call me and say,
what in the world did you just
vote for and we did pass a bill
through this committee that I'm
concerned has the oil industry.
Now going to Texas, now going to
more federal lands because the
business person in me says
clearly, if I can get oil and
gas out of the ground for 16%
versus 25% I'll do that all day
long. So the federal rate is so
much lower than what we're
talking about charging the oil
industry here in our state. Is
that more revenue that we're
going to lose and that concerns
me. So that's just where I'm
going. Um
I, I hope you're right. I just
hope you're right if this does
pass, but I'm concerned for the
long term, um, fiscal health of
New Mexico. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
And
What's your next, but.
Oil and gas is like purple
snobble leaving his gold mine.
It ain't gonna happen.
They're not leaving New Mexico,
the best of the best is here.
Uh, they determined by the feds
that they're going to drive this
in, it's gonna be here for a
while. Senator Woods, let's try
to be quick because technical
issues in my FRR, Mr. Chair.
technical issues are feel like a
damned attorney, but let me ask
him anyway, Madam prote.
Technical issues, it says terms
overburdened communities,
appropriate scale for bioest
projects, scientifically
determined restoration,
sustainable manner may require
more precise definitions. So
when we start talking about
overburdened communities who
will determine who those
communities are.
And this is administered by uh
DFA IC, so, uh, uh, the question
is,
Have you got adequate?
Adequate definitions in your
bill.
to
To administer the bill, Mister
Chair.
In protea.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Woods, if you look on page 4,
section C, um, we're going to uh
develop or identified data tool
that helps us with these
overburdened communities, uh,
federal EPA has had a tool like
this for many years called the
Um, so, um, this will, um, help
us, uh, determine those over.
And it's also defined in the
film.
And I know you may not have
heard Adrian say, not DSA that's
going to administer it, it's
other departments.
His funds go, uh, 3 of them go
to inner, 4 of them go to M
nerd, 12.
Of TFA want to economic
development I want to work for
solutions.
Mhm
Mm
But here it says on page one,
line 22.
The Department of Finance and
Administration to administer the
fund.
Right, but that Mr. Chairman,
that means they administer the
fund, but this these are where
the funds are and where the
funding goes to from DFA to, OK,
OK.
And Senator what
Senator Shindo.
Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Pro time for the presentation,
uh, several questions, uh.
The list that we're looking at,
the project count by County.
Where, where is that list from
and who, who?
Where do these projects come
from?
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, um,
This is coming from.
Hatred
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Shedo, so
over the interim, the Protes
team hired a staff to really
dive into these issues and they
actually did a lot of community
outreach and went out to the
communities and talked with the
locals and local government
officials and collected these
projects and compiled them, um,
in anticipation for this bill
and to help shape it.
OK
Thank you. um.
You know, we, we, we passed the
uh community Solar Act.
And uh
The tribes that were exempt.
from the 200 megawatt.
Number
To this day, no tribes.
That are within the industrial
utility has taken advantage of
that.
Uh, I think some of the issues
have been in terms of capacity.
And all of that.
So
But when you look at the rural
areas in the, in the, I know
that um.
You have one data project, I'm
not sure what that is. Maybe
it's something in one area with
the Navajo Nation.
But one of the struggles that
Some of the real parts with the
other tribe are having is that
Their power comes from co-ops.
And
We tri-state and
They're, they're handcuffed.
Because the portfolio standards
that we have for the
investorilles are very different
than the co-ops.
And, and so even though
All of this is great.
In actuality, it's not happening
on the ground.
And, and so I don't know when
that's gonna happen.
I mean, I think your Carson is
probably.
You know,
On its own because they were
able to buy out of Tri-State and
now they're doing their own, but
the rest of the state that, you
know, relies on cooperatives.
Your tribes can't do anything.
Uh, so I guess one of the
questions is with the tribes be
eligible.
For
Doing something, whether it's on
the grid.
Or behind the meter.
determine the tribes are part of
the communities that can apply
for these funds. And I know what
you're saying. I've been talking
to Louis Reyes quite a lot
because he's gotten a huge chunk
of money and he's doing green
hydrogen with a quest of mine
and uh that water reclamation,
so.
They're really going going great
guns up there, so.
We have to solve these problems.
we passed our community solar
act. We don't have any community
solar anywhere because we can't
find the grid to put it up.
So, you know, site.
with electricity, uh, more
modernization for our grid. It,
it's an issue for us.
OK
Uh,
the other question I had, I
think, uh,
The energy. So, so what anything
about you say the tribes are
eligible but usually in our
bills, you know, you have 5
nations, communities, all name.
I didn't see anything to Bill.
Whether tribes are eligible. I
know that they.
So at least for some of them
probably fall under the.
Definition of uh
what was just been talked about
uh by Senator Woods.
the uh overburden.
Communities, but I don't know if
that's the difference that
qualifies him or we actually
need to name them.
So Mr. Chairman, the
overburdened communities have to
be consulted with and uh
encouraged to uh be part of it.
We amended this bill in
conservation to um
ad on page 4.
Uh, line 13.
Um
apartment shall ensure that data
from tribal indigenous
communities are included in the
data used by the data tool.
So we've added tribes right into
that data set that we're
requiring on page 4, line 13.
Um
So that, so that, so that makes
them eligible then?
Mr. Chairman, they're just
eligible to begin with. OK. All
right. Thank you. Uh, yeah, Mr.
Chair, I just want to add, uh,
since they're in the data tool
that determines an overburdened
community. It's the overburdened
communities throughout the
entire state that are eligible.
So that includes
appreciate it. Thanks for the
clarification.
think we'll wrap this up real
quick. I mean, this is a funding
bill. This just gives
communities opportunities for
what they see as their vision
and what they want to do in
their communities. I I'll agree
with Senator Li a little bit,
you know, the ETA which I voted
against.
It was really a bailout for PNM.
That's all that really did was
bail them out of a stranded
asset that put it back on the
ratepayers. That's all the AT
was when you come down to it, I
voted against it. Uh, it passed
for that reason, and so here we
are today. How do you figure out
in our community the same way.
We lost our fun, we lost the
power plant, right? We have
stranded assets, they tried to
do blue, green, rainbow colored
hydrogen all over, and it didn't
work.
That hydrogen is a chase for
federal dollars when you have a
7 to 1 match, if you're going to
spend 500 million, you're gonna
get 7 3.5 billion in return. We
know that game and uh how that
works, but really for me, when I
go home, I'm gonna say, hey, I
want to fix this bike path
through Gallup that goes past
the airport and down the road,
right? Here's the money, here's
the resources, go get the money
and go get it done.
I mean, Chargers and electric
buses really don't work where I
live because we have the largest
bus fleet in our miles, our
buses go more miles than the New
York transit system, and we
require four-wheel drive buses
in some situations. We have
bridges that the buses can't
even go over.
So that might not work for us,
it may work in grants where
they're local and they have
don't have to travel the
reservation so far.
But I mean
And at some point you need to
realize this is just actually
funds. This is a capital out
Billy bill.
For what you want to achieve in
your community, whether it's
charging stations, whether it's
solar, whether it's
transportation, whether you want
to modernize your grid, however
you want to do that.
There's a bucket to help you do
that.
And so we'll hear him complain
that they don't really want it
and then we'll see their
communities apply and, and
that's the reverse mechanism. It
happens here a lot, but I mean.
Everything.
New Mexico has based their
revenues off oil and gas, and
that's how we live and that's
how we survive. But if we don't
start changing,
then we're gonna continue down
that path and we're going to die
on the vine like we've watched
in the past history of New
Mexico roller coaster through
episodes of high revenue to low
revenue to no revenue to being
dead broke and coming back up.
We've set New Mexico up
completely different, but really
when it comes down to it, if, if
you really want to look for
funding for what you want to
accomplish, um.
Here's a, here's a bill. Here's
here's the money. We, we leave
the session every single time
and say, oh we didn't put any
money here. We didn't put enough
money there. How do we get money
over here and we struggle
through that through the entire
time, so, um, I, I think this
allows people to do what they
want to accomplish and doesn't
restrict it to just one thing
and not just one vision.
So, with that, I'll take
emotion, and motion for Du pass
by Senator Steinborn, second by
Senator Padilla.
As a man
OK.
color.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Brown votes no, Senator
Campos. Senator Campos votes
yes. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes no
Senator Padilla Senor Padilla
Bosia, Senator Steinborn,
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasson votes no, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes no. Senator Sendo, Senator
Sendo votes, yes, Senator Munoz,
Senator Munoz, yes, we have a
deep pass 7 to 4.
Thank you, man. J next bill
we're gonna do Senate Bill 49
and we'll keep an eye on time
and see.
You want to start with Senate
Bill 49.
Short, quick because you know
what's gonna happen. 49, just
spells out thoroughly where the
money goes. It's just what we've
been talking about. It's fine
for you to table it.
Thank you. Any questions on
Senate Bill 49 seen done.
Question?
I have the fun of moving the
table,
I moved the table. We have a
table in motion non-debatable.
Well, we call and we have, we
have a second now.
Call the roll on the table in
motion.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos,
Senator Campos votes, Sergio
Gonzalez
Gonzalez, Senator they're voting
yes, they're voting to table the
bill, right.
OK.
Making sure Senator Lanier,
Senator Lanier votes yes.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes no.
Senator Steinborn.
There signboard.
Mm
Sinnersteinor votes yes, Senator
Tobiasson Senator Tobiasson
votes yes, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Til votes no. Senator
Woods.
Woods votes. Yes, Senator
Shando,
Senator Shedo votes, yes,
Senator Munoz.
Senators ports, yes, we have a
due past the table I'm laughing
because I walked around the room
to educate the committee on 49
and, and I still got some
notebooks.
So I know how to work those
votes now when I need the
opposite vote, I'll tell them
the opposite of what I need.
Thank you. Your bill's been
tabled. Let's do Senate Bill 38.
As amended, do we have, uh, we
have an amendment for that 203,
I mean 230971.
On this amendment I have. Thank
you. Tell us through that
quickly and
So, Mr. Chairman, um, so proud
of this, this bill, this 3 or 4
years that we've been looking at
this. This sets up an office of
special education.
In the public education
department. I have with me our
current deputy, Doctor Margaret
Cage, who has been working under
the governor's executive order
that set up this office. So this
is essentially a codifying that
and setting up uh a uh an
official office of special
education.
Um, there's so many things that
now we're gonna be doing if we
have this office, we're looking
at a statewide IEP which should
help tremendously. We're looking
at much more training for
teachers and parents and school
board members about special
education they're going to focus
on transition from uh elementary
to middle and middle to high and
high to career from pre-K to
elementary, so.
Um
The amendment we're offering,
uh, in the, go ahead.
Let's get motion.
Can I get a motion to move
amendment for discussion
purposes.
And have a second my Senator
Treil any objection to that
motion seeing none.
tells what the amendment does.
So
the amendment removes the ombud.
From the bill. So several years
ago, we set up a special ed on
but we put them in the
developmental disabilities uh
unit in, in DDC. So that's where
they are now. We wanted to move
them to the PED but the
community is just not ready for
that yet. Um, that was really
the only complaint about the
bill was you're pulling the on
but into the PED and we don't
like it there.
So what we want to do is pull
that out and look at it for the
next year, see if that um but
could work with the Office of
Special ed, you know, if it
would be much better to put them
in PED then we'll maybe do that
next year. Um, anyway, the
amendment takes out the on bud
both in the title and in the
body of the bill, and it also uh
uh.
Corrects a mistake that we had.
We had gifted children. It's
gifted students, um, it also
distinguishes special ed from uh
gifted students. We're one of
the only states that lumped in
gifted with our special ed, uh,
you, you have to separate them
because our special ed is under
IDEA from the federal government
and our our gifted students are
are separate from that.
So that's all the amendment
does. Happy to answer any
questions on the amendment none
can have a motion to opt in this
motion by Senator Gonzaloz,
seconded by Senator Brant.
Any objection to adopting the
amendment, seeing none were back
on the bill, questions on the
bill.
Center.
Thank you, Miss Chairman,
Senator, thank you for bringing
this, um, so you're not creating
a new department or anything
like that. I think we have
plenty of departments. Let's
just make sure that under PE.
It'll stay under pad, they have
an office that specifically
focused on special ed students
making sure that they get the,
the, the care that they need.
Is that correct? That's exactly
correct, and we want a deputy
there to run that department and
that's what Doctor Margaret Cage
is doing right now. She came
here from Louisiana a year and a
half ago and
And we want to hang on to her we
can keep her, you know, that'd
be great, unlike our secretaries
that we can't seem to keep, but.
Um
Because you know, I, I think our
special eds actually come a long
ways under you, doctor, and, and
I think it, we, we need to
continue that focus.
Um, I, I don't get a lot of
Complaints from my constituents,
but most of the time when I do.
It's about special ed in our
schools.
And so Chairman,
Senator, for a number of years
and now we have the ability to
do that. We've got this office
who's charge is to do that and,
and she's working with everybody
around the state. It's pretty
phenomenal.
Um
Thank you.
I think that answered any
questions I have. I, I think
this is a good idea to
Make sure that there's someone
really focused on this area. It
is, it has been an area of need
for a long time in our state.
I skipped one process we need to
ask those in support in the
room.
You really let's get 2 or 3.
And before getting in line, the
4th person buys dinner. We'll
take 3 from the audience, so
make sure you can count.
And then we have Chianzu's.
Yeah
Oh sure, we're gonna go.
And just leave, just leave it
there. Yeah, just go from there.
Do it from right there. You
don't have to stand up. You can
sit down.
Uh
I'm Greg Trap. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Commission for the Blind. We do
very, very strongly support this
bill. We see tremendous needs
out there for blind students and
students who have low vision. We
think the creation of this
office would be a, a great step
forward and we strongly support
it. Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, Ellen Pines
representing the disability
coalition we advocate for the
interests of people with
disabilities of all types and
people of all ages we do support
we did support most of the bill
before we believe that
formalizing these changes will
elevate special ed at the public
education department and we hope
that leads to improved delivery
of special education services
under Doctor Cage's leadership
and hopefully her successors we
did have very strong objections
to the movement.
The proposed move of the Aba
office into PED because we
believe that would negatively
affect its independence, so we
are thrilled with the amendment
and we can offer our
wholehearted support for the
bill with that change. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name's Eli
Frescos. I'm a civil rights
attorney and disability rights
advocate. I'll be very quick. I
strongly support this bill. I've
heard many people in the
community also support this bill
under the leadership of Doctor
Cage. Personally, I have a child
with an IEP. She has been very
successful with that program
here, um, after COVID she
experienced many uh issues that
she had to work through and it
was a fantastic job through our,
our current state program and I
hope that codifying this will
protect it, especially what's
going on at the federal level,
so.
I strongly support this bill and
thank you so much.
Thank you. Anybody in opposition
in the room?
Uh, just give us one minute,
let's get the 3. We have 3 on
Zoom.
We're gonna only take 3
they got one minute.
Michelle, are you there?
Michelle, are you there?
Next one.
Alice McCoy, are you there?
Yes, Mr. Chair. Thank you for
the opportunity. Uh, Mr. Chair
esteemed senators, the council
is mandated by uh the state and
federal law to to promote
systemic change for New Mexicans
living with developmental
disabilities. This is uh the DD
council where the Aed lives now.
The council members are
appointed by the governor and
the majority are New Mexicans
with lived experience and family
members for the past 6 years
since the very beginning of this
administration, uh, special
education has been at the top of
this council's priorities, the
coun
has worked tirelessly with the
governor, legislators, and state
agencies to improve the special
education system and this bill
is the culmination of that work.
The Office of Special Ed has
made tremendous strides in the
past year and a half, and will
accomplish so much more. The
council strongly supports this
bill. It's imperative that our
legislature cement the progress
we have made and we'll make in
the future. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Emergency committee.
Miny next, Liza, are you there?
Hello, Mr. Chairman. My name is
Alisa Deal, and I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty and a member of
the legal team representing the
Yazi plaintiffs and the Yazi
Martinez lawsuit.
Can you hear me OK? We can't
hear you.
Thank you. We stand in strong
support of Senate Bill 38 and
think the sponsor for her
tireless work on this bill, and
this amendment.
Um, in 2018, the court ruled
that the state is failing to
meet its obligations to students
with disabilities. With the
establishment of an Office of
Special Education.
Our hope is that the office in
PD will focus greater attention
on resources, uh, on meeting the
needs of our students with
disabilities and their families,
and whole districts accountable
for complying with state and
federal law. Uh, for these
reasons and those given here
today, uh, we hope you, uh,
voted you pass on this bill.
Thank you.
Nesbit
Laurel, are you there?
Yes, chair, members of the
committee, um, good afternoon.
My name is Laurel Nesbitt and
I'm an attorney with Disability
Rights New Mexico. DRNM stands
in support of the
Uh, he clicked on the wrong
button.
again
Laurel, I think you're back on
it.
Oh, I'm so sorry you for a
second.
My apologies. I hope I didn't.
Oh, terrific. OK, let me, let me
start. So I'm Laurel Nesbit.
Um, chair members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to comment. I'm an
attorney with disability rights
New Mexico, DRNM stands in
support of the bill as amended,
and we thank the sponsor for the
amendment to eliminate the
transfer of the special ed on
bud to PED.
Which had been a primary concern
for us. DRM and others in the
special education advocacy realm
rely on our collaboration with
OESSEO, and on the ombuds
independence both in its
reporting function and its scope
of advocacy for students with
disabilities and their families.
I do, uh, we do realize that the
that the bill is very necessary
to solidify the Office of
Special Education to enable it
to continue and expand its good
work. It has the bill has
strengths such as the efforts to
expand and clarify the data
ing and compliance monitoring
duties of the office. I would
just say that that piece can be
pushed even more, perhaps in
subsequent amendment and and
rulemaking to make um data
collection even more robust and
comprehensive. The need for that
is clear, particularly in areas
that have to do with such uh
patterns as long term
suspensions, expulsions,
shortened school day, and
informal removal of students
with disabilities. Uh, one last
point, I would just say that we
appreciate the
effort in the bill to include
language addressing provision of
a free appropriate public
education to children in
residential treatment centers,
but that needs to specify and
include private RTCs, which is a
problematic gap that DRNM has
tried to address for years now.
Um, we, we ask that you, that
you vote um.
For this bill and we appreciate
the opportunity to comment and
are always happy to provide
additional input if needed.
Thank you. Thank you. uh, those
in opposition, I think there was
out there.
But there's not 4.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name's Lee
White. I'm the superintendent of
schools in Loving.
And
When educational codification
occurs, the uh regulation
language that usually follows,
oftentimes becomes misaligned.
To what the original intent.
I mint and which appears to to
me as an over regulated process
during its implementation and
enforcement.
I believe this bill does just
that and for that I stand in
opposition to Senate Bill 38 as
amended. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, stand rounds for
the school superintendents
association. We stand in
opposition to this bill. Uh, we
want to thank the sponsor for
the amount of work that's been
done on it. It's not where we
think we need it, 90% of your
superintendents in New Mexico
still oppose this bill.
And so Mr. Chairman, one of the
suggestions that might get us
out of the quagmire is we this
bill is unnecessary. It's
currently under executive order.
That all of these things are
happening through this
administration.
So if you as a legislature
select that this needs to be a
statute, we would ask that you
set a sunset clause for June
30th of 2027, which would be the
apex of a new governor and allow
that governor and that
administration to determine
whether they want to continue
this model.
Or go back to some of the
originating models that we have
in New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you. I think the
legislature will determine and
the governor can veto.
That's the model I think I
worked under. Any other
questions, if not, good
question.
trail. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and um thank you, Madam Protem
and Doctor Cage for being here.
I have just kind of a, again, a
clarifying question in section
7,
page 10.
There's new material, the
transfer of preschool special
education, and I see that
Secretary Gruinski is popped in
here. I'm trying to figure out
how that works. I, I got through
the first part of it like it
transfers over to them, the
funds do, but then I got to the
last paragraph that the
department retains all oversight
responsibilities, and I'm
wondering how that would work.
So Mr. Chairman and Senator.
This is just to move.
A 619B coordinator. I don't know
what that means, Doctors in the
ECCD department.
So that's all this moving that
person a salary, uh, with her.
Uh
That's all that does.
OK. Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman.
Madam
Roam, I appreciate that.
I will just say.
We can do better on special ed.
We can do a lot.
And I know that we spend a lot
of money trying to
Undo
What's not being done.
And, and what I mean by undo,
which is the ramifications of
what happens to the state.
Because it's not being
accomplished.
I have a, a, a grandson that's
got special needs and, you know,
they've moved to Texas this last
year and it's deplorable, the
treatment that he's getting over
there. I mean deplorable.
And so I'm hoping that I can
move him back here that we can
get him back into New Mexico so
that these services, but across
the board, we are not providing
the education that our
specialized students deserve to
have.
Their students.
They need to have the education
that fits their needs and too
often we think that if a, if a,
if a
Staff
You handle or deal with.
The education of that student,
that moving them is the right
thing to do.
And it's not
We need to learn how to work
with students who have these
challenges and
They have the right to be there.
So I will just leave it at that.
This is long in the long needed
and I'm, I'm just praying
literally that this helps
improve the lives of many of our
students in New Mexico. Thank
you.
Senator Woods.
to bison we're going to go to
one minute time limit now.
by Senator Wood's past.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. OK, so,
Verheim's stuck.
Is
Why if this is under executive
order and we're just moving
someone. It sounds like a minor
shift to me. I'm not an expert
in this area. Why are 90% of the
superintendents in New Mexico
opposing this spill. Is there
something I'm not understanding.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm
gonna be honest.
Uh, they told us in education.
They're against these bills
because of what the governor has
done to the education committee
in the House and the Senate.
So this is a reaction against
that.
That's what they said in Senate
education.
And I wanted to be honest and
tell you that.
Thank you and as you know, I'm
new here, Mr. Chair, so what is
it that you're referring to
because I don't have that that
history. I really don't, so the
governor basically said that
none of the educators uh should
be on education committees, but
the lawyers should not be on
judiciary, that it's a conflict
of interest.
Um
You know, we're a citizen
legislature and it's gone to the
courts and
You know, we, we're all in
conflict.
With interest. But it's just the
way it is as a citizen
legislature.
If we were paid and didn't have
other jobs it would be
different.
But we, we don't, we all have
other jobs and we're not paid
with this one, so it, you know,
she, you know, the governor
sometimes gets angry at us and
and and I've learned to try to
let it just go off my back
because
Because this is incredible work
that she has done, uh, with the
executive order and then finding
people in other states and
hiring them to help us do a
better job. You, we need to
train teachers. They need to
know how to teach structured
literacy, if anywhere in special
ed, that's where kids with
dyslexia are, they're doing
that, so we've just needed more
work on special ed, executive
order goes away, uh.
When she goes away. It's a year
and a half, so that's why we put
it into the office of uh turned
it into an office of special
education through the staff.
And, and the person we're
transferring is just a person
that deals with young children,
special ed for 3 and 4 year
olds. and we've been, when we
created ECECD, uh, we move some
of the PED in there. And so this
is just a person that needs to,
to go into uh ECECD because they
have the 3 and 4 year old
special ed kits.
OK, and Mr. Chair, so it's just
3 and 4 year olds.
Uh, it's, it's called early
childhood transitions.
OK. Thank you so much. Thank you
for clarifying that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
It's Senator Gonzalez.
Chairman, uh, I move that Senate
Bill 38. Wait, wait, Senator
Gonzalez, send in.
Has a question. Let's just
clarify if you want the list,
let's get on the list early, so.
I'm I'm not dragging
along I got Senator Woods, we're
still gonna do Senate Bill 220
tonight, so.
Don't leave. Yeah, that's why
we're keeping you here.
Thanks Mr. chair. Sorry, I
thought you had me on the list.
Uh, Madam President, so I, I
just want to clarify just a
couple of things.
Um
It, it's really hard for me to
So I used to.
be in education. I taught for a
lot of years. I had.
My experience with with special
ed was a bureaucracy.
Um, we had great teachers, we
had, we had all kinds of things
in play and then the bureaucracy
would get involved in it, it
just created a lot of issues. So
that, that's like my pre-image
of all of this.
So I just want to make sure that
by, by moving a person over
isn't creating.
More bureaucracy.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, it's not,
it, it's just we've got a, we've
got still a relatively new ECECD
department.
Um, we've, we've, we've put the
PED special ed, the early
childhood special ed into that
department because they're below
5.
So there was one person left in
the PED um office that needed to
go over there. That's all that
is. It's moving her over to the
right department. It's a very
minor part of the bill. It, you
know, we, we did it because we
needed to have that movement
over there. OK.
Thank you. I think, I think that
explains. And, you know, just
the other thing is, it's really
hard for me to support it.
When the superintendents.
Aren't supporting this.
I mean they're they're the guys
we pay a lot of money to be in
the trenches and to oversee
this.
So I, I would like to, to visit
with some of them and get a
little more input.
On them before I can actually
support it.
It, it pains me.
That's why I told uh told
Senator Tobiasson the truth.
Um, because that's what happens
up here sometimes. You don't,
you don't know why things
happen. You just don't know.
It's like, why are they against
it? What about them?
So, I just felt like I needed to
tell you.
Well, thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I told you
short.
Thank you. Uh, um, you know, I
don't like the schools, they
have it under an executive order
right now.
But they don't like the
executive order either, and they
want to wait for a new governor.
Who knows what our new governor
is going to be or what it's
gonna look like, and if we want
to fix things now is our
opportunity to fix things in
statute. So Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you as chairman, I move
that Senate Bill 38 as amended
do not pass. Do we have a second
on the motion, 2 by Senator
Trujil. We call the ra.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Lanier, Senator Lanier votes no.
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes yes. Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes as
Senator Tobiasson.
No.
Senator Tobiasson votes no
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes no.
Senator Schendo. Oh yes.
Senator Shaobos, yes, Senator
Munoz Sen Munoz votes yes, we
have a due pass 8 to 3 on the
amendment.
OK.
Senator How long's 242 gonna
take us
probably.
OK.
Get going.
Mm
So my expert in this is Doctor
Jackie Costales.
You
up the Mississippi miracle.
Right
This is what Mississippi did a
decade ago. They put in their
state statutes that teachers
would have to use a structured
literacy in the classroom.
And that the higher ed would
have to teach teachers how to do
that.
Uh, so this just requires higher
ed.
To teach structured literacy to
teachers, so they can teach our
kids. We only have 25% of our
students that are really reading
at grade level. That is too
small.
Uh, so we do have an amendment,
uh, you have the same number as
969.969.1.
Yes. OK.
I can have a motion to move them
in for discussion purposes, and
motion by Senator Padilla, do I
have a second by.
Senator Gonzalez, any objection
to that motion for discussion
purposes, case center tell us
about the amendment.
So when we put in the uh
requirements for teachers. We
did 100 hours in classroom.
Because structured literacy
really requires hands on, and we
made a mistake and just did it
for too many people. We did it
for high school math teachers,
that's not what it was for. So
this, uh, takes away uh the 100
hours for everybody and
specifies that it's for
elementary or alternative
teachers at the elementary
level.
Thank you.
Questions on the amendment.
See none can have a motion to
adopt them adoption of the
amendment, a motion to adopt the
amendment can have a second by.
Senator Bran.
Any objection to the motion
adopt amendment. So then, so you
have an amended bill. Let me go
to the audience in Zoom.
Um
You have 2 on Zoom 4 and 1
again, so let's go to those 4
1st.
Duval, are you there and then we
got one minute.
You got it, uh, Duval West for
the greater Albuerque Chamber.
This is a smart bill. It tackles
a serious proficiency problem in
Mexico to school spaces, and
that's reading. It requires all
the current teachers seeking
licener to renewal to complete
the coursework and the science
of reading. It has additional
requirements for new teacher
candidates, and it's founded in
the letters program that was
part of the to be miracle as our
sponsor says, and it's part of
the training pet has been
scaling up. It lays out the
and FIR that support this
approach after Mississippi
adopted it, their 4th graders
made the largest score gains in
reading and math on the nape and
64% of their students performed
at or above the basic level of
proficiency. This is just a bill
that gives teachers the training
and the tools that they need to
give the gift of literacy, and
we thank the sponsor, and we
urge you to give it a due pass.
Thank you.
Who's next
Victoria.
Mandy Tors.
Um, good evening. Uh, my name is
Mandy Torres, Education reform
director for Think New Mexico.
Um, we see in support of this
bill and we think that many
people working to ensure that
teachers are prepared to help
students learn to read. My own
teacher preparation and clinical
practice took place in
Massachusetts with a mentor who
had more than 30 years in the
classroom. Every day she use an
activity called Guest the
covered word as part of her 3rd
grade morning meeting. As you
can imagine, this involves
students guessing at a word
based on its length in the
paragraph context.
I was reminded of this strategy
recently when my 2nd grade
daughter was working on a
biography project, and she tried
to read the city name Stockton
as Scotland. She tried to
explain, well, it looks like
Scotland. She didn't attempt to
sound out the word, only tried
to read it based on what it
looked like, and then guess
based on the context that it
must be a place and that she had
heard of Scotland before.
This would be considered a
queuing strategy that students
use when they struggle to read a
word. Teachers like my mentor
use queuing for years because
they had been sold a narrative
that queuing was a great way to
teach reading. We now know that
explicit instruction and sounds
and syllables is superior for
ensuring that students can
decipher unfamiliar words. This
is important because if my
daughter thought that Dolores
Huerta grew up in Scotland
rather than Stockton,
California, she would have been
trying to change the course of
American history. Guessing at
words means students will often
misunderstand text when an adult
is not there to help correct
them. I saw this over and over
as an elementary teacher.
We must ensure that students
have phonic skills to help them.
I don't know, you're getting
some back feed from somewhere
else. Are you about done?
Oh shitless.
Yeah, so we must ensure that,
uh, students have phonic skills
to help them with your words and
we got appoint somebody stepping
all over you
before this explodes like it did
during COVID. Thank you for your
support
Uh, anybody in, uh, we have one
in opposition on Zoom, let's get
to them.
Who is that?
Mm
You
Sarah, are you there?
Yes, sir. Thank you very much. I
appreciate thank you.
Right. Go ahead, go ahead.
I, um, thank you for the
opportunity, chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Sarah Hunt. I've been a lifelong
resident of New Mexico and an
educator in the state for 19
years. I'd like to express my
opposition to this bill
primarily in definitions and in
section 4. This bill actually
does um work with public
schools. It's not just an upper,
it's just not a higher
university problem. The bill
does not consider the local
needs of a district and is full
of blanket mandates for public
schools. It does not consider
whether or not schools are
highly effective and neglects to
support, but rather
advantage choices that should be
determined based on a school's
community culture and based on
assessment results.
We also need to keep in mind the
teacher shortage as we explore
some of these concerns. The bill
recommends a ban on balanced
literacy practices. This doesn't
really communicate the message
that we value teacher expertise
by limiting teachers to only use
certain instructional methods.
Understanding that balanced
literacy actually has many
similarities to structural
literacy components when the
media-driven version of the
literacy crisis is reviewed from
the eyes of practitioners and
researchers. The biggest
difference is the way phonics is
taught. Not that phonics is not
being taught. Balance literacy
tends to support
an analytic phonics
instructional approach, while
the science of reading supports
a synthetic phonics approach.
Both have been proven to work
through the National Reading
panel to teach foundational
reading. However, bold have
actually decreased effect sizes
past grade 2. Another concern is
the definition in current rule,
which is 6.30, 17 in MMAC. It
actually defines structured
literacy. However, in this bill,
it has a secondary definition
for structured literacy, which
causes confusion and
inconsistencies. Most
educational scientists would
actually argue that there's a
need for balance between these
two.
and I'm seeking transparency of
practice before we legislate
more requirements and restraints
on schools and teachers. This
bill also mandates that schools
use curriculum that's on the New
Mexico high quality instruction
materials list for ELA core
instruction. I questioned the
censorship, the censorship of
options being mandated by our
state with this bill. There are
already systems in the state of
Mexico that support schools and
districts that are struggling
and helping them choose
curriculum would be wrap up real
quick. Yes, sir. We already have
a model of traditional and
spotlight.
schools. We need to utilize that
model to support schools that
are struggling. Um, finally, in
my review, I just like for us to
know that seeking middle ground
is the purpose of this, and my
biggest concerns are in section
4.
Thank you. Uh, anybody in the
audience in support?
Do you have anybody in
opposition.
Don't see anybody in opposition,
so.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Dominika Chavez, advocacy
manager at New Mexico Kids can.
We strongly support Senate Bill
242 and ask you to vote yes
after significant investments in
structured literacy and the
success of the New Mexico
reading program, Senate Bill 242
is the next step towards
improving literacy instruction
in our state. Currently only 39%
of New Mexico students are
reading at grade level, and the
latest
NAEP results show that more than
half of our 4th graders lack the
foundational skills needed to
achieve reading proficiency.
These numbers prove we must do
more to improve literacy
instruction in our state. Senate
Bill 242 also incorporates best
practices that have led to
meaningful literacy gains in
states like Louisiana and
Mississippi. Mississippi, which
ranked forty-ninth in 2013 rose
to 22nd in 2022.
And now stands at 9th in the
nation for 4th grade reading.
Similarly, Louisiana climbed
from 50th in 2019 to 16th and
4th grade reading and from 45th
to 29th in eighth grade reading.
This bill will also require
parent notification in our
recent um survey of New Mexico
parents, we found that 80% of
New Mexico parents believe their
students are reading above grade
level.
Data tells us only 39%. Let's
improve literacy instruction in
our state, please vote yes on
Senate Bill 242. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, stand rounds for
the school superintendents, we
wanna thank the sponsor for
first the amendment. It was the
one remaining item that we had
some difficulties with, uh, and
I think it was unintentional, so
thank you so much. Please
recognize with us, this is also
the capstone of the work that
Senator Stewart has set herself
on for a bunch of years here in
her work, and we appreciate
that. It's going to make a
difference and so Mr. Chairman,
we stand
in full support of this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. I didn't see anybody
in opposition and see the guy
you were sitting next to you
position, uh, we don't.
Questions from committee
members. Senator Brent, you have
a question?
Yes, Mr. Chairman, anybody else
so I can get him on the list
right now.
in our woods.
Yes.
Yes, OK, good and mint. Thank
you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman.
and pro tem.
appreciate this bill, um.
I did look at section 4, it
does.
require this to be taught in
schools, I think, but I think
that's a good thing.
You know, um, you and I have.
Have struggled for.
Gosh.
Since I came into the
legislature so at least 13
years, you and I have struggled
together with education, trying
to figure out how to fix it.
We watched what happened in
Mississippi. I think both of us
were banging our heads against
the wall cause we couldn't get
anything done here and we're on
opposite ends of the aisle.
But this is one of the things
that we have agreed on and have
continued to agree on.
My oldest son.
In 2nd grade could not read.
It's really struggling.
And my wife worked uh at boys
and Girls Club and the director
of the Boys and Girls Club had a
program that he had used with
his kids called Hooked on
Phonics.
He said, try this with your son.
Within 3 months, my son had
caught up and passed the rest of
his class.
Because they were trying to
teach.
That whole language garbage
instead of phonics.
So I fully believe in this. I
believe it's the right thing to
do.
It's too bad we had to wait this
long.
I'm hoping that this really
has some huge changes for us,
um.
I'm glad that
the superintendents are for this
one. I
I have gotten a few emails about
taking away local control.
And and I'm sorry.
I'm usually not for taking away
local control.
But at some point we as a state
have got to do something.
Different than what we've been
doing because what we've been
doing.
ain't working.
Mhm
I use my southern English there.
It ain't working.
We're failing our kids.
Our kids aren't failing, we're
failing them.
We're gonna make some serious
changes. I appreciate this bill.
So I guess I really don't have a
question. I just really think
that we need to get this passed,
put into law.
our education system in the
state of New Mexico. So thank
you for bringing.
Settle in there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Madam President, it, it just
seems to fit better.
Madam President, it just, it
works for me better. I hope it
works for you. I, I, one more
question, um, it says to notify
the parents twice weekly, I
believe it was.
How, how are they going to be
notified is gonna create the
form.
So it'll be like a mailer or
and, and the reason I asked Mr.
Chair, is because our school is,
is all, you know.
It's all great and everything,
but a lot of parents when I was
teaching, that was one of the
things is teaching the parents
how to use it.
But Mr. Chairman, it's page 12,
line 6, the department shall
design and provide school
districts and charter schools
with parent notification
templates. Perfect.
Senator
they have a comment, Madam
Secretary, do you have a comment
on that?
No, OK.
I
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Oh, it's, oh, twice per year.
I'm sorry, I did misread that.
Thank you for correcting me.
And
The other thing is, is the
training for the teachers.
I love that you have that in
this bill cause I think that's,
that's so important. Um, I think
that's one of the things we kind
of forget sometimes and
Um, I
I think you're going to find
that it's actually gonna attract
some teachers.
I, I truly believe that there's
gonna be some teachers go, OK.
I don't know everything there is
to know about reading and math,
so I, if I can get trained, I, I
really do think, you know, that,
again, that's just my experience
of what it's been, um, I'm also
carrying a bill.
Or, you know, to intensify
tutoring for
Reading and arithmetic, so.
Um, I just commend you and, and
you'll have my full support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, hearing no other
questions.
Uh, uh, do pass as amended a
motion for due pass. We have a
second life in Brent.
Senator Brown, Senator Brandt
votes yes, Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes, yes,
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez Senator Lanier.
Senator Lanier Boer, Senator
Padilla. Senator Padilla votes
as Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson.
Do the
Senator Tobias and Botia,
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujillo Bosa, Senator Woods,
Senator Woods votes yes, Senator
Shindo. Senator Shindo votes yes
and Senator Munoz. Senator
Munoz, you have a do past 10 to
0. Wow, wish I could do that
every day. Mr. Chairman, let me
tell you, if you wanna
understand the backstory of
this, there is an incredible
podcast called Soul A Story
about the five decades where
teachers have the
To to do it the wrong way.
And how that happened. We've
lost 2 icons who led us down the
path and sold us a story that
wasn't true, so it, it'll just
give you a little bit more
information. It's about 7 little
30 minute vignettes. It's very
easy to revote on your bill.
You want us to rebu.
I this one.
Senator Woods, you have a, uh,
your bill, your expert witnesses
sitting in the audience, she's
been waiting for you patiently
all day.
Mm
Yeah.
Mrs. Woods, you want to come up
and be Senator Woods's expert
witness. You've been sitting
there waiting for him all day.
huh.
So Woods, we went over your bill
earlier today or yesterday or.
I've got amendment, uh, yeah,
so we went over your bill, so I
need a motion to uh
And
Emotion to adopt the movement
for just to.
For discussion purposes on the
amendment. I moved to adopt
Amendment 231054.2 for
discussion purposes.
Or 1054.2, correct? That's what
you have, that's what we have,
OK. Questions on the amendment
to our Senator Woods to explain
the amendment. Let me see the
amendment, uh, just talks about
Changing the dollar amount to
where we have the threshold to.
Create a, a, a oversight
committee.
And it moves it from 250,000 to
a million dollars.
The first part of the amendment.
Um
After agency inserts only in
matters where claim is pending
before the court.
A jurisdiction.
So
Guys again, what I'm trying to
do, I've told you before, is
bring transparency and to try to
figure out where the heck we're
having all the trouble at.
So this is an agreement made
between me and the General
Services Department.
Because they thought it would
cost too much money the way I'd
had it written, and this brings
it in alignment with them.
So they think they can
administer it better. So that's
what the amendment does, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Um,
Anybody in opposition to the
amendment.
secretary, do you have any
comments?
You're good with it now? OK.
Any questions on the amendment
see none can have a motion to
stop the amendment, we have
motion. I have a second my any
objection to adopting the
amendment or back on the bill,
can have a motion for a due pass
on the bill passed.
Yeah, motion in rent take by in
Padilla, we call the role.
Don't leave yet, you may not.
may change course.
Senator Bran, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Camposia, Senator
Gonzalez. Senator Gonzalez votes
as Senator Lanier.
Senator Padilia. Senator Padilla
votes as Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasinbotia, Senator Trujillo,
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Schendo.
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Munoz.
Yes, Senator Munoz votes yes,
you have a due pass 10 to 0.
close. Mister Jerk, we start
calling him Mr. Sunshine now.
Speaker, it was a I mean smile.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah
Uh, wait, Senator Brandt made
the motion concern Padilla
second the motion.
OK.
were adjourned. I, I'm thinking
about if you're registered
lobbyist that
We're not gonna allow you on
Zoom.
Um, because a lot of them could
be here and they're not here.
They choose to tie up the line
and that was really designed for
people that are in could come to
the Capitol.
And are not paid to come to the
capital.
And so those lobbyists.
I'm thinking about that. I mean,
we had 3 of them today that are
