Of formal slides and and
exhibits, and the reason is open
to foster conversation and and
be able to respond to any
questions. Um, I was note that
the Federal Reserve really has
two responsibilities as mandated
by Congress, and those are to
set interest rates so as to
support maximum sustainable
employment and price stability.
Ah, really the scope of the
Federal Reserve's actions stop
there in terms of monetary
policy, so I won't provide any
comments about any bills or
legislation at that you're
considering but happy to provide
some outlook on information
about New Mexico and the
national economy.
Certainly the price stability
mandate has been the biggest
part of the story over the last
couple of years in terms of
getting inflation back down to
2%. I'm going to organize my
comments today. Around that
development is essentially
saying what was really been
driving inflation downward over
the last year. Why might that
have been different in New
Mexico? Then I want to switch to
pivot and go forward and say
Where do we need to look
differently for factors that
might be pushing inflation back
down to 2%? So over the last
year, several things happen in
the U. S economy that helped to
alleviate some of the pricing
pressures As we emerge from the
pandemic, I will note that most
of those were probably on the
supply side in the sense that,
um, factors that helped the U. S
economy and many ways helped the
New Mexico economy actually
produce more goods and services
to free up some of the supply
chain entanglements and help
workers be more productive in
their jobs. It increased the
productive capacity.
City of the U. S economy.
And that was actually putting
downward pressure. There were
fewer cost pressures that needed
to pass through because the
YORKS economist producing more
of being a little bit more
efficient with it.
Unfortunately, New Mexico didn't
uh, realize as much of those
supply side gains, and so I do
want to highlight some of those
differences, because those are
factors that can you watching
for here in the coming months,
so one of them is is the size of
the labor force nationally,
actually started to grow last
year for the first time in quite
a while.
So as a one factor was
immigration picked up and so you
actually had a resumption of the
type of image immigration growth
that we have seen prior to the
pandemic, and that was
supporting the size of the
overall labor force.
But another factor was that of
the workers are actually here in
the in the U. S economy in the
New Mexico economy, more and
more of them were actually
willing to go to work.
So you had more women in the
labor force now than there had
been. Historically you have more
Hispanic and black workers in
the workforce now that had been
previously and almost
historically and overall, you're
having the recovery in the size
of labor force, not quite back
to where we were part of the
pandemic. Some of that's
expected just that we're an
aging population and you're
seeing some retirements. But
that really did help alleviate
some of the inflation pressures
of the last year.
Ah, New Mexico did not have the
same type of growth after having
a few years of increase in
immigration and having in
migration of workers that
actually really slowed down last
year, and so he didn't get the
same type of labor force. Uh,
the same alleviation of labor
force pressures from growing
labor force in New Mexico that
you might have seen in other
parts of the country.
And that kept prices for things
like restaurant workers. Wages
for restaurant workers growing
hotel. These are services,
professional business services,
All those labor intensive jobs
are actually uh, those those
price pressures remained fairly
elevated.
Now on the other side of sort of
the productive margin of the
workers. They have all the tools
and materials that they need to
use. And over the last year
those tools those materials the
capital actually became much
more available in the sense that
supply chain constraints were,
really, uh, freeing up, so wait
times for deliveries got much
shorter material prices in many
ways actually came down in
price. And so that meant that
for any anything you're
producing is a good or service.
You tend to have a little bit
more workers to do it. You tend
to have more materials and tools
for them to do it with. Um and
that is some of the cost
pressure.
And then finally, I'll just note
that productivity very much
increase as we got out of this
cycle of having to replace
workers all the time and pay
them exorbitant levels to
actually bring them into the,
uh, into the workforce or into a
particular company. Um, you saw
that the word labor force
productivity actually really
increased.
So overall, this is the same
looking back over the last year.
What happened is we had
relatively more workers become
available. They had more tools
and become available to use them
and they got more adept and
actually using them.
And that meant it was less
costly for them to produce and
supply their goods and services
to consumers that helped lower
prices.
I don't mean this to be only a
look back. I really mean it is a
prompted the conversation about
where New Mexico's economy might
be going, or where the U. S
comment might be going, But it's
helpful to look back so we can
ask the question. Are we likely
to see some of those same
factors repeat next year or do
we need to see some other
developments in the U. S economy
or in the New Mexico economy?
For us to see the same type of
growth or to see price pressures
further come down.
And that's really one of the
main points that I want to make.
today is it's unlikely in my
opinion that you're going to see
some of the same types of supply
chain gains were already at
record level labor Force
participation. We're already at
pre pandemic trends in terms of
immigration flows, so I don't
see where you're going to get
too many more workers coming in
and productivity is already well
above what you typically think
of as the as the long run
average for the U. S economy.
So if you're not going to get
any more of those supply seen
pushes, probably not gonna get
any more of the alleviation of
price pressures from those
factors. We've got to start to
look somewhere else. So this is
the pivot forward here and
thinking about what are some key
factors that I'm trying to
monitor to see. Are we going to
have price pressures continue to
come down over the next 6 to 9
months in the way that we did
over the past 6 to 9 months?
Shifting away from supply,
turning to demand. One of the
stories you wanna look at is are
we seeing a fundamental shift in
the way that workers are being
compensated the way that
businesses are paying them
Seeing that actually slow
overall demand? Think we all saw
the jobs numbers come out today.
Very healthy job growth across
industries, very healthy job
growth across sectors and other
parts of the country.
And I'll even note that there
was healthy job growth from the
government sector, which New
Mexico is very used to seeing
stimulus from government
spending and government. Ah
employment, But the rest of the
country is seeing that now
you're still seeing that job
demand.
Where the most fundamental shift
that I'm hearing from and
actually was hearing it first
coming from contacts in New
Mexico was a shift in the way
that works. Workers are being
paid.
The story of the last year was
firms are paying their business
their employees, businesses are
paying their employees to come
in the door. The wage gains were
really targeted at attraction or
they're paying them to stay.
Games were really targeted at
retention.
It wasn't targeted at these are
the workers that are becoming
more productive? That was
looking back.
And so what you saw is it was an
unsustainable level of wage
growth that was out there. It
wasn't supporting, uh, price
pressures or inflation coming
down. It wasn't sustainable for
the businesses.
You flip to this year and
already starting around November
December, we saw a large
commitment. The majority
preponderance of businesses that
we talked to saying We're going
to change the way that we're
paying workers and so far that
seems to be bearing out. Wage
gains are now more closely tied
to workers that are increasing
their capacity taking on new
responsibilities are becoming
more productive.
Promotions are tied to folks
that are taking on broader scope
of responsibilities are actually
being more productive or taking
works on.
And by that, I mean more and
more of the wage gains that
we're seeing are things that are
being tied to productivity
growth. Wage gains are being
tied to a sustainable level of
where you actually see workers
producing more.
That seems to be a fundamental
shift in the type of
compensation for workers.
So in that sense, I'm starting
to see how I'm asking. The
questions on that demand side
and that labor demand side are
you still seeing continued
pressure downward? That's gonna
be the important answer for
where we're going to see price
stability.
I'll close with someone in my
opening remarks and then take it
to questions here. Just say what
might be more difficult for New
Mexico then it might see in
other parts of the country. And
when I know more difficult, what
I mean is is more difficult in
terms of slowing down the
overall growth and pressures
that you see in the economy.
This is a story of New Mexico
being a little bit behind the
rest of the country, which is
often the case in terms of
economic trends. But here it's a
little bit behind in terms of
the deceleration.
So there's still healthy job
growth. Unemployment at 4% was
fairly historically low for New
Mexico wage gains being somewhat
elevated wage gains being
somewhat broad base. The fact
that that hasn't moderated has
been something of a boon for
households in a variety of ways.
But one of the factors that is
actually keeping price pressures
more elevated here in New Mexico
and others is a limited housing
supply. And so you actually see
that house prices have not
slowed down in terms of their
growth, inasmuch as they have in
other parts of the country, And
when I say house prices, I want
to distinguish that from also
Housing housing prices, which
includes rents or apartments or
other other types of dwelling.
We're still seeing those
pressures become elevated as
there's a limited housing stock
set against growing labor force
participation and a smaller
housing stock set against fairly
healthy job gains, both in the
private sector but especially in
the government sector, so that's
keeping inflation pressures up
in a very real way.
I noted that we saw supply
chains start to improve over the
last couple of years.
Bottlenecks, delays and
shipping. We're actually getting
much better across the country.
Actually, some of those freight
rates and shipping costs have
not come down into New Mexico as
much. You're still seeing things
in particular, like refrigerated
for freight rates or materials
for boxing for freight here in
New Mexico, actually still being
somewhat elevated.
And that translates right
directly into food prices, so
there's still some challenges
ahead for New Mexico in terms of
easing the overall price
pressures that households and
consumers are facing. Um, but
those prices now are those price
pressures are now originating
from what is a healthy labor
market in New Mexico, um and as
a healthy level of growth for
the outside of New Mexico,
driven both by private sector
employment and
Government sector employment.
So I will pause there. Um, and
open the see if there any
questions or comments
Let me I'm gonna let me ask some
questions because I gotta go
present a bill wage inflation
sector is is the biggest
increase across the board,
right?
Employees that
Were paid.
17 $18 an hour? No, that how
valuable they are in the demand.
Are we still going to see that
wage inflation increase? I'm
gonna call it wage inflation.
Yes. Payroll in cle increase
But to increase productivity,
But no new hires. Yeah, so
looking forward is I want to
compare it to the last couple of
years. I certainly expect the
wage inflation to slow down
where it has been the last
couple of years. We're already
seeing that and the fact that
workers aren't quitting their
jobs and leaving and pitting one
employer against another at the
same rates as they were before
it's actually significantly
lower rates.
That takes a lot of the wage
pressure out of there. That
said, Um, what we're still
seeing is wages growth being
somewhat elevated where it was
over compared to last 15 to 20
years, And so you're seeing wage
and wages going up, particularly
for service workers and partly
because that service demand is
still coming back.
Hmm. In unemployment across the
state, says average of 4%.
There's pockets that probably
have higher unemployment, right?
Certainly. Yeah.
And doing the way where those
pockets might be.
Um, well, they evolved pretty. I
think they change recently. So
you're actually seeing
unemployment come across ethnic
groups coming down. There's
still some persistent
differences there as you started
to see Permian Basin increase in
terms of productivity, but the
same time the number of wells
that are actually being drilled
declining you've seen a bit a
little less fieldwork. So to
that extent you're seeing a
little bit.
Less hiring into the oil and gas
while still seeing robust
production growth, really just
driven the productivity. They
needed fewer workers and so you
started to not see as much
hiring into the fields there.
And and then across New Mexico.
We've seen
Inflation construction inflation
right cost per square footage.
Some projects are 300. Some
projects are $1000 a square
foot, right? Yes. Is there any
determining factors that would
Make that such
And a vast difference, or do you
think that's the amount of money
that the government is putting
in the economy that's driving
that inflationary number?
There's certainly been a
stimulative effect of that, and
I think that it's been a matter
of not so much how much money
has been spent, but when it's
been spent
Meaning over the last year and a
half or so there were
construction backlogs that were
longest as they've ever seen in
history, right? And most most
architects would say drawing
took a very long time. Most
builders said that they had the
longest extended wait times that
they had ever seen.
And so what's happening is as
dollars are being spent either
privately or publicly. If you
wanted to be on the front of the
line and move ahead of the line,
you had to bid it up and you had
the dollars available to do
that. And so part of it was the
timing issue of when it was
being spanked.
You look forward if you look at
some of the the government's
image dollars question that I
have been asking, trying to
understand our contacts is when
are those dollars actually going
out for bid?
If it had been the last six
months for the backlogs were
still very long. One of the
factors would be you have to bid
up the price to be able to get
in the line.
But now looking forward over the
next 6 to 9 months for the first
time in years, we're hearing
builders and contractors say,
Hey, we've got gaps in our
backlogs. I've got three month,
six month windows here for small
construction projects or I've
got a three month build on
something more major, and so
they're actually able to fill
those gaps in a way using
whether stimulus dollars already
private growth in a way that
isn't necessarily putting as
much upward pressures on that so
Um, I think a factor has been
the the stimulus dollars that
went out both households and
businesses. Um, but it's also
been a matter of timing because
if it pushes it back, and we
actually see it being
stimulative later, that's
actually a buffer for
construction, employment and
other employment were broadly if
it's more soon, then you can see
it being somewhat more
inflationary. And that's a
question I'm trying understand.
What about on this on the food
Inflation side, right? Yes.
How much pressure we're going to
see that over the next meeting.
Yeah, There's so you still see
some food inflation pressures
More broadly, um, want to
distinguish between a couple
ways to cut this because it
matters. There's the food at
home. How much he pays, they
actually feed themselves at home
and when they're going out
Um, so food you know when you go
out to a restaurant, even if
it's quick serve restaurant
affairs, something that's
reasonably more inexpensive.
The reason those prices have
gone up has been that the
finding labor finding wait.
staff finding survey staff has
actually been much more
difficult in the cost pressures
have been pretty high there, so
that's been pushing those
pressures up.
But I go back to food at home.
Anything that's processed
anything that's bagged or boxed
or anything else. Actually, it
was difficult to hire those
workers as well. So I'm starting
to see some declines in those
cost pressures that are coming
from, you know, workers' wages,
pushing up the cost of
production, But I would say
that's actually one of the more
stickier components of inflation
right now is actually service
worker wages and so in that
sense and is in this sense,
these are
Goods as well, when you think
about the food at home, um
you're actually still seeing
elevated pressures. They're
expected to come food, inflation
to come down, but maybe not the
same rates that we've seen in
other parts of the economy. For
example, oil and gas or other
goods when you see certain
sectors chicken scared the other
day, right? Yes. And so you
think those if there's a meat
scare if there's a shortage of
we write you think those are the
sectors?
They are going to have like are
going to be the highest growth.
There's something that happens
in the market for a shortage or
why did your always looking out
for? I think I was looking out
for shocks things that actually
move prices quite a bit up, but
I think the
There's some sustaining
pressures there that you can
point to that are very much
pushing prices upward and its
cost of labor is a pretty
significant factor. Whether or
not you have a distribution
challenge. Um we saw through
geopolitical disruptions that
there were disruptions in global
grain markets. Those things can
move the prices but over the
course of a year or 18 months, I
think the cost of laborers can
be one of the bigger factors in
moving prices up and down.
Um, I can follow up with you to
share some research from
colleagues at the Kansas City
Fed have noted that tight link
between food, inflation and some
of the labor market pressures
certainly think some of those
other developments can matter if
they're shocks your political
events, but the sustained
pressures or something.
And and how much? I mean, how
many more are we looking at any
more Jews critical flanks that
Israel Palestinian more right,
Ukraine.
How much inflationary
Pressure have they put on us?
In the supply chain. We're
starting to see the early signs
of it. And again, I'm gonna 0.2
different questions. How much
better when
So we've already seen the
conflict following Hamas attack
in Israel and the broadening of
that conflict and the sustained
nature of the conflict. That's
there as it's moved into the Red
Sea and even
Potential for it to move more
broadly, you're already seeing
is that freight rates ocean
freight rates have moved up
pretty significantly.
Not quite to the extent that
they did in the pandemic, but
quite significantly.
We're also seeing that the
growth in those freight rates
are tied not only to the extra
miles they have to be traveling
fuels being used, but the cost
of insurance
Those are the types of costs
that actually don't make their
way to consumers for about 12 to
18 months, So we found the
researchers that historically
those types of shocks absolutely
do passed through to consumers,
but they do very much with a
lag. One thing that I'm trying
to understand is actually I'm
here in New Mexico and even
coming back is meeting with
contacts. Understand this is a
shock to shipping prices that
occurred fairly early in the
year.
When importers and other
retailers are actually looking
to their fall and winter sales.
And so actually, the the
increase in freight rates could
be more meaningful. This time
around that I had been in the
password seen shocks that
occurred in, say, August or
September, when actually, most
of the contracts for shipping
have been already said. So I
think there's definitely scope
for there to be an impact, but I
don't expect to show up.
For about 12 to 18 months.
And in one last question before
I got to go, the strict you say
contractors were bidding up cost
right because we would need to
get in line for my back units
for red iron for whatever
whatever product we need on the
job, right? And so we those are
the numbers that our suppliers
are giving us. We gotta add
margins in and and stuff. So you
think that that is going to
begin to slow?
Yeah, and I'll comment on that
is we do remember run a number
of surveys of both contractors
and those supplying the business
and also, folks in commercial,
real estate or other housing and
ask the questions. Are you
starting to see stabilization of
those prices on the material
side? We are, um, we asked about
escalators. Are you actually
seeing the contractors work in
bigger escalators or looser
terms and how they might
escalate us?
They're not. And so what we're
seeing is is broad reporting
from businesses throughout the
district, including New Mexico
that actually contractors not
pushing upward on those prices
As much also know they're not
bringing them back down,
necessarily, but they're not
pushing them up anymore, And
that's the inflation number.
We've seen schools.
Hmm. And you know a nursing
facility, which should be a
higher cost per square foot.
Yes. $300 instruction for
schools. Is it 1000 Square foot?
So if we don't we have to start
limiting construction because
Amount of dollars that we have
less than a higher rate I That's
what I fully appreciate that
point. It's also why distinguish
the difference between how much
is being spent and when, because
right now that you have a
different effect, but the same
dollar spent maybe a few months
out or a few years out, can have
a very different type of effect
and essentially be supportive,
so and so I in that conversation
We're driving constraints.
The cost per square foot and
they're gonna hold there so
until we pull back from the
market contraction and cost per
square, I will say that that was
something looking back. That was
very much true and part of the
narrative. The narrative is very
much changed over the last nine
months or six months where
architects have much more spare
capacity by architects. I mean,
drawers, folks early on the
construction process.
We're starting to see that
commercial real estate bids for
land development is very much
down. And so it's not quite the
same story anymore. There's a
little bit more capacity but
over the last, you know, 918
months or nine months to 18
months ago. That was very much a
part of it. But I don't want to
suggest that that's the that's
still a relevant story. Going
forward capacity is the driver
in the construction rule, right?
Yes. You don't have a capacity,
you throw a high number at it.
And if the number comes back
high enough, you'll create the
capacity.
If you can find where you bring
workers in from other other
sectors. Yeah, absolutely. For
sure in the construction sector
on the education on educating
more money we put in
The contractors know or I'll
I don't really have the time to
go build that school and
In Mascaro.
Whatever the price is right, I'm
going
We're hearing that we're also
hearing, though, that those, uh
the stimulus is coming from that
type of spending for municipal
projects. Um, is actually taking
up more and more of the service
agreements or more of the the
backlogs after his contracting
companies as the private sector
starting to pull back now they
have some spare capacity, but it
is very much being filled with
municipal projects. Okay, Thank
you.
Accomplished or center and
Rodriguez you're gonna have to
chair Thank you. Nice meeting.
Appreciate you think the
opportunity to speak, sir.
Thank you very much for your
presentation. Um, is there
anyone who would like to ask
questions? Senator Woods, you
are necessary to compost mix.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair.
It's It's seems to me return and
sure it seems to me we're kinda
Chicken egg deal.
When we completely shut down and
the economy
Due to Covid.
And then we try to revive that
economy from
Zero.
And we pumped lots of money in
Making it
Damn near free money, not not
even a borrowed money and time a
lot of just free money and we we
doled out a lot of that money
from our state.
And
We created inflation.
Because we created
More money than we had
contractors service people to
use that money.
So naturally, they escalated the
cost in in my eyes And if if I'm
getting this wrong Well, please
chime in, but
My real problem today.
Is the wage inflation.
Because we're chasing
A
A world wind.
To put it mildly.
Because
We're finding that other state
other agencies Washington D. C.
They're pulling their talent.
We cannot stay.
Oh,
Hmm. Maybe because our
HR. Maybe because our
Pay bands. Uh,
Hmm.
Many, many restrictions. We have
we see it in our our budgets
that
Our agency. People come in and
tell us, you know, I've got to
give everybody wage increase to
keep
And in there, we don't have it
in our budget to do that now
they're coming in for
supplemental saying
Man I had to, you know, well,
they violated the law by doing
it.
Because we we set their budget.
And all of a sudden they come in
and say, Well, it was a
necessary evil to do that. Well,
I can understand that. My
question, I guess.
Is. How do we get ahead of this
club?
Yeah. How much? How much should
we shoot for increases of wages
to be ahead of the curve? Do we
need to start thinking about
25% increase in wages?
What? What is the magic number
that you see out there that
we're gonna have to have in wage
increases in the near future?
Madam chair?
Thank you. You can respond, so I
appreciate the question in terms
of longer What's the longer term
Sustainable wage growth? Private
industries is gonna push wage
growth in some industries faster
than others just because it's
growing and so some level it's
it's what is the market actually
pushing them.
But a good way to calibrate that
is is you're compensating
workers for the changes in
prices that are out there, but
also their growth and
productivity. How much more
value there, adding, that's out
there.
The Federal Reserve's positions
The committee is committed to
bringing inflation back down to
2%. So for the real spending
growth for the real spending
growth actually have to
increase. You need to see wages
growing someone above that 2%.
Then you can add on what's
what's the additional value. Add
that those workers are bringing
productivity has been fairly
strong for the last couple of
years, which is an extra 2% or a
little bit over 2% so adding
that up that actually 4% wage
growth is really just keeping up
with the additional value added
that workers are happening and
that actually that keeping up
with inflation in that way, so
that's it for me as a helpful
way to think about it. Some
industries will be a little bit
ahead of that, in the sense that
they're growing faster than the
national average.
Some industries. You might see
wage growth be a little bit
slower because in terms of value
added, they're not growing as
fast as the rest of the country.
When I look at his thing he was,
Where's the productivity growth?
Where's the value at and then
also meeting some of the nominal
inflation numbers.
In that sense are we getting
there I think is another
implicit question you had is his
inflation pressure coming back.
Are those wage pressures coming
down? They need composite it for
the first time in a while, we're
seeing workers that are actually
having real spending power
increases and their wage gains
are faster than the overall
level inflation. We're seeing
inflation come down and with it.
We're seeing those wage pressure
start to abate.
There's still some work to be
done for sure, right there.
Well, the other half of that
madam chair, many of our many of
states
Workers or regulators.
They go out and try to regulate
business and many times we have
bees on business.
For that regulation through
permits. These whatever.
So we need to also escalate
those fees, which is an
escalation to the expense.
Of the businesses.
And we worry about
Overburden.
The business and will they stay?
They stay here.
Well, they go somewhere else.
Um
It's a huge
Morty complex deal that we deal
with to try to figure out how do
we stay on head? I would like to
bring up one more thing.
To stop will like to bring up
one more thing. Inflation is
from one point in time to
another important time to say
that we're going to lower
inflation doesn't mean we're
gonna roll back prices 100%,
sir. Yes, that's correct.
So I think that's a great
Ms thought of many people.
About eggs for
A dollar.
Last year.
I don't mean that we're gonna
roll over egg price back to a
dollar this year. We we might
expect egg price to go up a
little bit over a period of
time.
But they will never be back
where they started.
And I use eggs as an example.
I don't know what eggs are doing
right now is a commodity. Uh but
I'm talking about more
manufactured things like
automobiles or computers.
Or
You know, and and that adds into
technology newer, brighter and
better, And and what do we pay
for for a wider scope of usage?
that, uh, iPhone?
Can do nearly anything.
That did nothing a few years
ago. And do I need one that will
do anything and everything but
my my
I guess.
The cost of labor.
And and trying to keep them at a
net neutral on their student
ability, their cost of living.
Is also a hard thing to track.
Because
We don't move that fast and
straight government.
We We we don't We don't escalate
prices of labor as fast.
As private index Sometimes you
say
The more services you render.
The higher the value.
It's not always the case in
state government sometimes
That just doesn't happen. We get
to a peak of efficiency and
We never get above that peak of
efficiency. The the covid.
Time really wrecked.
Our efficiency and state
government.
We sent those workers home.
They
They have not all returned back
to the office or we don't. I'm
not sure we have enough office
space from all to come back to
My complaints at home or nobody
picks up the phone
inefficiencies and it's hard for
me to sell.
I need to give everybody a race.
Yeah, because of things like
that.
You're looking at a huge
economy. I'm looking at a very
small economy.
We've got 2.1 Million people
Interstate. We've got zero
Population growth. We got zero
New babies being born. The only
growth we have is to
immigration.
Some of it legal, some of it
illegal.
In my eyes. What would help if
you when you get back to
Washington, if you could get
Congress to change the
immigration policy
I would appreciate it.
If we could just give more
people
A number so that they could
enter our workforce.
And be legal and start paying
taxes.
It would make a huge difference
to our employers.
When they are penalized for
hiring someone that doesn't have
the right credentials and they
need the labor. There's nobody
out there to do it. It's not
like they're taking jobs away
from anybody.
That's the
The biggest factor I see in New
Mexico.
Skilled labor, unskilled labor
across the board.
I appreciate the comment,
senator and I'll say as a matter
of record that I won't be able
to lobby one way or the other
for Congress, something that
that is not appropriate from
from my position. However, we've
tried to provide some analysis
on where we see constraints on
immigration, actually
influencing labor market
outcomes. And I think that the
connection between immigrant
labor and service employment
It is.
Highlights why immigration could
be alleviation some of the
pressures around the wage growth
that we see in the service
sector for the types of
professional business services,
which would be similar to your
state government folks or even
restaurants and hotels. So I do
think it's the fact that it's
been a play of the last year and
something to be attentive to,
But it's going to be up to the
constituency and
it's a very complex subject.
It's not something that we can
Can fix with the one stroke of
the pen. I appreciate that. I
think when it's complex, it's
helpful that we can share a
variety of different views and
analysis about that. You know,
we thought we thought when
Reagan
Initiated his plan that took
care of everything, and it did
for a little while.
Most people don't realize there
was a period of time in our
country when there was zero
immigration
During the
During the twenties and the
thirties and the forties.
There was zero immigration
because there was we were in
such a
Financial crisis. There weren't
any jobs here, either.
Uh, we are still
The bright spot.
And and most of the world
because we are still creating
jobs. We are still having a
robust economy.
So
I see us.
As a nation prospering, but
Amongst through what or not one
or not yield to my good friend,
senator Compost over there, and
I asked him if he has some
questions.
Okay, so the vice chair is going
off to present a bill. I'll be
cheering until they get back.
Senator accomplished.
Thank you very much, Mr Chair
and again. Thank you very much.
Senator Woods for
Revealing to me and there's
I want to go through this
systemically and
Possibly go ahead and start if
you will, with just the value of
the dollar.
As we continue to deal with that
we continue to see if fluctuate,
but it continues to diminish.
and and with that that would be
the first line of questioning.
How do we deal with the debt
service? How do we deal if you
will, with a growing costs for
goods and services?
How do we continue to deal with
the labor force? And even though
we indicate
Um, Unemployment is possibly one
of the lowest rates that it's
it's been a long time.
But but the value of the dollar
and it continues to shift and I
want to get into some examples
in a few minutes after you start
that conversation with me.
In terms of how are we going to
move forward and we continue to
go ahead and see if you will the
even flow of the fluctuations.
We see what happens if you will.
during the time of the pandemic,
and then from there, of course,
the inflationary rates that
continue but but to me, the
stability and continuity of the
economy is going to be
Essential as we move forward,
and in particular in a state
like New Mexico, where we see
the lower 25% of our population.
Continue to be in poverty
continue to go ahead. And if you
will even work for will say.
Minimum wage, But at that
minimum wage, it's just not
enough to take care of the
family needs.
And so as we we start there.
Maybe you can lay some some
groundwork, so I can Segway into
some of the other points that
I'd like to make into deal with.
Absolutely thank you, Senator.
The value the dollar.
Picture is it may be different.
I think about it is another way
to see the importance of having
price stability.
And why you see where should the
value dollar be changing over
time?
The committee has set that
target and is committed to
returning to that target is
getting inflation back down to
2%.
Which is to say that the value
of the dollar should really only
be depreciated by 2% of the
course over time.
And that is a is a commitment of
the Federal Reserve, the mark
committee that sets interest
rates and moves policy is
driving for that mandate of
Congress to get back to 2% in
the weight is another way to say
that is that's how the value of
the dollar should be changing
over time.
And I think what you noted, is a
number of reasons why that price
stability mandate could be so
important things other than just
prices of eggs and air travel,
and everything else is that
stability is fundamental to
having a strong labor market. Mr
Having clear expectations about
where the course of the economy
is going so that businesses can
make good decisions and have a
resilient economy, So I agree
with you that price stability is
is is critical. It's crucial.
And you're seeing the Federal
Reserve Open Market Committee
take action to move inflation
back down.
To sustainably 2 2% to protect
the value the dollar over time.
So so, Mr Chair as we go
forward, and we start talking
about the Federal Reserve, and
is there working to control if
you will not only the value of
the dollar but also the rate of
inflation.
Uh, there are a lot of people
and we'll just go ahead and use
New Mexico is the example. The
definitely are hurt by few. Will
the fluctuation within the
economy talking about housing
and how many of our young
people young families aren't
able to afford if you will, the
rising costs or if you will
purchasing a new home?
And part of that also goes back
to even the systems that we put
into place within government.
Where there are caps and so as
an example if someone's going to
go ahead and borrow resources
and work through the government,
Uh then they find themselves
that there's going to be that
cap if you will, and how much
they can borrow. What kind of
home they're going to have.
But again, we continue to go
ahead and see if you will the
inflationary costs where people
really can't afford that
housing.
When it comes to food. We
continue to go ahead and see if
you will. The the produced food
that is not if you will frozen
not sent to market and then
brought back. Um, we continue to
go ahead and see that hard to go
ahead. And if you will deal with
because families just can't
afford if you will, those things
that are going to be good for
their health. So what they're
doing is they're
Purchasing more of the processed
food and again when we have snap
program, so we continue to go
ahead and see Medicaid at least
50% of the state population. And
so so within that the the
government subsidiaries if you
will dealing with this in in all
areas, it's not matching what
the Federal Reserve
Is doing.
And and so within that, how do
we as a state try to elevate
that so that there will be the
continuity there will be if you
will, the strong wages for the
people in the state.
And then tied to that again will
be where where is that
discretionary money? Where are
the are the savings to send
people on to school, and we keep
dealing with issues as an
example. And we say, Well, it's
the opportunity scholarship.
It's free tuition.
But in reality that continues
that people continue to indicate
his. It's not free. It has to
come from somewhere and I'm just
trying to to grasp and grapple
with
How we can stabilize the economy
here as the Federal Reserve
continues to make those
adjustments and again with the
resources that we need in New
Mexico, how do they tie in? So
they were going to have if you
will, a stronger economy and a
better environment, So we
definitely have seen food.
Inflation slowed down, which as
senator was pointed out doesn't
mean that food prices
Came down.
We've seen the rate of growth
for food prices slow when people
trying to purchase at home
When people trying to go out to
go out to eat and whether it's
fresh food or processed food
that it is more durable. And so
those prices have definitely
remained somewhat elevated. The
fact that they're slowing down
doesn't mean that the prices are
high that we don't have more
folks actually expressing a
realizing straps.
When you mentioned housing as
well. What we recognize is that
lower income households tend to
spend a little larger share of
their income on transportation
on food and on housing.
And so they're exposed more
exposed in some sense to the
changes in those prices, on
average, as opposed to other
households. So you do see that
the costs which in higher food
prices affecting some
households, more than others?
Uh, in the sense of they have
less disposable and you also see
them affected them right now
because food inflation is one of
those aspects that still remains
somewhat elevated even as
rationally consumption back and
I'll add to that that we've
heard broadly that, um into the
end of last year. End of 2023
that, um, the need for the draws
on food banks.
Other draws on other social
assistance programs were
relatively high and they were
high for working families or
seniors more so in ways that
they had not been drawn on
before.
And so you You still see
certainly the U. S economy and
focus and New Mexico trying to
grapple with the elevated level
of prices. I don't think that
the I separate that from the
stress of lower inflation or the
gains and lower inflation, which
tells us a little bit about
what's going forward. That
doesn't separate it from the
challenges that emerged from
what happened in the past.
For the reasons you brought up
noted, that's why it's so
important to price stability
back to a sustainable level so
that all parts of the economy
can really shake out and some of
the gains from the
So, Mr Chairman, and as we go
forward, this is the big
question in dealing with it as
we try to go ahead and get
prices back to
Where were they are affordable
for people at all levels because
there are those people that had
discretionary income or if you
will, to savings that they've
tapped into and now with a
growing population that really
are elderly individuals and in
the state.
With that fixed income and then
we see young people being
educated, but they're looking
for a opportunity. And so
they're they're leaving the
state or they're picking if you
will, one or two of the larger
communities that have great
wages, and so again, we have
that imbalance and and as we
develop the budget
And and move forward. How are we
going to deal with something
that is going to provide if you
will, more of that stability not
to go and say we have a crystal
ball, but to indicate
Here's some things that we can
do that would hopefully drive
prices down at the local level,
make them more affordable
everything from vehicles to, uh,
dealing with with even clothing.
these kind of things and and
just an example. So, um, due to,
uh, hailstorm or having the real
for my home, replaced.
It was about 10 years ago. It
was $15,000 to do that. Now it's
50,000.
So and it's gonna take a while
for those materials to come in
and again, the point being, How
do we spur the economy when in
reality, we still have a few
will, uh, delayed part of
manufactured goods, the exports
that, uh, we we want to send out
but the imports that we really
need to continue with what we're
dealing with.
I'm still trying to grapple with
how do we create if you will,
something that is going to be
strong for
The state's population That
really brings up if you will.
those people that are still
struggling in order for us to
move forward and then within our
rankings of the good things
within states so that we can
move up from 50th 49th. Maybe 48
to 2, maybe the middle of the
pack and then from there be able
to be recognized.
As a state that has the
innovation as we move forward,
thinking this is two ways over.
they comments from Trevino's
before departed.
Ah, one of those days is what
sorts of those wage gains are
and stimulative effects might
actually be sustainable.
Those are the things that will
be, uh, tied to productivity
increases.
There are stimulative effects
are activists have taken that
actually increased purchasing
power, certain households or
certain types of businesses, But
those are transfers that's very
different than stimulative
payments that actually allow for
the, um I'll note that that, for
example, the housing prices here
face a little bit more pressure
than in other parts of the
country, in part because some
other growth is occurring in
certain parts of the state.
His buddy up against constraint
housing supply. And so it's not
a matter of of the the, uh,
pushing that for the
affordability of dollars to be
spent, but it's actually
bringing that demand back with
supply. And so new Mexico, I
think is a little bit further to
go in that you've seen some
stand ups. So, Mr Chairman along
with the housing and I'm not
going to go out and be labor.
The point, but
Where the new housing
subdivisions and developments
that are occurring, Uh, the
costs of rent the price of
housing continues to escalate.
So as we keep talking about
that, well, it's becoming more
affordable. In all reality. It
really isn't because we can't
keep up with if you will, the
growing costs of inflation.
So so in dealing directly with
that, I hope, particularly at
the federal level as we deal
with this
That it's not going to go ahead
and just be what the Federal
Reserve indicates they need to
do to go ahead and control
interest rates and and if you
will to help us to balance this,
but also at the state level, how
can we deal with that? So and
unfortunately with small
business? Um they're taking the
brunt of a lot of this in
The the growing cost of
insurance liability rental space
And then from there, people have
gone online, so we know that
across the board, it's really
easy to go ahead and order
online. Get the product back and
48 hours in some cases, but with
the things that really mean so
much to people with health,
water and education.
Um, those areas continued to
escalate, so I'm just I'm
searching for some of the
thoughts that you might have as
to how we can create that
balance as we put together if
you will. The final touches on H
B to at all. In other words, our
budget
And then as we deal with
projects, so today, we might
have
4900 projects that are held in
the billions with about 5 to
$5.2 billion that's held and
from there as we go through this
cycle, we're going to go ahead
and find again that we're not
going to be able to go ahead and
find the projects because what's
happening is an example on this
side and the Senate side.
There's an appropriation set
aside for each of us to go and
dispersed to the areas that we
represent, and for. We'll just
save 4,000,001 0.7579.
Is not enough to go ahead and
take off and create these
projects to fully fund them.
So, so we still have disparity.
We still have systems that, uh,
that are broken and and in that
from the federal perspective
How does all that tied together
so that we can put together if
you will resources that are
going to help us so that the
value of the dollar is going to
be at its best.
Projects and and things that are
related to it, including the
materials and labor are going to
be maximized and these resources
then definitely stimulate. I
take a step back and and for
specific projects being specific
recommendations. I won't provide
any commentary on that. It's
been a really important
conversation for you to have
with your constituency and
brought in Mr Chairman. If I
may.
So with that, as we go forward,
though, with an umbrella type
approach to it, What are some of
the things that you've seen that
have helped economies to ensure
that those things do create the
long term stability instead of
continued to go ahead and
fracture if you will assist them
in a broader sense, Uh, some of
the spending is. The timing was
noted. Before of when things are
spent.
So a dollar spent in in
municipal stimulus we've seen
from urban studies and runaways
can really vary based on what
the local conditions are meaning
dollars spent at a period where
unemployment is very low. We're
backlogs are very long, um,
where the availability of
contractors or land space
infrastructure is limited tends
to be more inflationary is not
necessarily
Stimulative or creating long
term stability in terms of the
growth path, as opposed to
dollars that are spent.
At times when you actually are
leaning against, uh, employment
gap. Um Ah. You're spending
dollars at a time where there is
available work or there's
available capacity. So part of
it is, it is a time and
conversation, and that's been
true. Broadly. Have you seen
that in a number of studies,
urban studies and also, um,
broader Agra studies that point
this out?
When it comes to, uh
The notion is that is as
affordability. I do want to
separate the difference between
Adjusting from the profound
shock that was covid.
From the profound inflationary
response that we saw due to a
variety of factors.
There is still some adjustment
that is working through largely
the economy is reopened in a
minute and a variety of ways
Many of those supply chain
constraints, many of those
workplace habits have adjusted
in real ways. But they just did
something that we didn't see
part of the pandemic and still
working out that
renormalization.
So there is so some work to be
done for. What were the
challenges that were that
households and businesses are
facing.
Based on things that happened in
the past.
Um, that's a very different
question. Then what are some of
the challenges are coming
forward? So I do want to
highlight that that timing
conversation that timing
thinking about this is, are the
policies that you're
considering? Are they are we
thinking about doing what was on
the past? Are we thinking about
exactly what's happening into
the future? And are we really
take into account the
circumstances? How they're
different Those times? So so, Mr
Chairman, and I could go on, But
I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna
Pretty much stopped with that
point that you just made and it
all goes back to silos. We
continue to go ahead and operate
in silos in our country.
I'm very concerned about the
leadership and I'm speaking
across the board as we put
together if you will, those
things that are definitely going
to take care of those people
that are in in dire need, and
and it it goes across the states
and I know we're all working
hard to try to go ahead and
compensate and come up if you
will, with some solutions.
But we start talking about the D
e I So we go ahead and we talk
about diversity, Equity and
inclusion.
Ah, Are we really creating the
balances for all populations in
all of our states and do it so
that we have the credentialing
so that we have if you will the
qualifications all those things
in line?
But more than that, as we deal
with the disparity in terms of
cost of goods, cost of materials
cost of, even even if you will
compensation for our employees.
we keep saying that unemployment
is low.
But we can take it to the small
communities and in all reality,
so many of them are just
struggling from day to day.
Even below the minimum wage and
and in the area that I
represent, and I use that as the
example.
Small communities like Wagon
Mound or Springer Maxwell. Uh,
they struggle day to day and as
the population in that area
continues to not only be on the
fixed income
But then as they pass the
generation that that they raised
that we're hoping to go and stay
in those areas
Are boarding up those homes and
they're leaving and they're
going to the larger, larger
community so really down to the
crux of rural New Mexico, the
frontier part of our state.
Um we still see if you will, the
disparities and Mr Chairman with
that, I just I really appreciate
the commentary and the guidance
said it means a lot to me, but
it's It's a serious issue that
we continue to deal with here in
the state. Appreciate that
conversation on the last point
about disparities. You're right.
The average numbers don't
necessarily reflect how
extensive are some of the gains
and I'll just point to a number
that that I tried to look at
pretty closely.
It's a report. We should expect
the new numbers from the Federal
Reserve coming out fairly soon,
which is called the shed survey.
They asked the question what
fraction of households or could
you cover a $400 expensive $500
expense without having to
borrow?
And it's seeing, uh, the extent
of the number of households not
on average, but the extent of
the households that actually
could cover those types of
expenses. Um, are those surprise
shocks without having to borrow
either through payday lending or
credit card or something else
that I think is an important
indicator of to your point of
how broad based are some of the
improvements in the economy, and
that's one figure I tend to look
for.
Mr. Chairman. Thank you very
much. And again. Thank you.
Committee for your patients and
thank you very much for the
conversation. Mr Chairman. Thank
thank you, Senator. Campus.
Quick question, sir. Because I
walked in a minute later you
work for I work for the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
I've worked out of the Denver
office, which represents
northern New Mexico, Colorado
and Wyoming. For the bank. You
do you fly in just for this
area. Today. I flew in with us
in mind, but a big part of our
job is to actually connect with
folks from New Mexico talked to
business leaders, community
leaders try to understand what
challenges they're facing. So
that
Part of the policy advising
So I had some engagements
earlier today. Welcome to Santa
Fe. Thank you to Mexico.
I just have one question for
you. The news that came out
today about the employment
numbers 300,000 Plus jobs
announced, and I think the
headline was robust job growth.
So, um, what does that say to
you about the economy right now
that there was there's ongoing
strength in the labor market If
you look in the details, which
something that I enjoy doing as
well, it wasn't just that there
was a very strong report that if
you look back to December and
November, another 100,000 plus
jobs were revised upward,
meaning that there was 100,000
more jobs than it thought
previously.
So if you look over the last
three months that's fairly
healthy growth.
Let me rephrase that. That's
very healthy growth and overall
jogging, especially in a
position where you have 3%
unemployment.
Something else that did stand
out to me. And that's been true
for New Mexico. Is that close to
10% of those job gains today? If
I reading it right was, um,
government jobs. You're actually
seeing stimulative effect that
are coming up for the rest of
the country, Not just in Mexico,
where you're seeing the
government sector actually
supporting some of that that
employment growth, So those are
a couple of things that stood
out to me.
It says to me that there is
still a healthy labor market.
There's still some ability of
workers to demand relatively
high wage premiums. And and Sean
Great. Um yeah, so rumors have
our demise are premature.
The economy is doing well. I
think that there's always
watching out for concerns. So I
think that the economy has been
in the labor market has been
very healthy. That doesn't mean
that they're at risk to monitor.
Sure, um,
And, you know, I know before
there were a lot of there were a
lot of people who would kind of
left the Labor market reported.
Are we seeing now? More people
enter the labor market, who had
maybe given up?
In 2023 Over the last 12 months.
you did see a pretty stark
increase in labor force
participation broadly for the
rest of the country. It was true
in New Mexico as well in the
latter part of the year, maybe
not to somewhat of the same
extent that you have seen, but
it was a much stronger recovery
than he saw in 22 or 2021 couple
of things that I would also note
about that the recovery in the
labor force participation is
first. It's not back to where we
were in 2019.
Part of that. Just do that as a
country and then also the state.
There's an aging population. So
you expect that participation
come down. There's more and more
folks are into retiring.
Secondly, you're seeing labor
force participation among black
workers and among women among
Hispanics, workers being at near
historic highs, and so it's been
a broader draw into the Labor
force. Overtime. Sounds good.
Um
So some of the dynamics or
imbalances, or rather probably
not even the right word. Some of
the changes market is we've been
told when Covid happened, people
leaving people choosing to
change careers.
Are we seeing the market
basically adjust now to where?
You know, we have a new normal
evolving where we have a lot of
people re entering the workforce
and
I mean, it feels like that would
be
Necessary in order to have this
accept that premise, correct
that things are returning to a
new, healthy situation. Although
maybe different. There's a
variety of ways to think about
us returning to qualified
normal, meaning a period
situation that we had prior to
the pandemic. But again going
back to there's some things that
are that are fundamentally
different, which is we're
actually seeing greater labor
force participation among women
in some minority workers that we
had previously so that's a
different fundamental.
The how we work or work from
home is still a little bit
different, so we're starting to
see some office vacancies.
That's not as much of an issue
here in this market that it has
been in some other states. Not
to say that's not an issue here,
but it's been more of an issue
and other markets. So that's
somewhat different. So we
returned back to something that
looks healthy.
Um, I hesitate to say normal
because so much change about the
economy. Going back to where we
were previously is probably not
something that we would think is
being driven by typical forces.
Typical economic board.
Interesting. I'll just ask one
final question. Um, you know
that whole issue of people
working remotely and
You know they're being a debate
in corporate America about
working, working in the office
working. Have you done any
surveys or just generally to
test where workers are at on
that issue, or what's the
efficacy of
You know, the
The the economy as far as people
working remotely. I mean,
obviously, our economy is
expanding. More people are
working remotely so many
Generalization. You can draw
from any of that.
There's there's a lot of work
that's being done on that. I'll
point to work that we have done
to that I my team have done
looking at just productivity
gains with regard to work from
home. We did not see any
relationship between
productivity gains all. No, we
didn't see any relationship with
productivity losses for
industries that were actually
utilizing work from home more
effectively. We did see smaller
wage gains.
Among the industries that
actually more utilized work from
home or heavily, um,
essentially the industries where
requiring workers of business
that we needed workers on site
because of the nation of workers
being done, they were being paid
a premium, and that premium is
showing up in the wage levels
and in their wage growth, and so
you have seen, um you know some
shifts in labor market
fundamentals that are related to
to
How it works, but I haven't seen
any really robust or compelling
evidence that suggests that
Industries that use work from
home more had either faster or
slower productivity growth over
time.
It's really interesting. My my
twin brother has a company in
Austin, Texas, is the tech
company.
And, uh, of course from Covid
happened. Everybody had to go
remote. He had a company with
like 30,000 square feet.
Everybody, of course, worked in
person, and then everyone went
remote, but fortunately it set
up an app digital processes
where they could get everyone
working remote when Covid when
the vaccines came out, and it
became safe to go back to work.
He surveyed his employees and
said okay.
Who wants to come back to work
and the expected a lot of people
would be chomping at the bed.
Every single person, in the
exception of one said Absolutely
not. This has been life
changing. We want to say remote,
and so they literally subleased
there 30,000 square feet, and
now they're essentially a remote
company.
And their you know their sales
haven't been impacted. So I just
say that anecdotally because I
know
A lot of narrative out there
about
Kind of blaming workers or, you
know, creating a fundamental
premise that it it can't work,
But there's kind of an
interesting example where
It's working pretty damn well
for him, but
Anyway, I really appreciate your
being here again. Thank you.
Anybody else on the committee
Have any questions for this
gentleman?
Okay. Well with that.
I've been instructed that the
bill we were going to hear
I've been instructed that the
bill we were going to here today
is that changed?
Thank you. Thank you very much
for your help on helping us here
while we're running from
Committee to committee, But we
are waiting for a couple of
minutes. If I'm in, I think
Senator Woods had some questions
and we were waiting for Senate
and want us to get back before
we proceed on to the next item,
But we do have some questions
before we move on. Thank you for
your work and your presentation,
Senator Woods.
Yeah, I've got a couple more
questions. If you don't mind. I
know you're trying to say that
doesn't that doesn't usually
work when someone has a question
for you get up and walk away by
apologists on it.
I'm a Republican. They walk away
from me, all right?
Sir and
Madam chairman and sir
We have a very
Our key industry in our state
that
Our revenues come into our state
government is all in gas.
Yes, sir. And you know, there's
a, uh, shifting philosophy.
Over the the many countries of
the world that they want to get
away from fossil fuels.
And we're desperately trying to
figure out how to diversify to
keep our state
Revenue increase our income, you
know, close to where it is. We
don't want to build a budget and
then
I have no way to pay for it.
So
As we move away from maybe a
fossil fuel economy.
What do you see? What do other
states out of the
Give us some examples of what we
might be able to dirt
diversified to know. Maybe
knowing a little bit about her
state. Absolutely. So I think
we'll be careful. We talked
about fossil fuels justice
delineate, call liquid natural
gas and crude. And that matters
because if you look at where
fossil fuels are located,
Called being very heavy and
Wyoming.
Gasping very much present in,
uh, in Oklahoma, for example, as
a Confederate but their
oilfields being actually a bit
more gassy. Whereas New Mexico
has the Permian there's a little
bit more of a healthy mix most
of the active rigs outside of
Texas are actually really
Many of the players are down in
the Permian over 100 active rigs
right now where you're not
seeing a lot of development.
You're still seeing wells being
dug in New Mexico.
And that has to do with the fact
that it's not as gassy in the
sense that you've got more crude
coming out of the ground,
something more crew coming on
the ground in crude prices being
a little bit more elevated, as
compared to say, liquid natural
gas. A lot of the
diversification or the momentum
that's been, uh, out there in
terms of moving away from fossil
fuels has been first and
foremost to move away from coal.
Mexico's experience in terms of
its dependence on energy for
resources is very different than
I would see in other states like
Wyoming, where it's a move away
from coal, and that's not the
same type of conversation here.
So
To to dress your point. I don't
think that the same narrative
that applies for what we're
seeing in Mexico is the same as
what we're seeing Oklahoma or in
Wyoming or Louisiana, other oil
rich states, So it's very much
in New Mexico. Permian play type
of story. We're still seeing a
healthy bit of activity down
there.
But one of the developments I
will note, though, is that
there's been increased
productivity.
So in terms of tax revenue, the
sales but in terms of impulse,
actually, how much that activity
feeds over the rest of economy,
You're not seeing as much
employment kick either in the
mid service or even in the in
the E M P framework. You're not
seeing as much employment come
because there's fewer draw wells
going down on fuel
transportation, less
transportation that actually has
to be there to support it.
You're not seeing type of
employment gains out of the 100.
Plus, you know, active rigs that
you might have guessed in years
past, But you're still seeing
New Mexico be fairly active that
way.
Right, But you see, you see
employment as steady.
In the Permian.
It's just not a growth in the
premier actually recently for
the least for the coming year,
declining somewhat is been what
we've seen so far. And what a
lot of the contacts in the area
expect is modest declines as the
way that we characterize, uh,
growth and employment down
there.
But I just want to emphasize
that's very different than what
you would see in other parts of
the country where they expected
declines are much more moderate
or severe.
Well.
You know, every time I see an
advertisement, uh
For technology for technology
improvements. You know, we see
more chaos.
Machines and different locations
now, Hmm. McDonald's service
industry, the
The checkouts in your grocery
store.
The you know all the
Technologies that's taken over
human jobs that we just saw just
a few years ago, and I'm sure
there's oil patch has some of
the same thing happening. Uh,
technology costs money. How can
we get in to the technology
business? That's a very growing
field. So what? What should we
try to promote?
In our state to bring
technology.
Growth here so that we can
manufacture some kind of
technology.
Yeah, I, um
I don't want to speak. I want
to, I think is most important to
talk out to some of the
industry private industry of
what it is that they want to
see. Historically, we've seen a
glamorization of technology
companies surrounding just
commenting on what do we
actually see in the data across
the country is that type of
agglomeration the attraction of
a robust industry tends to
surround a couple of things. One
of them is, um, a fairly skilled
workforce.
So you see, not just educated
but skilled workforce, stability
and prices has been another
issue that is has been a
glamorous VCI, um, lets you see
the longer term stability
actually promoting that that
type of investment but something
else that we've have seen in the
literature and we've seen from
other experiences and talking
about academics. I say we, um is
that there's a tipping point
element of these
That it's not something that the
first couple of companies in the
first couple of jobs that are
actually located get the same
types of spillovers that she
would see until you get to some
sort of tipping point. When the
ecosystem is built. You have a
robust group of folks. There's a
tipping point where actually the
returns to underground building
ecosystem can be very, very hard
because you just don't get the
same type of gains until you've
attracted a fair amount of the
industry.
So when I note those things of
where have we seen agglomeration
throughout the different
throughout the other parts of
the country and tech sectors, it
took a long build and a big
build to get to that tipping.
So you're saying that
One industry.
As industry comes in
Like industry follows.
And
The support industry. Follow our
All of it comes in as a as a
group.
So how? How
How would we
Direct our economic development
Bunch.
We want. We need
Jobs. We need large large
employer jobs. Um
I'm still trying to figure out
you know we're trying to direct
or economic development company
or group to to attract
Industry into our state, and and
one deal is water.
Yes, although we have probably
We could achieve an abundance of
electricity.
Especially in the renewable side
of the electricity.
Um so
A skilled workforce, and that's
kinda
Follows.
Do you have the job here before
you can have the workforce
developed.
They get. I don't want to make a
recommendation on that because I
want to highlight some of the
other considerations is a push
towards an agglomeration.
Uh, economy where you have a
large, robust industry and you
have a it's dominates part of
the labor force. You get
something to kilometer, and it
actually has spillovers and it
can, you know, perpetuate
itself.
But those can also be poorly
diversified economies that are
sensitive to shocks and more
exposed to shocks and more
difficulty in wrestling with
them. And so I bring that up is
that's a decision about
allocating those funds is really
important to be driven by, you
know, uh, local constituency
attitudes of what those
priorities are because there are
sometimes trade offs. They
become very real, and I think
it's it's a It's a
Challenge that that I recognize
that that you all have in terms
of managing some of those
offsetting risks well, and we
also have a huge presence in our
or national labs here, Right? Um
You don't you know, the normal
person doesn't think much about
the national labs until you go
down and seven o'clock in the
morning down there on that
highway, going up to Los Alamos
and see how many cars go up
there. Yeah, it's a huge local
economy for that area, and I'm
sure it's the same over here at
Sandia.
And then we have some some air
force bases in the in the state
that attracts local economy and
if we could spin off some of
those workers out of those
national labs
We would have a high tech
industry and and that's one
thing we're trying to do here is
developed those jobs in those
those businesses were that
that's that's one small part
that we're trying to play, and I
Yeah, I I was sure looking for
some silver bullets, so
Yeah, it's it's finding the
panacea that silver bullet. I
think we all would have it. It
is a challenge, and it's um big
question understand is how many
folks are being brought along in
some of those economic
challenges or in that economic
growth. And so as much as how
much are we growing? How many
folks are included? That are
both important questions and I
think you're right. There isn't
as much of a silver but well,
you know, we we have a state
next to us on
Every side that that seems to be
more prosperous than us, and I
don't know a lot of it has to do
with just strictly water.
Um
Yeah, just supporting a
population.
You need so much water? Yes,
sir. And so there's some things
that that need to be developed
here. And and I realized that
and but I thank you so much.
For coming back to talk to me
again. Best for sure. The
conversation please don't
hesitate to reach out. We made
notes of a couple of reports
that you mentioned so we have
evidence in front of views. Sub
ground. The conversation. Please
think of us as a resource for
that type of analysis. That's
out there in the public domain.
We're happy. There's one more
question. What? What is the
You may or may not know, but in
banking what is the overnight
rate that's being paid right now
and deposit the target fund.
Rage is between five and five
and a quarter five and five and
quarter.
And and what is the
The
Requirements own reserves.
You like a bank reserves like
Yeah, they don't is. Does that
vary from bank to bank too much
to do? I think you're asking a
couple questions. Now we're
getting to some details here.
Excess reserves, which is not
there anymore, But thanks. Do
have to hold capital buffers and
hold reserves against their
assets as well. And so it would
be different based on and also
the risk profile. They have an
increased that much. I mean, the
requirement has an increase.
What I'm talking about.
We haven't had. We haven't tried
to restrict the money.
Bye.
Increasing reserves and
individual banks.
I won't provide comment on that
side of the house that will
discuss regulatory policy. But
one thing I will say is that the
elevated level of interest rates
is specifically stated to be in
a restrictive stance. In that
sense, It's actually um, meant
to remove the amount of money
this this moving around the
system. Moreover, the Federal
Reserve has been shrinking the
size of its balance sheet, which
not to your question.
Is affecting individual banks,
necessarily, but is removing the
overall amount of reserves that
is coming out of the system. So
over the last year you've seen
about 1.3 Trillion reserves
being removed. Excuse me. I'm
gonna have to interject only
because I didn't realize it was
so late already. And Senator.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Madam. You have been wonderful
and asking all those questions
and thank you for your
responses, but I think we
probably taken a little too long
here and we're running so if
there are no other questions
here, we're going to have to
move on to the other two items.
On the agenda.
It really hasn't been beat up
this time.
Thank you Know you're great. We
do appreciate you very much and
we're going to move on to, um
Senate Bill 159 and Senator
Compost. You have been patiently
waiting and we've got higher
education Trust fund. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair and I
understand you're operating as a
subcommittee at this time.
Yeah. Yes, thank you. I just was
told we just wait a few minutes
until we have a corn. We're
trying to get members here
because everybody's running in
different directions. So, um, I
suppose you can. We're not going
to be voting without a quorum.
But see if we can get a quorum
to at least listen, And if not,
do we have enough for a
subcommittee if we get least one
or two more, Madam chair. You
have enough for a subcommittee.
You're right. We couldn't do
that. Yeah, that's what I hear.
But I was hoping that maybe with
At least to listen to your bill
that we could do it with a
subcommittee, But, um
Tell me where? Okay? Yeah. Just
reminded that based on the
chairs have a correction that he
would not want to move with you.
Have you have a quarter? Madam
Chair,
I'll six with you. Thank you,
Senator. You can proceed. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Madam Chair
members of the Senate Finance
Committee. In essence Senate
Bill 159 establishes a 959
Million trust fund.
To pay for increases in
scholarship programs subject to
legislative appropriation.
Funding comes from a transfer
from the Tax Stabilization
Reserve Fund or the TSR.
The State Investment Council s
I see reports that 2023 year in
balance of the TSR was 2.3
billion with another
contribution of 723.9 million
anticipated at the beginning of
2024, and that was supposed to
be sometime around the tail end
of January beginning of
February.
The funding transferred from the
TSR to the Higher Education
Trust fund will not be counted
in the General Fund Reserve.
The trust fund may be spent by
the Legislature, if all General
fund reserves and the TSR are
depleted, and again I indicate
That it's going to be the
Legislature that goes ahead and
makes the final determination.
Balances in the higher Education
Trust fund will be invested by
the SEC and interest earned will
remain in the trust fund.
Yes, I see estimates annual
investment returns of 6%.
The trust fund will distribute
5% of the average ending balance
for the last three years. In the
first year, the distribution
will be 47.95 million.
The opportunity scholarship or
require a 10.6 million
supplemental appropriation in
fiscal year 24 special
appropriation for this amount is
included Energy A and is
contingent on enactment of
Senate Bill 159.
An additional 16 million is
needed for the opportunity,
Scholarship in fiscal year 25
and the distribution from the
trust fund will pay for this
amount.
In essence, as we continue to
create if you will stability and
an ability for us to move
forward, so there'll be
resources available for
students, scholarships and, of
course to also cover fees that
in essence, madam Chair members
of the Senate find Finance
committee. That's what it does.
And if I may, I would like to
defer to
An expert who is here with me
today. He has worked from the
LFC. But if I may, he's not
here either in favor or opposed
to this particular legislation.
He's just here to offer us the
technical support. And if I can,
madam chair I'd like to differ
at this time to Connor Jorgensen
to make a brief statement. Thank
you very much, madam Chair
members of the Senate Finance.
Thank you, Senator Connor. Did
you want to say something here?
Thank you for your work, by the
way, always thank you, Madam
chair, and I would just add that
the
Senate Bill 159 is an LFC
endorsed piece of legislation
and significant part of the
hierarchy. Education budget
recommendation is passed by the
House. Uh, Presupposes passage
of this bill.
Thank you very much Madam Chair
were available for questions.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone have
any questions on this bill?
And then where do you want to?
Yes. Well, you know what? I
think it's a good idea, and I do
have a question at the very end.
But for now, Senator, I want to
thank you. Not only for your
patients today, with so much
going on, but also for your work
on this bill. It seems like a
very good bill and I have really
much appreciate what you're
doing. And of course, Connor.
But do we have any? Um, any one
of the audience who wants to
speak
Uh, for the bill would go for
for Q. Okay. And just briefly.
If you can make a comment,
because we're so late
Thank you, Mark. Thank you for
your further record. You can
state your name quickly. Yeah.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair Members
Committee. My name is Mark. So
whether I'm, the director of the
New Mexico Council, University
presidents, we are here in
support of this legislation said
about 1 59 1. Thank the sponsor
for bringing this and and this
just shows a lot of planning and
vision for the future to support
and sustain financial aid for
our new Mexico students. There
comes the opportunity
Scholarship and comes the
lottery.
But with the leadership of the
government legislature, we're
very thankful for that. And
we've seen for example, in New
Mexico. First time on all time
high of enrollment for first
time Freshman University of
Mexico. That's example of what
this financial aid is doing for
our students. I just want to
just like one thing from the
Alps. The the F I R that was put
together by Connor.
It mentions that there was an
LFC evaluation done on financial
aid evaluation recommends
improving Steinway, the stage
tuition, scholarship programs
and priors in future funding
increases for core instruction,
operate and Operation state
colleges. That's what we want to
hear. We look forward to that,
And so therefore we stand
support this legislation. Thank
thank you. Thank you very much
for a few comments and quickly.
Vanessa if you can state your
name for the record and quick
comments, Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair Committee, Senator
Campos. Vanessa Hawker. I'm the
executive director for the
independent community colleges
and we are in support.
Of this bill.
Oh, this is an opportunity to
invest current revenues that we
have.
So that we can help relieve
pressure off of the General fund
in the future. It helps us to
sustain opportunity Scholarship,
the lottery scholarship. That,
as you know, are doing some
phenomenal things for our
students. So thank you very much
for your consideration.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Vanessa. Anyone else have
comments? Senator hemp. It was
next, but before I do, I want to
ask for anyone against the bill
because I asked for those in
support anyone against this bill
just so we can be fair. Okay.
Thank you. And then we're gonna
go to a senator Hemphill. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
senator. Compost for bringing
this good bill forward and
Connor for your work and higher
ad and lfc.
Um, of course, we all know that
we have a limited amount of time
to really invest in the people
of New Mexico and plan for our
future and diversify our
economy. And so I'm I really
valued the investments we've
made and higher ad.
My my question, Senator is and
Madam chair. Um should we be
requesting limits or parameters
on tuition and fees? Um, that
Our institutions are increasing.
sometimes what can we do with
the Legislature to really make
sure that we have those
parameters to protect the
taxpayers will still making sure
we're making those investments
in our students. And do you
recommend any policies so that
our institutions are really
focused on investing in the
people of New Mexico?
So Madam chair and senator him
feel it's It's a very good
question, and we've dealt with
that over the years,
particularly whenever we
increase if you will, um, any
form whether it be secondary
education with SCG, or we get
into the I N G formula for
higher education.
And so as we continue to put
more resources in at the other
end, we continue to go ahead and
see an increase in, uh will say
tuition and fees and those
things. So the point that you're
bringing up is very important
for us to consider in terms of
guardrails, and as we've dealt
with this in the past, we have
tried several, but at the same
time we continue to go ahead and
see because it
These institutions are
independent in essence, and they
continue to take a look at this
at the local level, and they
continue if you will to consider
whether or not to raise the
tuition or fees.
What would work with us or for
us? I really believe that, at
least at this point, the
resources are going to be
available, but it's going to be
communication and an
understanding that would build
trust in terms of a commitment
that we are not going to
continue to raise. Unless there
are those valid facts to take
into consideration.
We've tried again, different
things to try to curtail if you
will.
Increasing and then those, uh,
those costs not only being
passed on, but increases
continuing as well. We just
haven't found if you will, um
A piece of policy that would
really fit in that would go
ahead and, uh and restrict that,
unfortunately, but at the same
time, I really believe working
with various institutions of
higher learning that we can at
least all work together to try
to keep those costs as low as
possible. I know that's not a
good answer, but that's where
that's reality. That's where
we're at today. Thank you very
much, Madam chair. Thank you.
Senator him full. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
For that response. I think
that's a great response. And, um
that's my hope for the future as
well. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Hemphill.
Um, Senator, Senator Gonzalez.
where you ready? You have any
questions? Or I think he was
ready for a motion. But Senator
Woods, you're next in them.
I'm sorry. I had to step out and
take a quick phone call.
Senator. Apologize, Apologize,
Senator.
Madam chairman.
Um, to fund this trust fund.
Where is the money? Is it
General fund Money coming to
fund? This trust fund.
So, Madam chair. I'm going to go
ahead and refer also to Connor
to help me answer this. And so
if Connor if you'll go and take
the first crack at it, then
input as well.
Thank you, madam Chair and
Senator Woods.
The revenue source is the Tax
Stabilization Reserve fund. It's
a transfer.
From the TSR balance, which is
reserve.
Already established this bill
would transfer 959 million from
the TSR to the higher education
in down moment, Fun.
It will not be counted as a
reserve at that point.
Uh um, and all of the investment
earnings of the endowment fund
will come back to the endowment.
To the endowment fund, and
that's what's gonna spin off and
be used to pay for increases in
those scholarship programs.
And and, um, Madam chair.
Connor, can you tell me what the
balance of the TSR fund is right
now?
Uh, yes, Madam Chair and Senator
Woods. It's 2.3 Million, um,
sorry. Billion billion. Um, and
there's I think it's closer to
three. We're going to have, um,
an additional 730 odd million
remitted at the beginning of
this year, it might have already
Occurred.
Okay, So it's not gonna It's not
gonna have a grave effect on
that particular fund at all.
So it's a transfer of somewhere
in here of $47.95 million
Madam Chair. I'm sorry. Thank
you. That's okay. Connor, Can
you respond to that? Please?
Madam Charon, Senator Woods so
The way the bill is structured
959 million will be transferred
from TSR to the Higher Education
Trust Fund.
From that trust fund. 47.95
million will be distributed to
the higher Education Program
Fund. That's where it can be
expended. That'll be an F Y 25.
So that's the total amount that
would be authorized for
spending and that's 5% of the
balance.
Okay?
I think I think I've got an idea
of what you're doing here and
I apologize. I was so busy
reading the another bill.
That are neglected to read this
one. So I apologize to both of
you.
Madam Chair. I really have no
further questions. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Senator.
And before we go on to Senator
Gonzalez when you said we're
going to be transferring it from
P s, R
What? Tell me that what that is
for the public and to understand
We don't understand. Acronyms if
you explain him. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
the taxes Stabilization Reserve.
Cheap P. That's where we do
understand that. Thank you very
much. Alright. Um, thank you so
much for your presentation. Your
answer, Senator Gonzalez? Sure.
I move for a do pass. Okay,
there's a motion for a do pass
in a second motion for Senator
Gonzalez, second.
From center share anyone a post
Okay, We're gonna do a roll
call, please. Thank you.
Senator Burke.
Senator Campos president and I
vote Yes.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gonzales. Yes, Senator
Gonzalez votes. Yes, Senator
Hemphill? Yes.
Senator him fielded votes. Yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Scherer.
Yes, Senator Stein born yes.
Senator Stein born boats. Yes,
Senator Woods? Yes.
Senator Woods votes Yes.
Yes, yes.
70 0. Thank you.
Congratulations, Senator Chair
members of the Senate Finance
Committee. Thank you very much
for your consideration in this
piece of legislation. Thank you.
And thank you, Connor. Alrighty.
Now we're gonna move on to
cannabis regulation changes, and
we have Senate Bill six.
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill six.
And we have senator do Hig.
Sorry. My voice is a little
horse. Still so I sound like
I'm barrels Awesome.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Would you like me to proceed?
Madam chair?
Thank you. Thank you very much.
We're just trying to wrangle
through several committees here,
Senator Appreciate you doing
this and you can proceed with
your presentation. If you want
to be introduced the people next
to you, please, so we can have
them for the record.
Yes, Thank you. I have here with
me. The director of the Cannabis
Control Division, Todd Stevens.
And general counsel for
regulation and Licensing
department. Kevin Graham. Okay,
Thank you, Kevin and Todd for
being with senator and with us.
Okay, Senator, you can proceed
to present your bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair. There's quite a bit
in this bill, so I'm just as
quickly as I can. I'm just going
to walk through the sections and
describe what's important in
them.
There's also a lot of just
little cleanups in the spill, so
I'm not gonna highlight all of
those, but I'm just I'm gonna
Put the the things that
Are mostly are significant. So
Section one is an opera
exceptions.
What's happening right now? Is
that someone? Someone in the in
the cannabis industry sees
another business doing something
wrong doing something illegal or
against the rules. They report
that to CCD, as we would want
them to.
And then whoever got reported
call CCD up and says, Who
reported me and they have to
tell them.
And that is creating a careers
both safety concerns and is not
conducive to an environment
where people are going to
report bad things that they see
which is what we want. So this
exception would keep records of
an investigation confidential
while the investigation is
pending after the investigation
is over, then those are public
records.
Some folks have asked for some
clear, clearer language to be
put in to make that intention
clear. And if that is an
amendment that committee would
like then and we are all for it.
Section two is just a title
change. Section three is
definitions and the really
important one here, Madam Chair
is on page 11.
Of that committee substitute,
and here we are defining illegal
cannabis and this is going to be
really important when we start
talking about trafficking of
cannabis later on, but this
defines illegal cannabis as
anything produced or
manufactured outside of New
Mexico. Anything produced from
manufactured, distributed or
sold New Mexico by someone who's
not licensed for that.
Or anything produced
manufacturer distributor sold by
someone who is licensed. But
that's beyond the bounds of
their license, And it's
specifically does not include
home grow.
Section four has has two
important things.
The first one is on page 19.
And Madam chair when we
originally passed this past the
Cannabis Regulation Act, there
was a desire that cannabis and
alcohol not be served together.
But we went a little too far in
the language. We said you can't
even have both of those license
licenses.
So we're fixing that we're
saying you can have a liquor
license and a cannabis license,
But you still can't have those
at the same place that you can't
be selling those on the same
premises. Because, Madam chair
what we know is that when you
combine those two substances,
the fatality of accidents
skyrockets, And so it's just
it's too much of a public safety
risk to be.
To have both of those available
in the same place.
And then on page 23.
The other important part of
Section four.
What? Before we legalized
recreational cannabis when we
just had medical cannabis. There
was a rule from the Department
of Health that required those
medical cannabis companies.
To file as nonprofits.
It was meaningless. They weren't
treated as non profits by the
IRS, or by TRD. They got none of
the benefits of being a
nonprofit.
Uh, there is
There was no good reason for it.
But now those legacy folks are
stuck. There is no mechanism for
them to be able to convert to a
corporation in LLC, a
partnership whatever. And so
this is just providing a one
time mechanism. It's about 34
companies, I believe to be able
to convert to a normal
corporation just like everyone
else who is operating it for
recreational cannabis.
Because we don't want our legacy
medical providers to be
Essentially punished just
because
They were. They were in the
market before we legalized
recreational.
Section five on page 24.
Right now.
To get any kind of a cannabis
license. You have to prove your
water rights. We are narrowing
that so that it's the folks who
are using the water who have to
prove their water rights. So
producers are micro producers
would have to show water rights.
But retailers manufacturers
folks who aren't using the water
in the way that we were
concerned with.
So that we put this in the in
there in the first place. They
don't have to prove water rights
since that's not an issue and
what what they're doing.
On page 26, starting on page 26
and continuing on to page 27.
This is a really important part.
This is really broadening CCD,
the cannabis controlled
difficult control division's
ability to keep bad actors out
of our market by saying by
broadening the criteria of what
they can use, uh, to either
denial, license revoked,
license suspended license,
etcetera.
We have seen a number of
situations where, like there was
the Denali case. Um, this is you
might have heard about this. He
had a bunch of Chinese
immigrants that he was
essentially using a slave labor.
Um, we know this is a bad actor.
Ah, he also you'll see in this.
It refers to a pending
investigation would be a
criteria to suspend, revoke deny
that's because of situations
like the done Ali case. He has
not been convicted. His case is
slowly making its way through
the federal courts. But we know
this is not someone we want
operating in our markets.
And so we want to give CCD the
ability to to keep those folks
out on page Uh, Section six,
which
I'm sorry, Section seven. This
is language.
For federal background checks
The FBI has said it doesn't like
the language we have now.
We sent this new language to the
FBI and asked them if this was
okay. We have not heard back
from them, so we don't know if
this is going to be the fixed,
but we'd like to keep it in the
bill.
Just in case when they
eventually do. Get back to us.
They say yes, they might say no,
We might be back here next year
doing new language around these
FBI checks, But this language I
believe was modeled after the EC
EC.
Language, um, that, most of
which has been accepted by the
FBI. So
Maybe someday they'll respond.
Um Section seven on page.
I'm sorry, Section eight.
My outline was to the old Bill.
On page 36.
There's some language being
struck in sub D there.
And Madam chair. Um
This is this is corporate
welfare that were taken out of
of our act. When this act was
passed, we put this provision in
there, saying Happy license fees
at $125,000.
There's only one individual or
entity in this state that has
ever gotten the benefit of that
cap.
Ah, it is corporate welfare that
does nothing but help the really
big guys and one really big guy
in particular, uh, while putting
everyone else at a competitive
disadvantage, So that's why we
are taking that out.
Section nine. Originally, when
we passed this act we had put
CCD in charge of
Um, like dealing with
educational programs around
cannabis. That's not that's not
their job. So he took that out.
And now if there is a public
post secondary education,
educational institution that's
offering cannabis classes, then
that's something that CCD will
post on their website. This does
not exclude if some private
group a private business wants
to offer cannabis training or
classes. This does not exclude
them from doing
So
This just says that if a public
university does, CCD will post
that on their website, so people
can find that information there,
Section 10 is about packaging.
If you look on page 38, we want
to make sure that we are not
marketing cannabis products in a
way that is trying to appeal to
Children.
And so that was already in
there, but we're flushing it out
more here to make sure that
they're not using cartoons.
They're not using
Ah, certain color ways or images
that that are are frequently
used to appeal to Children were
also saying that packages for
edible cannabis products have to
be opaque.
Because we don't want kids
finding those packages and oh,
it looks like a yummy lollipop
or brownie. I'm gonna try it, so
we want that packaging to be
opaque to help continue to
protect kids from from accessing
These products.
And then section 11 is just
clean up.
Um
Section. 12 is just moving the
definition of advertising. This
was the only place we used it,
So we took it out of the general
definitions. Put it here.
Section 13 is a very important
section.
Having your recall when we're
looking at the definition of
illegal cannabis. I said that
would matter here.
Here we are laying out what it
means to traffic, illegal
cannabis, and we're also
increasing the penalties for
doing so.
Um, because what we're finding
now is that, uh, a lot of times
the juice isn't worth the
squeeze for law enforcement. Uh,
going after some of this illegal
trafficking, and so
We wanted to address that We
also wanted to make sure that
we're not
Felon izing someone who is just
coming across the border from
Colorado with pre roll
With with a small amount of
cannabis that is for personal
use.
And so we have said that on page
40, for it only applies to
quantities of more than
And then it lays out these
numbers 15 ounces of flour 120 g
of concentrate 6 G of edibles
Now, Madam Chair 15 ounces of
flour. That is a lot of
cannabis. Um, the reason we
picked those numbers is because
that is the maximum amount that
medical patients are legally
allowed to have.
And so it made sense to tack it
to that we don't want to be
accidentally villainizing
medical patients who
Are entitled to have these
amounts.
Um so, but anything over that
that
Uh, then becomes trafficking now
for miners originally right now,
if a minor is trafficking
cannabis, the only penalty is a
four hour drug education course
or four hours of community
service.
I talked to, uh, Children's
court Judge.
Who was telling me that, you
know, Half the point of
Children's court is to connect
those kids with the services and
resources that they need so they
don't come back in adult court
and that four hours just isn't
nearly enough contact to be able
to do that.
So we have we're saying now the
penalty for minor trafficking
would be
Anything under the delinquency
Act. And then those step four
hour thing.
That gives Children's court
judges the discretion. They need
to respond to the particular
circumstances of the particular
minor before them, Uh so that
hopefully that is the last time
they are there.
For adults.
We've made it so that if you're
if you're 18, and you're
trafficking, it's a misdemeanor
If you're 21 or older the first
time you do it, It's 1/4 degree
felony, second and subsequent.
It's a third degree felony.
Um, and also and then and this
is this is kind of automatically
true. But also this would all be
subject to the forfeiture Act.
So those big trucks that they're
using to bring in tons of
illegal cannabis from Oklahoma?
Would be subject to forfeiture.
Potentially, uh, under this.
Section 14 is talking about when
cannabis is adulterated. We have
a Food Safety act here in New
Mexico. This is modeled largely
after that, if there is mold if
things are being processed and
sanitary conditions, we don't
want that getting out to
consumers. So this this gives
CCD the ability to to step in.
When that's happening. Similar
early is a section 15 page 47.
If it's misbranded, this is
again.
Modeled on that same existing
act, if something is is
fraudulently entered dangerously
misbranded. Um we don't want it
out there, uh, with the public
Section 16 is just a cleanup to
account for that Ipra exception
that we did in Section one.
Section 17.
Is a clean up of an unintended
consequence. When we
We passed the Cannabis
Regulation Act. We removed
cannabis from the definition of
controlled substances.
When we did that we made
cannabis no longer contraband in
jails and prisons.
That was not the intention
should absolutely be contraband,
So we are let adding that back
in specifically as contraband so
that that is not in our jails
and prisons.
Section, 18 is adding traffic
cannabis trafficking to the
racketeering statue. This was a
request from the Governor's
commission on organized crime
who you might have seen an
article in the paper just in the
last few days about a bust that
happened to dispensaries in
Albuquerque. And that was that
Organization or commission on
organized crime, helping to to
lead that up. They want to be
sure that they can
They can capture, uh organized
crime involving cannabis
trafficking.
Ah, specifically.
Section 19 is just adding and
the Cannabis Regulation Act two
or trafficking cannabis to the
Delinquency act because of that
reference we had made earlier.
Section 20 is just adding
cannabis control division to the
Uniform Licensing Act, which is
important because
If
When somewhat stuff like
Revoking a license. We want to
make sure that we are building
and due process. So now all the
all of those processes will be
approached under
The the rubric of the Uniform
Licensing Act to ensure that
we're building in due process
for licensees.
Section 21 is a repeal of a
sunset when we passed the
Cannabis Regulation Act we put
in plant limits, but we added a
sunset that expires next year.
Ah, this is taking that sunset
away. Frankly, madam chair. We
don't need more cannabis.
Flooding our markets here in New
Mexico we need we need less. We
need to to get get a handle on
this market and get it. Get it
healthy. Uh and so getting rid
of those plant count limits now
is likely to to worsen a very
unhealthy market rather than
improve it. And Madam chair Ah,
that's all I have.
Yes. Thank you, Senator for
that. And before we go on to
questions Do you want to say
anything before we move on to
the audience for anything and
they will go to the members.
Thank you, Madam. Chair.
Senators. This bill allows, uh,
for the law enforcement
necessary and the changes that
the cannabis division can
continue to mature this market
and arm us with what we need to
continue to help.
Licenses and control the illicit
market as well. Thank you. Thank
you. All right, Kevin.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
senators. Really? I am here
through any technical clean up
what we can as general counsel
for the rld. I am now I think
our longest serving person has
been here since the about three
years before we passed the bill
and starting to work on the
bills, and it's starting to work
our way through them. We have
our council in our cannabis
control division Robbie Sex who
wasn't able to be here today.
Robbie was our very first
employee hired actually for
Cannabis Control division, and
he's great and he's super
knowledgeable. I've only got
about three or four months on
him as far as being involved in
this building, happy to answer
your questions and try to
explain anything that you have
questions about.
All right. Thank you very much,
Kevin. Alright. Anyone in the
audience for this bill?
All right. I'm getting okay. Can
you come up briefly? State your
name for the record and just be
quick as we're running way out
of time here before we
I have to go on to other
committees. Thank you.
But, um, chair committee
members. My name is Ben Longer.
I'm the executive director of
the New Mexico Cannabis Chamber
of Commerce, where the Industry
association representing
licensed operators and ancillary
businesses. We stand in strong
support of this bill. This bill
empowers our regulators to do
their job. It has lots of
provisions that will be hugely
beneficial for the long term
health of the new cannabis
industry.
And it has lots of really
important fixes to the cannabis
Regulation Act things that we
didn't know now. We didn't know
then that we do know now that
being said, I do think there are
a few places where we look
forward to working with the
sponsor and CC'd on some
technical cleanup specifically
sections around local location
of cannabis and alcohol.
Around cannabis, server
permitting and education, um and
then in Senate judiciary, there
was an amendment that disallowed
drive throughs, which if you
permit me another 30 seconds to
talk about that. I think that
was a mistake.
Um
One of the best parts of our
Cannabis regulation Act. Is it
really allowed local entities to
define the time place and manner
of how cannabis exists in those
communities So Albuquerque, for
example, does not have any drive
throughs, whereas in Las Cruces
and Dona Ana County and in Santa
Fe, those are in a very
important part of the cannabis
industry.
And as the former executive
director of mothers against
Drunk driving, and the 10 Year
appointee to the Bernalillo
County Wi Planning Council.
There are places where it makes
sense to have parity with
alcohol and cannabis and policy.
This is not one of those places,
Cannabis impaired. Driving is
not the same as alcohol impaired
driving, and I'd be very happy
to talk more about that.
Also there are at least seven
cannabis businesses that are
open that are driving through
only
And it's uh, it's an access
matter for people enrolled in
the medical cannabis program.
Uh huh. And it's frankly, a
social equity matter for those
small businesses that launched
their business around the plan
of being drive through only so
that amendment would immediately
have to close those businesses
and would affect some 30. Other
licensed operators across the
state. So again, the industry
stands in strong support of this
bill, and we look forward to
working with
Our sponsors specifically to
hopefully
Give some kind of runway, at
least for operators who have
drive throughs as part of their
business so they can continue to
thrive. Um and have a chance at
success because these are the
small mom and pop operators that
So much of this original bill
was made to create and support
their businesses.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your
comments and next person, I
think we have three that were
four and wanted to speak If you
can keep your comments brief,
please. I would appreciate that.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Matt Kennicott. I'm the
CEO of the plug or a newer
industry association that
represents cannabis businesses
under 50 employees.
Ah, we do support this
legislation, especially the
provision giving CCD additional
enforcement authority.
Uh, previous to this. I was also
a are normal licensing firm
where we licensed roughly a
quarter of the entire state. So
we've seen a lot of things that
have happened around the state
where CCD doesn't need more
enforcement. Um, we do have
similar comments to bend from
the Cannabis chamber. We are
opposed to closing cannabis
drive throughs.
As stated, there are businesses
that will necessarily shut down
If that provision passes. We
also have similar concerns
around alcohol and cannabis in
in similar locations or in the
same location. There is there
already are several instances of
businesses operating where this
occurs.
And I do know of a large project
in Dona Ana County. Uh, that
could potentially be impacted by
this over. Although we do
support this legislation. Thank
you. Thank you very much. One
more, and we have chief Troy
White West Weisler here. Thank
you very much, Chief.
Hi there. My name's someone
else. I'm sorry. I apologize. Go
ahead. No, that's that's fine.
Go ahead. You're already sitting
down High, Madam chair. Thank
you for having me. My name is
Shannon had a meal. I'm with
seed Crest. We offer staffing
and certificates and permits to
the stakeholders in the
industry. We also interview
about 2000.
Individuals, Mexicans on a
yearly basis to get jobs in the
industry. I support this bill.
However, I think that we may
look at the cannabis server
permit peace and the cannabis
server permit provider as well
as the new material regarding
education. I'd like to work with
the agency and legislators on
that.
I think that it's a crucial time
to be having cannabis
consumption areas without a
cannabis server permit, just
like the alcohol servers permit
The cannabis server permit
provides harm reduction and D W
Y prevention to the state of New
Mexico.
Um, New Mexico regs and
Licensing does have an alcohol
service permit, So I think it
would be cool to use the same
mechanism right now. The
industry does not have a bridge
into the jobs and we promised
New Mexico 11,000 jobs with
cannabis. So while they support
this bill, I think there's a lot
of room for improvement around
those areas. Thank you.
Thank you very much for that
Chief Choi Weisler. Good to see
you. Thank you for coming.
Afternoon, Madam Chair members
of the committee. Um
True research. Even Mexico State
police we We appreciate the
sponsor bringing this bill and
we do support this bill. It has
as mentioned before several
items of cleanup and
specifically on the criminal
enforcement side. Um, as the law
currently stands, there's a lack
of tools in the toolbox for law
enforcement to deal with the
illicit cannabis market.
And the changes in this bill
would would give us some tools
to help address that illicit
market, which in the long run
will help the regulated market,
So we do support this bill.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
Thank you, Chief. All right, And
we have, um, I think I'm just
going to go to one person on
zoom before I go to the members
because there is, um one person
by the name of Lindsay Valdez,
who's been waiting and
apparently in favor of the bill.
So it's what I get here. So can
there we go. Alright. Lindsey,
are you there?
Lindsay, are you on Zoom?
Yes, I'm here. I wasn't sure if
you could hear me or my video
wouldn't load. Um, Yes, we're in
support. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Okay. I own a
dispensary in Farmington, New
Mexico, and we are in support of
the bill, Except for the section
six pertaining to the ban. The
proposed ban on drive throughs.
We have a drive through it is
utilized very often by our
patients. We have a lot of
feedback that it is.
Just
Everyone is very grateful for
it. Um, you know, we have a lot
of people who are disabled and
not able to come into the store.
It's really helped streamline
business and get people in and
out quickly without congestion.
The way that our drive thru is
set up is very efficient.
Traffic has not been an issue.
Um, we believe that that putting
a ban on the drive throughs in
the state of New Mexico would be
Really unfortunate for a lot of
people that use it for medical
purposes and just the
convenience of being able to do
that is has been really great
for the business and and for the
industry. I believe so we are
definitely in support of the
bill. Besides that particular
section
Okay. Thank you, Lindsey.
Alrighty. Now you sure? Thank
you. Now we're gonna go on to
anyone in the audience against
the bill. We know that some of
the comments were made for in
some parts of it against or
changes, according to your
presentations are hand And can
you come up to the front and
state your name for the record
and your comments Brief, please.
Thank you.
I'm Melanie Majors. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Foundation for Open
government, and we feel even
with the changes that were
addressed today concerning Ipra
that this bill is still too
broad in this section concerning
when an investigation is
ongoing. We don't feel that this
agent she C should have powers
that even DPS doesn't have.
If you will note, Um, three
years ago, the Supreme Court
said, just because an
investigation is ongoing,
doesn't mean that the
information in the investigation
cannot be released if an Ipra
request is submitted, and
therefore we would like to see
this part of the bill, um,
withdrawn. Thank you for your
time. Thank you very much.
Melanie. Alright, one other
person back there Your name for
the record, please. Yes. Hi,
madam Chair members of the
committee. I'm Jesse Hunt and
I'm here on behalf of our
Greenleaf.
And we have worked.
Our Greenleaf.
We've worked deeply with both
the sponsors and with the agency
on this bill and support the
vast majority of what's in the
bill and would love to see it
passed, however, with the change
in the amendment in the last
committee around, um, drive
throughs, we really think that
that should be readdressed and
we would even be interested in
considering
Potentially a three year phased,
implement or delayed
implementation of that provision
of the legislation. It's just
not the time to really be
rolling back things that
companies have built their
businesses around at this point
in time when it is, you know, a
difficult environment to be in.
So thanks for your consideration
of that recommendation, Okay,
Thank you very much. Alright,
Scott, You want to come up
briefly and state your name, and
then we're gonna move on to
That's what this bill so Scott
Scanlon, registered lobbyist for
Everest and I two, we to share
the same concern. We worked very
hard this summer with the
interim committees and are
excited about this bill. But
with the change in the amendment
and Senate judiciary regarding
drive throughs, we just can't
support this bill, and we think
smart people can get together
and come up with a
A good, elegant compromise,
perhaps to solve those problems,
So appreciate it. Thank you,
ma'am. Thank you, Scott. Okay.
Um Then, at this point, I think
we've heard the for and against
and we will go to Senator
Gonzalez. And then we have
Senator Stein born and senator
share case, Sarah Gonzalez.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for the presentation
of I just have to
Uh, one question and another one
or both Questions.
I think he was on section 10.
And is that the one that you
mentioned about Children not
being able to
To see through the
Yes. Uh yes, Senator. It is
section 10 and I'm trying to
find find it here.
Oh, I'm sorry. It's section Uh
oh, It's not 37.
Oh, wait. No.
3838
Okay?
So
I guess the question is now we
do have some that
Would not meet what you're
talking about.
So, Madam Chair, Senator. What
we have right now is we have a
requirement that packaging be
childproof.
And we have language that says
it shouldn't be designed to be
appealing to a child. So those
are staying. What we're really
doing here is we're just
expanding on that would be
appealing to a child part and
really flushing out what that
means and what function do and
then adding the requirement for
the opaque packaging for edible
problem, madam. Sure, thank you
for that answer.
Um, the next question is so
So this doesn't address
inventory at all.
Madam Chair, Senator. No.
No, it's not an inventory issue.
but with new inventory it would
be. Once this becomes law. This
would be henceforth.
Madam Chair, senators. I'm
sorry. You asking the products
that are already out there?
So they wouldn't be subject to
this but new ones going forward
and and I think products that
are already out there. They're
still required to be child
resistant and not designed to be
appealing to a child. So I think
While they might not be subject
to the very specific like
saying, color way, which I had
to look up to even find out what
it meant, Um, they still can't
be appealing, designed to be
appealing to Children, whether
their existing now or after
this, this goes into effect.
Yeah.
Um very well. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Senators.
Time board. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, Senator. Welcome. I
do have a lot of questions about
the bill because I'm just saying
it.
Really, for the first time and
all the amendments
So I also have to say, though,
that the amendment put on
judiciary definitely crosses a
red line for me because I live
in Dona Ana County. I've been
communicating with people back
home, um, their medical
patients, otherwise the benefit
from that, and that's
I think we're making an apple
orange comparison when we
compare drive through, Um,
cannabis to drive through
alcohol, especially given the
people that benefit from this
product. And, um
So you know, I want to propose
today that we take that out. I
respect someone else's opinion
to do that.
But, um, for my community and my
constituents that are served by
that that would be a step
backwards.
Um, And so I'll just address
that right off the bat.
And see if that's a friendly
friendly amendment or a
Not an unfriendly negative
amendments double negative.
Okay. Thank you, Kenny. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, thanks for
letting us whisper there for a
minute. So Madam chair. This was
not part of the original scope
of the bill. This was something
that was added on in judiciary.
I think this is an agency bill.
I think CCD is neutral on that
amendment.
So therefore you're not opposed
to an amendment to remove that.
Because it was not part of the
original.
Plan.
They are neutral, Madam Chair.
Um
I can give my personal opinion,
but that is the agent. What's
your personal opinion? Madam
Chair, Senator.
So, Madam Chair, senator. My
personal opinion is what
We have delivery, so I'm I'm not
that
Swayed by the accessibility
issues. Um and
When someone's in a car, so so
you're not supposed to sell
alcohol or any intoxicating
substances, someone who's
already intoxicated.
Making that assessment of
someone's intoxication when
they're in a drive through.
It is difficult is a lot more
difficult than what you would
see. Uh if they're if they're
walking in somewhere, or even if
you were delivering in there,
just walking up to their their
door to open it for you.
Um, I think that that one means
that it's it's likely that folks
could
Could be sold cannabis when
they're already intoxicated. Uh
and that could pose a danger to
others, but also poses a lot of
liability to the business that
is doing that, because there's
this thing called DRAM shop
liability, which is what it's
when you are liable for selling
and toxic substances, someone
who's already intoxicated.
You are then respond and they go
out and they mow down a family.
You the seller are responsible
for that. So I think it
increases businesses liability
to have those drive up windows
and I don't think this is an
accessibility issue because we
have delivery now, Miss Hunt
mentioned having kind of a three
year delayed implementation of
this
I think that makes a lot of
sense. I think for folks who
already have this they're going
to need some time to kind of
recalibrate what they're doing.
Um, but my personal opinion and
again this is an agency bill.
The agency doesn't care my
personal opinion is that it's a
good public safety measure. Uh,
not to have
Drive up accessibility of
intoxicating substances.
Madam Chair, Senator, do you my
understanding, and I'm getting
text saying that drive that
delivery does not work in
summary all areas.
Madam Chair, Senator. I'm sure
that's true. I'm sure there is
not easy delivery accessibility
everywhere. Um, but in those
rural areas, that means someone
is driving somewhere really far
to the drive up window and then
driving probably real far home.
Um
I just
I I eileen and in favor of
better safe than sorry
personally, but but again to be
clear. This is an agency bill
and the agency has not taken a
position on this senator would
just two things for context
there. Yeah, I would say you're
identifying the same sorts of
things we've discussed in the
last few days about you know
whether or not this is and there
are pros and cons, certainly for
both sides.
As regulators and looking at the
industry. We will carry out the
public policy that the
Legislature sets We see valid
public policy issues on both
sides of this.
As of yesterday, we had 1050
licensed retail locations in the
state of Mexico. If if what we
heard today was earlier, What
I've heard so far today is that
there's 37 locations doing this.
I give that just to you as
context for the number versus
the total number of licensed
retailers.
Right. So so, madam Chair
senator with that tells me that
there's not a huge problem. Um,
there's not a lot of these
locations, but we're cracking
down on these few locations were
We're turning it into something
that I don't think it is drawing
corollaries I don't think are
appropriate.
Although the points are well
taken, Um, but there's the flip
side of the coin, too.
And for these businesses that
have invested money and started
up and everything else, you
know, we're
Literally shutting him down. So
I
I think it's a bridge too far.
Um
I think we need to find a
We need to find a
I don't want to say necessarily
compromised, but
Find a better solution that
looks at this. I mean, maybe it
could be a Maybe It could be a
study that looks at this over
five years, and we evaluate how
big of an issue this is.
Maybe we carve out medical
medical licenses.
Um
But I would be inclined right
now.
To try to
Try to take it out.
So
You know, maybe what I'll do is
listen to a little more debate
and then possibly offer an
amendment.
Because I'd like to hear how
others feel about that.
But keep in mind. We have a lot
of people who benefit from
medical cannabis in the state.
Do you know how many licenses we
have for medical cannabis in the
state and chair Senator? So
madam Chair, Senator, right? You
You don't have just a medical
license or or a if, as a
licensee, as opposed to a
medical card holder, you're not
licensed just for medical or
recreational. Your license for
both. You can choose to just do
medical and then you get a deal
on your
Your your licensing fees and
plant fees, but
But we don't have specific
medical licensing, as opposed to
recreational licensing.
How many did we have? Madam
Chair before we passed this law,
so medical madam Chair Senator.
That's that's different having
have who has a medical card? I
don't know. I don't know if CCD
knows Madam Chair senators. The
medical program is run by
department of Health. I can get
that information for you, Um,
just to give a little bit more
context. There are zero
operators in the state that our
medical only that haven't chosen
to, um, sell retail as well.
Right? I guess I'm just trying
to make a point. You know, we
have people who are dealing with
chronic pain.
People who are dealing with
PTSD people who are dealing with
mobility issues who are
I'm sure taking advantage of
these windows and
You know, we need to consider
those as well. We don't have
medical alcohol in this state.
But we met for cannabis helps an
awful lot of people and, uh
So at any rate, so I'm gonna
leave that there for a little
more discussion, and I may not
vote for the bill. Um
Um, over this issue, but I'm
also want to bring up another
issue. We have a lot of
questions, ma'am chair that is
the
exemption.
I agree reading that language,
and I think it goes too far.
Um And I heard you say beginning
that
Kind of like hinting you're
basically open to removing it if
that's what we wanted to do, and
maybe I maybe I misheard Gee,
madam chair, Senator, I wasn't
suggesting removing it. I was
suggesting adding language that
makes very clear that it's only
while the investigation is
pending that those records would
not be public records so
Probably before that, Um,
semicolon on on that line, 25,
adding in languages said while
the investigation is pending
right because it's because the
language now says that we will
shield from EPA any information
gained during an investigation.
So that means even after the
investigation, anything gained
was gained during an
investigation and therefore
could not be accessible to
public.
So I think the word against
problematic and, uh
Even then, I mean, it merits a
good discussion. I mean, are
there other provisions in Ipra
that already
Um
You know, protect
Investigatory details, but I
think that's another issue with
the bill, and maybe the thing to
do is to not vote on the bill
today and work on some of these
issues because I know sometimes
we roll over bills, right and
just, you know.
But but that's I think there's
other sloppy wording issues
here.
That I want to just run through
real quick, Madam chair, Okay,
I'll try to do it quickly. Thank
you. And let me just say that
one thing on your initial point
here, Senator that I know
Senator Munoz was working on an
amendment to on that issue with
the pro. But he's not here, and
he's presenting another bill. So
we were gonna wait on his
amendment to see if he gets here
and if not, it would be done.
On the floor because we don't
know what it's amendment would
he intended or what he has on
there. We don't want to present
it without him, but that had to
do with the oppression. Senator,
you can proceed to continue to
ask you just kind of quickly
roll through it, Madam chair coz
I'm sure others want to speak
and, you know, be respectful of
everybody's time.
But yes, Go ahead. And Madam
chair. Uh, election would you
like to
What you're
Uh, Madam Chair senators. This
would also help in an event
where we have an ongoing
investigation that we have one
recently where we didn't even
begin. We were just collecting
evidence and we were episode for
all the information in that
investigation, which is still
ongoing to this day, but getting
ready to be finalized,
understood.
So and again the language goes
beyond that. You recognize that?
And so, um
Alright, So I'm gonna have just
some questions for you.
Um
We'll start with page 10.
So we deem that out of state
cannabis products are illegal.
And that to me feels like a bit.
I mean, I don't know if out of
state cannabis products are
illegal now. Yes, Yes, Madam
Chair Senator. Yes. The Cannabis
Regulation Act and federal law
specifically require that
anything for it to be a legal
Canada legal cannabis product in
New Mexico. It has to start here
and stay here.
Anything that crosses state
lines is de facto illegal.
Is that in current statute,
Madam Chair? Yes, ma'am. Chair
Senator. I didn't see where it
was. But
I guess it's somewhere else in
this statute, right? It's just
man Chair, Senator. It's just
not. That section isn't for
supporting New Mexico
businesses, but
Kind of seemed inconceivable
that there weren't products made
out of state. But I guess I
could understand because the
federal law to um alright on
page 13.
Hmm.
This issue of of of grow
operations, not being able to
expand.
Outdoor grow operations without
the permission of the division.
And I wonder, what are the What
are the
Criteria that you base denying
Um, an application to expand.
And and Madam chair, Senator.
That's not what this does. This
doesn't say You can never never
expand. If you want to expand
their you, you do an amendment
to your license and you request
the approval to do so. This just
says you can't
You can that you can decrease
the size of licensed premises
without having to get that
approval, But you can't increase
it without getting that
approval. And that's my
question. Madam Chair, senator.
My question is, is you you in
order to increase the amount of
land amount is the new word here
being added.
Um
It cannot be increased without
permission from the division.
And my question is is what other
criterias that you base giving
permission or denying permission
to increase the area.
Senator that ties into a couple
of areas of the law that are
much good with those covered by
rule as well, but it has to do
with security systems syncing.
um, the production capacity that
they would have, like the plant.
Cattelan is that sort of thing
because all of those are
controlled as part of the
license before you expand the
facility basically, come to us.
You show us that Yes, we're
going to comply with those
other.
Types of things like we're gonna
put up to the proper fencing
We're gonna have to security
camera systems We're going to
have, uh, you know the proper,
you know, parts of our training
manuals for our employees, but
what can be done in different
parts of facility so it is all
essentially very functional
parts of just making sure that
we know what type of operation
you're running there. How big it
is What the what The system is
gonna look like
And it gets approved. Okay. You
know, I'd be really interested
in knowing about those roles and
I'll tell you you may have heard
that there is a
Use the word in quotes,
controversial grow operation in
my community and my distract
Where it popped up in a
residential area essentially
kind of a rural residential area
and
You know it, Um
And it was kind of a moving
target because it started off
There was like no fans,
Neighbors were freaked out and
then suddenly, a little rickety
fence went up. No landscaping,
and they're like, Oh, man, These
are nice homes, and then they
They're like, do more, and then
they put in a little bit of
landscaping, which was still a
little hokey, okay?
So so this directly relates to
kind of an area like that, where
somebody locates, and maybe they
start buying overnight. It turns
into something very different.
So let me ask you this, um
Do we require that if you're in
an outgrowth area, I mean, we
were very permissive in our law.
We basically allowed local
Local governments to establish
We didn't have any setback
requirements or anything like
that. We basically were very
lazy fair. We said local
governments can figure this out.
Well, my community one kind of
plopped down in a residential
area of people.
Not happy about it.
I'm wondering.
Do we require landscaping or
fencing? Or do we have rules
that actually kind of consider?
The residents.
Inherent interests a little bit
aesthetically otherwise.
And if not, is that an amendment
that you would be open to maybe
down the line?
Senator. We do have rules
regarding fencing and security
systems do not have rules
regarding landscaping for
aesthetics as you describe them.
Um those are generally left
under as you mentioned the time
place and manner type
restrictions that are left to
the local jurisdictions as
opposed to the state. Um
I think we'd have to see what
you had in mind. Yeah. Make any
kind of a call on that. All
right? How do you feel about
that, Senator? I mean, I would
want to consult with folks just
see if there's any good ideas
out there and
And Madam chair, Senator. I
think that's stuff that we have
in place already is sufficient.
There might be some folks who
aren't following the rules the
way they're supposed to, or are
delayed in doing so as what you
described
Might have happened. And who
knows if that rickety fence met
the standards for the rules that
we have, but I know that we have
rules already in place that that
address the issue that you are
raising. I don't think we needed
additional amendments to deal
with that.
Oh, madam Chair. I didn't know
that I heard all the all the
answers that address the
concerns of my constituents.
With all due respect, so
But I hear you wanted to hear
your thoughts on it. I'm gonna
move on.
To the color locating with
alcohol is interesting in our
current statute, do we actually
prohibit the co location with
alcohol? And and Madam Chair?
Senator What we read what we do
now, as we say, You can't even
have both licenses.
Um you can't have a liquor
license and a cannabis license,
let alone co locate. Uh and I
know that there are folks who
want to make a lot of money
locating those.
That is no reason to take that
kind of a public safety risk.
Madam chair. It is so dangerous.
To be driving after you combine
these substances and co locating
would make the likelihood of
that happening Far, far greater.
We will see some terrible
fatalities if we allow that as a
state.
Hmm.
No.
That may be true, but, um,
alright, but I'll move on. Um, I
see. We removed the single
amendment on page 2223 that we
passed on the floor when we pass
this bill, and if you all
remember that one
That was
That was some high drama.
Their senator. I just wanna so
that was not
That's not part of the scope of
this bill. That was not
something that the agency
Was wanting to do or was
something that was even
considered in approaching this
bill. That was something that
was done in Senate judiciary. It
just it was interesting. I'm
sure because it removed a little
bit of conflict of interest.
But, uh
But, uh
We have lots of conflicts, and
this would
In our legislature, and this
would be an exception to that if
we left it in, I suppose.
But anyway, moving on the issue,
the nonprofit on page 23
nonprofits becoming for profits.
As a person who kind of lives in
the nonprofit world.
You know, that's interesting. Um
So let me ask you the division
there, so you have nonprofit
licenses right now, or people
that are have a certain amount
of licenses that you gave out
for just nonprofits or
background. So, madam Chair,
Senator. No, there's no such
thing as a nonprofit license.
the only reason any nonprofit
and it's it is nonprofit in name
only.
They do not behave as
nonprofits. They are not treated
as non profits. The only reason
they exist. It's 33 or 34
companies is because they were
the medical cannabis companies
before legalization. And there
was this rule by the D O. H that
said, You have to meet
nonprofits.
The rule was nonsensical, The
fact that we have to change our
law because of a rule. Frankly,
I think it's kind of ridiculous.
But the secretary of state has
said she does not have a
mechanism to do these
conversions. Um, now
I'll tell Tell you, Senator,
Madam Chair.
When I was first talking about
about this section with some
folks, it was suggested. Well,
why don't we just do this for
all nonprofits just create this
ability to convert for all non
profits?
Manager, Senator. That's a
terrible idea. I would I would
never suggest doing that. This
is only specific to those 33 or
34. Medical medical legacy.
Cannabis companies, Um, and it
doesn't
Paint really change anything
about them other than their
formal corporate structure.
But there are already being
treated as corporations for tax
purposes.
So right. Well, that's kind of
my ethical issue a little bit.
You know, I run a 501 c three,
OK?
I don't know if you've
You have you've ever worked for
non prophecy probably have
Um, you know, they have certain
advantages, and they raise
certain money, so I realized
we're seeing a medical cannabis
legacy non profit, but it is
organized under the nonprofit
Corporation Act. So I guess my
my wonder is, are any of those
nonprofits did they raise money?
Did they get grants?
Basically as a tax exempt
organization that we're now
allowing them to spin off into a
for profit. And now you have an
I R s issue.
Um
So, Madam Madam Chair, Senator.
No. All those benefits that a
nonprofit has. They did not
have. They literally were
nonprofits in name only they had
none of the benefits of a
nonprofit at the state or
federal level.
You can say that unequivocally
not I can see it. Yes, Madam
Chair, Senator Unequivocally. I
can say that you could say that
None of them are 501 C three
organizations.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, they
might have separate 501 c threes
that they have that are not part
of it. And I have no idea. But
what I do know is that folks who
were nonprofits under that D O h
rule got no none of the benefits
of a nonprofit at the state or
federal level.
Okay, Um
Thank you. We'll move on to page
27.
That, um
Language also think I understand
what you're saying the example
you use of some really bad, bad
person That's got an
investigation going.
It's on your radar.
But this
When we say any other
governmental action pending
against an applicant that you
all could do it. I mean, that
could be anything from
Unpaid traffic tickets to child
support to
Anything.
Um
They can be denied a license.
any other governmental action
pending or taken in an instant
applicant?
That makes the person
unqualified.
To be in the business, So I just
think that's awfully vague.
And
You know, probably needs a few
words.
To kind of quantify that a
little bit.
Because otherwise, I mean it
right that. Would that not give
you extremely broad latitude to
say any legal action.
Anyone has or has had you all
can literally say no. So madam
Chair, Senator. So this is a
catch. All that is very similar
to a lot of catch alls we have
throughout our statutes. Um, and
there's actually a catch all
already now in our language that
if the CDC something funky in
their judgment
Merits extra review. They can do
that. So this is
I have heard from from a number
of folks who have had had some
harsh heartburn over this
provision, but this is an
approach one. We need to have a
regulatory agency that is nimble
in responding to changing
circumstances are but two. We do
this throughout. Our laws
include catch alls.
To address unforeseen
circumstances. And so we're just
doing that Same thing here, Uh,
we have had there's been an
existing catchall for two years.
We have not seen that abused.
Um, Frank, and frankly, if it
was abused because this is now
under the Uniform Licensing Act.
Whoever had one there's going to
be an arbitrary and capricious
standard that is applied to any
decision that is made, but to
the licensee would have
recourse.
They would have recourse under
the Uniform Licensing Act to
appeal any final decision to
district court. Um, so if in the
event that this catch all was
abused, um there are
That would not be the final word
on it. There's recourse just
want Do you have several other?
I'm I'm almost done. I'm sure
you can proceed. I mean, okay.
Yeah, I'm almost I'm almost
done almost done. I just
wondered if perhaps with so if
you have several amendments and
didn't for discussion, and so
on, if you would be willing to
work with the
With a sponsor to depending what
your other ones are. Let's look
at him because it seems like
there might be something for you
to discuss if we decide to pass
the bill from here today, then
you can still proceed to work
with the sponsor. But let's see
how you what other was you have.
Thank you. I would recommend. I
mean, I think there's a lot of
cleanup in this bill, and I
think it would warrant
Another pass, but and whether or
not the sponsors willing to do
that, that's really the
question, but I think it's kind
of clear. But Madam Chair
Senator, I'll say Judiciary
Committee spent 3.5 hours going
through this bill with a fine
tooth comb. So to the extent
that there are additional
amendments that that you'd like
to discuss I think we can
discuss those for the floor. But
I would ask that this book will
not be rolled over today.
And and that's exactly what I
was thinking of is that I know
Senator Minos had an amendment
to but we're looking unless he
comes in and the next few
minutes we will wait to discuss
that on the floor if we had to,
because we haven't seen it. We
don't know if that meets us his
intent and the same thing with
yours. If we have these many,
then perhaps we can do that. But
let's let's proceed, Senator.
Okay?
Um
Moving to page 42.
The advertising.
Provision.
Where basically we're exempting
from advertising and editorial
or other material printing and
publication.
Where the material is not paid
for by the licensee.
And it's not intended to be
promoted by a particular brand
or company.
To me, I I think what you're
probably getting at is normally
and you hear the word editorial
You're thinking of maybe
something from the news
publication. This can be if you
have a third party.
Do you have a third party
source? Let's say the Chamber of
Commerce of Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce they could print and
editorial and you as cannabis
Company X.
Didn't
You're not in league with him.
This could be
That could be exempted from an
advertisement. I'm just
Wanting that out, and Madam
chair, Senator. This is existing
language. We just moved it. We
just moved it from the
definition section to the
advertising section. That's the
only place that was used. Well,
it might be an existing section
that could use additional words
methane just to get at the
intent. I'm just pointing that
out that you know if you if you
read that
Um
You can have a third party
entity, basically putting out
materials and as long as they're
not connected through intent
with producer
Then it would be exempt from
advertising and Madam Chair
center. That is that is the
intention. So let's say the
Cannabis Chamber of Commerce.
There's a letter to the editor
or an editorial. Um, we want
them to be able to do that. We
don't want we don't want, uh, no
Everest doing it on their own
behalf to get you know, some
earned media that way. But if
there is a third party who is
not doing it for the you know,
just to
To specifically to promote
another company, then yes, we do
want that to be accepted from
the definition of cannabis Just
basically, unfortunately made my
point when you said that.
You will get a third party to
get us some earned media so, but
it's not you so technically,
it's not advertising, which is
my point. It's It's um
But
I'll move on. That's just
another thing that
Could use a little bit of
wordsmithing like a news
publication, issuing an editor,
not including trade
organizations, or
And and and Madam Chair,
Senator. Uh so First Amendment
like we can't regulate the
speech of a non licensing.
There's limited authority
ability to regulate the speech
of a licensee because they have
the privilege of that license,
But we can't do that. We can't
say no one can say anything.
That's First Amendment
violation. Well, that's an
interesting point.
So thank you for making it.
Um
Okay, moving on.
Um
Two page
40 for the trafficking issue. I
found this one kind of
interesting, Madam chair because
as I read this first of all
questions for the division
because you made it up, you kind
of commented on this.
Is there a limit if you grow
your own
Under our law. Is there a limit
to how much cannabis you can
grow for yourself?
Mm. Madam Chair Senator you can
have. If you're an adult
household with one adult, you
can have 12 plants. If you're a
household with two adults you
can have up to 24 plants.
They're different strains have
different yields are different
sizes. There's no limit on what
the yield is from those plants.
The limit is on the number of
plants correct.
Pardon?
Okay, but we are putting a
yield. We are defining here that
we're now saying that if you
produce more than 15 ounces of
cannabis, you're now a
trafficker of and and Madam
chair Senator of illegal
cannabis, illegal cannabis,
which homegrown is specifically
excepted from the definition.
Of illegal cannabis on page 11.
Try all this trafficking is
about illegal cannabis, not
homegrown, not legal cameras.
Well, another Steph emission of
of
Trafficking in this bill, would
you tell me where it is again?
Real quick.
Mm. Madam Chair, Senator. It is
on page uh, starts on page 43.
And goes on to page 44.
Just your little reminder. I
also have Sanders share and then
Senator and I know sinner.
You've got lots of good
questions. We want to let you
almost done. We like to have a
hard stop. Um, probably by five
is what I hear maybe a little
bit after if we can. So let's
continue. Senator, I'm almost
done. This is a super important
point, though.
Let's gets back again to medical
medical patients who may grow
their own.
By the way, this definition of
cannabis of trafficking just as
to produce manufacturer
distribute or sell, but you can
just be producing producing it
for yourself. You could be doing
nothing else than producing it
for yourself.
And you are considering
trafficking if you produce more
than
15 ounces of cannabis. I mean,
forget tell me Show me how I'm
reading that wrong So again.
This is Lee illegal cannabis, So
you have to look at the
definition, Madam Chair Senator
of illegal campus. That's
anything from out of state
Anything done without a license?
Anything done with a license
that's outside the bounds of
that license, except for home
grow.
So if you are doing home grow,
and you are staying within the
plant limit of homegrown, that's
never going to be illegal
Cannabis That's never going to
come into this definition of
trafficking.
So, Madam Chair, Go ahead
Vigilant. What's that 11 is the
definition of illegal cannabis.
Where does that tie that into
traffic? Look, look at the
bottom of page 43.
Ah as using this section
trafficking cannabis products
means to produce, manufacture,
distribute career or sell
illegal cannabis products or
again. Look at the top of page
44 talking about illegal
cannabis products online, too.
Cheers,
11 definitions for the entire
act. So when that term is used
anywhere else in the act, That's
the definition of
Okay. Thanks for tying those.
Those dots together for me, so
because of that excludes
homemade cannabis products. So
where is that to find?
Uh, Madam Chair Senator, So
that's where in the section
that's talking about home grow.
It talks about what homemade
products you can use. You can't
use volatile. Uh so
Solvents to do extractions,
etcetera, etcetera, So all of
that comes under
Home ground.
The homegrown products. Madam
chair also include edibles.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, they
can as long as you're not using
volatile solvents to create
those edibles. Um
Oh, and and also, uh,
If you look on page 10, you'll
see the definition of homegrown
or homemade.
And it also limits it to
anything. It can't be for
resale.
So if you are just making your
own edibles at home, uh and you
are not selling them to others,
and you are
Otherwise, following the rules
that is not illegal care.
Okay. One final question. Final
question. I think I had a few
more, but I ran a paper and I
went to a different shape.
Anyway. For now, the page 46.
Confectionery.
Why are we calling it
confectionery product by itself?
A
An adulterated product.
Madam Chair. Uh, Senator, So
this is all this is from in the
food Act. This is from the Food
Safety Act. This is using the
same language that they use
their to deal with other
Consumables. Um I don't think
it's saying it's a confectionery
just because it's a cannabis
product. Um, it's saying to
confection it's fits a
confectionery has alcohol and
this other stuff, So it's saying
you can't put alcohol and
cannabis products.
The same as and
Any right. I think that's
something else worth looking at.
And then I just had to laugh
when we talked about harmless
coloring substance except
harmless coloring.
Uh, so anyway.
Just kind of comical, but I'll
leave it at that, Madame chair.
a lot of lot of lot of little
issues and some serious ones on
Oprah and the drive thru so Oh,
and right there. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. And thank
you to do it for responding. As
I said before, you know, we, um
We have other amendments here
that we're going to hold off
because we want to make sure
there's no conflict. There's a
chair is not here for his
And so on. Working with the
bill, Okay, we've got standard.
Sharon, Senator Padilla, and
then we will be able to move and
Right. Thank you, madam Chair.
First, just in a
Bigger picture. How does this
compare to our alcohol laws?
Man chair, Senator, You know, I
don't know that I know the
answer to that because there's a
lot there is some areas of
overlap, but there's a lot of
things that aren't a 1 to 1
comparison for for cannabis and
alcohol.
So I just asked. So the
At least in my mind intoxicating
is intoxicating, whether you
smoke it or drink it or snort
it.
Uh, some may be illegal, but
it's still intoxicating. So
Um, So that's why I was just
wondering because one of the
things that certainly came up in
my town was, how can they have a
drive through window and other
people can't
Okay?
And so I agree.
But
There there.
Is there a phase out option or
just you know you phase it out
over this weekend.
And
Whoever share Senator um
So I think so. A phase out
option was suggested for for
that drive through ban, and I
think that makes sense. I think
that would if that was a
An amendment that that you
wanted to offer. Um I don't I
think that would be reasonable.
I have not yet that Yeah agency
would not object. No, I'm not
going to offer the amendment,
But I did want to talk about it.
Just throw it out there because
Frankly, at this point
It doesn't make any sense that I
can take one intoxicating
substance before I hit the
street, but I can't take another
one before.
Um
The $25,000.
Fee or licenses. License fee.
Where did that?
What? How do you see this
working now? Can it be a million
dollar license?
Or a $10 license.
So So, Madam Chair, Senator.
Ah, your license fee is depend
depends on what kind of a
license you're going for, and
then your plant count fees and
the plant count fees are really
what what adds up and gets you
to that 125,000 limit there. And
so what That means is that after
you've gotten and so
Well by statute, plant plant
fees could be anything up to
$50. They are five They are five
and 10 5 for medical, is it? No.
No. Or is it five for everyone
now? Five for everyone, so it's
$5 per plant, So this would
Essentially the last one to get.
Oh, gosh, it's you end up about
20,020,000 plants and then
anything you have after that you
don't have to pay for
Only one only one person has
benefited from this cap.
Okay, so I did. I didn't really
quite understand that.
Um, one of the things that I am
concerned about, and that's the
illegal. How did how does
How does anybody How do you How
does Department How does anybody
tell the difference between
Cartel.
We'd and legal cannabis grown in
Albuquerque.
Madam Chair, Senator, There's a
track and trace system so every
single marijuana plant in this
state is tracked from the time
it is a seed until it is sold to
a consumer, if anything, is not
within that track and trace
system, it is de facto illegal.
Okay, and then
So part of that is because we
can't bank this money.
So I get cartel.
We'd in my shop, and I sell it
for just as much as I sell the
other, but I paid less for it.
How do we deal with that? Or do
we deal with that?
Yes. Okay and manage chair.
Senator. That's exactly what
this bill bill is trying to
address about. A third of our
market is illegal. That's what
we're trying to fix. Large
enlargement. The federal
background checks
Um
How did those were? How long do
they take? And where do you go?
And that was all that.
Madam Chair, Senator. They're
not happening right now. Because
the the FBI isn't accepting the
language and have not responded
to us about what language they
want. So that's that's the
problem is happening.
Construction agencies, you know
people that are doing this,
probably were doing it before.
Okay?
Um
I do agree with the things being
a little
Flaky to me disagree with the
drive up window thing.
And oh page 37.
What kind of classes are we
teach? So oh, so man Chair,
Senator.
Originally, the bill made CCD
responsible for essential for
accrediting classes. That is not
their job. They're not educators
or institutions of higher
learning. So this how to grow it
or how to sell it. Or Madam
Chair. CNN Madam Chair, Senator
CNN has courses about
cultivation.
Ah, many natural and stuff like
that. There's some private
companies that give their own
classes that would not be
impacted under this.
Alright, dude, it's cool.
Thank you, Senator. Alright,
Senator Padilla. You're next.
And we will if you can be brief
in your responses Also, as
you're trying, senator and your
questions, Thank you so much.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair and
you you I know you've been
waiting patiently, Senator. Just
we also have
Time feels strange, so we wanted
to make sure we let everyone
respond and ask the questions we
can reasonably. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair,
So thank you, Senator. And your
your your experts, you know, I
guess I'm not familiar.
And I was shocked to find this
out. I'm not a fire. I don't use
this. I don't know. I didn't
vote for it to help you legalize
this and others to legalize
this.
But I just just because I don't
take myself this
I have some questions about
this, Um
I was surprised that there were
drive up windows.
There aren't any in Albuquerque
And I guess I haven't noticed
them when I've traveled the
state and I travel the state
extensively.
Why aren't there any in
Albuquerque? I'm just curious.
Is there a local and if you've
already answered, I'm sorry. You
know, Senator, we're doing 93
things up here, So I've got
questions. And I'm just gonna
ask you mean even if they've
already been asked, But, you
know, we're trying to help
everybody get all their work
done up here. So
So bound chair, Senator locals
can control time, place and
manner. I believe Albuquerque
has said no drive ups. Cruces
didn't And so that's why there's
a lot of love drive ups and
launch process. Okay, So then
Madam chair and I'm gonna be as
quick as I can. So on. Yeah, I
got you The message from you on
drive up.
Can you buy the recreational
from the drive up or just the
medical Madam Chair, Senator?
Yes, you can buy either one.
Ah!
That concerns me.
To be honest with you that that
that's a huge concern of mine.
Um, where are we, with the cost
per plant discussion.
That you and I and others had
several times during the
interim.
So, Madam Chair senator under
current law, and still under
this bill, the maximum that CCD
could ever charge per plant
would be $50. Since their
inception, they have only ever
charged $5 per plant. And if you
only do medical behalf that
price and that's Madam chair
that anybody is, it's never been
more than $5.
Madam Chair, Senator. Yes, just
$5.05 dollars, then.
Madam chair, Senator, I think we
want to provide for the
flexibility to change that, if
if it's appropriate to do so.
And and who knows what 1000%
Flexibility range.
Madam Chair Senator. That's just
because CCD chose $5 as as their
appropriate starting, Um
On the paws, are we? How are we
gonna? I've also surprised. I
guess I don't really and I was
interior. See recently I love
tears. I spent a lot of my
childhood. They're working in a
restaurant. Me and my sister and
we were being fostered there, so
we
Jobs, very, very young. And so I
go back there a lot, and it's a
town where I can really enjoy.
There was like six locations
there.
I was also surprised to hear to
see that
Um
Just seems to me like the end of
the day. It's like too many of
these, and it's strangled,
holding and and putting.
Hard working folks that are
investing a lot of their
personal capital moneys.
At great risk.
What
Where are we with pause, And are
we going to do one? Do we feel
like that's something that's
needed here?
So, Madam Chair, Senator. That
was something that was discussed
a lot over the interim. Um, this
is a a agency bill, and we chose
not to address that in this
bill.
Hi.
I'm not saying that that might
not be an appropriate response.
Um, but that's not that was not
part of the agency bill. Also,
the number of retail licenses
has been flat for the last eight
months, so we don't have this
continuing rise in licenses.
It's been about the same for
eight months now.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um, she's not listening to me,
but that's fine on on the pause
if it's alright, madam chair
Madam chair. Thank you. Yes,
please. I wanted to hear from
the chamber if they'd be willing
to give us some
But on the pause, I'm just
curious. I'm surprised I did not
wind up here because that was a
major point of discussion in the
interim, With your permission,
Madame chair.
Madam chair.
Madam Chair? Yes. I'm so sorry
Here from the chamber to me Want
to do it without your
permission? Of course, here from
the chamber on where things are
with the pause And is that
needed? Is that what's going on
there? Thank you. Proceed.
Madam Chair, Senator Padilla
again, one of the hallmarks of
the Cannabis Regulation Act in
New Mexico is that it was wide
open. There have been many
states that had quotas where
we're only doing, you know, 20
licenses a year and in those
states and and definitely New
Mexico, it would have been very
difficult for those licenses to
not only go to the wealthy.
And well connected so
I I, uh I'm very proud of the
way that we legalized cannabis.
The flip side of that is we have
retail saturation. We are very
likely overproducing cannabis. I
think the retail saturation is a
problem. It's one of those rare
situations where the free market
will actually eventually solve
the issue.
And it's It's very unfortunate
that that means that lots of
small businesses with no
bankruptcy protections could
lose everything and that that is
not something to celebrate, and
that is very unfortunate.
Uh, on the chamber is more
concerned with oversaturation,
or overproduction of cannabis,
because when you produce too
much cannabis, it has nowhere to
go except into the illicit
market or accept into the
illicit markets in other states,
which is exactly why we have so
much product from Oklahoma and
California.
There was language in the
original Cannabis Regulation Act
that gave the cannabis control
Division the authority to with
input from the Cannabis
Regulatory Advisory Committee
with input from U N. M. Um
Bieber, Forgive me. I don't
remember what that acronym is to
do a study and then determine
Whether or not a pause would be
timely and effective. And that
language unfortunately was
pulled out when House built 12
became House Bill two when it
moved from the regular session,
two special session where
eventually passed in the chamber
is supportive of amending some
version of that language.
Back into the bill, but in in
discussions through, UM, interim
committee that that language
again didn't make it into this
bill.
And so, madam chair just to to
follow ups, then if it's alright
with you just lying on the, um
so
I guess I'd heard reports that
some of these I am worried like
maybe I think I heard you say,
um, that the chamber say that
some of the retailers could
potentially just, you know, have
to fold up and close their doors
after making these investments.
So is there enough supply
throughout the year to keep the
doors open because I had heard
the opposite.
In some cases.
Does anyone want to address
that?
Chair senator that there's
enough supply of cannabis to
keep the doors open the doors
open because they've still got
to pay their rent, and they
still got to pay their employees
and they This isn't a seasonal
thing they get to do they have
to sign leases, and I want to
make sure that folks aren't
losing their shirts out there.
Madam Chair Senator Padilla's
supply is not the issue. The
issue is oversupply. The issue
is illicit products coming in
from other states.
Other states grave, you know,
legal market so it becomes great
product as it comes into gray
market product as it comes into
New Mexico, So the problem is we
We have an oversupply of
cannabis, which is kind of
caused the bottom to nearly drop
out where the price of wholesale
product is so low that it's
really difficult for small and
medium sized cannabis
businesses to survive.
And then my second follow up,
Madam chair and then I thank you
so much from the chamber for
being in here. Um, okay.
So when you have a license
Do you also? Can you open up
multiple locations with that
license, or can you have to get
a license for every single
retail location? So, Madam
Chair, Senator, you can get
multi multiple premises under a
single license. You just pay an
extra premises fee.
So I sure if I could, madam
chair senator, One of the issues
is you are able to have several
licenses. So while you have a
plant count limit, the upper
limit is now 20,000, which is is
probably too much. You produce
that many you are able to go and
get another license under
another business and open up
another production facility and
produce 20,000 more plants.
Okay. And then, um on plant
count. Do we have any anything
in this bill? You know, it's
pretty lengthy. I haven't had a
chance to read every single word
of it. But
Where are we? With plant count?
I mean, are we going to continue
to have these limits or
Madam Chair, Senator. Yes, one
of the things we do is we take
out the sunset on the plant
count limit so that that same
can't limit will stay in place
because of that goes away are
the overproduction problem that
we have now gets worse and worse
by taking out the sunset. You're
leaving it that way for until we
come back here and say
something, or can the division
or department I'm sorry. Do
anything about that. Madam
chair, Senator? No, we we would
have to to
To take that out.
So from here on out, we've got
to limit then. Should your bill
pass?
Mm. Madam Chair, Senator. Yes,
just as we do now, Okay, but
that's okay. Um and then, you
know, just curious. I heard you
used the term corporate welfare
about one company. Who were you
referring to manage Chair,
Senator Ultra health. Okay.
Thank you.
It's only
Thank you, senator. And thank
you for your patience with
intolerance and everything.
We're all going through. All
right, So, um and I know Senator
Steinberg just stepped out for a
moment here with our chair. But
I think at this point, what
we're going to do is just
proceed to take a vote on the
bill the way it is because
there's so many things discussed
here today that we have not seen
or even seeing some amendments.
Some we have
And some may conflict with
others that may be proposed. So
between now and the Senate
chamber. If this bill passes
here, you can all discuss the
amendments together and see what
we can come up with. That would
be a symmetrical and at least
streamlined the whole thing.
How's that? So, um yes, Senator
Gonzalez. Sure I vote for a do
pass.
There's a motion for a do past.
Do we have a second motion from
Sandra Gonzalez, second from
Senator Korea? Hemphill, Any
opposition?
Okay? And I know too bad Senator
Stein born staked out yet He
wanted to vote, but he's not
here, so I have to keep on
going. All right. So then we're
going to go for a roll call
vote. And can you let Oh,
please. Thank you. All right,
Maybe we have a real call. Vote,
please. Senator Bert.
Senator Campos.
Senator Brantley.
Senator Gonzalez? Yes.
Senator Gonzalez votes. Yes,
Senator Hemphill? Yes.
Senator Hemphill boats. Yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator. Sure.
Senator share votes. Yes,
Senator Stein, born
Mama? No.
Senator Woods.
Senator Padilla? Yes.
Vice chair Rodriguez.
Yes.
Chairman Munoz. We have to do
pass six in the affirmative, Mr
Mr Chair, Couples. Thank you.
Yes. I didn't see that You
walked back and I did go.
Yes, it is. Yes. Thank you very
much.
We have a do pass seven in the
affirmative. Negative. I mean,
sorry to in the negative. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator. Sarah,
You want to explain your vote?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator. I
think there's some really good
things in this bill. But there's
also some things that need some
work, and I I
Push back a little bit when I'm
told Well, you know, just like
roll over here, and judiciary
committees, the committee that
You know, can consider these
things and it's just, you know,
I'm not worried about time with
this bill, because, but I do
think we need to. We need to
listen to
Some of these issues and
continue to refine this bill. So
I'll take you at your word that
you're gonna work on the upper
thing and
I think the drive thru thing
Also, this black or white
proposition is not right.
Um, for lots of patients and
lots of people who use cannabis
and we need to work on that some
more. So, um, I don't want us to
take a step back in order to
take a step forward and some
other areas that really matter.
Cannabis has helped a lot of
people.
And I'm not trying to take away.
Um some of the benefits of that
for a lot of my constituents in
Las Cruces. Self someone no for
now, and we'll see the way the
bill evolves on the floor and
hopefully we can have amendments
on these issues. Thank you,
Senator. Explain your vote.
There is a committee process
will have to follow that.
There's a but
We're going to respect the
committee process and the way we
bypass it, and
Hum pervade that somebody else
did it. That's every committee's
prerogative to do that and make
amendments as they wish and pass
or they don't pass.
Any. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you. Committee members.
