Yeah,
we're gonna get started here.
Told the O T. They'd be the
first one out since
Ricky had a good vacation
beginning Sunday in L. A
It's good.
I have that, too. Wasn't from L.
A, though.
Already you're up, Joey.
First thing I want to say is,
you know you guys are running
around the capital, telling
everybody you're cutting your
budgets.
We'll start cutting and then
we'll move from there. But
that's not a good way to
operate.
It's kind of like Bali violating
policy.
Joey, you're gonna start, sir.
Good morning, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee and the
committee is a staff is handing
around around for you A
overview of action that was
taken recently by the House
Transportation Public Organ
Capital Improvement Committee on
Department of Transportation
Budget. Just a little update,
Uh,
To to the to that. So, um my
name is Joseph Simon. I'm your
LFC, analyst for the Department
of Transportation. And also here
is Diego. Uh, in minutes.
Who is at the Department of
Finance and Administration and
Secretary Ricky Sarna.
Um and, uh, Mallory Manzanares
with the Department of
Transportation.
Um So, Mr Chairman, you should
have a some pages in front of
you are the one I'm going to
start with is the one that is
the one that says House Bill
three total budget.
So the department, the
Department of Finance and
Administration and LFC have been
working over the past couple of
weeks on
On the Department of Transport
on House Bill three.
Um, I'm looking for the sheep
that says don't total but
actually operating. It should
look like this, Mr. Operator.
Um, I'm looking for the sheep
that says don't total but
actually operating. It should
look like this. Mr operating its
total total budget.
Mm D o t OPERATING budget Total
budget Yes.
Um so House Bill three, as as
action was taken by House
Transportation Committee stands
at 1.276 billion.
AH, made up of various federal
and state revenue sources that
includes 216 million for
personnel. 678 million for
contracts and 382 million for
other costs.
Um and just very quickly. I'll
run you through a couple of
highlights in the different
programs for the department
before I hand it over for any
further discussion, Flipping
that total budget page over
you'll see at the top of the
project designing construction
program. This is where the
department's road projects are
funded. You can see there is a
big decrease in the other cost
category.
That's due to a fall in the
total debt service that the
department's going to make in
fiscal year 2025 and you'll
notice. Conversely, a big
increase in the contracts line,
so that's for design projects as
well as state funded road
projects around the state.
In the highway operations
program. These are the
transportation districts.
There's a there's a total budget
of 316 million, uh in this is
where a lot of the road
maintenance um takes place and
that was one of the actions that
was taken by House
transportation was to add about
$16 million into the
Uh,
Maintenance budget for the
highway operations program and
to provide from for some
additional equipment purchases.
The program support on the next
on the next page of the program
Support program. The, uh
Recommendations for that were
pretty consistent, but there was
a slight increase in house
transportation to bring some
state road fund balance in for
it and facilities expenses at
the department.
And then finally in the Moat
Motel program. This is the area
with the largest year over year
increase that's due to bringing
in the transportation regulation
function for over from the
Public Regulation Commission to
the Department of
Transportation. So there's $4
million in House Bill three for
transportation regulation, and
that includes
Ah 28 Ft. Yes, 2850.
15 Plus 13. Yeah.
Yeah. 28 ft, Uh, with that, Mr
Chairman, I'll ask Diego if he
has any comments and then handed
over the secretary
Thank you, Joey. Mr. Chair
members of the committee and I
don't have any additional
comments on the operating
budget. That was the consensus
that
We all came to an agreement to
with a House Transportation
committee, but the executive
would ask the committee to
consider some of the non
recurring recommendations that
were made. There was 240 in the
Transportation Section nine
appropriations
Um, that's 200 Million General
Fund for Road projects, 30
Million for wildlife corridors,
10 million for Roadway
beautification.
And then the executive also
recommended 30 million from the
armpit funding for the electric
vehicle charging electric
vehicle charging infrastructure.
Um
Thank you, Mr Chair.
And with that Mr will ended over
the secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Good
morning Committee members we
have We have our slides for you.
Just a few words right before
and then me and Mallory will
take him this. Uh, you know, as
you all know the enemy, Bot is a
highly regulated agency. Not
only does Federal Highway
administration oversee any
project that touches a federal
penny were audited like every
other agency, and we report here
around two legislative
committees that focus primarily
on transportation
infrastructure.
Um, to be more exact in the past
eight months, and M D. O. T is
presented at a minimum of eight
tiers, Senate Finance and House
Transportation Committee
meetings and that each of these
discussions we stress the need
for additional resources
demonstrated our ability to
spend money on road
infrastructure. And of course,
we open ourselves up for
feedback question concerns from
members and I think it's fair to
say that LFC analyst staffers in
particular, D D O T staffer was
president majority, If not all
of these meetings, and in some
instances
Um, they reported out, of
course, on our progress and our
performance. Um, coming into
this session. The LFC
recommendation for Dottie does
spark significant concerns with
a couple of things. One is the
cash capacity in the existing
fiscal or in FY 25 to get
construction projects done, but
also recommendations that
earmark, um, state road fund
revenue for the agency.
So we've had a number of
conversations, the number of
members and, uh, you know, a lot
of these conversations have
identified some concerns that
may serve as the impetus for the
LFC recommendation. And a few of
those concerns are that we don't
spend money fast enough that
we've reverted funding and
certain budget categories and
certainly concerns that if we
have financial capacity to help
local governments do we
necessarily need financial
capacity for the agency?
And of course, our presentation
today will address these
concerns.
As we look back at the meetings
that I mentioned just a little
bit ago, we tried recalling a
single instance when the
committee was informed of
unsatisfactory performance from
an M D O t. As many of you know,
I've led three state agencies
for the state for if you count
my short stint at HD, and I know
what it is to walk into this
building and build a case for a
single ft and lose those types
of battles.
But in the 1717 months I've led
an M D O T have never before
seen such legislative support
for the work being done by our
2500 state employees in
particular our support for our
ability to help local
communities our capacity to
solve some of the state's
largest problems. And of course,
I think our collective and
shared understanding for the
resources that we need to
address our roadway
infrastructure. In short, the
LFC recommendation represents a
252 $140 million decrease in non
recurring general fund.
The recommendation also earmarks
nearly 10% of our state road
fund, in contrast with an
executive wreck that funds a
section nine to the tune of $240
Million to 70, if you include
Arpaio redistribution
So we sit here before you
members with a stellar audit A
demonstrated ability to spend
$100 million a month a
reputation to help local and
tribal governments when they
need help, most and a report
that shows we have either spent
or obligated 66 million of the
1.7 billion that you all have
given to us generously in the
last four years.
As you'll see our ability to
receive federal redistribution
dollars is also a testament to
our support from Federal Highway
Administration as it relates to
adequately spending and
obligating our federal funds for
you all if you go to the power
point presentation that we
provided this one appear
apologies for the date.
I know we got rolled. Thank you
for that. Actually, I'll go over
the first slide and then miss
once a notice will finish up the
last few
And so on This here this slide
here is really talking about N
m d O T s capacity and and this
is really where we talk about,
Um are are reduced ability to
address roadway infrastructure
in the state of New Mexico. And
so the table below shows our
operating budget on the second
column next to the fiscal year
and the operating budget is
state distributions from plus
federal apportionment.
And so that really does comprise
the some of our $1.2 billion
operating budget.
The section nine column There is
allocations for consequence
truck shin equipment later and
maintenance. The column that we
call cost escalations is really
a conservative estimate of what
it costs to do business now
business these days relative to
four years ago. I think LFC uses
our cost escalation factor of 40
greater than 40%.
Um And then, of course, are
earmarked projects. Are those
projects that come to the D O T
through non recurring general
fund appropriations, including
our appropriations that go to
local governments or that fun,
None bot priorities, And so when
I walk you through the table,
I'll show you the cost
Escalations, for example, in FY
24 show just projects that will
fund this year that will either
go to locals or for non duty
essential priorities.
Or showing here on this table in
FY 24 if you go down to fy 24
with an operating budget of 1.2
billion and the section nine
funding of 232 million with
average cost escalations. We
need $300 million in FY 24 just
to do the work that we were
doing four years ago as a
conservative estimate.
When you factor in what we spend
what will what will allocate out
this year in earmarked projects?
You subtract that from my
financial capacity. We also fund
virtually everything out of the
State Road fund. As you're
hearing a little bit, even our
assumption of the motor vehicle
regulation division at PRC will
come from the state road fund
revenues, reducing our capacity
by yet another 4 million from
State Road fund.
But legislative pay increases
are also funded out of the State
Road Fund. And so over the past
four years that some is about
$37 million. Our financial
capacity sits at just above a
billion dollars.
And so when you look at this
table, what were essentially
toying with here is the
inability to keep up with what
it's costing to do work at the
very top. You see the FY 25
operating budget, but we
currently have in Section nine
funding.
The possibility that what we
might be able to earn motor
excise tax and the bill that
Senator Gonzalez is carrying. If
you look at average cost
escalations just for that budget
and the 50 million earmarked
projects on the LFC wreck
additional pay increases You see
our financial capacity dwindling
in 25 relatives 24 with capacity
to do construction.
So what we're asking, of course,
is for a couple of measures and
one is that consideration that
the executive recommendation is
providing to us with a $200
million
Allocation for construction,
construction projects. And, of
course, um, additional one time
funding for the year Mark
Project on Wildlife quarters.
I'll Hand it over to miss months
and artists now already on page
number three.
This shows our federal
apportionment. The Black Bar
shows the U. S. D o T dollars
that come into the state of New
Mexico gives a show of fight the
five past years. The green Bar
is what our obligation limit. So
although the black bar is
higher, we are put a cap on our
obligation limitations. So, for
example, in 2024, we have a
federal portion mint of $506.2
million. We are only allowed to
spend $445.4 million of that
federal money.
The green bar shows are federal
redistribution and FY 23 US
Still T swept about nearly $8
billion of federal money
throughout all federal programs
that they have in particular one
program that comes to other D, O
T. Or that U S. D O T gives are
the tribal transportation
program and those monies go
directly to tribal entities and
23 deal. U S. D O T swept about
$90 million that they were not
Not able to obligate
Therefore, do you teach has
proven in the past five years
that we're able to obligate and
spend our money timely.
Therefore, we've been awarded
about $60 million and, um, fy
23 and we've been awarded in the
past five years rear
distribution.
On page number four.
This shows I were debt service
payment. The first schedule
shows the fiscal year The great
column shows our state Rolf. One
portion that we're paying for
debt service. The Green column
is the federal monies that were
showing and the Blue column is
our highway infrastructure
funding.
The total column is how much the
department is obligated to pay
each fiscal year. So as you can
see, in FY 24. We're obligated
to pay $194 billion in debt
service payments and F I 25
we're gonna go down by about $80
Million to $111 million. In the
graph below. We focus on FY 24
and FY 25 as I mentioned in the
previous slide, we are still
given the same apportioned
amount. We're still given
obligation limit. Just our debt
service amount goes low.
Where so you can see in 24. We
have a debt service payment. 138
million. Whereas in 25, we're
only going to pay outfit. We're
only going to utilize 57.3
million of our federal dollars.
The remaining $80 million can be
used for design or construction
projects. Federal funds cannot
be used for any type of
maintenance maintenance work, so
we cannot pay for any pothole
patching, guardrail, repair or
any type of stripping activities
with federal funds.
And page number five. This shows
the D O T and the executive and
lfc request as you can see, um
and box number one. The
department has identified one
priority project for each
district. The executive
recommended $200 million of
General Fund where LFC has
recommended $40 Million and
Number two. The executive
recommended $10 Million and Road
Rage Beautification where LFC
has not
How to recommendation number
three wildlife corridors, the
executive recommended $30
million of General Fund LFC has
recommended the department used
their cash balance of $50
million to support this and
number four for your electric
vehicle infrastructures. The
executive recommended $30
million of opera funding. LFC
has recommended $10 million of
capital outlay.
Um and AR and Page number six.
Page number six goes over all
the general fund appropriations
that the department has received
since 2019. If you focus your
attention on road number 36 the
department has received about
$1.6 billion worth of General
fund monies. We have encumbered
about $342 million of that we
have spent about $758 million
and we have about $500 million
to go.
You can see online. 21. This is
the RP funding. This is the
majority of where we have have
not spent our money. It's about
38% that we have not spent. We
do have a plan for it. We will
meet the DFS deadline as far as
obligating the fund timely by
their deadline. Um, we will just
need an extension on making the
payments by the December 2026
deadline set by Congress.
The line number. 35 is also
Keep that again. Line 21 on
Arpaio. Yes, so line. You don't
have the funds committed. We
have to pay the to the Congress
Deadline of December, 2026.
So we'll be able to obligate by
the D F a deadline. We just will
not be able to spend it by the
deadline will be able to spend
it by the Congress deadline of
December of 2026.
But you said all you need a D F
extension Banana congressional
extension.
Not a congressional. No, okay.
And then line number 35. I just
like to bring to your attention.
There's about 34% that we have
not.
Committed yet this funding was
just given to us and July we do
have a plan for this money as
well. And we are on track to
spend this timely and meet that
deadline.
And that Mr Churn remembers. We
stand for questions.
Thank you. Um, Mr Chairman and
thank you guys for the
presentation. Ricky, I want to
draw your attention to something
Yesterday we received RP funds
that were in jeopardy of
reversion. One of those for
anyone who drove up from Las
Cruces. We certainly know
there's a need for rest
stations. Those rest areas
remodel. Some of them are pretty
bad shape.
Looks like you guys were
allocated $20 million to do just
that, and we're still sitting on
16.3.
There's a reversion data on our
sheets of June of 25. And yet
you accept expect those
contracts to be at this summer.
We We understand that there's a
number of reasons for delays.
Can you just quickly tell us why
you're still sitting on $16.5
Million when we know there's
such a great need? Sure, Mr.
Chair, Senator, um, the bulk of
that funding to the tune of
about 14 million will be
committed to the rattlesnake
area and vertical construction
for it.
And so it will be two
facilities, one in each
direction for rattlesnake, and
it's currently under design
already, so we'll be entering in
the final design with
contractors and we're expecting
to let that project in the
summer this coming summer of 24,
which means that we'll have
construction beginning in the
fall of 24, which means that you
under construction and contract,
which is the federal obligation
for obligating it in the fall of
this year.
And the estimated project cost
there is 14 million. So of the
16 million that you see in
balance. That's where to go. The
remainder of the 2 million were
used for various upgrades. As
you mentioned in various, um
other rest areas over the course
of this summer, with all those
contracts being esta executed in
August of 24, Thank you. So, Mr
Chair to clarify the 14 million
is a new rest area. I don't know
where rattlesnake is. I know
where some rattlesnakes are, but
I don't know.
Where is that? That rattlesnake
area
between Moriarty and crimes
corners and there is a facility
in both directions. And so we'll
be redoing the the actual
facilities at that, at those
restaurants will be vertical
construction. And then Mr Chair,
the other 2 Million or upgrades.
Could you send me an email on
where which which rest areas are
getting
Any sort of upgrades at all on
that. And then Mr Chair. I have
one final question. We have a
$30 million request for
wildlife corridors. Could you
just explain to the committee
and to those watching wildlife
corridor and why we need $30
million to do it? Sure, mr Chair
Senator Wildlife Corridor is
essentially achieves a couple of
things.
One is, um it creates an
opportunity for wildlife to move
across roadway infrastructure,
so as opposed to just fencing
them in from one side or the
other wildlife corridor may
allow for wildlife to move above
or underneath a roadway
structure to minimize impacts.
And so that there is the second
goal and so the corridors allow
for free roaming across roads or
under them.
And then, of course, they
minimize impact with drivers and
going back a few years. The
state of New Mexico worked with
various other agencies to like
department of Game and Fish, for
example, to develop a wildlife
corridor plan and study and so
top five priorities by location
have been identified to reduce
collisions and another top five
for secondary priorities. And so
the plan exists and those exact
locations have been identified.
And the number one project would
be on 550 between Cuban born Leo
estimated about $50 Million.50
million. Thank you, Mr Chair
could just send me a list of
where those corridors are going
in. I could see the need maybe
where we address you know,
roadkill and traffic accidents
where there's a lot of big game
and I don't mean this
facetiously, but so we have a
wildlife corridor in five miles.
Are we posting signage for
coyotes and deer so that they
know to cross in three miles and
not now, And I mean this
seriously like how
How do you How do you encourage
wildlife to take the bridge two
miles down the road? Sure. Um,
sure. Sorry, Senator, I was
taking you seriously
want them to take the bridge?
How do I do that? And so the so
the corridors are designed to
flow them into these areas,
Right? And so on the contrary,
the drivers were like, for
example, right now in 550 near
Cuba.
The drivers are notified. It
works the other way. We don't
have a wildlife corridor that
but we have warning
notifications that indicate to
the drivers that wildlife are in
the area. So what we'll do with
the wildlife corridors design
the environment in a way that
moves them through the corridor,
specifically given where they're
going to cross, either
underneath or over, and so it
doesn't focus on a single area.
It's broader, but it pulls them
into an area.
And then we at the same time,
notify the drivers that there is
game in the area just to slow
down. Could you send me a
breakdown of that $30 million?
How many bridges and
underpasses and
And warning signs. I guess it
just seems like an awful lot of
money.
And I just wonder what the
return on that is as well. But
thank you. Thank you for your
presentation.
Thank you, Senator. Um anyone
else have any questions? Woods?
Okay, Senator. Would your first
I don't have a list here. Let me
look for it. And then we have
Sandra goes sites.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and you know, we
In boards and network.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
On on this page. Uh,
Arpaio page here.
That we're talking about.
You were saying that on page
online 21.
It was 38% there.
And you're saying that that's
not going to be
Spent by our deadline, But the
federal deadline. Is that what
you told me?
Chair, Senator. Yes, that is
correct. We will actually have
the money spent on the latest
will be August of 2025.
Well, I missed folks are in
March of 2026.
And
I I
Sometimes I don't quite
understand. Some of these
processes are just
I know that you put out a lot of
bids. Do a lot of projects do a
lot of planning. You have to do
a lot of planning a lot of
permitting a lot of things
before you can do a new project.
I don't know how much you have
to do to actually maintain the
roads and I don't know how much
of this money can be used for.
Rehabilitation of the roads that
we already have. And I don't
know how much process that is to
to clear all the hoops that I
described to do that.
But as you know, I mean, every
night on the news people talk
about the roads.
And what is our problem of taken
so long to get that money out? I
guess is the question I'm
asking Mr Secretary, Mr.
Chairman, you, Mr Chair,
Senator, Um, for for d O T in
2021, a number A list of
projects were identified as
being eligible for RP funding
use.
And so the language was specific
to these are the projects that
it may be used on and as you
mentioned the process of
planning and design right away
acquisition and getting us to
the place where we can actually
let those projects is what we've
been working on since then. And
so it hasn't been difficulty in
getting there as much as there's
been procedural in getting
there.
And so we have those projects
identified the Pinion Hills
Project in Farmington, for
example, is a local project.
And it is expected to be under
contract by February in less
than a month.
We have us 180 is a $29 million
project and we're going to be
opening bids now in January,
Montgomery Comanche, which is a
major project over 250 million.
We have 61.5 million there and
it will be under contract by
March and 11 million just under
12 million for New Mexico. 39
will be under contract in July.
And so, um, what will be doing,
of course, is burning through
that funding as quickly as
possible. We won't be able to
spend all of it by June 25,
which is its current reversion
date extending through June 26th
would allow us to get it on all
those projects and spent but
before the federal obligation or
the federal expenditure deadline
of December 26th kinda
We had a list of projects and I
know again for meeting
All the all the hoops.
Um
Did we just not have the ability
to get those contracts out
quicker?
Or was it
It literally was the the
different permits and the bids
and the planning. It was
literally the process of that.
Just eat up so much of her time.
Um
Was that because of staffing
that we didn't have a large
enough staff to accommodate
that. Was it just so much money
at one time? We just couldn't
Process at all quick enough.
To to to do all the
That kind of work. I'm still
grasping at straws to tell my
constituents, you know, they
look at roads and they say,
Well, there's money. There's my
road. You know, I know it's not
that simple. That's what I get
from my constituents. So
Literally. We don't We didn't
have the staff to get everything
done, or we didn't have the I'm
sure if you cross federal lands
and that kind of stuff all the
time.
Whole different set of
circumstances. So essentially,
what you're telling me is
That the paperwork is just held
up a lot of these contracts
being let
Mr Chair, Senator. We would say
it's the process and so, um like
with any one of us, if if we
woke up this weekend and said, I
want to, I want to build an
addition to my home, right? I
got my federal income tax check,
and I want to use this money on
building a second edition to my
home.
As you know, between getting the
permits finding the contractor
looking at the designs, figuring
out what you can do the
electrical and everything
getting done. It might be 10 or
12 months before you actually
start work on that addition to
your home, and all the while you
may have a spouse or a good
friend saying, what's taking you
so long right and your point to
that process.
That says, Well, this is all the
check boxes that need to get
done first, before we actually
start burning through my income
tax, So it's the process of
getting these projects designed
and ready for let that we've
been working on and getting them
all under contract by July of
this year. Um, is a goal. We
know we can meet its just a
matter of burning through.
142.5 million within a year. We
just construction process will
just take a little longer.
Um
And you said you had mixture you
said that you actually had Mr
Secretary, a a list of projects.
That were required under that
bill to spend
Spend the money on
Uh, I mean, and the question I
have
Is
I know that you told me many
times that you go out and survey
all of these roads.
To determine
The roads that need to be
redone.
Was that taken into account when
we listed these projects
Mr Chair, Senator on my
understanding is it was a good
collaborative process between
legislators at the time and the
D O T with regards to what
projects could get done
reasonably in the allocation
deadline.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Senator Hemphill. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Secretary for
the presentation and the work.
Oh,
go ahead.
Service.
That's what I thought. Okay, um
and thank you for the work that
the Department of Transportation
does. You've always been
incredibly responsive. I just
wanted to get an update on what
we've discussed a little earlier
about the highway 180 project.
Can you explain a little bit
about the past funding and what
funding you're still needing to
move on to the phase two, so
Right now. Phase one is fully
funded. From what I understand.
Can you go over that funding a
little bit? Sure, Mr Chair
Center, and I'll have chief
engineer correct me if I if I
misspeak on anything.
We have a three phase project
between Hurley and Silver City
for New Mexico 180 right now,
and we have us 180. We have
funded phase one at about $30
Million, which is fully funded
and is is underway.
We have the second phase
estimated about 54 million but
were again using cost escalation
knowledge that it probably be
closer to 60 million. That
second phase is in preliminary
design. Um, at this point, we
could we would work on getting
the design to 90% getting it
complete and letting that
project for phase 2 $60 million.
And Miss Mr Chair and Secretary.
What is the do you have an
estimate of what Phase Three
would cost at this point. Mr.
Chair, Senator. Let me get that
information for you at the top
of my head. I don't have it, but
I'll get it to you today. Thank
you, Mr Chair and Secretary
Phase three. Can you describe
where Phase three would start
and end approximately
Um, not Mr Chair Senator also
include that in my in my
correspondence with you exactly
the limits, But that third phase
will take it into Demi. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you. Um, so
for phase one, the $30 million.
How is that amount funded? What
was the history of that funding?
Was breakfast, purple right up.
Um, Mr Mr Chair, Senator. Yeah.
RP funding was was is the
funding source for the first
phase? 2021. Mr. Chair, Mr. Mr
Chair, Senator. Yes, that is
correct. Mr Chair. The full 30
million came from RP funds and
2021. Mr. Chair, Senator. Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. That's
all my questions, and
I just missed your chance.
Sorry, Mr Secretary Secretary. I
just wanted to let you know that
whatever we can do to help get
that amount for Phase two. Let's
start working and make sure that
we have that funding. Let me
know what we could do to
Advocate for that additional
funding. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Sarah Gonzalez.
And I do apologize. I'm sorry.
Sorry. Thank you Will
Uh, First of all, Good morning
and thank you to all of you.
And I'll just start off by
saying now.
To me.
From all the agencies in the
state. To me, This is one that
is very special.
And I think it's because I
understand it.
You know, and being the only
agency that, uh, you know, it's
not completely or any funding
from the General fund. It's just
into the past few years that
That we have been working with
that on some areas.
And I'll just start off by, uh,
by saying No, um
Our party's volunteer.
And that's by choice.
And then also by our
constituents that they elect us
to be here.
But Senator Bentley last
Saturday.
I was going home at 530 in the
morning because I needed to get
home to take care of some
things.
And right at what we call the
horseshoe going into towels.
Just there was a stay police.
Maybe just
Maybe about a minute ahead of
me.
And then right after that, he
must have happened just right
there.
There was a huge elk that was
hit.
It was right on the center.
And on a two lane.
You know, an animal like that
Pretty much takes a lot of the
space of a two lane.
There? No.
Oh, just a little bit further
back, You know, maybe a couple
of years ago.
There was I left also very early
to be here at one of our early
meetings.
And there was a car behind me.
That was just very edgy to pass
me and just a sauce out of
ranches that 1000 Okay, Mado.
And finally, you know, he passed
me just as he passed me. He had
three elk.
You know, And so this is a
beginning for our state, You
know, just recognizing the need
for for this kind of improvement
safety both ways.
You know, for individuals and
for wildlife and for us
But I hope that you know we can
continue. Continue working with
this and then also follow the
research that goes with it.
You know, and there's a lot of
them that are in place that we
don't even notice. You know,
like between.
Uh, Santa Fe and Albuquerque.
The ones that you don't even see
that they're just under neath.
You know that we're
Animals and also horses and
others you know, used to
Go from one point to another
point.
But the whole thing is so
It's needed. You know, I'll just
say that
Um, I need to ask them.
Has there been an increase on on
our liability?
Mr Mr Chair. Senator, we could
We could check with GST to see
what that is. Perhaps. Okay,
maybe we can pull that up. Okay?
And the reason that I'm bringing
this up is so
It goes hand in hand.
You know, we don't keep up
maintenance.
Racist. That part
And then who pays, you know is
if your PSA liability comes back
to the state
You know, so that's another area
that we have to really take care
of mean. It's not a
An automatic that if there's
bad, mean inst, nothing happens.
Yes, things do happen.
And then, uh, I needed to ask
you
Yes. So secretary and staff
How much do you need?
To say that you would work well
for the coming year.
Mr Chair, Senator, As you know,
Uh well, let me put it this way.
How much are you short?
Um, Mr Chair Center. It's a It's
a big question, because, um
As you all know, we participate
in providing providing data for
the trip report, which is
presented every single year in
House transportation.
And that will show a very high
number that talks about the gap
in our, uh in our stipp, Um for
d, O t. And then, of course, we
have the temp report, which
shows a gap in all of our
maintenance.
And those numbers are enormous.
And we wouldn't expect for the
Legislature in a single session
to fund that.
What we asked for over the
interim was for each of the
transportation districts to
identify a priority project that
they could
Get funded and completed within
three years. The lifespan of non
recurring general fund and the
some of those projects is just
over $300 million we need, uh,
typically about 120 million to
fund our maintenance priorities.
And so our strategy and hope is
that changes to the motor excise
tax distributions would
Give us that 120 million needed
to support our maintenance
priorities.
And so the sum of all those the
non recurring request and the
motor excise tax was in the area
of 425,000,445 million, which
was split between non recurring
and changes to motor excise tax
distribution. So, Mr Chairman,
secretary of that would put us
with what about
About 200 million short. Um, Mr
Chair, Senator, The the
Executive Rec gets us two thirds
of the total cost of those
construction projects Executive
concluded that 200 million
Um, another 100 million would
fund all six of those district
priorities If we successfully
get the changes to motor excise
tax that revenue would fund our
maintenance priorities in the
coming years since it be
recurring.
Mr Chairman and members as one
member.
And with the status of our
revenue.
I strongly support that we
support you in what you need.
You know, we need to work that
out between now and her house
appropriations and coming
through, not less. We need that.
And, uh, it's it's a matter of
You know, it's how it works. You
know, you work on the road and
and in five years you need
maintenance.
And, uh, the rotation is not
fast enough to catch up with
what the needs are statewide.
But I definitely support you
know what your needs are?
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much. Mr
Chairman, members of the Senate
Finance Committee to our
presenters and the people that
are here as we continue to go
ahead and deal with our road
issues just quickly, of course,
uh, safety is number one and
always looking at if you will
for our state employees and
contractors that are out there
and, of course, the traveling
public.
A couple of questions, and one
of them refers to an
appropriations bill that I've
submitted.
And that is, if you will just
study where these charging
stations are going to be going.
I know that we've talked about
the possibility of placing some
in or near rest areas and I
realized that federal resources
can't be used for that purpose,
but but in moving it forward,
what are some of the plans that
you have for the charging
stations throughout the state?
or if you will, with an
appropriations?
Bill that hopefully would
provide you with resources to
help you further study. This is
that needed or do you have
enough information in place? Uh,
in terms of how you're going to
be placing these charging
stations throughout throughout
the state
Mr. Mr Chair, Senator. Thank
you. Thank you for the question
and for the support on being
really strategic about where the
charging stations go the overall
strategy precedes me. And it
came in a lot of foresight. So
before coming onto the UT, there
was a lot of thought about what
was going to happen when the
Legislature allocated about 12
million in ARPA funding to
support charge station
infrastructure.
The department knew at that time
that it would also then receive
Navy funding, which would focus
on the alternative fuel
corridors and interstates. And
so that first round of RP
funding was used in very rural
communities throughout the
state.
That funding is out the door and
those stations are coming
online. It seems like every day
or they're being commissioned,
Um and so that was the first
round.
Now that we have the Nebbi
funding available to us, we are
already awarding if we haven't
already that first round of
funding and so that funding then
we'll focus on our requirements
to have a charge station every
50 miles on our three
interstates and alternative fuel
quarters.
We also went after a large
number of CF. I grants and you
may have learned recently that
we received a significant
funding there. But the bulk of
that is going to a project in
Dona Ana County for heavy truck
charging, and then we have other
charge Nations here in Santa Fe
County. And then of course in
Taus.
So the ask in this coming
session is after all that work
is done. Senator is to put those
charge stations on a map and
start plotting out where the
gaps are, and then
Reissue another RFP identifying
those gaps locations as priority
locations for contractors in a
as a follow up question
regarding specific to the rest
areas throughout the state.
What what are the plans in the
long term to ensure that we're
going to have the proper
accommodations and facilities?
For the traveling public. Let's
say, for example, they get
caught in a snowstorm, or, uh,
as our trucking industry
continues to utilize those
resources and of course,
families that are going through
What? What is a strategic plan
for that to upgrade if you will
the rest areas.
Mr Chair, senator. And and
again, I'll ask my colleagues
correct me. If I'm wrong. That
hurdle. There is a federal
limitation to bend on federal
rights of way.
And so it isn't necessarily the
funding source that that creates
the prohibition to have charge
stations there. It's a federal
statute that doesn't allow for
bending to to occur on federal
rights away, and so, um, I
imagine that working with our
federal delegation to create a
venue within that existing
statute that allows for charge
station infrastructure to be put
in place would be one of the
first places to start.
Um and so not opening it up
entirely, so that our federal
rights of way or rest areas are
inundated with businesses and,
you know, vending but could
create a space for us because it
makes sense to put charging
infrastructure there really
appreciate that. And then time
to that is the beautification of
our roadways. And again. I
applaud the work that you all
do, but I get I'm really
concerned about the public
safety and the safety of the
Employees that are out trying to
maintain this. Can you elaborate
a little bit in terms of what
that strategic plan is for the
long term?
And what marketing tools are you
using? To get the word out to
the public to please don't
litter. I know that's a It's
another significant issue that
we're dealing with.
Mr Chair, Senator. It is a big
priority for us and the
governor. You've heard her talk
about this certainly in the
state of the state and
otherwise.
And so we're working on a number
of things. We've we're locked
arms with the tourism department
that's working on reviving the
Tosh. No mosque campaign in a
way that we think can really
enhance our communication with
the general public.
But what we're also working on
is, um, a toolkit that our local
governments, counties and
municipalities and tribal
governments can leverage so that
this isn't all falling on state
resources to get this work done,
but it leverages elementary
schools, high schools,
correctional facilities, state
correction contracts, etcetera.
And to kind of burn the candle
at both ends If you will, so
that we're we're in greening in
a generation that this is wrong,
and we're using the communities
to keep them clean, creating a
culture right that we've got to
stop littering some of the
toolkit that we're working on,
Also includes some local
ordinance work right, including
Um, you know, secure your load
ordinances, ordinances that
might allow a municipal judge to
fundamentally, you know, say, if
you can't pay your fines, then
you're going to go to a local
beautification program and pick
up litter. Um or a local
ordinance that says, Hey, this
is where you call and report
someone if you stumble upon
their bag of trash, and it has a
bill in it with their name, and
so we're trying to identify tool
kits and researches for local
governments to do their part.
Over the past three years dot in
particular has burned through
$10 million of beautification
funding again funding that you
all gave us and we can send you
a breakdown of how that's been
distributed and some of the
productivity there but unless we
start on the preventative
measures, we can do that all day
long every day. And so, Mr Chair
as we move forward, all this
ties in directly to the budgets
that you deal with with
maintenance with
Okay, keep and we're talking
about everything from the
potholes along the roads to
public safety within
construction zones. Which brings
me to the next question
regarding cameras. I know we've
talked about this before.
Whether continues to be if you
will, In my opinion in order
number of accidents,
particularly around lava, Hara
the rope, Pecos area seems to be
open.
However, I know that there's
still work that needs to be
done. We talk about the animal
crossings and I really applaud
you again because I know in the
Cuba area as we talk about
boxcar, the box culverts and if
you will, the lighting that's
there, and I've seen that in
operation. Uh,
How are you dealing with? And
what is the status of, uh, that
innovation in terms of how you
get a better control traffic
going through the construction
zones?
Mr Chair, Senator. We're working
on the legal parameters for
placing speed cameras on
construction zones, and that's a
measure that involves a
partnership with Department of
Public Safety and, of course, is
supported by our partners at the
Associated Contractors of New
Mexico.
The initial partnership with
Department of Public Safety was
an exhausting one for them, and
that was presents presents
presents and where necessary
support by local share or by
county sheriff enforcement.
And so what we're working on is
what are the legal parameters
for us as an agency to do this
to to identify the project
selection method of what
projects will have speed cams.
We would work much like the city
of Rio Rancho with a contractor
to place and manage and
calibrate and and, um I maintain
the infrastructure at those
selected projects.
And so that's something that
we're hopeful we can get done
very, very soon.
So, Mr Chair as we move forward
with particularly how their
project
What? What is the intent?
Because I know once that's
complete traffic definitely will
flow much easier and much safer.
What's the timetable in terms of
that full completion?
Me. Um yeah.
Mr Chair, Senator. Um, the
contractors should be going
getting back out there with the
warmer weather, paving the other
side. Um, that should take
approximately 60 days. So, um,
by June time frame, they should
be completed.
I appreciate that very much.
There's a other questions, but
just to close again. I want to
Thank you, Mr Secretary. Members
of the department for the
ongoing work the hard work,
particularly to maintaining our
roadways and then lastly, I
continue to emphasize as you all
do the public safety it It means
a lot to us, and I know every
time we lose either an
individual from the O T because
of a road accident or we have
these accidents.
Those are things we definitely
want to continue to find ways to
prevent which all ties into Mr
Secretary, you know, in your
your background you believe in
in the strategic approach, and I
know that you're working on some
of these additional preventive
methods to take us forward. We
really talk about our ground
transportation again. Thank you
all very much. That's all I
happen.
Hmm.
Thank you, Um
Let me ask you some questions.
How how many high level
employees have left?
You know, District money left.
Is it seen him at the gas
station the other day.
Jason Justin.
Right?
I mean, how many high level
employees district engineers and
have left Mr Chair? Our deputy
secretary retired. Um, we're not
aware of it. He came from
District one to be the deputy
secretary, but he just retired.
Um and our district engineer and
District three recently.
And how many applications that
we had for those positions.
Um, for we're betting, um,
interested candidates for our
deputy secretary position, But
as you know, those positions are
gave X and, um, aren't posted.
Typically, like others for the
other position, do you?
We have one applicant for the
district three position, which
is a continuous posting.
And how many other employees on
edge of retirement.
Um, Mr Chair. We can get you
that number by classification at
some point near future, Okay?
And then how much of the ARP of
money was transferred to the Rio
Grande trails?
You know that?
Zero.
None. Mr Chairman being told
none.
And so how did that Rio Grande
Trail get funded through BOT?
Mhm.
The rail trail or what rail
trail or whatever Mr Chair the
rail trail. The $10 million for
Albuquerque. It was that state
road fund Steve Road Fund
mixture into you. You have the
authority to just move $10
million to anywhere anytime.
Mr Chair. We, um over the last
three years, including my two
predecessors. Providing local
support is common. Uh, we have a
report of $58 million of State
Road fund resources that we've
provided to local governments
that need funding to close gaps
on critical projects.
So, but when you do that, don't
you have a contract with them
and say
I mean, like you filling
potholes in Santa Fe. Was there
a contract with the city center
facing if we do this, you accept
liability. If anybody it's
another pothole, your we're not
liable. You are. Do you have
those contracts in place for you
know
In emergency situations like in
in mortar in Las Vegas.
Probably had to put those in
place a little bit later. But
the liability issue did we did
they accept the liability for
the work? The state did, Uh, so,
Mr Chair when we transfer
financial resources to another
entity, period, whether it's a
capital flow through our state
road fund resources, we do have
agreements, of course, where
they assume responsibility of
the infrastructure after it's
done unless it's our
infrastructure, because
sometimes the local works on our
infrastructure.
Um And then there are a number
of instances where we go in and
help a local and it's not
through an agreement. It's like
resources like you mentioned if
a county were to call tomorrow
and say, Listen, we have
residents that can get out of
their home. Can you come and
plow our road or can you do
something?
Then we'll go in and do that, as
you know, a big brother partner
of theirs without an agreement,
and so in those instances,
certainly if something is done
while we're plowing a road or
clearing something, um, there
could be a discussion about
liability if something were to
occur, But there are those
instances where we don't have an
established agreement because
we're lending state resources.
But we're I mean, in the city of
Santa Fe deal just kind of irks
me.
I mean, we're
We didn't have an agreement,
right? You just were told to go
fill the potholes, Mr. Chair. We
worked with the city of Santa Fe
to identify the idea areas and
to go to work and getting them
repaired. And but no over there,
No other city, the richest city
in the county in the state.
With
The richest population.
Right?
Who doesn't have their audits
complete.
Get services.
But the other cities that have
their audits complete and have
just as many potholes gallop is
one
Silver City towels.
They don't get those services.
Um, Mr Chair again to the
fairness Sure. And and so again
to the tune of over $58 million
over the past three years, we
have local governments that sit
in a room with us and say This
is big for us. Can you help us
get it done, And we do that?
because we don't need for them
to have have completed projects
and we know that the resources
we give to them, give them the
capacity to do other things like
How their roads or fix their
potholes or blade patch, you
know rough areas, and so there's
no question that we help local
governments that sit with us. We
reserve that funding for the
purposes of helping them get
those works done, but they have
to apply through it and go
through a process that are given
the automatic gift and like,
come to my come to the street
and fill these Powell's I mean,
that's
That's a problem. I mean, miss
orally and and policy wise. I
don't know what it is, but
there's some. There's something
in there. I mean, governor can
order whatever. Tell anybody to
do anything. But then the day
What everybody else is not
getting those services.
And and and this is to the city
of Santa Fe. I mean, your audits
aren't complete or three years.
I mean, you have crews. You're
one of the richest counties.
In the state and the poor ones
lose out.
Or ones that Clayton four ones
where everyone call it right.
They lose out because
Somebody told somebody to go to
the richest county and and fill
potholes.
When they had the ability to do
that.
Let me ask you on the gap on the
charging stations on the gaps.
How are you mapping the private
sector ones already?
Um, Mr Chair we have on our on
our website, the availability of
all charging infrastructure
infrastructure across the state
so we can identify where they
are by location. Um, regardless
of who's put them up, because,
like it grants they put like 10
up. Tesla did right.
And then, like there's not one
that through, which is 30, Miles
and 60 miles to gallop, right,
And so, yeah, pulling it
through. There's some of the
hotels in Gallup, right?
How many I mean, like in a city
like Gallup. How many additional
charges do you do you need? How
are you Basing this service
population.
Um, So Mr Chair, the Gallup
location because in particular
that one's off of I 40 we know
that as we start from the state
line or Albuquerque, every 50
miles. We need to have one, and
that's our requirement under
Navy.
But all that, Mr Valdez if he
wants to expand on how by
location, he's creating that
capacity measure.
Mr Chair, members of Committee.
Thank you for that question and
definitely from the different
from resources Secretary
mentioned our plans on the Navy
is absolutely every 50 miles.
It's a federal requirement. But
what you're referring to more is
our community, charging, uh,
And the build out that we're
looking at from a community
perspective. And so what we are
doing is absolutely you
utilizing our G I s team within
the agency to map out the great
thing. And I think just to
answer some of the questions
that, uh, Senator Compass had as
well is that we are definitely
looking at ways that we put
these charging infrastructure
stations in places where there's
amenities.
Restaurants, restrooms, lighting
and other amenities that keep
the motoring public safe in
regards to where we're
strategically mapping these
locations it's based on. Of
course, the need to get to a
level of saturation around the
state where, as the adoption of
E V s are increasing, there'll
be a station for at least every
10 electric vehicles around the
state.
And so we're working towards
that end to not only you know
the question about what comes
first, the people buying the
electric vehicles or the
infrastructure needed to support
that infrastructure Gallop is
one of those areas in our CF. I
grant where we actually from
McKinley County, uh, went out
for $6 million worth of
infrastructure projects because
of its proximity to the
interstate. We believe that
that's an area that needs
additional resources.
To be able to traverse the state
from east to West. And so
unfortunately, that portion of
our CF I application was not
funded. So talking about the
additional influx of state
funding that will be provided
those projects that were
submitted for for that CF I
application will be reviewed and
we'll be able to utilize some of
the projects that were not
funded through the CF. I process
with state funding because those
projects are shovel ready quotes
have been provided. The need has
been
Identified not only from the
adoption of the vehicles but to
ensure that the Justice 40
equity and geographical
locations are addressed for
those infrastructure projects.
So
Jerry how many electric vehicles
are in Gallup?
Um, I have an in Mr Chair.
members of Committee, our
partners at taxation revenue
have provided the list by
county the breakdowns of
registered vehicles I can
absolutely provided to you at
the end of this meeting. I don't
have that at my fingertips, but
I can absolutely provided with
you within the hour. Yeah, I
understand that. I 40 issue
right. But in Gallup
And this goes to the governor's
order. We're going to go, all
electric, right?
I don't think there's more than
10.
Thanks.
Inside a gallop.
And
You know, Albuquerque may have
10,000
I think Gallup. I mean in rural
New Mexico, I don't know how
you're going to calculate the
rural demand versus the
interstate demand.
And then in Zuni.
I don't think there's one and
they have a charger.
You and thank you. Zoonie
Charger just went up. Last week
Secretary looted the fact that
almost daily charges are coming
and one of the things about the
charging infrastructure is not
only about providing, charging
for the vehicles that are in the
community, but what we really
want to make sure we had
charging stations go online.
Interior Maria, you know, in the
in China's circle, we want to
make sure that we're putting
these charging stations not only
for the fact of charging
vehicles
But providing the economic
anchors within communities that
people are able to go to these
communities spend dollars
infused, You know those
communities, you know, like
Mama. We put a charging station
at the, uh Toltec Railroad,
right? We want to be able to
bring tourist dollars in New
Mexico. For those individuals
who are driving.
Electric vehicles were just
coming through our state going
to rural New Mexico traveling
spending dollars out of New
Mexico and infusing our tax
based in that way as well. Isn't
that a gas stations do
Ah, Mr Chair. Ah, it's exact
same model on I mean, I like Yo,
you spun it to electric charging
vehicles. But more people are
going to stop the gas station
and they are the electric
vehicle charging stations. So
those are the ones you want off
the interstate because we get
their excise tax, right?
They go in there. Most people
charging cars. I see him at
Scottsdale all the time and just
sit in their cars and scroll on
their phone while they're doing
that some of them may go to the
bathroom and run to McDonalds or
if there's one near there, but
I mean, I mean, he just gave the
perfect reason why gas station
model. It's just It's a gas
station. But
Share Emergent committee. We're
pleased to announce yesterday
Secretary did mention that the
first, uh, round of funding did
go out for Navy $11.9 million
across 20 locations 1000 miles
of our interstate system and the
perfect model that you're
describing is the award that we
gave to the pilot truck Stop.
Where they submitted a proposal
or charging stations will be
added to that pilot travel
center to be able to meet those
needs as well. Um so we're
definitely the great opportunity
to be federal funding, as well
as the article Funniest provided
for us to partner with these
local private entities to be
able to have a performance
period that we measure we hold
them accountable for, but those
dollars are being infused and
kept at that local level through
that through that economic
These are electrical
There's a chair members of
committee. I know that those
vehicles are being worked on in
regards to Tesla. Other
secretary and I have actually
visited with the technology on
the heavy freight vehicles, and
that's a technology that's
moving forward. However, I don't
have the numbers.
Okay?
I mean, there's nothing wrong
with a person chooses electric
or gas don't really care.
Thanks their personal choice,
but they want to do
Sarah Personal choice. Do you
have
Do you have the numbers prior to
2020?
General fund subsidies that were
given to the OT.
You have up to 2020, so we have
2019 so Lions two through six.
That's 2019. Which page page
number six
because I'm looking on financial
capacity.
You're talking about the General
fund.
Yes. Page number six.
That's the one in which line
Its lines number two through
six. Those are since 2019 that
we've received general
What's up?
Two through 19.
We received $400 million in
General fund and then because of
the pandemic, it was reduced to
325 million.
And the 325 million was Arpaio.
Correct? No, Our boy is found
online. Um 16 through 21.
16 through 21 2019 and, uh, 12.
Through what
912
But you have you right where it
is, Um, if you go to the right
line
15 all the way to the right.
You'll see Arpaio right in front
of right After the percentages,
You'll see that all those that
say Arpaio where the allocations
in 2021
Okay? And then the General fund
for 2019.
It is.
Mr Chair like 25 in total.
And how is that in 2019? How was
that? Given their what? It was
all just general. Just general
fun. Yes, it was for
construction projects,
maintenance projects and then
the Transportation Project fund.
Okay?
Let's go to your art, but here
and get back to that line.
So the art But aviation has been
100% E V stations. 167 million,
right?
Yes, 167,000 that has not been
spent that has not been spent.
Hmm.
Your lyric control.
1.4 million has not been spent.
Mhm. Yeah. And Arbor
Construction projects. 100
million. I think I've seen some
emails on that.
And then
Arrest area improvements we
touched on
So and out of the
30210 to balance on our part,
right?
Right. It's a total of 120.3
million that we have not spent.
And then
And are trying to find the sheet
We just had printed
In ours. Our party we've seen
300 million on spending Arba.
That's correct.
So, Mr Chairman, I'm not. I'm
not sure I've seen that that
sheet but that I believe the
numbers that Mallory has here.
Correct. Okay, somewhere I
thought I'd seen 300 for D O t.
Well, I think if you if you look
at the very bottom of the sheet
she's referring to, there's
about 500 million total.
Of those funds.
100. Those are not all our
funds. Are they Mr Chair? That's
correct. Those are not all are
funded only in 20 only 16
through 20 or Arba.
so that's 120,000,001 spent
money.
We know that 16 of it probably
gets spent.
102
Where are we at with that?
Um, Mr Chair. Hadn't print that
report. I know they sent it to
me. I just
And we can send it, Mr Chairman,
But we have, um, on on that
survey. We'll have all those
projects under contract by July.
Opinion Hills in February, US
180 in March, Um Montgomery,
Comanche in March and then the
latest one under contract will
be New Mexico. 39 LB under
contract.
And those are those federal
requirements for those dates to
be expended when we met Mr Chair
in if we receive an extension
through June of 26, that's what
were we indicated in our survey.
An extent. But the deadline is
June 26th for them to be
completed.
Um, Mr Chair in our survey we
have, um, when we'll have those
done, I believe it was March
march of 26 is when we expect
the last project to be
completed.
And we're sure about that.
Yes, Mr Chair, but the June
reversion Day gives us a few
months on that latest project.
Okay. Thank you. Um
We're gonna look at bonding.
And what number we can get to
Probably going to look at it
hitting a billion dollars in
Bondi's bot, everything
itemized.
Throughout.
We're going to see what the
agency and what the state has
available to Bond, a billion
dollars project. Listen, just
gotten so big in one quarter
here one quarter there.
Yeah, And but the Legislature
will probably
We're gonna figure out our
bonding capacity today, Joey as
soon as you leave here, and
we're gonna come back, and we're
gonna bond
A dollar amount.
Hopefully, we can get to a
billion dollars.
And we're gonna like these off,
but everything is going to be
itemized local governments.
To where the projects are going,
and the dollar amounts with
timelines for them to get done.
We're gonna put
We'll look at those numbers. But
the 120 million for maintenance
that's going to be an angel.
Reoccurring cost choice will
figure out how we spread that
out on their budget.
I want those itemized each
district in dollar amounts.
Sent last year and got vetoed.
Everybody's talking about
potholes and road conditions and
wildlife corridors. The only way
we're going to play catch up is
to bond it in that condition.
And
If we don't find it, we're just
gonna keep nickel and dying and
everything.
But in this agency everything
and we'll probably have a
hearing if we get to Bondi
number
We'll have a hearing with
legislators and they'll come in
and they will present their
projects and they'll go on the
list and that's what we'll do in
D O T.
Seems to be too much moving the
money around at certain times
and and we're going to follow
the guidelines and and we're
gonna get projects done.
Ah!
Through bonding.
We have the ability we know
we're gonna have bonding
capacity.
Uh, we know that you probably
join, Do they have burning
capacity in the region? How much
bonding capacity had Mr victory,
Mr. We can check we get it
reported out at every other
commission meeting. We can have
that for you in an hour. Also,
you don't remember what the last
bonding was it the last
commissioner. It was 300. Mr
Terry believe the last month
bonding was done in, um, 2021,
and it was in the tune about
$353 million
In your capacity to bond for the
I don't recall that part.
I have to get that.
I mean, that's the only way
we're going to play catch up.
The only way we're gonna get
stuff done is is to put money on
it, And today's money is cheaper
than next year's money.
And if we don't do those, but
we're gonna cap some costs on
those and those contractors are
going to have to operate within
those caps.
Hmm.
In state preference for in state
contractors will probably part
of the bonding capacity and
requirements.
So we take care of our instinct,
guys first.
There's plenty of work for them,
But sometimes a big guy swallow
up the little guys or the little
guy. The big guys don't want the
little guys to do the work and
filling potholes. Little guys
can do very well and very quick.
Well, we're gonna look at
completely setting up a bond
package.
Or too far behind. There's too
many transfers of money.
And everything will be itemized
in local government and in all
that.
Okay?
Thank you.
When you want to be next.
It's just me and Senator
Gonzalez so he might not have a
whole bunch of questions.
Senator Rodriguez walked in this
When Propst face secretary
He had his presentation
yesterday.
Thank you quickly as you get
moving and started.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. I do
promise I'll be brief. I do want
to start off by apologizing to
union staff. I know you
rescheduled yesterday to
accommodate my schedule and then
it didn't work out. So I do
apologize for any inconvenience.
Psychology. You, um I guess
we'll start with the and listen
and I'll be very brief.
Real quickly did that did that
house give him what he needed?
Yeah, we need to have a hearing.
Okay. Goodbye.
There's something that none of
us can buy, and that's time.
And we have two weeks worth of
time left. Who's next E. C. C.
D.
Anybody have tough questions for
Senator Stein, born
I think they're doing a great
job. Mr. Secretary, before you
sit down to the house, give you
and you and you You're good with
your budget.
Yeah, Areas So you just
substantial cuts is what you're
coming here for, or you're
either happy or you're not happy
if you're not happy. Sit down.
If you're happy.
Goodbye. Yeah.
We can look at those requests
later through staff. We may call
you back. Once the budget
crosses it may have ability.
Saving your time. Sorry this
deal. Who else do we need to
clear off the slate taxation?
Rev. Madam Secretary.
Madam secretary.
Your next We're waiting on you.
Nobody has any questions. She's
happy with her budget.
We're just going to hear him
talk for things that they're not
doesn't even matter.
Are you happy with your budget
in the house?
I'm sorry. Tell me your name.
Your new Hi. Good afternoon. I'm
Ginger Ginger Anderson General
government.
Maybe I look new. So that's in
the house wrecks. Are they close
to what? The secretary wanted
him? We don't know yet, and they
have not gone before the full
committee. I have to go to
committees committees. Hmm.
Senator Rodriguez will run the
meeting.
Okay?
Thanks. Chairman. Happiness
start making cuts.
Thank you and you can proceed to
start so we can move along and
be as brief as you can, because
we don't want to run out and
have to rush you at the end.
Thank you.
Okay. Um, Madam Chair members of
the committee. Good morning.
Here with us. Today is the
Taxation and Revenue Department
We have with US Secretary
Chardon Clark and her leadership
team as well as D. F A analyst
Cecilia Mavrommatis. Um, this is
agency code 333. If you're look
following along in the volume,
it's page 73 through 78. That's
volume. Two of the, um LFC
publication and, um
I just wanted to let you guys
know that as Secretary Chardon
Clark had just mentioned to
Chairman Munoz.
HFC adopted the lfc record. Uh,
recommendation.
And there are some been items
underway through the HFC ad.
hoc. Um, and nothing has yet
been seen by the full committee.
So there are some items under
review. The primary difference
between the LFC and the
executive wreck. We're in the
motor vehicle division, where
there were 667,000 either
requested in General fund to
backfill. Some lost revenue as a
result of some legislation that
passed last session.
Shin
In compliance enforcement
127.1000 on the table, the
agency requested for salary
increases. Um and then the
program support division.
Had some differences between,
uh the recommendation for system
and maintenance updates for the
tax systems of record, so those
were the main change main
differences as well as in
general fund, the LFC had
recommended. 3.3 versus the
executive had 4.5%
And, um, finally, in non
recurring. There was a
difference there because the
executive had a recommendation
of 9.3 million versus the non
recurring through Lfc was 3
million, with one of the bigger
differences being in
a recommendation for a motor
vehicle tax code changes. And
with that, I'm gonna go ahead
and hand it over to Cecilia for
any further comment.
From the FAA. Thank you. Ginger.
Alright, Cecilia. We got your
name since last. Yes. You got
it. Madam Chair. Thank you. Good
morning, madam chair and members
of the committee. Um Ginger did
a wonderful job explaining this.
I think something to just note
is the executive recommendation
did take some of the recurring
and built it into t rds non
recurring. Um, and it is
particularly impactful this year
because there is a lot of tax
legislation on the table, and I
think Secretary Chardon Clark
Can explain that very well a lot
better than I can. So I will
pass it over to her. Thank you.
Okay. Hi, Secretary. Good to see
you again. It's wonderful to see
this subcommittee of the Senate
Finance Committee. Thank you for
being here.
I will a lot of experts in the
room with me from our team, but
I just want to thank them for
being here and won't go through
individual introductions because
I know you're pressed for time.
So the big picture and our
budget is that we are in a
difficult position with the LFC
wreck because our I T contract
services costs are rising. Um,
the main contractor that we have
for our systems of record for
tax and M VD. Those are called
Gentex and tapestry.
The way that that contractor
bills their clients for
maintenance is changing, and
that is pushing our cost of
those systems up by a couple of
million per year in tax and MBD
side, And so, um, probably the
single largest difference
between the executive and lfc
rec has to do with that contract
services funding for our IT
systems and if we don't have
adequate funding for those we
what Wales you will have to see
a stew in FY 25. That'll be
unfortunate is probably borrow
money from
Salaries and the contracts and
increased our vacancy, right?
When we increase our vacancy
rate, you see our customer
service and our processing times
suffer, so we certainly know
that the committee has a lot of
difficult choices to make, but
with certainly appreciate your
support and making sure I t
services contracts are fully
funded so that we don't come to
the position of having to make
that tough decision.
Um, there are a lot of
differences and are non
recurring appropriation. Um
Recommendations from the
executive and LFC to as Cecilia
mentioned, Um there's each year
since I've been in this position
except the first where it was
kind of a free for all we have
requested a $5 million non
recurring appropriation for
whatever bill implementation
comes our way and then we spend
from that appropriation.
whatever is necessary based on
what is enacted in the session.
And we revert the rest and we've
certainly appreciated the
committee's support with that,
Um, we have several bills this
session that will cost you know,
if enacted, will cost 1 to $3
million and then dozens of bills
that, if enacted, will cost more
like 10 or $20,000. Some of you
know, some of that is staff
workload that we can absorb, but
some of it is contract services
if its programming in Gen tax or
programming in tapestry, It's
not something we can just
Choose to do with staff that's
source code of a contractor. So
We really can't emphasize enough
how important it is that we have
money at the end of the session
to implement the text could
changes that are required of us
legislatively mandated.
And so, um, that we had
requested 5 million the LFC
wreck I believe with for zero
and the executive request for 3
million
Um so well, we, You know, we
just We just need to emphasize
how important that funding is to
be able to meet the deadlines
that are enacted in statute and
the background on why were we
request? The money like that is
because House Bill two is always
passed before the tax package,
And so we don't know what bills
will need to implement until
after the budget is is long
done, So we appreciate your
support with that.
And I'll ask the committee if
you'd like me to. I can go
through our slides or it can
stand for questions.
I think at this point unless the
committee wants to do otherwise.
I think we could just stand for
questions because we have seen
the information that you're
presenting and and then briefed
on a lot of it. And a lot of it.
We learn all the time from you.
So thank you. Yes, And we've got
yes, We have senators time born
with a question, and Sarah
doesn't chick Secretary Good to
see you again. And as always,
thanks for all your great work
and the great work of your staff
being so it's kind of
To my jets tracked. I really
appreciate it. And you know
you're just an exceptional
secretary and do such a great
job for our state on
Seems like every level every
time I see you.
Come into action. You're
You're just doing an awesome
job.
Have a question how much more
money is needed for the
contractual services that you
described are pretty important,
Okay? It's um Madam Chair and
Senator Stein born. Thank you.
Um, The short answer is $2
million. It's a little more
complicated than that, because
of what's your cilia mentioned
that were from our request. The
executive moved
1 million of those $2 million
into the non recurring request.
The LSC just didn't fund it, So
it's if if we end up with the
LFC records, 2 million. That's
the short answer.
Okay and
Madam Chip, Madam Chair
secretary. So do you support
that strategy of putting part of
it in non recurring and part of
it and recurring.
Madam chair and Senator Stein
born um
As you know, from a purest
standpoint, we would rather see
it in recurring because we do
believe it will be a recurring
cost. However, we know that the
committee and the executive need
to make these tough decisions
about balancing the recurring
growth and we understand that.
That's why part of it was moved.
Thank you And Madame Chair
Secretary. Is this a definite
expense? Or is this a
An anticipated expense.
Madam Chair, Senator Stein
board. I would call it a
definite expense. We have multi
year contracts with the vendor.
Um they're underway. They've
already provided us quotes and
procurement are done.
And is this Is it a done deal
that this will not happen in
House Bill two and House side?
Madam chair and Senator, I would
say no. Um, you know, I would
never call anything a done deal
until they passed it out of the
house. We do have, um, this
instruction to, you know, have a
working group conversation with
their staff and
I don't know how successful will
be in that, but we're certainly
trying
Great. And then would you flag
again? Just what are the other
dollar needs that you're
Department has that you
mentioned
So, um, some of the highlights,
Um we did request and and are
you are, senator. Can I clarify?
Do you mean recurring or non
recurring? Okay, probably after
the 2 million of it costs that
you mentioned that we talked
about a moment ago. Probably the
second. Most important thing is
the funding for bill
implementation following the
session that contingent
Money to implement bills that
passed this session. Um, and a
quick question on that. Yeah,
looking at the LFC documented.
It seems like there was a note
maybe about authorizing you to
go to the border finance.
That seems like kind of an
elegant solution for a
contingency type of thing. I
don't know how you feel about
that. Yes, Um Madam Chair and
Senator Stein, born sometimes in
the past years, that money has
come to US. Contingent upon
board of finance approval of a
financing plan. Putting that
together is is fairly simple.
It's like we take all the
administrative impacts tables
from all the cars that passed.
And go present that to the board
and they released the funding.
The only hard part can be that
the board meets monthly and so
after Bill signing deadline,
then we submit to them, you
know, meet maybe a month later.
Meanwhile, we can't get started
on implementing bills, so it's
not ideal to go to them. When,
when, really every time that
we've gone. The approval has
been for exactly what was in our
favor. Rs. Um, but it's It's
more important than we get the
money. And if we need to go
through that process, we will
About bar authority decided to
get you there or is everything
pretty lean?
It's pretty lean, Um, madam
Chair and Senator Stein born
sometimes program transfer
authority can help us. Um we
have five. I believe programs in
the department and some are much
better funded than others that
can be helpful.
Um, the other the other thing we
will try to do, um, one of the
costly bills that we may or may
not end up implementing, um,
could possibly be funded through
an MOU with Medicaid program. So
if if a bill, um, implementing
an assessment for Medicaid
passes will will seek to
independently fund that if we
need to, But there are several
other bills coming away with
implementation cost over a
million dollars each.
Thank you. And I know you were
going down the last sure. Yes.
So after the I T contract
services costs in our recurring
budget bill, Implementation is
also very important. Um, I would
call note that one thing we
haven't mentioned as we had
requested. 600,000 non recurring
to replace em VDs queuing
system. So when you come into an
M v D office, you check yourself
in with a queuing system and
we're thankful for the one we
have, but it's fairly unstable.
And when it's not doing its job
to, uh, check customers in and
that means the supervisor of the
office gets taken away from a
teller window and it's just, you
know, doing a lower return item
of checking and customers. We
really would like to be able to
replace that system.
I'll leave it at that.
No, not very much. Madam Chair,
is it?
Such an important agency. Thank
you. That's how I feel.
I had a feeling you said it.
Yeah, well, I I fully support or
whatever we can do, Madam chair.
Thank you. Thank you, senator.
Points and good questions. Now
we have Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you to all of you.
Um, just gonna ask Ginger you
mentioned about
That you had to backfill
something. And that was hungry.
Hmm.
Um, vehicle? Yes. Um, Senator
Gonzalez, so I can also let the
agency speak to this as well.
Um, about the legislative. You
want to talk about the letter?
I'm going to let her describe
the legislation that was passed.
Um, and then the secretary, um
they had wanted 667.7000.
Um in general fund to be able to
backfill the lost revenues as a
result from that legislation
compared And so the executive
recommended that they the
General fund be used, Um, in
that recurring costs for the
division of
Versus the LFC recommendation
includes that, but in fun
balance to be, um, so I'll pass
it over to the secretary for
more information, Madam Chair
and Senator Gonzalez. Um the
legislation we're talking about
was last year's Senate Bill 47.
And that was the bill that, um
we no longer suspended driver's
license for failure to pay a
citation or failure to appear in
court.
And so that, um, you know, was
the policy of the state that's
been implemented. Um, However,
we estimated in that bill that
as a result of not as much
incentive to pay that the MBD
fund balance would lose about
667,000 of incoming revenue per
year, so that fun balance is not
in a critical position yet, but
we requested that money in our
budget to make sure that we keep
the fund balance from getting to
that critical point.
Metal chair just had a cool acid
rain.
What is the cigarette stamp?
What is a cigarette stamp or
here on this list and another
Oh, that's our list of contracts
And and okay, so Madam Chair and
Senator Gonzalez and I share my
deputy secretary can get into
this in more detail if needed,
but basically the way that
cigarette tax excise taxes
regulated is that no cigarettes
can be sold without being
stamped.
And so the stamp is what is paid
by the cigarette wholesaler or
distributor distributor to make
sure that those are taxed in
legal cigarettes.
And so we have to have the
stamps printed by a vendor.
So
Madam Chair, soul Go ahead.
person Purchasing is not paying
for it.
Madam Chair, Senator Gonzalez.
You're you're correct. It's paid
at the at the at the higher
level at the retail. There's a
different point of taxation. And
I also mentioned that cigarette
stumps are also subject to
escrow with our master
settlement agreement, the
attorney general's office uses
that to enforce compliance of S
grove for a different fund.
Yeah, It's a good thing. I don't
smoke.
Yeah,
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Senator. And I don't even know
what a stamp one of those stamps
looks like. Either society don't
smoke. I guess if you do smoke,
then you get to see all that.
But anyway, thank you very much
for that. I just Yes, Senator
Woods. Did you have a question
before I go? Thank you, Senator
Woods. Go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm sorry. I'm late
to the game. That's alright. Go
present a bill. Thank you, madam
Secretary and and and met him.
Chairman, Madam Secretary.
Are these all your
Your contractors here? Yes,
ma'am. Chair and Senator. Thank
you for that. Thank you very
much. Uh, I'll see if I can and
Make something out of that,
Okay? And the other thing I was
noticing.
That, uh
You have
This is something that I didn't
know.
That you have, I guess revenue
fees coming in from
Cannabis.
Yes, Miss Madam Chair and
Senator. The cannabis excise tax
legislation did direct and admin
fee to the department, which is
very rare. And I think that has
funded correct me if I'm wrong,
half position and SD and half in
I t D. Come on up. Senator
Woods, the FT pulls in about
167,000 for each division.
Within our program Support
division so 167,000 per year for
it and 167,000 per year for
financial distributions. And so
that helps fund the FTE s to
administer the cannabis program.
Okay, in the course the question
I have in that is is your is
your program.
Is your I saw the name of it
here somewhere in a all the jobs
that I don't see it right now.
Uh, your general program and do
you see you're gonna be able to
keep that long term Do you need
to also
Trade out to a new program. Ah,
well, are your vendors
responding to your program? Uh,
that line of questioning more or
less make up an answering chair
And Madam Secretary, Madam Chair
and Senator Woods. I think
you're talking about our sister.
Our system is a records on the
tax side. We have Jen tax on MV
Decide We have tapestry. And,
um, I think I know what you're
talking about it. You know some
large I t systems reach a useful
life and just have to be
completely reinvented. We do not
expect that to be the case.
With you there, Gentex or
tapestry.
There are and and our I T
director Mike is Baca could
speak to this in more detail, if
you like. But basically those
are programs. The code is
flexible. Um, they're upgraded
with new modules every time we
have a new tax program, there
were constantly every couple of
years version upgrading, but we
don't expect to ever have to
completely scrap and redo them.
Okay. And and with that, How are
they talking with the Secretary
of state's page and and all of
that bunch, Madam Secretary,
Madam Chair and Senator Woods.
We have dozens. I would wager of
interfaces with other state
agencies to in real time and in
an automated fashion to share
information between the either
the MBD system or the tax system
for various purposes, so
One of the bills that were still
implementing from last year has
to do with the Voter
registration act That was
passed. Um and so that's an
example of an interface with us
and secretary of State that
we're working on. Okay, alright.
But I'm sure that's all they
really have. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Senator.
Alright. I just have a quick
question. And then maybe more of
a recommendation here than
anything you know, on the when
you mentioned what you need
Secretary for your I T in the
contracts. Um, it is confusing
as you mentioned. I'm glad you
clarified that because
When I saw this What information
I have here. Um it seems like
you would be instead of 2
million short that you would be
approximately 900,000 short
wanted to make sure that
That we can make this
clarification presenting more
whatever because it says here,
The lfc recommendation included
the 2.6 million, but the
executive included 1.7. I'm
sorry, My voice is a little
horse, but, um, yeah, but either
way this for your Gentex system
and, um
That's means certainly not the 2
million short that you
mentioned, so we need to make
sure that the committee
understands you need that much
more. Thank you. Thank you very
much for that. But one final
comment more than anything. Is
that when, um, I heard you say
that sometimes you have to
excuse me.
Sometimes you have to go to the
state Board of finance or go
through a different form just to
get what you need, And it's
usually what you had asked for.
Anyway. It doesn't make any
sense to me. Why we don't fund
you with what we already know
you're going to need. It's been
proven You've showed it, um,
it's clear, um and free for us
to give you less just to send
you and your staff.
To do more work. Spend more
time. Um and take away from
other work that you would
otherwise be doing, creating
more of a of a hole in your
vacancy, time and area. Um, you
know, just by having to do all
this, you have to get away from
your work that you normally do
to go and spend all this time
and I don't think anyone has an
idea. At least some of us don't
but I thought I had a little bit
but teach me please.
But I'm visualizing here how
much time it would take to go to
the state border finance all
that done schedule meetings.
Rearrange your schedule. Do all
the paperwork tried to justify
convinced them, um, whatever it
may be, and then wait for that
all that time to get your okay
and
Just for something that should
have been funded from day one.
And so I hope that this is not
the case in the second continued
situations in your request. So,
um, you have my full support in
doing anything that I can to
help you. You have a lot of work
big job, lots of responsibility
and never a popular job. So, um,
I just want to thank you and
your staff.
For all this work that you do
and know that I appreciate you
and we'll flag your request
here. It would be interesting to
see how it's coming in from the
house to see where those gaps
are so we can work on it here.
See what we can do, All right.
Thank you so much. We appreciate
your support. Thank you.
Appreciate you too. Thank you.
Thank a think we're going to
have to head over there. We have
anyone else. We heard Finance
and administration So it seems
like we're done for today until
