Well I just off the two hundred
million and you said no.
Of the got a broadband has left
the room.
Could you describe another
characterization.
Webcast looks good now.
We're back at home secretary.
I mean Senator Rodriguez thank
you thank you Mr chairman and
thanks secretary and I see the
three thousand additional three
for you all to have for pre K.
how many of those are for your
rules and how many are three
yearolds that you're you're
doing on the three part of the
three thousand hello Mr chair
and madam vice chair eight L. L.
it will depend on who applies we
have to put out a request for
application to all of our
centers into our school based we
have more threes that need to be
served and we do force but we do
have a number of the school
districts that are under fifty
percent saturation in four year
olds that's inclusive of head
start community based and school
based pre K. so we want to
prioritize four year olds
across the state and then three
year olds I see okay and I think
you mentioned the time we were
cutting off from zoom you
mentioned about the additional
hours how many additional hours
are scheduled in this budget
that you're we print providing
thank you Mr chair and madam
vice chair excellent question we
are following what the HFC
recommendation which is that
eight eight hours and I twenty
five additional days as an
option but we again know that
not all programs will be set up
especially our school based
programs to be able to
immediately start offering that
in August you know eight hour
days and twenty four there may
be negotiations but will also
want to increase overall
instructional hours for our pre
K. program even if they don't go
all the way to eight hours I
think Kelly would agree they've
given us that flexibility within
the budget
to meet the unique needs of like
our micro districts who bring
all their kids for to date long
days and so that's a long answer
I apologize but no not that
flexibility that's great you're
helping me understand this so
you are in fact correct me if
I'm going you are planning to.
To do full day pre K. at by
increasing these hours that
you're talking about so it'll be
full day and it makes sense to
me because covering more three
and four year olds in full day
full year pre cannot for here
just full day for the months
that you're going to do it so
what month are you not going to
provide to pre K. is there a
break like in the summer or
someone.
Mr chair and and then vice chair
the it was so it's the proposal
coming from a gypsy was eight
hours a day and twenty five
additional days so right now we
offer programs are required to
offer nine hundred and ninety
hours that would increase by
about five hundred hours so
there would still be about nine
hundred and sixty seven hours in
the year that families who need
the full day full year would
need to take advantage of but
that would be all family so it's
going to depend most program
start early August.
And go through may or June
what do you have anything to.
just just a clarification on
this proposal so just so you can
see how the pre K. money just
looked at it on your page two.
A lot seventy three through
eighty is the early childhood
are sorry the land grant
permanent fund money that we're
talking about here and so the
secretary is proposals to reduce
that money by us as thirty two
point four so that would have to
come out of either line seventy
three seventy four seventy five
so we either have to less
providers would be if you would
be saying their days or hours or
we would have less lost if you
were to move that money out for
childcare so those of the
particular lines were looking
at.
Or it Mr chairman.
I'm sorry she is cutting okay
yes not let me ask you the this
other question we're getting
some more federal funds rate on
this right remind me either one
of you last meeting when we were
together here you mentioned
there was an influx of federal
funds coming in and so what is
the plan for those federal funds
at this point thank you and
Mister chair and then base
should excellent question we it
that omnibus spending bill that
Congress passed in December they
did increase the child care and
development block grant
discretionary funds across the
country and New Mexico we'll get
fifteen point six million
dollars increase for FY twenty
three and hopefully going
forward and then we do still
have discretionary funds through
our pent up for the relief money
but yes so our our total budget
so using our cost model and the
for your finance plan projection
puts our total budget need for
FY twenty four and a little over
three hundred and thirty million
so the general fund money the
federal money the relief money.
We'll be able to provide the
comprehensive care.
The children birth up to age
twelve and also allow us to
expand pre K..
With this proposal and extend
days and hours of pre K. C. okay
what helped me further here a
little bit Mr chairman US
secretary because we're getting
all this additional funding why
wouldn't we I don't understand
why we would provide additional
full pre K. full year
considering that it's a proven
and secondly it would free up
some of the additional money to
be able to use for child care
target it more for child care
because I know it's so needed
and I applaud you for working so
hard to get child care
assistance but we can do both
can't wait and and still do it
full year I don't stand why
there's that break we have so
much money to do everything we
need to do with pre K..
Mr chair Center Vegas we've
never talked either LFC HFC
about full year we have talked
about that five hundred
additional hours and so I would
just say that what what pre K.
so we can extend pre K. we can
continue to the momentum on
childcare and make sure that all
children so.
We have to we have half of our
four year olds are served in
schools and so they would have
to say yes I want to go to eight
hours a day and twenty five
hours a day we also want to be
mindful of what families need in
many families need actually ten
ten and a half hours a day of
wraparound care so I think it's
the department has to release
our application here in the next
three weeks to be able to get to
be in line with FY twenty four
spending and so now it's we have
to do communities look different
and how they deliver their pre
K. both the threes and four year
olds so I I don't know how to
answer except to say that with
what we proposed here on this
sheet we believe we can meet the
needs of working families and
expand and proven an important
program in our state
significantly when that New
Mexico pre K..
Okay thank you for that Mr
chairman thank you Secretary and
this is for both this expansion
will be both for a public school
pre K. and community based
correct okay Mr chairman I'm
going to defer to other members
if I may thank you thank you
Senator Steinborn and etcetera.
Well there and
Secretary welcome and.
I just I mean this is just an
issue we can have a divide and
I'm not an expert in the field
other than the staff provide
both sides persuasive.
And.
Madam chair through the chair
now
yes
well
of feel like this fall monic
solution of of of having to meet
in the middle on the the Gulf
that divides these two sides no
no we we we have a call for that
as I understand about thirty
some odd million of.
How the department would like
spend money how LFC.
House Bill to recommend and
spending the money so.
Maybe there's a way to.
In the middle so to speak.
So I just throw that out there
as a totally unhelpful
suggestion problem would be that
you know at this point in time
just so torn and yet I want to
be constructive and and I really
appreciate I want to say it
again on the record the job the
secretary is on and the
department is done and you know
you hire the best people you can
and and
You know we're certainly not
experts in everything far from
it maybe only a few things and
be on that we we we we we and
yet LFC is awfully good at what
they do and they're really
looking at evidence based data
which I so appreciate so
it I just hate picking.
In this particular case saying
you know maybe there's a way
where.
Where we can kind of split the
difference will bid on this Mr
chair because there is a
difference here so.
Solution.
Thank you so I have.
Senator.
Yeah thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you secretary and
I just love singing your praises
and I love singing the praises
of your department and all the
wonderful work that you're doing
all of you we had a great
discussion on the floor Saturday
about you as an individual and I
stand behind you one hundred
percent of the work that you're
doing and I do want to just ask
a little bit about when you were
coming together with a lot of
these items how much interaction
are you having with I know
you're having a ton of
interaction with your colleague
was another.
There was a how many cabinet
secretaries and PED in the role
that the in the tenure that you
had with I know you work closely
there but we would sort of
commutative at your interaction
with private providers and how
does that go House has that
scheduled and and and what's
that interaction look like.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
Senator Padilla thank you for
sponsoring me and for all for
all the kind words you know we
have it is at we have in the
last week had some really great
conversations both with growing
up New Mexico with the New
Mexico early childhood education
care association we get that
right and other providers down
in Los crucis and I think what
was hard about this year was
that we started our budget at
forty six million coming out of
the trust fund and then our
specials and then we you know
Ellen the HSD had the hundred
forty million in the base so it
it's been a moving target so
it's been hard to have the
conversations I think that we
need to have but we have had
them in the last week and even
as early as today sharing this a
one pager and feeling what I
understand to be and I hope is
concur and with you know voices
and Ole and other providers that
we have agreement that we we.
We can achieve the goals that
the LFC the HFC have put forward
for pre K. and what the governor
wants to see in terms of
expanding New Mexico pre K. more
hours more days and not roll
back any of the gains we've made
in childcare keep moving forward
we have a fifty five percent
labor force participation rate
in our state that is hurting our
economy childcare is key to
improving the economy we have
sixty six hundred early
childhood professionals out
there who've been getting a
three dollar raise.
I heard from providers over and
over more talented staff they're
staying longer we don't want to
go back we want to go forward
and we think that the right
revenues that the but they're in
the ECC budget right now allow
us to do that collectively as
the legislative and executive
and meet all the goals we want
and not revert back you know
money that we we can't
necessarily get out the door
because the programs are
providing these services may or
may not be ready on August first
to expand those hours and days
and and have all the resources
they need to do that so we built
this we have struck the we feel
we've struck a balance but we
look forward to further dialogue
with all of you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary Legisla- a lot
of the things he did I was going
to ask about the the wages and
and you know we're all that's
going and how that's looking in
your right you're going to be
able to attract a whole
different type of person that
three dollars what what is that
as a percentages rough it
percentage increase over what we
were paying folks they would be
right as we were starting the
department.
Mr chair Center be right when we
were starting I don't know
because that was even before we
did the first cost estimation
model in and maybe that rate
increase I would say on average
most people are making their
minimum wage who are working in
early childhood education.
So you're looking at anywhere
from fifteen to thirty percent
increase it is what it sounds
like to me thirty you're going
to you are going to be able to
you the legislative private
providers are going to be able
to be a little more selective
with who they're identifying and
and and things of that nature
and I'm really glad that you
commented on we don't want to
and I'm I trying to figure if we
come up with an artful way save
better or more artful way of
saying this but you know we want
to give you sleep so much money
to trip on it if you will and
and that's the last thing that
the legislature wants what are
some safeguards or or guard
rails or mechanisms you're
putting in place to make sure we
don't do that because that that
could turn into a big problem on
the other side of the coin.
Mr chair Senator Padilla X.
excellent question I think
that's what the team has been
working you know every day last
week or so running different
scenarios to make sure that we
can effectively administer this
money as I said in three weeks
an application has to go live
providers have to know how to
apply for and how to expand
investing in our quality
supports our letters training
all the things that we know will
have to also be expanded those
are the things that we're paying
attention to every single day
and the other piece that's in
our one pager are these local
early childhood coalitions which
we think fully funded at Senator
Woods you're the only one on the
count on this committee that
doesn't have an early childhood
coalition in your district but
everyone of you on here has a
coalition that's working to
better coordinate collaborate
the conversations Kelly and I
are having need to be happening
in civil updated to be happening
in in Las Vegas where they are
happening in all these counties
working with us as a state so
that's the other thing that is
so important about our
infrastructure piece because we
can't do it alone at the state
that you all know better than I
do how different each of your
communities are and how those
conversations are happening as
essential to building a strong
early childhood system that
reflects New Mexico diversity.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and madam secretary I just love
the work that you're doing so
but when you when you look at
the analysis here there's some
items that are in red how often
are you rolling up the sleeves
and putting together action
plans and but what we doing to
address some of the things that.
I read.
Fund.
Mr chair Senator Padilla and I'm
again excellent question so the
one where read on we were thirty
nine and our target was forty
percent so we want to be alone.
But we do have to do better
there and that's getting our
child care providers I'm
enrolled in the focus a system
and getting them to that four
and five star level so that's
very important Public
prekindergarten participation
here again we would set a goal
of eighty five percent for
children and role to be at the
first step for kindergarten and
only fifty four percent were so
that has to be a focus we've
invested in more quality
coaching and also more evidence
based curriculum especially
around structured literacy.
I'm so yes we will up our
sleeves often I think of those
with a lot more performance
standards Mr chair in twenty
four that will be performance
measures thank you Mr chairman I
think that's terrific and one
thing you know you if you could
just in a not show if you will
that be great but
that I always ask about is just
the whole you know Senate bill
twenty two we created the
department a career ladder
salary plan a development plan
to trade can you just give us an
update on where all that is
because that was the one thing
that you know I constantly ask
about because it's very
important that we go to the
letter of the law that was
created when the department pre
absolutely Mr chair and senator
pretty at thank you again for
that question we have done the
discovery on developing the
professional development
information system which will be
the place where people will put
their credentials and will be
able to manage that we have a
secured federal funding for the
preschool development grant to
continue and finish that work
and we have a number of
initiatives happening to improve
access to both the early
childhood education teacher prep
programs and improve our teacher
prep programs but that work is
slated to be
Much further along by the end of
twenty four and then I think
fully implemented in up to
twenty five.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm I'm
really happy to hear that
because those are very important
things as the department was
created and the last thing I'll
just mention is
so myself and Representative
Garrett a couple years ago
created something called grow
your own teachers act and we
were helping folks that were
already in the in the in PED
doing other jobs ancillary
services whatever and help them
to get their bachelor's degree
through through funding you know
helping them that way I think
we're gonna make a big huge move
this year to dramatically
improve the pay of EA's and
think and folks like that would
would you not for today's
purposes but would you in your
department you know consider
something like that would you
take a look at that finding a
way to help professionals it
might not be at the top tier
level teaching whatever within
early education and and creating
some sort of a grow your own
within your department.
Mr chair Senator Padilla and
that is an excellent question
actually there are some
wonderful model Santa Fe
community college actually has a
great apprenticeship model
they've been implementing a we
also have a student success
requests for we've been giving
small stipends to students as
they complete a semester to just
help encourage them to finish
that degree and to get moving
and then the legislature gave us
seven million for endowments and
we got those other getting out
to seven higher ed institutions
to be innovative and creative
about building a pipeline of
bilingual indigenous educators
in early childhood so all those
efforts are I think part of it
and I'd definitely be interested
in looking at the grow your own
model to see where we could
adapt that as well thank thank
you Mr chairman and madam
secretary at the first round the
money was gone before it was
even and and and then the second
round really helped in a very
big way I hope that you'll take
a look at that
can you give us some sort of an
outlook or a do you have a
projection on when all early
education teachers will be set
the bachelor level or whatever
the next level up is that you're
looking at.
Mr chair Senator Padilla I I
cannot do that but I think when
we have that professional
development information system
will have better data on our
early childhood workforce we
right now have that for the
competitive pay for
professionals and and there are
a lot of professionals working
all day and then going to school
and putting all their effort
into increasing their
credentials but I look forward
to the day we can share that
with you and hopefully that will
not be tuned in the distant
future reference thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam
secretary please pass along my
thanks to everybody that's
working in the department really
really hard all I'm sorry one
more thank
I think you told me this but the
is there a current Assistant
Secretary for native American
affairs is there I know that we
have Giovanna but is there
somebody else in the role that
can you tell us a little bit
about that person.
Yes Mr chair Padilla her name is
cotillion Smitty yep and she
joined us in early December I
think she joined us two days
before first government to
government meeting and she has
hit the ground she's today
twenty four years working in
early childhood in indigenous
communities both here in New
Mexico also in Arizona and also
in Canada in the territory so
she comes with a wealth of
experience and knowledge and she
did higher ed he taught higher
it early childhood courses and
so we've been enjoying learning
from her and engaging and her
engaging the public tribes and
nations in developing inter
governmental agreements.
Thank you thank you very much
for your presentation and again
like I said please pass on my
thanks to everybody that works
in your department doing a great
job and I do want to remind you
that we're going to hop in the
Oldsmobile and get out to Hobbes
we told them that we would do
that and I'm happy to go with
you to do that thank you.
Thank you send shared a center.
You know you're driving Jim Cena
knows what the.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair I want to
start with some follow up on a
Senator Rodriguez who isn't here
she was talking about slots and
things like that but I want to
start with I thought so Kelly
did you tell us the on line
twenty three thousand extension
money for thousand slots.
online twenty three yes so that
is the estimated cost British
small thousand children to have
child care system for the next
fiscal year based on the current
coverage right plus the rate
increase proposed by the
department so that's what we
just maybe thousand kids with
cost.
This Mr chair three thousand
slot so.
Then we do agree to.
So Mr Chairman is committed I
don't think that exactly the
request I think around twenty
seven thousand slots
right now we're funded for about
twenty five thousand so this
week it is to about twenty six
but if their savings from more
kids into prekindergarten that
money could go a little bit
farther as well.
Mr chair Senator share I think
are three thousand on various
referring to expanding a pre K..
The whole the subset of no fewer
well.
An eighty five hundred infants
and toddlers.
Okay
in madam secretary I know we
keep hearing about shrinking
birth rates and shrinking
numbers.
We have that many kids or will
we have that many kids.
You Mr chair and senator share
our all of our modeling is based
on the New Mexico birth rates.
So we as we estimate how many
children are going to be
eligible for each of our four
core programs we are basing that
on the birth rate and yes it is
declining but it's not declining
to like.
Zero or even ten thousand it's
it's two percent to percent
thank you that's a great number
for tax reform.
So how does this work with.
With the
the private providers who gonna
make these new slots.
Can they keep up with that can I
mean.
The state can build schools or
build buildings PED can build
buildings but can the private
private providers in isn't there
supposed to be some kind of
equity in what's going on
between the.
The private in the.
Chair Senator share an excellent
question there absolutely is
that fifty fifty split and so
within pre K. right now
Three year olds are served in
the community based sector along
with four year olds and and and
four year olds in the
schoolbased sector so we
absolutely want to mixed
delivery system that's what we
call it when you've got head
start and community based
private providers as you say and
schools working together to make
sure that what families need is
the types of programs in the
system that we're building so
community based programs private
providers often are the ones who
can be there at ten and a half
hours they're the ones that are
there in the summer the break so
absolutely the department looks
at saturation levels and make
sure that as we make decisions
about funding that we're not
over saturating or that we're
pushing out one sector over
another.
So.
Mr chair if this office speaker
How do they build physically
build the buildings for that
capacity I know schools could
physically build buildings
because well we can fund
schools.
Mr chair Senator share on that
is that is an issue we have used
about ten million or maybe
twelve million now of our
federal relief money to help
private businesses private
childcare community based pre K.
and childcare businesses expand
and build renovate not full bill
but renovate but it is an issue
that we you know we understand
and hear about because of the
anti donation issue
but we we we're mindful of that
and I think that's where your
local early childhood coalitions
can come into play and work with
private businesses schools and
make sure that we're not
diminishing one sector over
another families need to.
That's my concern is that all of
a sudden the screen full out
have everybody at least for the
company here but not all here
and we won't have anything for
the rest of the time because
they can't they can't build to
keep up so that is a concern of
mine.
to note me follow up on Senator
Padilla just in the three dollar
raise.
Is this sustainable.
And how does that.
Is that in this budget and how
does that get to the.
The private providers.
Yeah Mr chair Senator sure that
is exactly what in the executive
budget request and why it was so
large because we're going to
increase the childcare
reimbursement rate maintain
expanded eligibility so that
most families in New Mexico
accessing childcare are going to
be able to have assistance and
that pay that the pay that we're
giving private providers is
going to in effect have that
raise built into what we're
funding them to do in terms of
the cost of delivering.
Quality early education I'm in
their private businesses will be
reflected in the child care
right.
So.
Mr Chairman.
I'm trying to wrap my head
around this but
So the three dollar rate came
from of federal.
Whatever they call that are
before us whatever that was but
now we're going to fill that gap
with general fund money.
I'm just way we share Trust Fund
yes.
Okay and general fund both and
So the the private providers are
going to have to.
Say gosh I got to do is the
three dollar raise or any races
at in Los somewhere.
Mr chair no Senator share it was
really about the guidance that
we receive from the federal
government in different ways
allowable uses to take we got
over four hundred and twenty
million dollars in federal
relief that specifically had to
be spent on childcare and so we
invested in a way that again
this is coming directly from the
private providers saying we need
help we're losing staff to every
other industry how can you help
us so it was not a law but it
it's in the R. fund
discretionary it is an allowable
use of those funds to help
support retaining and
recruiting.
Quality staff in early childhood
education.
Mr chair madam secretary I know
I know they need help I just
want.
We run out are the money and all
of a sudden they have to pay a
they don't have the income to
pay that that's that's you try
can you.
Which one of these lines are
where in here what I find that
because I was looking for from
this Mr chair on which is
somewhere up it's on page three.
Your packet.
So on lines eighteen through
lines twenty two those are what
the department requests for rate
increases for age ranges to
increase that income level for
the providers.
Mr chair Senator that's the LFC
analysis our request is on line
twelve around thirteen which was
in the special appropriation but
we we based on and that hundred
and twelve along with the other
federal revenues I described for
a total budget of three hundred
and thirty.
Million for childcare for FY
twenty four.
So Kelly I just want to make
sure that so HFC put that money
in but LESC didn't recommend it
is that Mr chair so LESC did it
have those numbers until session
had already begun about the rate
increase and so we had basically
enough money can see online
twenty nine of eighteen million
dollars left over on specified
spending the HSD came to us and
said our priorities are really
to keep in it increase
eligibility to do the rate
increases and do something on co
payments and so using what HSC
passed in revenues LFC shows
that there is enough money to
fund those priorities as seen in
lines eighteen all the way down
through lines twenty six so for
instance for infants and
toddlers the agency provided the
number to do a twenty two
percent rate increase would cost
almost thirty eight million
dollars that fits within the
funding revenue sources of
everything we're accounting for
that's going into the child care
assistance budget so we do
believe that there's enough
money in this budget to do rate
increases to do something in co
payments and to do something on
expanded enrollment.
The agency
that reflected in the store.
That's on page three your own
wifi that you're talking about
on this one of the right the new
rate increases as proposed by
the agency are seen on page five
in that orange chart.
So you can see the blue chart is
our current rates annually by
age range and by Senator and
quality level and then generally
I'm not this is just go to rule
in these issues more work but
using those brought percentages
this what the new rates will
look like annualized for those
same categories so you for
instance an infant would be
would have previously been put
in a five star Center received
about eighteen thousand two
hundred thirty four given these
broad percentages that hassle to
be a you know worked out by the
agency but that twenty two
percent would then become twenty
two thousand two hundred forty
five thousand dollars for one
infant in a five star center
with the new rates.
Sure so.
Those are reflected back in here
correct.
The money's there we got the
money so the the four hundred
percent of poverty the.
Hey can you name the three
people in the state that don't
qualify because that.
Can only be three or four for.
Mr chair Senator share I
probably could a lot of the
cabinet secretaries if they have
young children wouldn't qualify.
I'm not sure.
You got to.
The hundred and a twenty
thousand for a family of four
yes exactly I move for that's
gross annual income in the
average in New Mexico's less
than half of that to us was at I
just want to page three they
are.
dollars in one.
Thank.
Okay so is that changing
anything in here we gonna stay
at that level or.
Just for ever and ever it's
going to be everybody in the
state.
Mr chair for Ted Turner and
more.
Senator share that is that is
the plan that is the goal to
have a high quality universal
early childhood education system
for all New Mexicans because we
know that that return is so
great and that we know so many
of the challenges we see in our
state are we because families
have struggled to get what they
need early and then we play
catch up whether it's in
kindergarten or first grade and
then sometimes children are
starting kindergarten a year
year and a half behind and that
that that's a hard catch up to
make so yes and I just would
like to say that and I think
what the more information we
provided to the LFC those were
average rate increases and so
their their estimations that do
not match but we had to do with
her law a cost model for our
programs which we have done and
it's all in a spreadsheet with
more than happy to sit down with
the Senate finance the staff and
committee and show them how we
got to our numbers and what that
equates to okay so I just need
to make sure that.
Everybody in the state at four
hundred percent.
Of of of poverty.
Is funded in our budget.
At three dollars an hour or more
for the for the staff that's
actually doing it.
For at least a thousand more
slots.
And somehow we're going to
support the private providers to
get there so all of that's so
Mr chair Senator share all the
eighty five hundred additional
input the tellers are all served
by private providers I mean
there's maybe small but that's
all private providers revenue
all private provider investment
Senator let me madam secretary
from two FTE we're probably not
going to hear you because we
want to have a really good
hearing spend time in the and
five fifteen now and and I know
what price spend an hour in your
area okay Senator Rodriguez has
a hot date tonight so.
Yeah we're going back probably
tomorrow.
Impacted.
It is.
That's thank you very much for
letting me know you to sorry
keep building do that too but
that's going.
Mr chair I was coming to an end
to me if you want to keep here.
The okay I just I I just try to
make sure that somewhere in here
it accounts for all four of my
concern four hundred percent
poverty three dollars an hour.
thousand people and we're not
leaving the private providers
out we are going to in fact make
sure they've got enough money to
build the the facilities to
remodel facilities so keep up
with the.
The demand.
Is to Mr chair Senator share
most of those we we have use the
federal money to help them with
renovations to expand their
businesses those dollars are
over but we do want to continue
to work with the legislature and
find ways so that we can invest
in the expansion of our private
providers because they they're
the ones to serve children you
know birth birth to three for
sure that the only one serving
them but also the and huge
server huge need in our pre K.
community as well and but after
school out of school time okay
right thank you Mr madam chair
somebody.
Mr chair.
Several recent question I don't
know.
You know I'm trying to scratch
my head on this.
And I've been here not as long
Center Rodriguez or Center
combos but I've never seen a
hundred percent budget increase
and someone come back and say
we're still short.
Hello hundred fifty million
dollars pretty amazing to me.
That that's not enough.
And it's a hard on this and to
be before you start interjecting
into it's a hard pill to swallow
when we started the struggle
these two ladies behind you
start the struggle I think when
I first came in and that we've
had everything from superhero
signs to the bad boys and the
killers and and it's been a war
over early childhood education
how we're going to fund it.
But to come in to to a session
in your base budget was a
hundred fifty million and you
get a hundred percent increase
I've never ever seen that in the
history that I've ever been in.
I mean I remember vitamin
Department getting seventeen
percent increase we did that
over here and they thought we
are that wasn't that we're crazy
in the other side but a hundred
percent increase and we still
don't have enough so let me ask
you some questions.
On the on the provider rate.
I don't care what you do in this
district rings true with the
police if we raise one right.
Somebody's going to raise their
right and we're gonna change
that all the way up to where
we're going to end up right no
providers can say sure I won't
take a pride rate increase
absolutely not but what makes it
functional operational that's
the limit we want to live that I
mean if getting employees to
fifteen dollars an hour I'm fine
with that that's the way we need
to go on I'm good at that but
we're gonna have to get some
leveling off in in how we do
that.
thirty two million that you're
counting for.
Asking for an additional thirty
two million which is kind of
odd.
One had losses in the state read
this good I just want that we're
not asking for more money we're
asking for just a sh J. sources
to use that's all no more we
don't want more money and we
just kind of really is the what
the voters voted for to increase
our budget by a hundred forty
million which you know was so
anyway I just want to clarify
we're not asking for more money.
And actually asking for swap on
the thirty two million yes and
so it's interesting to me that
you are the funds that you have
on uses thirty two million.
And you're asking for it swap on
other funds for thirty two
million why don't you just use
your are the funds.
Mr chair we are using those as
well as what we need here to
meet the twenty seven thousand I
think it's nine hundred children
that we estimated project to
serve in twenty twenty four in
FY twenty four alighting to use
the last year if we need a
provider rate increases and we
use those numbers moved up.
So when you come to us you have
that our best funny still
sitting there and you're getting
an additional fifteen million
dollars from the feds on top of
that so that's forty five
million of on spend money that
you don't have.
Mr chair we it's just that we
get the money at the end of
December December twenty two our
our budget goes until September
of twenty twenty four we set
aside seventy seven million for
the competitive pay for
professionals the three dollar
an hour raise but we only had
about of sixty percent uptake
from providers across the state
so that money is is now
available to use towards what we
very much need.
In our three hundred thirty
million dollars.
So in that thirty three increase
from line sixteen and twenty
five.
Twenty six where you can spend
thirty three million.
Sixteen which major with this to
chat on page three.
Are you know we're gonna spend
the thirty three million within
those lines.
Mr chair it's all part of the
budget I can do I can share with
you or that I'm asking about
where you can spend this part of
the budget in these line items
in this area where you can spend
the thirty three million dollars
because this is where you said
you need to spend money of our
overall Mr chair over overall
budget increased seventy eight
percent is to increase the rates
the twenty two percent is to
maintain expanded eligibility so
what we have is up we can say of
the thirty three million you
have to spend that thirty three
million in those line items so
do you want to give me a list
later on we're going to spend
those that thirty three million
in those.
Ten eight can find items I mean
that's where the money has to
go.
The.
If you can't tell me you're
gonna say I'm increases one by
million hello my million then
it's Tommy or wasting thirty
three million dollars you Mr
chair I will I will provide for
you what we provided to to the
LFC staff that shows by age
group how much money both in the
rate increase and what expanded
eligibility will be so I will
it's all it's all broken down
and I can I can share that with
you.
Are you gonna go above what we
want to adopt here with the
thirty three million so.
Mr chair what we're basing it on
is our caught the for your
finance plan that we have built
to look at the costs we're
your finance plan that we can
make operational data for your
finance plan this is an
additional thirty three million
dollars in those lines are you
going to spend in it's not based
on your for your operational
because that next year could be
higher provider rate increases
go I think you have a next year
we're talking about the thirty
three million dollars that you
want to just this year from the
left my wrong in any of that
that's what I do the math you're
you're correct what we have
asked for in our projected what
are in in our executive asked
for our general fund request
does allow us to serve so yes
because when we submitted our
budget we were projecting it
based on what we were currently
serving but we're seeing between
five and eight hundred children
coming into child care
assistance every month and so
that's our projection out where
we will be in twenty four so.
Yes you're not and you're
correct in what you're saying
and that's why we have the
discretionary funds and we have
the additional child care
development block grant funds in
addition to this it will help
us.
Offset that increase cost.
How much do you have an
discretionary fund.
We budgeted I think and I think
I'm out LFC actually or agency
budget in at thirty point three
that we need to sources.
Thirty million in discretionary
funds.
Thirty point three thirty.
C. C. W..
Yes there is.
I would if I were you I would
run out of this room as quick as
you could.
Thirty million dollars in
discretionary money that you can
just spend anywhere within one
hundred anywhere it has specific
allowable uses under the federal
guidance so I'm sorry to me to
say that it's it's specifically
has to be used to for childcare
and to specifically address the
issues of compensation and
stability of the childcare
industry and growing the
childcare industry so it's not
special education it's called
just take those federal funds
and put them in your budget in
those categories so we can
appropriate incorrectly under
the federal lawsuit or no
lawsuit the legislature to the
governor on appropriated federal
funds.
Stitch on the chemistry that's
actually a little bit different
so is a direct appropriation
from the bank yet so those kind
of yeah thank you very back of
your pack and go over this with
the I like to watch people's
hearts Committee.
Yeah.
It was so they got they got a
separate peace directly to them
three separate pieces and on the
back page gives you how much
they got for each one of those
which was significant several
hundred million dollars.
I just want a answer to that I
think your budget is.
It's better than gold it's like
me that you got a.
Right level of diamonds of of a
hundred fifty million dollar
increase we're allowing you
flexibility
we're putting stuff for you said
you wonder quest to increase the
range where we are in sometimes
a window when you come back you
could lose.
Just as we move forward yes if
the the committee in the
legislature I understand that
we're giving you the best the
best information we have based
on the data that we collect
every day and the work we do
with providers and communities
so I appreciate that and it is
absolutely your call and your
decision but I did ask you that
thirty three million dollars
we're gonna put in if you were
to come in the Senate finance
committee presentation in this
presentation so the divisional
thirty two million dollars we'll
go to the.
I can line items so we know
where it's going to instead of
saying you want thirty two
million more but we don't know
what's going to go after we gave
a hundred fifty million any
agency that came in under fifty
million dollars that you should
be that everybody should be
jealous of you in those in those
meetings in the and the for for
for for secretary means because
I mean you've got a large chunk
of money
so I I guess will carry that
conversation forward and see
where where it goes but thirty
two million is a little squishy
to me since we haven't done that
and the House gave you three an
additional one fifty four fifty
two
in there and then extend that
that.
Pretty darn good
but I guess we'll talk about
these line and as we move
forward any other questions from
committee members.
Senator Steinborn.
Shared not not a question just a
statement I just want to remind
us that this is this is money
for kids this is this is a rare
moment that we have now to put
New Mexico in a different place
so this is not about reader
anything this is it and I really
kind of reject that frame this
is this is about.
Shooting for the ideal for kids
and for New Mexico's future so.
And I I I applaud you for
shooting for that madam
secretary I think that's what we
expect from you is to say this
is how we get what we always
talk about would never been able
to find.
And you're not to be condemned
for that and whether or not we
can afford it you know balance
with all that's another question
but.
This is about the kids and
that's with that's with this
money so called I don't want to
can have a better our with our
our allies of thank you.
Thank you.
