And I usually kick us off
talking about the macroeconomic
forecast, some of our major
revenue sources, uh, turned it
to Secretary Crops too.
Basically translates what that
all means for the general fund,
and I understand what you want a
short version of the
presentation, right? We
understand that you have to pick
up.
Children in 2 hours. OK.
You don't have 2 hours.
You may have like 1015 minutes
at the most. OK, that, that
sounds great. 10 minutes and
Izzy gets 5 we're quite long
time. That sounds perfect. I'll
hit the highlights. So,
Do you need us to put the slides
up or are you good?
Do you need us to put the slides
up or you can't sure where's the
computer for that.
Did you bring a slide deck?
We just, we delivered slides to
the committee. let me
figure that out real quick. Let
me go.
but you can go ahead and start
with the presentation. We're
we're online and then I'll start
for for members if you have the
slide deck in front of you just
a quick reminder who makes up
the consensus revenue estimating
group. It's made up of career
economists from 4 state agencies
which are tax and rev,
Department of Finance and
Administration, Department of
Transportation and legislative
finance Committee. They meet
several times a year to update
the forecast. Slide 4 covers the
baseline forecast that we
subscribe to that inform the
forecast. Those are for Moody's.
P U Ms Bureau of Business and
Economic Research. We also use
data from Riceadgy and a few
other sources.
The next few slides review
changes to the forecast, uh,
between the August estimate and
the December estimate on slide
5, you can see that we um we had
a slight upward revision to the
forecast for US real GDP growth,
but as a, as a theme in this
whole forecast, we expect future
economic growth to be positive
but moderate. The economy is
flattening. So slide 6 has that
same gross state product data
for New Mexico, where again you
see a, a slight upward revision
to the forecast from August.
To December. Again, flat but
positive economic growth is, is
expected.
On slides 7 and 8, we look at uh
the employment forecast and
there is almost no change to the
employment forecast nationally
or for New Mexico. Um, we are
again expecting positive but
fairly flat growth and
employment in New Mexico and in
the US.
Slide 9 provides data on change
in employment by sector in New
Mexico. You can see that over
the past year, that was from
October 2023 to October 2024,
New Mexico added 12,600 jobs,
which is growth of 1.4%. Growth
is across most sectors with just
a few contracting detail on that
on slide 9.
On slide 10, uh, you can see
that the forecast is for the US
and New Mexico unemployment
rates to trend downward a bit
and stay at about the, the
target rate of about 4%, which
is close to where they both are
now. A great thing to note is
that New Mexico did recover
employment and, and bring down
its unemployment rate more
quickly than the national
economy did following COVID and
now we're hovering right around
the national level, which is
much better than we did in
recovering from the Great
Recession that started in 2008.
Slide 11 provides some data on
inflation and interest rates,
um, the Fed is expected to
continue to cut the federal
funds rate to a target rate of
just below 2%. Inflation is
expected to trend downwards
towards 2% and continuing
downward. The stickiest part of
inflation is in housing and
shelter, while energy and food
inflation has subsided somewhat.
Next, I'll turn to slide 13 I
start um covering some recent
data in oil and natural gas
markets, which are, of course,
very important to New Mexico's
revenues on slide 13, you can
see that between August and
December, we had a fairly large
revision to the oil price
forecast for 2025, we cut $6 out
of per barrel out of the
forecast price for oil, but
what's really important here to
note is that as opposed to a
decade ago, if we had revised
down the oil forecast, we would
have
I've had a multi $100 million
shop to the general fund for you
to manage the budget process.
Now we've insulated the general
fund from that oil fluctuation
and instead, we're revising
downward the expectations for
these transfers to other places
like the early childhood trust
fund and the severance tax
permanent fund.
On site uh 14, we look at oil
volumes. I just wanna know that
our recount remains above 100
most times, which is a great
indicator of GRT remaining
strong in Leonetti County, and
it's also an indicator of future
production remaining high if the
rigs are active, future volumes
will be high. We are at high
production levels, historically
in the state.
On flight 15, we move to natural
gas. Um, natural gas is really
kind of following oil in New
Mexico because the natural gas
is, is present when the oil is
drilled and comes out.
Um, natural gasses, um, expected
to uh average $4.26 per MCF in
budget year and range around
4:45 to 4:50.
For MCF in the out years with
volumes being revised, um, up
and down depending on which year
you look at in the forecast, but
not, not a whole lot of change
in natural gas volumes.
Moving to the grocery receipts
tax, that's the single largest
uh revenue source within the
general fund on slide 17, uh,
you can see that for the out
ears, groceryreceipts, tax
revenues, the general fund is
expected to grow by between 3
and 4% on average. Again, that's
strong positive but sort of more
moderate growth than we've seen
in, in the past years, uh, we
had just 2% growth in 2024, uh,
part of the, the recent years
that reflect tax cuts.
So, the underlying growth in the
New Mexico economy was stronger
than you see in the revenue
growth because we made policy
changes to reduce in this case,
the grocery receipts tax rate by
0.25%.
Um, I think I'll skip slide 18,
but if you're interested, it has
data on growth in the GRT based
by different industries. You can
see what you're performing
strongest and weakest.
Um, flight 19 has specific data
drilling into the gross receipts
tax base in Eddie and Lee
Counties, which reflects the
drilling activity in the
permian.
And then turning to personal
income tax data. I go to slide
21.
The pit outlook um shows that
for FY 24, the personal income
tax contracted by 12%, but
again, that's not showing
weakness in the underlying
revenue base, but instead it's
reflecting that taxes were
reduced. Um, we had in 2024 also
an accounting shift, $190
million of pastor entity tax is
being moved from being accounted
for in the personal income tax
to instead being accounted for
in the corporate income tax. So
nothing changed about.
The underlying taxation, you'll
just see pit down 190 and sit up
by the same amount.
In 2025 we're forecasting an 8%
contraction. Again, that's um
moving into place that
accounting chains for past
attacks and also some
legislative implementation for
the out years we expect it to
grow by 3.9 and 3.8%.
And
Like 22. Uh, we, we pay close
attention to withholding returns
that are due quarterly
withholding is, is a great
leading indicator of what's
happening in the personal income
tax base because while tax
returns aren't finalized until
April 15th or so, we get
quarterly returns based on
current um wages and salaries
that are being paid to wage and
salary workers by their, by
their employers. So you can see
um for the first quarter of FY
25, that was the, the first
quarter of the year that we have
data for that.
strong growth over the past
years and we've, we've seen very
strong um underlying growth and,
and withholding for several
years in a row.
Onto the next slide on 23. I
mentioned a minute ago that we,
you know, are implementing these
legislative adjustments. Here we
just provide detail on the
revenue impacts of some of the
more major policy changes that
have been enacted in the last
years. We'll go through all
detail on those.
Only 25, couple or a little bit
of information about severance
taxes, rents and royalties.
Um, as I mentioned at the onset,
you know, it's, it's important
that we've cut the oil forecast
for this fiscal year by $6 with
the general fund is not taking
that hit. Instead, you can see
on this slide the amount in blue
bars of uh severance tax from
the oil and school tax and
federal mineral leasing is going
to the general fund versus the
amounts that are going to be
when we reduce the oil forecasts
now that are being brought down
at the general funds. You have a
lot more plannings that I'll
turn it over to the secretary.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, my
general fund uh forecast 7.
A lot of the information but I
want to draw your attention to
the graphic.
that slide.
Uh, it shows the remarkable
revenue growth of the state of
New reported on.
Uh, but it also shows that that
the, the highs of the for the
most part, um revenue over FY
25, uh, as opposed to the 12 is
moderating and returning more.
Only thing, other thing I would
point out on this slide on this
chair and a.
secretary of Sergeant Clark over
the last, uh, I think it's like
25 quickly, um, in the interest
of time, but I really think
because it tells the story of
the work to them uh bipartisan
uh to not only make
importantation health care, etc.
over the last several sessions,
but also to take some of that
incredible revenue growth that
we've seen and set it aside for
the future.
Uh, to the point, the chairman,
and this is really almost
unbelievable that by the year
2040.
Investment earnings on the money
that has been set aside over the
last several sessions will
become the the single leading uh
source of growth in our re is
told here and you see that
investment earnings for FY 25.
on those, uh, on those, on the
money that you have set aside
and instead of 26 and and other
pieces of legislation.
Slide, um 28, Mr. Chairman.
This is a slide that most people
are interested in at this time
of the session, how much money
do we have to be appropriated
for FY 26.
You'll see on the FY 26
estimated bar, uh, the consensus
revenue uh group is forecasting,
uh, you'll see at the very top,
uh, $892.3 million.
In total, new money available to
be appropriated, uh, for
FY 26. Generally, Mr. Chairman,
we consider this to be the funds
money that's available to be uh
appropriated on a recurring
basis.
But that doesn't have to be the
case. Some of that could be
appropriated on a non-recurring
set aside as you've done in in.
In prior years, uh, for future
years, um, but the total money
that's available over FY25
appropriation session over the
current session, I guess that's
a million dollars.
Oh you seen this chairman that
right below that, the bracket
below, low
in non-recurring money that was
available last year, and that
same amount of money is
available over from FYA 25, but.
Slide 29, uh,
some information in the FY 26
box, so I won't go through that
again, but I think the, the
takeaway um from
Uh, the other two boxes is for
FY 24, uh, general Fund reserves
ended at slightly over $3
billion or 33%, uh, and for FY
25, we are projecting current,
currently projecting uh general
fund reserves to be almost $4
billion or 38.4%, but of course
that's before 26 in this
session, uh, at the end of the
session, we'll, we'll take a
look at all of this again, uh,
and that 38.4%.
will come down, uh, but I would
note, Mr. Chairman, that nations
for FY 26 uh come in at reserves
of uh at least uh
uh
30
Again, uh, somewhat repetitive
of the information uh that was
on the last slide, but uh just
in a little bit more detail, um,
but, uh, again, reserves for
both FY 24 and projected for uh
FY 25 and above, um.
30%.
Slide 31, Mr. Chairman, the
consensus revenue forecasts and
our consultants uh do a lot of
Work in terms of stress testing
our forecasts, we think that's
important that we uh look at
both the upside and the downside
risk to the the forecast, there
are, of course, upside risks,
Mr. Chairman. I, uh, things can
turn out better than we
expected. I
agree with the statement that uh
pessimists may seem smarter than
optimists, but optimists tend to
live in bigger houses.
Uh, so I generally find find
myself falling on the more
optimistic side, and it is
possible that our forecast will
turn out better than than what
we currently project, but there
are downside risks as well. I
would say, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, as I
indicated to the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee yesterday. I don't
worry too much about the upside
or downside risks that are
listed here because I really
don't have much control over
them. There are risks that we do
have control over.
the risks, in my opinion is if
we saw reserves fall below 30%.
I would consider that to be a
downside risk.
Mr Chairman, members of
committee, I would also suggest
that some of the work that the
legislature has done over the
last few years on our pension
plans, to stabilize those
plansion plans, uh, both for the
educational retirees that are
public retirees.
Which has been noted by Moody's
in when they upgraded our
outlook from stable to positive,
uh, that if
If there were changes to those
reforms, Mr. Chairman, I would
consider that a downside risk.
And also as chairman, some of
the funds that have been set
aside, either Cenate Bill 26 or
the Childhood fund, uh, if we
were to start using those funds
for other purposes, uh, that
would certainly be, I think,
identified as those by those who
look at our finances as a
downside risk as well. Of
course, Mr. Chairman, all of
those.
On slide, um, 2032.
Um, Mr. Chairman, this is, as I
mentioned, the stress testing
that we do, we do an upside
scenario.
Uh, how, what happens if things
turn out better, uh, than we are
currently projecting. We do
what's called a moderate
recession scenario. We also do a
low oil price scenario, which is
uh what we would consider the
worst case, uh, scenario. I will
say, Mr. Chairman, I think uh
most economists are now saying
that the, the risk to recession.
Journal today that had an
article about some uh economists
are now suggesting that it's
about 22% chance for a
recession.
Uh, in the next year or two,
just a year or so ago, that
would have probably been closer
to 50%, so the risk of
recession, I think, has
moderated some, uh, but you'll
see on to the left of that in
the bar grass, Mr. Chairman,
I'll draw your attention to the
dotted red line, that is the
worst case scenario, a low oil
price scenario.
And even in that worst case
scenario, uh what this
demonstrates is that we would
not have to uh look at reducing
the current recurring levels of
spending.
Uh, in other words, Mr.
Chairman, we wouldn't have to
start going to agencies and
asking them to reduce their
budgets, to stand their budgets,
to look for pennies and dimes in
the seat cushions and in the
desk drawers, and that's really
quite remarkable that even in
the worst case scenario, um, we
would still be able to maintain
current recurring spending
levels.
We would, Mr. Chairman, perhaps
have to look at reducing a
non-recurring uh spending
levels, but again, uh this is a
testament and I think
demonstrates the work that the
legislature has done over the
last couple of years to take the
incredible blessings we've had
in terms of our revenue growth
and ensure that we're using some
of it now for priorities, but uh
slide 33 is somewhat uh again uh
repetitive of previous slides,
so I'll jump forward to the last
slide.
slide 34.
And what this demonstrates, Mr.
Chairman, is, um, when you see
the lines diverging, um.
That is revenue volatility, uh,
when you see the those two
lines, the blue lines and the
black lines coming together, and
that means that we have smoothed
out uh volatility, um, and as
you see in the 10 year trend,
the blue line and the black line
at the very end of the graph,
uh, together, and that is
exactly what you want to see,
uh, and for the last time in
this presentation, at least, Mr.
Chairman,
I sounding like a broken record.
But that's due to the fact that
we have set aside money now,
invested it now in the severance
tax permit as a fund in the
early childhood education fund,
uh, those investments are
earning income, uh, and that is
reducing the volatility that we
have historically seen by from
our reliance on oil and gas. We
are now beginning to rely more
on those return on investments,
uh, which are much more stable
in the past, so.
Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned in
uh
December when we presented this
uh essentially the same
presentation to legislative
Finance Committee. Uh, the good
news is that there's no bad news
in this forecast, and we do have
additional revenues for FY 26,
working with you, uh, during the
segment.
Thank you. And, and we need to
say this publicly. I mean, we're
gonna.
an increase in our bond rating,
but that wouldn't have happened
without you sitting down and
talking to Moody's directly and
explaining to him, you know, we
have all this revenue.
We have all this money typed
away.
And, and you need to look at the
entire picture and not focus on
one thing, so it was you that
took that on to do that and so.
That's the other
Isn't you gonna start?
Yes, Mr. Chair. Uh, good
afternoon. My name is Ismael
Torres. I'm your all's chief
economist at the Legislative
Finance Committee, and I'll
See if I can just do some value
add, taking a step back. I'll be
speaking to this presentation
titled Money Matters, I think
you have it in front of you.
Um, I, I think it's just helpful
to reiterate that the bottom
line here is on page one of this
presentation. It's the table at
the top.
Represented in beige, about
$13.6 billion in estimated
revenues for the budget year
that you all are all about to
appropriate for. Um,
Of course, this brief is full of
information. So if you'd like to
read more, you don't have enough
to read during the session, you
can dig in certainly deeper, but
I do want to point to the graph
at the bottom of this page, and
Um, um, just illustrate a little
further what Secretary Chardon
Clark mentioned, which is the
economy has over the last 5
years, accelerated.
To really historic growth
levels. That's also been in
inflation, in job growth, um, in
wage growth, and, and so on. And
we saw that here in New Mexico.
And of course, we also had our,
our tremendous growth in oil
production, which all
contributed to record revenue
growth in the last 5 years. The
graph graph at the bottom of
page one shows sort of that
peaking in 2022 and 2023 before
it came back down to about half
of that 20% growth rate, I think
it's about 14%, 12%, excuse me,
in
24. We expect that to continue
to slow down in 25. Again,
mostly because of tax cuts, but
also the slowing of the economy
as Secretary Shadon Clark
mentioned before our revenues
approach a more historical norm,
uh, still slightly below our
historical norm of about 4%. So
a little bit of headwinds for
the revenues in the out years,
but we're seeing a slowdown as
we in revenues as we are in the
broader economy. I also want to
spend a little bit of time on
the chart in the middle of the
page. This is a graphical
representation of that new money
figure that
Secretary Props mentioned a new
money as calculated as total new
money, total revenues minus
total appropriations, $892
million. Um, this is a little
bit different than in prior
years because of the growth and
non-recurring appropriations
that we've seen over the last
several years. Of course, you
all may remember that
non-recurring appropriations
might have been maybe $200
million in previous years. We've
seen that number grow, of
course, with our revenues now
approaching maybe something like
$3 billion a year. And so as
that
Growth and monitoring
appropriations has occurred.
We've seen it necessary
hopefully to help be a little
more informative and, and, and
display it in this different
way, total revenues taking into
account the tremendous growth in
non-recurring appropriation. So,
in, in other words,
Uh, $3.4 billion if you do take
total revenues minus recurring
appropriations, but that would
mean 0 $0 for non-recurring
appropriations that are, are of
course of critical need that
would meet capital outlay
specials, supplementals,
endowment of funds, and so on.
So, really, the total pie, the
total appropriations can grow by
800. OK. If you turn to page 2,
Uh, the, the table in the middle
of the page here is the
financial summary, as you all
know, the state has a
constitutional obligation to
pass a balanced budget every
year. This is the way that we as
your staff keep track of that
and hopefully help you all keep
track to make sure that you are
all are on track to pass a
balanced budget. The good news
is you are, um, and this is an
abbreviated format. You can see
revenues at the top, spending in
the middle there, and what's
your total balance is at the
bottom, as Secretary Props
mentioned, we're seeing reserves
at 33% in the previous year,
8 % in the current year,
although that's before spending
in the upcoming session. So
we'll see that come down.
The graph at the left top left
hand corner of this page is a
graphical representation of
where the revenue growth is
coming from in FY 25 in the
current fiscal year, and as
Secretary Props mentioned, the
really incredible thing here is
that interest, you'll see it
labeled interest $213 million.
That's our investment income to
the general fund. That's the
largest dollar source of growth
in the general fund in the
current fiscal year and we
expect that to continue during
the forecast period. And that
speaks to the amount of
investments that you all have
made into
earning accounts that are now
benefiting the general fund,
which you all get to appropriate
in the coming session. But we
also see some tremendous growth
in the gross receipts tax,
that's our sales tax, income
taxes is showing a negative
here, but again, as Secretary
Shadon Clark mentioned, that's
because of personal income tax
reductions.
All right, I'll, I'll skip
through a lot of this that
Secretary Sheridan Clark
covered. I'll stop at page 4.
If you'll turn to page 4, just
highlighting.
The oil growth in New Mexico
that has contributed to that
record breaking revenue growth
in the state. Uh, you can see
that we've quickly become the
2nd largest producer, but in
terms of growth rates from 2017,
it's not even close. New Mexico
leading the, the nation ahead to
Page 8
Just a little more on, on the
importance of investment earning
accounts here in the general
fund with the chart at the top
of the page. This is in percent
terms, so earlier you saw in
dollar terms how investment
income was leading the pack for
revenue growth in the general
fund. This is in percent terms
and you can see just how much
more, maybe 3 or 4 times more,
um, faster growing investment
earnings are in the general fund
compared with other traditional
forms of revenue. So that's
benefiting you all there and an
important point here is that
that investment
income is the most stable form
of revenue in the general fund.
It's something that you can
count on because it's based on a
five-year average of the
balances of those funds. And as
you all continue to contribute,
we expect that to accelerate as
well. So definitely good news
there.
Skip ahead.
To forecast risks.
Um, on page 12, here's a
graphical representation of what
Secretary Props mentioned with
our uh declining risk of a, of a
recession there as surveyed by
the Wall Street Journal
approaching that 20% as
Secretary Props mentioned, um,
as you all have taken care of a
lot of the oil and gas
volatility in the general fund
by setting these caps and
distributions to investment
earning accounts. We're seeing
new sources of volatility emerge
in the general fund, or maybe uh
new sources in terms of um um
importance when it comes to
Our general fund forecasts. And
we're seeing that in um some
investment earnings,
specifically distributions to
the general fund from the state
treasurer's office investment
pool. Um, that's not a
strategic, uh, um, issue there.
It is simply a factor of the,
the financial mechanism by which
they distribute to the general
fund is directly influenced by
market changes. So we're seeing
a lot of volatility in the bond
market specifically right now,
and we expect that will continue
and that's a source of
volatility and concern for us.
And we're also seeing it in the
corporate income tax.
because corporate income taxes
are heavily dependent on the oil
and gas industry here in New
Mexico. And so, of course, a lot
of volatility depending on. Um,
moving on to page 13, as
secretary props mentioned, this
is our stress test where we, um,
evaluate different scenarios,
depending on risk probability
and see what kind of outcomes
they would have for the general
fund, so that you all can um
gauge how much you may want to
keep in reserves in the event of
one of those scenarios. And the
difference how far those
revenues can fall below
what current appropriations are,
is on page 14, the chart at the
top of page 14 shows.
How much cash you may need to
cover existing appropriations,
if appropriations are maintained
as flat. So you can see N FY 25,
you might need maybe 700 million
in FY 26, about 1.4 billion, or
a sum of about $2.1 billion if
you kept appropriations flat. So
of course we expect that you all
may add to this, um, during the
session. So whatever you add to
existing appropriations, um, we
would suggest are added to this
$2.1 billion in reserves figure.
And, and of course reserves are
over $3 billion right now.
so you all, um
have that room available
currently.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I think with that
I'm happy to
questions. Thank you.
Um,
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to all three of you.
Um, on the stress test.
Oh, how do you work it to go
like beyond 12 months.
Mr. Charon and Senator Gonzalez.
Um, so the approach we use is uh
similar to our regular forecast.
So in our regular forecasting
through for the baseline of what
we expect revenues. Of course,
we model based on certain
leading indicators over the next
3 to 5 years, and we do the same
thing again with the same
models, but with different
indicators. If there was a
recession, here's how wages
could look if there was an oil
price crash. Here's how
production could look, and we
feed it into our models that
we've.
developed to determine what kind
of difference that can make in
the revenues.
OK. So, uh, Mr. Chair, so we
could go more than.
You could end up with a couple
of years or even 3 years too.
into the stress test.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair. Uh, the
other part, uh, um, Mr.
Chairman.
So is there, or do you have a
recommendation.
Because uh we have our numbers.
And we have budgets that have
come in and we have had um
agencies with the request.
And uh going above and beyond.
This is on the recurring that
you're adding here a better way
to forecast.
To keep in a zone.
You know,
here uh
because so I think that's the
hard part to really and everyone
just sees there's money, the
safe level.
Mr. Chair and Senator Gonzalez,
um, this group, uh, also
conducts a long term revenue
forecast. This year it was in
September, and um we do some of
some of that analysis. What is a
sustainable level of budget
growth, how long can that budget
growth be sustained, um, before
the state finds itself in a
difficult position. Top of my
head, I, I'm remembering around
5% could give you a pretty good
runway, um, if, if recurring
appropriations were about 5%,
that could give you all a pretty
good runway of time before.
Um, you, you found yourself in,
in maybe more of a tighter
financial situation. So, that's
as of our latest estimates in
September.
OK, Mr. Chairman, and you were
showing us that you Mr. Chair,
unfortunately, we didn't include
it in this presentation, but I'd
be happy to very well. I think
that in my part, that's the
hardest, everyone just sees
large and understanding the
recurring part.
And it keeps going, what do we
present, you know, as a balance.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
And you send her.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, secret,
um.
Secretary, props, you go by.
Director.
of the DFA. Thank you.
Appreciate y'all being here,
Ismail, um, couple of things,
Mr. Chair, for the new members,
I'm sure it's it's a lot coming
at you, all these different
things I just want to flag one
very big thing that's happened a
few years and it's part of the
story you've heard it, but when
you've heard about interest
income, what's happened here is
the legislature.
Made a strategic decision.
To set aside a lot of the
windfall of our oil and gas
money into our permanent funds
so that we could actually turn
it into an investment source for
us recognizing that oil and gas
will eventually go down, so it's
projected globally as a
commodity and therefore the
revenue to the state, which is a
huge percent anytime
historically, less than 30% to
now over 40% of our income in
total comes from the sector. So
as that income goes down, where
are we going to replace it in
years to come. So we've turned
all this wind.
into we've grown blown up our
permanent funds, so we're
spinning off more income to our
state to replace as much as a
billion dollars or more a year
in a few years of income. So
it's working, brilliant strategy
and
Those that are worried about us
spending all the money like
drunken sailors and not being
fiscally responsible. It's
actually a very different story.
Like, we have set us a lot of it
aside. So just want to share
that with you because I think
it's such a huge story of what's
going on now and our future is
going to depend on it. Also want
to credit, of course, um,
Ismael, our, our chief economist
who kind of helped.
Pioneer this along with Senator
Gonzalez, um, when they did this
legislation to do it. So,
great story there and uh that's
really wild to hear that it's
now the biggest source of
revenue, I mean, that's just so
cool and it's just gonna get
bigger, way bigger. Um, question
I wanna ask you about the stress
test.
We, we've obviously entered a
new administration. We are the
budget committee, so we have to
look at things that could really
impact our revenue one way or
the other.
Tariffs.
Is that
You know, the impact of tariffs.
I have another concern, but I'll
ask you about that first. Is
that been factored in?
Um
Mr. Chair and Senator Steinburn,
I'll take a stab at that first,
and if, if Izzy wants to add to
that, that would be great, but
we do list as one of the risks
to the forecast, um, changing
federal policy, and that could
mean a lot of different things,
but tariffs is certainly
something that's included in
there. I mean, tariffs on one
hand or, you know, the, the,
those in favor of tariffs to
argue that it brings more
manufacturing and maybe growth
to the United States on the
converse side, they are just an
inflation factor, and so, um, to
the extent inflation.
depression depresses economic
growth, tariffs are part of
that.
So it could kind of go either
way, but there is concern about
inflation pressure.
that was exactly what I, I was
hoping to add, um,
Simply that the extent to which
tariffs
Actually add to the forecast
because as prices are, are
applied to them. So there isn't
a possibility that we actually
see revenues increase, but to
the extent to which demand is
destroyed and and maybe a
moderate or severe recession is
entered, uh, could obviously be
a net result negative. And, and
that's a difficult
Um, determination to make,
depending on the size of the
tariffs, which we still aren't.
Got you, I guess in a way it is
baked in because you are looking
at recession and things that
would cause a decrease of
consumption, um, or, or revenue,
and so that could be caused by a
lot of things, including this,
right? The other thing is what
we see happening potentially
will happen with agricultural
labor and uh driving up prices
if a lot of our labor.
Disappears, um.
You know what's the impact of
that, certainly on that sector
and prices and probably all the
same secretary maybe like
addressing.
Yeah, Mr. Chassement, you're
right that the labor market
could also uh experience a
different level of shortage, but
would add to agricultural
potentially construction.
And hospitality sectors.
And if I could add one last
thing, I think for us, what we
may be watching.
Even more closely is, is the
path of federal spending, which
could have an even more um
significant impact on, on our
budget, but also on our economic
prospects.
Got it. Well, thank you all very
much for that remarkable
presentation and situation that
we find ourselves in, which is
just unprecedented as a state.
Thanks.
Senator Tobison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would like to ask all three of
you, um, and actually recognize
you for putting together really
thorough information which as a
freshman here on the committee,
you know where I'll be spending
my free time and what I'll be
reading, um, but when I hear,
um, revenue growth, especially
in the oil and gas sector. Um, I
also hear job creation. Do you
know the numbers of jobs created
specifically in oil and gas
during this increase and then as
a projected decrease, what would
that would mean in.
of those jobs.
Mr. Chair and Senator, um.
I'm happy to take a stab at it
and if the secretaries would
like to add uh.
Unfortunately or fortunately for
the industry, they have been
very um innovative in increasing
productivity per job. So, we
actually haven't seen employment
in that sector increase with the
amount of production. Each
wellhead is actually producing
more and more oil with fewer and
fewer employees. Um, I, I think
the last I've seen employment
estimates in that sector range
from 15,000 to 20,000. And what
we are expecting even with the
um leveling out and eventual
decline of, of that sector is um
not
an immediate necessary fall off
in production nor employment, we
would likely see employment
trickle down over that time
period, but I wouldn't expect us
to see large employment
disruptions from
Um, maybe declining global oil
demand.
OK. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Center trail.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman, I
just want to take just a brief
quick moment. I really fumbled
the ball yesterday when you
asked me about my community. I
just want to say like welcome
everyone to Santa Fe. This is
where I live. I'm glad you're
all here. I hope you enjoy our
restaurants, our museums, and
our outdoor recreation.
Um, I will, I just have a few
questions on page 15.
Why does natural gas
have such fluctuation, and I
don't need a whole story behind
it, just like in a nutshell, why
is that happening? That's
interesting, Mr. Chair and
Senator Trujillo that you asked
that we we answered this
question in HAFC yesterday, um,
whereas oil is very much
controlled by global market
factors, natural gas is more
regional, so some of the big
fluctuations you'll see on that
chart reflects with, for
example, like a really bad
winter storm, really hot heating
season that spike.
Demand or cut off supply
pipeline burst or something
along those lines. Did you want
to add to that though?
And um, Mr. Chair, just the
Russian invasion of Ukraine
during that period, uh, caused
concerns for European security
and in natural gas, which they
are a large consumer of, and so
we saw a spike in demand and a
spike in prices during that
time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that answer. And then
on page 30, um, just again, just
a quick brief explanation. Is
the 38.4% of the budget, the
reserve fund, is that of like
the budget that we've
I'm done, that we have
appropriated for spending.
That's a percentage of it.
Mr. I know that's really
elementary and I apologize to
the committee at all, Senator
Trujillo. That's a, that's a,
it's a tough one to to think
about because the percentage is
total cash divided by the
recurring appropriations and uh
so the the recurring
appropriations for FY 25 have
already been made. Depends on
how much cash is left, and, and
how much of it. OK, thank you.
And the last question, uh, Mr.
Chairman, um, panel on page
3233, um, what would worst case
scenario.
low prices be, is that like per
barrel? What should we be
looking for?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator,
it's about $40 a barrel. $40 a
barrel would be worst case
scenario. All right, thank you
and Mr. Chairman, does the um
$40 a barrel include an analysis
of a reduction in demand.
Or could it go lower?
Mr. Chair and Senator Trujillo,
um, kind of tricky to think
about if demand drops, um,
actually prices will likely
fall. So, um,
Certainly in COVID, for example,
we saw prices go negative at
some point. So it's possible
that they go lower than 40, um,
the likelihood of that is, of
course, very low. And so we
actually demonstrate maybe a, a
5 to 10% likely probability
scenario rather than a very
extreme scenario. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. I, I'm seeing you for
the question, but just the
history and, and maybe you'll
remember this, but we used to
make more than we did off oil.
And so that's the change in
scenario, I mean,
a 10 may be different now, but I
remember a 10 cent increase.
And natural gas gave us $3 more
dollars. 10 cents was more.
$3 million.10 in natural gas
price increase was $3 million
for a dollar increase in barrel
of oil was only.
So it that it's that for those
people. So whenever we talk
about a reserve number, 1% is
equal to 15 million or 7
million.
Uh, Mr. Chair, in the previous
year, 5, in the future year, it
depends on how, how much you all
increase your current spending
for every 100 million we take
out or spend that drops the
reserves by 1%.
We say 30%, that's 3 billion, we
say 33%, that's 3.3 billion.
OK. Thank you guys. I appreciate
your time.
Charles, you're coming up with
wing.
Star.
Oh
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh, I
had some slides that I was gonna
show the committee as well. I
think there's gonna be a well,
they're pulling those up. Maybe
I'll explain to the new members
of the, the books. Yep, that's
what I was gonna go over, um,
and actually before that, Mr.
Chairman, you should have a
directory for LFC staff, uh,
they might be in your binders,
but we'll make sure that there's
somewhere.
Um, easily accessible for you.
You have a team of 45 over in
the capital North annex.
Uh, that work year round is um
Nonpartisan fiscal staff, we've
got a team of program
evaluators.
Uh, that's unusual for budget
shops that have a program
evaluation, government
accountability unit located in
the budget shop, but it's really
important for helping the
committee develop its budget
recommendations as well as its
accountability work.
The essence of what the program
evaluators do if they could
stand up behind me.
How much did you get? What did
you do with the money? What are
the results? How do we improve?
That's the essence of what
they're doing year round
including uh right now, then
we've got a team of fiscal
analysts that you'll see before
you throughout the session of
the ones that are here could
stand, we're spread all out
doing FIRs and over in HAFC
right now, but the analysts, uh,
usually are assigned blocks of,
of similar type agencies, Health
and Human Services, education,
higher education.
You have questions about what's
going on with the budget or
general.
Generally with those areas, feel
free to give them a call
directly, you don't need to go
through, through me, they'll
follow back up to make sure we
get you the information you
need. You just saw your team of
economists that work on the
revenue estimate with the um
Executive branch economist for
the consensus revenue estimating
group, and then the folks that
make all of this stuff work are
back in the office doing just
that our support staff and
really want to thank uh all of
for them, for all that hard work
and Miss Janay Leger leads that
unit. You've got the LFC uh
budget recommendations are
broken up into 3 different
books.
Uh, the first one we call
Volume One. This is a good one
to take with you this weekend.
It's got
Um, policy analysis that
provides important context on a
range of different uh issues
facing the state fiscally and
performance wise, and then it's
got performance report cards for
all the big agencies, how they
did the last fiscal year. Uh,
did they meet the mark? Are we
heading in the right direction,
because we use that information
to help inform.
Uh, budget recommendations.
Our performance-based budgeting
system does not replace your,
um,
Judgment as a legislature over
how much money to give an
agency. It's merely one data
point to help inform whether
we're, what whether the
investments we're making are
working.
This volume too is the actual uh
recurring budget recommendation
for all the agencies, higher
education and public schools.
It's a good one if you're gonna
have a hearing on Tuesday for
public school support, the night
before or while you're on the
floor listening to memorials get
introduced, thumb through it.
Uh, because it will tell you
why, uh, the recommendations
were made in the way that they
were and what the agency had
requested.
Other than that, it's a good
reference document.
Um
The last one we call Volume 3.
And this one has supplemental
information.
Um, how much money do we spend
through the tax code? What are
our tax expenditures? What are
the top 5, who are the
beneficiaries of the land grant
permanent funds, they're
actually multiple permanent
funds, not just one.
Uh, who's the 2nd largest
beneficiary. This is my fun
fact.
Turns out to be immi. Most
people would have thought you
and him or New Mexico State,
just so happens Nimi and their
trust lands that they own are in
a very profitable area of the
state in southeast New Mexico.
Uh, if you want to know how much
an agency reverted last year,
how much they were transferring
out of salaries and benefits,
you can find all of those things
here.
Now that we got the uh
Presentation, Mr. Chairman, so
the members know, leave these
books here if you want
additional books to take home or
somewhere else.
And I think you should have some
down on the floor too.
Um
So the finance committee members
will have those on their desks
on the floor too, so, but if you
want another set, there's sets
in my office.
So, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to go
through a couple of slides. I
will try not to repeat what you
just heard with the economists,
but I want to reinforce some
things because I think context
matters before we get into what
the actual budget recommendation
is.
The, the first thing I want to
reemphasize what you heard are
revenue growth is slowing.
Uh, some of that is due to the
broader economy, some of it's
due to, uh, fiscal policies that
you put into place.
There's a myriad of different
revenue, uh, taxes that are
coming into our general fund.
I think of them in 3 big
buckets. The first one are
revenues related to our broader
economic prosperity as a state.
Personal income
Uh, pur purchasing goods, um,
some services.
The second are direct energy
revenues, um, things that we're
getting from the oil and gas.
That's a very volatile set of um
Revenues that are coming into
the general fund. And the third
are the investment income and
you heard the the importance and
the growing importance of that
that investment income uh going
forward.
You've taken the strength in our
broader economic prosperity over
the past couple of years.
And you've virtually
pushed the entire amount back
out into the economy through a
series of tax cuts since 2019.
So it's it's reducing revenue
this year by about a billion
dollars. Uh, that'll be growing
slightly over the next couple of
years.
You've taken your energy
revenues and said we're gonna
cap.
How much can come into the
general fund because we want to
insulate it from.
Uh, that volatility, and I'll
show you why in a minute with
some other slides.
So you've got headwinds over the
near term and the long term.
Because both of those are
essentially going to be flat.
Or they're only going to be
growing if something changes in
our economy for us to be doing
better.
And then the investment income
is going to be what's driving
our, our growth. In the mid to
the long term revenue growth is
only 3%.
Which is less than we were
growing the budget.
Under the Martinez
administration, uh, through the
budget significantly under the
Richardson administration had
Better revenue situation, go
back to the Johnson
administration in the 90s,
budgets were growing only about
4%. So 3% is less than what our
long term.
Kind of sustainable growth
pattern has been.
So that's gonna be an important
figure.
This revenue volatility, the
black line is the revenue growth
and the bars are the budget
growth going back to before the
Great Recession.
You know, I used to say,
I could take this graph back to
the early 80s, and that would be
the story of the general fund.
This boom and bust. So if we
could go to the next slide.
My economist did that to the
mids and the challenge with this
boom and bust is
People in this building,
including me for my entire year,
wouldn't necessarily feel
confident coming out of the
legislative session that we
weren't gonna be in a bad space.
Within a fiscal year.
Maybe a half a fiscal year. You
can't look, if you can't look
through and have confidence in a
fiscal year, let alone two
fiscal years.
Or let alone the next 5.
How can you be strategic with
what you do?
Well, we're not.
We just look and say how much
money were we gonna get that new
money figure.
And are we gonna spend it?
In the budget where we spend it
in the tax code.
Not taking into account the
implications of doing that.
Over the next 3 to 5 years. And
that's really an important
backdrop to consider because I
tell people, virtually
everything is affordable today.
But the question will be, is it
affordable tomorrow and the next
day. Is that something that's
really sustainable? So that's
really an important backdrop to
what I'm going to talk about
with the, with the budget. Next
slide.
I think the economist touched on
this really good, uh, the kind
of insulation we've got for our
general fund is going to be
really helpful, gives us a lot
more confidence.
In a smoother, more steady set
of investments over the next 3
to 5 years.
Uh, I used to really dread both
dread and love Thanksgiving,
because on good Thanksgivings, I
came back to the office and
didn't have to like rearrange
the budget on.
That Thanksgivings, you know,
I'd have to come back on Monday
and they say, well, how are you
gonna rearrange a billion
dollars in the budget.
And before LFC met in December.
I don't have those concerns
right now. In fact,
The general fund, uh, virtually
didn't change from the August
estimate to the December
estimate.
Uh, but how much was going into
those trust funds did. So that's
really important, gives us more
confidence to be able to look
over the, the mid to the long
term, uh, with our investment
choices.
Next slide.
I just wanted to put this in,
this, you've got, I think, a
paper copy in front of you too.
When we talk about the
contributions of oil and gas
revenue to our state. It totals
over $15 billion.
12.5 billion is coming to our
state and local governments.
It's helping fund a significant
portion of your
General fund revenues.
It's helping fund your capital
program.
It's help in normal years, it's
helping fund now in a big way,
uh, tomorrow dollars through
your permanent funds.
Uh
Turning off that spigot fast,
you won't find anything to be
able to replace it.
Wind, solar, not even close.
Uh, so that's an important
backdrop of just how
Big of an impact.
This industry has and, and the
activity that they do. Now
there's lots of.
Legitimate policy discussion
over environmental concerns and
are we doing that right and
those things, but in terms of
like a revenue replacement.
If we were to turn off this
switch and turn on the other
one, be very challenging. In
fact, all this money allows us
to tax our citizens at a lesser
rate than we would otherwise
have to do.
Uh, to afford this level of
government that we've got at the
at the state and the local
level. We couldn't have the
lowest property taxes in the
country. I don't know how much
that gets this from an economic
development standpoint, but, but
we have it, whereas other states
are taxing their citizens at a
much higher level, uh, on based
on their property values. So
that's an important backdrop.
Next slide.
Not gonna last forever.
Um, but
If these permanent funds work
the way that that we're hoping
that they will.
Uh, in the out years, they will
basically replace.
That lost revenue coming in
dollar for dollar.
The challenge with that is
you're flat.
That's another headwind, long
term, over the long term.
On being able to sustain
whatever level of government the
people in Mexico want, how much
they want to spend on schools,
health care, and otherwise,
which means we do have to find
transitions. We do need to find
ways to grow our economy, uh, in
our broader economic prosperity.
Next slide.
And we've got a bubble.
A window of opportunity.
Maryland, California, there are
two examples of states that blew
through their surplus coming out
of COVID and already cutting
budgets.
They spent big through the tax
code, they spent big in the
budget and are having to make
painful decisions. I mean,
California, I think they were
doing like 8% across the board,
like budget cuts.
That can happen if you spend too
much today's dollars and not
spread it out over time. So you
see that bubble where the
legislature has not been
spending all of the revenue
that's available on recurring.
This is a very new and different
position that we're in, and
you've set up mechanisms
including uh what's called the
grow to try to spread out.
This revenue surplus over time
and basically say we're not
going to grow the base budget
and automatically put money into
it, for new programming and new
interventions, agencies are
going to need to demonstrate
that it actually works before we
put it into the base budget.
And so, you know, if you get
into like a 6%.
Spending growth scenario, you
can spread out this surplus and
have nice smooth and 6% budget's
a nice budget. You can put
together a lot of things,
particularly if you're
supplementing it with those, uh,
pilot, um, intervention money.
You start nearing into the 10%.
Uh, window and all you're doing
is accelerating the date that
you're putting together a budget
that only grows 3%, would be
very difficult to do with the
way that Medicaid, uh, requires
so much money.
Uh, and, and you wouldn't be
able to do really a comp
package.
You know, it'd be 3% is very
challenging. It's below the
historical spending growth rates
even under the most austere
times coming out of the, like
the Great Recession.
So
That is part of the backdrop to
the next slide.
That
Oh, let me talk about this,
particularly for new members,
our existing members.
Um, know all about this. We've
developed an analytical
framework.
Over the last 20 years at LFC to
bring in
What works. Research about what
works. What's the evidence say?
Using performance information,
in a continuous quality
improvement process.
Into the budget making process.
So we start with that
performance information. What's
working? Are we heading in the
right direction at Children,
Youth and Families department or
not.
That data and that scorecard is
not going to tell you.
Why they're getting reds or what
to do about it, so then our
analysts or the evaluators got a
deep dive, how are we, are we
spending money on the wrong
stuff? Are we not giving them
enough money?
Are we not spending money on the
programs that research say
should work.
And we're spending on something
that we're making it up as we go
and it's clearly not.
And then if we're going to steer
money towards things that work,
start building that into the
budget development process, you
know, pre-K will help low-income
kids be better ready for
kindergarten and the long-term
benefits from that intervention,
more than, well more than pay
for itself. It's not going to be
a silver bullet, none of these
social programs are, but it's a
good investment. So building
that into the budget development
process.
A really important part of your
job as a legislature doesn't end
when you pass the budget.
Because implementation of all of
these things is going to be
critical, and we've seen that's
what the evaluation unit will
find over and over again.
Yeah, it's not for lack of
money.
That we're not getting good
results in certain areas. It's
poor implementation of even an
evidence-based intervention.
We've seen that.
And at the end of the day, Mr.
Chairman, you all are making
appropriations to accomplish
something.
You want to affect change in
some way. You want more 3rd
graders to read at grade level.
You want fewer offenders leaving
our prisons and returning to
prison because they did
something bad in our community.
And you're appropriating money
to try to change that. So we've
got to come back full circle.
Did we in fact accomplish what
we wanted.
That leads me to the budget
priorities.
Uh, next slide.
So thinking about how we can use
these surpluses both in the
non-recurring budget as well as
the recurring.
To change our fortunes
economically will require us to
have a much more educated
population.
That's working and working full
time.
That's everything from the
trades.
To advanced PhDs working in our
R&D sector where we've got
competitive advantage.
Those will increase individuals
per capita, this is an important
part of that per capita earned
income.
The second one
It to for us to grow, we, we
don't see how we can do that
with the kind of healthcare
system we've got right now, you
can't attract people to come
here. People are fleeing.
Because they can't get access to
high quality healthcare, so
improving our access to high
quality healthcare.
Including behavioral health was
the second big priority. The 3rd
is
We've got bountiful resources to
do things to really focus on
improving the quality of life of
our people in our communities.
Everything from safer
neighborhoods, clean drinking
water, you'll see in the LFC a
big and multi-year investment
and getting water projects
actually complete that are um
That are in the pipeline, as
well as nice amenities.
Uh, things that we normally, uh,
haven't had the, the budget to
be able to fund things like uh
rural recreation and quality of
life grants.
You know, a new
Uh, family oriented lake in
dimming with placescapes to
attract families in a
historically retirement
community.
Nice new parks in our rural
small villages in Cuba and
eastern New Mexico, rodeo
arenas.
You know, those types of things,
you've got an opportunity to
fund and you have funded over,
over the last couple of years.
So with that, let me go through
a couple of key
Um, highlights in the LFC budget
recommendation.
The first one is the
recommendation to grow the
general fund recurring budget,
uh, to 10.8 billion. That's
about 5.7% growth. So starting
to rein in those big spending
increases that we've seen over
the last couple of years. We've
grown the budget 61% already, so
we've taken it to taking care of
a lot of today needs.
You've taken care of a lot of,
you know, tomorrow needs in
terms of like long term, uh
those uh permanent funds, and
now we can get on a, a more
stable, predictable.
Uh, trajectory of of growth.
Um, heavy focus on education,
behavioral health, public
safety, and even wildlife
preparedness and recovery.
Some of the big key policy
areas, um.
Uh, for funding, uh, include a
continuing the investment in
early childhood, you will see a
major difference with the
executive on this.
Um
The trust fund has a statutory
dis distribution amount that LFC
recommended appropriating to the
administration's gonna wanna do
another bill to increase that so
they can increase spending at a
higher level, but the LFC
recommendation prioritizes uh
increases for the home visiting
rates.
Uh, continued pre-K expansion
for a 3 year olds were making
good inroads, as well as
investments to ensure uh high
quality, uh, care in both
childcare and pre-K.
The public education uh budget
would grow by about 6%, uh,
prioritized in there would be,
uh, some changes to how we flow
money to high poverty uh school
districts.
Um
As well as funding just 6th
grade to be at the same waiting
level in our funding formula as
7th and 8th grade, whereas
there's a historical
happenstance that it was funded
at a lower level, as well as
basic opening the doors costs,
that's like insurance, uh,
utilities.
Um, and the like. And then,
Um
Trying a similar approach in
K-12 is what we're doing in
Grove for agencies.
Uh, through a reformed public ed
reform fund, so multi-year
Appropriations for piloting
things like attendance
improvement, um,
And uh through the public
education reform Fund.
Health and Human Services.
Uh, when you look at the
healthcare authority, the new
healthcare authority, and you
take all funding sources into
consideration, um,
That's about a $15 billion
agency. There will be big
increases in in the budget as
hospitals pay a new uh surcharge
that will pay for uh enhanced
Medicaid rates for hospitals
that will bring them up to what
commercial payers pay. That's
pretty big and it doesn't cost
the general fund anything. The
big question there is,
At the end of the day, will that
help improve access to high
quality care will or will money
flow out of out of state.
big priorities in in here are
continuing rate increases for a
couple of key areas, primary
care physicians. How do we
recruit a primary care physician
to say Roswell, when they look
at their panel of business and
40+% of them would be on
Medicaid.
And other states pay it 80% of
Medicare. Well, New Mexico under
this budget recommendation is
going to be paying 150%.
Vastly different, uh,
conversation to be able to
recruit and retain, uh,
physicians to do primary care
and focus on prevention efforts.
Same thing with behavioral
health, uh, in infant maternal
care, and DD waiver would have
pretty sizable rate increases as
well. You'll probably hear from
the nursing home industry, uh,
wanting to get in on that as
well as other providers.
Compensation around this out
with the, the last of the large
uh components of the recurring
spending uh is at 4% increase
for all public employees, uh,
including a higher education and
public schools. Uh, the
executives a little bit lower at
3%. 1 of the rationales for
going with 4 is we have
insolvent, uh, public employee
healthcare plans that are
looking at
10% premium increases next year
and even for the foreseeable
future without some pretty major
changes.
In terms of non-recurring.
There's about 3 billion, uh,
from the general fund for
non-recurring appropriations.
Um, big investments for water of
about 300 million.
Um
There's 20 million for the rural
water infrastructure revolving
loan fund, uh, money to help,
uh, all the disparate small
community water organizations
start consolidating some of
their uh operations uh to help
with that as well as mapping our
aquifer to get a better
understanding of potential new
water supply.
Um
There's overall a significant
investments, uh, in behavioral
health and expanding our
behavioral health system, uh, as
well as addressing crime,
homelessness, and other things.
All of those really are very
related. It's hard to isolate,
uh, those types of things.
They're very, very related.
Um, 50 million for regional rec
centers and quality of life
grants. We did do an evaluation
of those.
Um, appropriations that you made
a DFA to administer. They did a
really nice job administering
them, so I give credit to the
secretary and and his team for
being able to work with
communities to score projects to
make sure the money got out the
door and we actually saw the
fruits of our, our labors there.
Uh, of 135 for a variety of
higher education initiatives,
including um 15 million for
medical education, a loan
repayment. And then setting
aside another tranche of money
in the corpus of the grove. This
is an expendable trust fund that
spends off 25% of its corpus.
For those pilot projects over a
three-year period. The grow
would act, uh, continue to act
under this recommendation as a
backup reserve to the operating
reserve, uh, but it would count
in your overall uh reserve
calculation, which would be
sitting at 33%, uh, coming out
of LFC, which means if you want
to get to the 30%, you've got a
little bit of room, um, to be
able to do that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I'd
like to turn it over to the
Secretary Props and then we'll
be happy to answer, um, as
Chairman again, Wayne Props with
the Department of Finance and
Administration, um, particularly
for the new members, uh, Mr.
Chairman, we are located right
across the street in the Batan
building. Uh, we have several
divisions at the Department of
Finance Administration,
including local government
division, which you'll probably
interact with quite frequently,
uh, a new infrastructure
division, the state Board of
Finance.
Uh, is at the Department of
Finance, uh, as well, we have a
financial control division at
DFA, uh, but the, uh, department
or division that you're probably
interact with the most is our
state budget division.
That is led by Doctor Andrew
Miner, who is sitting right
behind me, as with the LFC we
have a number of very talented
budget analysts that work at uh
DFA in the state budget
division. You'll be meeting them
over the next few weeks as
agencies come before you with
their LLC counterpart, uh, to
talk about their uh budget
requests, so just wanna let you
know that uh when you see the
DFA analysts, uh, there as much
as your LFC analyst who begin
your
time on this, Mr. Chairman, I
have a very brief uh
presentation, um.
Because again, I don't need to
go into details, and that's what
your hearings are going to be
about for the next, uh, 3 or 4
weeks, but you'll see on the
first slide, the executive
budget recommendation for FY 26
is $10.944 billion.
Uh, that, uh, leaves a reserve
of 30.4% or about $333 billion.
You'll see the major buckets in
the executive recommendation,
uh, for example, we are
recommending about $46 million
for the various legislative
agencies 466 million for the
judiciary, um.
4.6 billion for public
education, uh, and Mr. Chairman,
you should have a copy of the
executive budget recommendation
looks something like this, and
also a budget and brief that
covers the executive budget
recommendation for executive
agencies as well, uh, when you
get done reading the LLC's 3
volumes, you can uh keep on
reading for a few more days, but
uh, I do think it is helpful as
Charles indicated to take off at
least look through these, a lot
of the information and there
will be.
Volume 3, but that's the overall
executive budget recommendations
chairman is 10.944 billion for
FY 26.
the next slide, you'll see a
little bit more granular detail,
uh, general fund by agency.
Overall, the executive budget
recommendation is a 7% increase
over FY 25. That includes a 3%
compensation increase uh
proposed for teachers and public
employees, uh, if you subtract
out that compensation increase
the overall executive
recommendation for agency budget
growth for FY 26 is about 5.3%.
Uh, so again, I think Mr.
Chairman, we are all largely
singing off the same hymnal at
the beginning of the session.
Uh, we know that uh revenues
are, are, are moderating, I
think they certainly the
governor recommend uh recognized
that in her budget
recommendation, uh, and it's
reflected in the fact that
overall the recurring budget
recommendation difference
between it and the executive is
um less than $200 million.
Priority for the executive on
the next slide. Um.
Again, the, the priorities are
very similar to what you just
heard from director Seli, uh,
the executive will be
prioritizing infrastructure, uh,
will be priority, prioritizing
roads, uh, will be our
advertising water.
Uh, we will continue to
prioritize early childhood
development and build upon the
investments that you have made
in development department and
the trust fund,
uh, education, 30, we have $30
million for the governor's
summer reading intervention
program that she talked about in
her state of the state address.
Uh, and of course, Mr. Chairman,
I think uh we have all come to a
consider making that a priority,
Mr. Chairman, and you, uh,
On that as well. And we have a,
some additional resources for in
the executive recommendation for
CYFD, uh, Mr. Chairman, we are
also a prioritizing and
continuing to prioritize uh
housing and homelessness, uh,
those issues in her state of the
state.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, um,
looking forward to to working
with you and your staff, and the
committee, uh during the
session.
Uh, we are close, um, and that's
a good place to start, a
marathon, you know that the 1st
19 miles or so really aren't
that bad.
It's the last ones that get you,
um, but we'll get there at the
end of 6, have a lot of respect
for the work that's known
Charles now for 20 years, uh,
used to work with Charles, uh,
uh.
And our analysts worked very
closely together throughout the
year for the time that you've
given us today and
57 or so days.
You have to remind us.
I, I've never heard the word
hymnal used in a budget
presentation.
In sign board. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you both and
Charles, welcome, um, thank you
for your presentation and high
level and even a kind of big
picture, um, really helpful.
Um, profound stuff.
And good job to you to help him
to manage this transition that
we're in.
I have a few questions, uh, for
both of you. The Office of the
State Engineer, Mr. Chair, as I
understand it, Texas versus New
Mexico, litigation that we have
funding through this year, but
not in the next. I'm hearing
from some of the folks down
south asking about that.
Is that
Um
You know, I don't know what
percentage of our litigation
money, I guess maybe they're
doing expert witness kind of
stuff, and maybe a lot of it's
being shouldered by the AG, but
That's on my radar and that's
down in Donana. What um, what
are your thoughts on that issue
and funding OSI potential Texas
v. New Mexico.
Steinburn, we didn't fund OSI to
do that, we funded the attorney
general's office. We handled
that with another client, the
new attorney General has now
replaced that with the.
Another litigator.
And so.
As I understand it, Mr. Chair,
I, I got an email about their
work on it, so I assume they may
not be the, obviously the main
litigator, but maybe they're
supporting it.
I'm not an expert in what money
they've been appropriate.
Mr. Chairman, I can't speak to
the executive recommendation
real quickly. I believe that
overall recommendation for the
agency operate a lot of uh.
Confidence in her, um, I hope
that that's why be an area that
we can look at and.
You trust Jimmy thoughts on
that.
Mr. Chair, I need to go back and
check on
Uh, the expenditure levels for
the litigation to carry them
through or if they were, they
would need more or to be
reauthorized. Thank you, yeah,
and I just heard from one of the
big.
Big farmers down south, chili
farmers, um, that I see was in
contact with us outside, so
thank you. It's amazing, like
$10 billion budget, we asked
these guys these random
questions and most of the time
they haven't answered, it just
blows my mind that they can keep
track of it all, but
Thanks for getting back to me on
that.
Uh, second question is another.
Thing that's important to me,
but um, that's a difference
between the the the executive
and the LFC and that's for the
cleanup fund for the
contaminated and abandoned
uranium mine sites in the state
of New Mexico.
Finally with all this one time
money, we have 1000 abandoned
uranium mine sites, San Juan
County, I mean all over the
state, but a lot of north, a lot
of tribal lands, um.
And 300 abandoned neglected
sites that are a lot of old dry
cleaners and just things we
never had the money to deal with
now we got this one time money
we could put these lands
productive economic use and
clean them up.
The executive recommended 50
million, I think the department
asked for a $300 million
supplemental, keep in mind we
could spend billions on this and
it would still not be enough, so
perspective, but the environment
department said, OK, 300 million
executive recommended requested
50 million, I think it's a part
of their 50 year water plan. I
think LFC was 0, talking to the
department, I know there's a
little concerned about, well,
maybe from our perspective,
like, can you really spend the
money and the time left, they
absolutely feel like they can.
Um, so,
Anyway, we're at 0, they're at
50, or just want to flag it's a
big priority and I know when I
talk to members, particularly
from northern New Mexico, it's
super important to them. Um,
And maybe get a start on the
uranium mine. You feel free to
comment. You don't have to. I
could just be a flag for you
guys, but
Um
We'll leave it at that for now.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, any other question?
couldn't cut off light today.
Thank you.
Remind me what verse in the
hymnal will be singing as we go
along to the session, so that
way we're on the same page and
same note.
Let's see, I don't think we have
a need to go into executive.
I don't think we need to go into
executive. We're just gonna go
over.
For
I don't think we need to go in
the executive. We're just gonna
go over some, some guidelines
and.
So, kind of yesterday we
Chatted our organizational
meeting slash.
I built one meeting.
I think some of that got over,
over with. But I just want to
talk over you.
Good.
Oh yeah, yeah, let me go ahead
and sit there and I'm just gonna
go over some stuff.
as as we go along, everybody's
gonna have a special interest,
right?
And so, if you want those
agencies here to be heard.
Or something that you read.
You know, you can read this, but
You're only gonna absorb so
much.
That we need, you think as a
committee member that you want
to focus on, and we need to
bring them in. Let us know so we
can schedule them, right?
Um, the other thing is,
You know,
Try to be on time. We know that
there's constituent stuff that
has to happen. We know that
there's meetings that you set up
with other other people, um, and
we understand that. We're gonna
try to start on time and who
knows when we're gonna end
because legislative time could
be any time. The floor sessions
are gonna go completely
differentinance may have to come
up and do some stuff, and then
go back down to the floor. It's
kind of a
committee
So, just kind of keep on your
toes.
Um
Our committee secretary will get
your text numbers, right, or
your numbers on your email.
There's a form here.
So the best contact number, best
email, so if we have to send you
stuff.
We will send you stuff, uh, the
ranking member is Senator Brant,
so we'll meet and talk about
bills that are gonna be coming
forward, we'll make sure that
those bills are in your emails.
So that you have the FIRs with
them, so you're prepared.
We'll try to get them out as
soon as we can. We'll try to
plan a day ahead, but so if we
have to come up and hear a bill.
Make sure everybody has a FIR in
You know, people come late to
committee.
And I understand that.
But if we have a presentation
that's already going.
And they're 2030 minutes into
the presentation. I don't wanna,
I wanna make sure everybody gets
to answer their questions and
ask, but if you're coming in
late,
One of our staffers, he goes is
back there.
Uh
Somebody's around, so you, you
should make sure that you ask
them where we at in the
presentation and what questions
have been heard, cause I'm not
gonna go over them again.
I understand that, but, but
we're not gonna go home again.
Um, make sure you're on time. I
don't have time to chase you
down. I can barely chase myself
down in the morning in which
direction and so when bills come
along, just let us know that
you're gonna go to prison you
have to go wait in the committee
room or whatever, so we know we
have to vote on something, and
it's something that you want to
vote on.
If you're presenting the bill,
we'll try to to stall it or
not say it public
We'll try to make sure you're in
the room to vote.
Or if we need your we'll make
sure we know where you're at.
We can go, somebody will come
get you.
you're presenting, won't you
know.
So I wanna make sure cause time
management is the hardest thing
we're going to do. Last session
we did 2 meetings.
A day
We're not gonna start that
early.
And then we're gonna start
rolling into 2 meetings a day.
And and to get everybody caught
up.
I will not.
Put a bill on I'm comfortable
with or don't know need to
understand what you're voting
for.
needed to understand
Um
Where we're at.
To make sure that when those
bills hit your emails.
That you are reading them and
don't say, I don't have them in
my email and I don't have that
IR if we made a mistake, we'll
admit to it.
Uh, they'll be there, and we'll
track it electronically.
You're asking questions, you get
to the direct question, right?
And
There
11 of us, and I imagine
everybody wants to to do that,
and we'll have some
A lot of time, that's kind of
it, the most important thing is
Everybody's gonna be busy
presenting those.
Let us know where you're at.
Cause if we need a quart and
where people are gone from the
room, or 5 people are gone from
the room.
We're just sitting here
listening.
And we got
You represent trail that
question and it goes.
Sorry, Mr. Chairman Deville, you
are OK.
Thank you. I mean, I'm sitting
here today and I got 25 text
just while we're sitting here.
I'm not a text person I learned
my lesson, and so, I don't
really
Track my texting on my phone.
Just let somebody know committee
secretary Adrian, you know where
you're gonna be. I'm not, I'm
not, I'm not gonna.
Yeah I need to know where you're
at every minute of the day and
know all that just you know,
going in, we're gonna leave, let
us know.
Senator Gonzalez.
Um, Mr. Chairman, you might want
to mention how.
We're discussing amendments
right now. And so we know we're
not doing a junior, and we know
we have to open the budget up,
doesn't do.
Uh
We're gonna have to pick up.
And so
We don't know how we're gonna
handle that yet. We have some
thoughts.
We're not exactly sure. I had
discussions with leadership and
Senator, Senator Woods yet.
Uh, I kind of been
Laying my head on the pillow and
thinking how we're gonna and so
we'll, we'll try to, as soon as
we get
Somewhat of a plan identified.
We'll let everybody know how
we're gonna hand amendments.
Now, if you have a bill or
there's a bill coming.
council services sometimes I try
to get those amendments.
Uh, you know what a bills are
signed your staff should know
what bills are assigned to what
committees and where they're
coming.
So they come back out of
committee reports in their next
referrals and finance.
Sometimes, some point, some of
them may be, um, some may not be
on the calendar.
And so you guys are gonna have
to kind of track that on your
own until we send you the bills
that we're gonna hear the night
before, which you can
Get a hold of council. How late
are you there till?
Midnight or one
Mr. Chair, we are
And and so, yeah. And so if you
need an amendment, get it to us.
I, we tried everything about
amendments we want the day
before, so we know we have a
mistake in our amendments, and
then we got to go back and a in
and.
It's
Kind of a wishy-washy process.
OK, let me, let me finish with
Senator Gonzalez. So as soon as
we figure out how we're gonna
handle the amendment process.
On the budget.
We'll let you know on bills,
preferably the sooner the
better.
And that way, and if you're
gonna do an amendment on a bill,
please talk to the sponsor
before you present that
amendment, it just.
Creates a shock wave if if they
don't know that there's
amendment coming. It's out of
respect.
Um
There is Senate amendments of
the money out, do some other
stuff. We try to tell the
sponsor that we're gonna do
that, so they understand the
process, and what's happening,
OK. Any other questions?
It would
You know, I'd say again, and I
emphasize, I believe if you want
money for something, you should
run a bill.
It's very transparent.
Everybody can see it, Internet.
So if you have a special project
you want done.
Run a bill.
Just pretty damn simple.
That way, the whole world will
know.
Just my opinion.
What if we don't want the whole
world to know.
Well, then that's not
transparent.
Steinmo. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Pickybacking off of that. I was
just, I know things could be
last minute.
But I would just request to the
extent possible that when we see
major, we see.
The bills were being asked to
vote on the changes from House
Bill 2 for this committee, that
we can look at it one day, it
could be accessible to the
public and then we could maybe
vote on it the next day rather
than see it for the first time
have to vote on the public
doesn't know, we don't know that
also leads to problems, that
also leads to conflict and uh.
I think if we could just manage
the clock upfront with our staff
working with HAFC that we know
when we're getting it, we can we
can schedule this thing, right?
It doesn't have to be a train
wrecked, unplanned thing and
then.
Spreadsheets are there, we vote,
and the public has no idea what
we're voting on, and it's just.
That's all. That's just request,
Mr. Cha, just in the same vein
of asking for amendments and
things that are, you know, same
thing applies to all of us and
things we're asked to vote on.
You, you know, the problem
becomes this last year we had,
we were in committee and we're
hearing stuff and somebody's
texting HAFC.
And telling them what we're
doing, and then we're in this
string of messages like, we
don't approve of that and we
don't do that. We're on
committee.
You want to be on HFC? Go over
there.
Don't text those messages, um,
this is our responsibility in
the Senate.
We're here to protect the
Senate, and we're going to do
what we think's right in the
Senate. If, if people want to
text the house and tell them
what we're up to. I have a
