And then we figured out there
was an issue with the FIR.
The, the actual bill has to do
with the uh transparency of our
A liability and different suits
against the state so that it
brings forth the actual cost to
the state from each agency, each
one of these suits will be shown
the individually as a cost to
the state and the reason for it.
Is
So that we can
Figure out how to reduce some of
these civil liability suits that
were coming forth. So what I
need to do is change 11 item.
Uh, to increase, uh, uh, an
amendment that you see coming
forward in the amendment
essentially talks about changing
the, the level where we
Assemble a team to digest this.
To, uh, a million dollars
instead of 250,000.
OK.
Any questions, any objection to
Reconsideration.
Any questions on it. OK, well,
we're gonna hear that at the end
and we'll add that amendment for
you so there's no objection to
the reconsideration. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Senator Worth.
That's about
The plan, right? Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Yes, indeed, Senate Bill
81 involves
Uh, the fair plan, which is a
law we've had on the books here
in New Mexico since 1969.
Uh, this is the default, uh,
insurance plan for homeowners
and businesses that are denied.
Um, coverage.
Um, allowing them to have a base
level coverage with me today is
Representative Vincent, uh, from
the house who's a co-sponsor
along with Representative
Gonzalez, uh, and then Alice
Cain, who was the superintendent
of insurance and Christian
Meyers, who's the actuary.
An important
seat at the table here to
explain what we're doing and
putting together a plan that has
to make financial sense as well.
So this bill.
came to me in a little different
way than it came to
representative Vincent's.
Um
I represent a district here in
Santa Fe, uh, that.
Borders on wild lands areas and
we've had insurance companies
here denying coverage to
constituents in Santa Fe when I
presented uh the concept of what
we were proposing to a chamber
town hall. I had a farmer's
agent tell me that he was losing
$20 million worth of insurance
business at the end of the year.
Insurance companies are pulling
out because of the risk of
wildfire.
I'm gonna let Representative
Vinson speak specifically about
You know, the, the, the, the
tragic situation that's happened
in his district that puts him at
this table.
This bill, uh, increases the
limits and gives the, it creates
a revised board for the fair
plan. It's a broader board and
we can get into the specifics of
that.
But I think that the real gist
of it is that it increases the
potential limits right now, the
fair plan, uh, limits are
$350,000 for a residential
property and a million dollars
for a commercial property, this
proposal gives the board the
ability to increase those limits
up to a million dollars for a
residential property and $5
million for a commercial
property.
Uh, there is a key requirements,
uh, that's part of this new
insurance, which is hardening
and mitigation.
Uh, as we have talked about this
bill, Representative Vincent,
we're on the we were on the
radio together with the
superintendent on Sunday
morning, and one of the lessons
here is regardless of this, this
legislation.
Every one of us needs to be
aware of the risks that are out
there and when you live in an
interface with a more
Uh, forested area, you need to
take the efforts yourself around
your house to harden.
Uh, and then something that
representative Vincent will talk
about is how this bill fits into
a whole package of bills that
we're doing this session, uh,
because it's not just around
houses, it's also in our
forests, uh, and it's making
sure that we are thinning and
that we are being proactive
because if we're not, we're
going to be reactive.
Uh, and so that's the general
gist of what the bill does again
for those that are unable, I
think have been denied.
3 times, uh, for coverage, this
provides a default uh insurance
plan that they can get. Some
have asked, well, you know, is
the, is the money gonna be there
to cover this plan and we're
increasing the limits up to a
million dollars. The reason that
uh Mr. Myers is here to talk
about the actuarial actuarial
piece of this.
The higher premiums are gonna be
attributed to the higher policy.
And so there needs to be enough
money paid in so this thing is
sustainable on its own, but then
there is a default provision,
uh, if there's a catastrophe
that allows the insurance
companies to go out and be able
to assess to collect the
resources to do that, so I'm
happy to yield to uh
representative Vincent's and he
can explain why he's, he's
sitting at the table with
Senator Wirth.
Welcome to the Big Boy's table.
You, Mr. Cheer.
And you know, last time we saw
each other, you told me I didn't
say much and I come prepared to
say a lot and then you tell me a
little bit, so I'm confused by
your tactics, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you members of the
committee, um, I just wanted to
give you a little bit of
background on the Senate Bill
81, uh, property insurance
carriers are filing for
significant rate increases,
restricting New Mexico business
and non-renewing policies.
And the geographic regions in
the wildfire exposure area, the
Calf Canyon and the South Fork
and salt fires are recent events
that have impacted our state and
we anticipate the, the recent
events in Los Angeles to further
exacerbate the insurance
industry in New Mexico and Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee.
I'm just gonna tell you this and
this is coming straight from the
heart. I'm not saying that this
is the sexiest bill.
That we have to offer where we
just have to give.
Our
The people that live in my
district as well as in New
Mexico.
An option and right now there is
no option.
So, for example,
This is how bad this problem
starts to compound. So,
Without insurance, how do you
buy property?
How do you buy a house? You
can't do it. They won't give you
a loan.
Well, if you're a realtor in
Lincoln County.
And I'm just speaking for
Lincoln County. This is all
across New Mexico, but if you
are a real estate agent, how are
you selling property to someone
who can't get insurance, and
that means the financial
institutions are unable to loan
money, and this is a huge
problem and it all has to do
with.
Hate to just keep beating them
up, Mr. Chair, but the Forest
Service has got to start
managing these forests way
better than they're doing. We
can do better than what we're
doing.
And the insurance companies, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
what they're doing is they're
they're, they're taking a
satellite image of houses and if
you're in that high risk area,
you're not going to get
insurance and if you do get
insurance, it's gonna be very
expensive.
And so
What this what Senate Bill 81 is
gonna do is it's going to get
you an option until you can
finally get some insurance and
As soon as uh insurance
companies come back and they
start rewriting policy.
Then you're not eligible to be
on the, on the program anyways.
So, Mr. Chair, I'll, I'll leave
it at that.
Thank you. Just if I could, I
think it's important just for a
couple words from the
superintendent and something she
mentioned to me about how other
states are looking at the
package that we're doing this
session, I think would be
important for the committee to
hear.
Thank you. Uh.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for giving
me this moment. I want to
emphasize that this, this uh
fair plan is not a competition
for the private market. It's
really just supposed to be a
bridge until the private market
comes here. The second piece is
that uh we are, uh, with the
help of my chief actuary, uh,
and working with the fair plan
we are going to be charging
market premiums, not above
market right now, the fair plan
is below market, about 20%.
And then the question that keeps
on coming up is, uh, in
California, quote the fair plan
went bankrupt. Well the fair
plans can't go bankrupt. They
have this mechanism where if
there's not enough money built
up because of premium
assessment, a premium charge
that the uh industry is assessed
for the money to pay claims if
there's a large incident, and
then the industry in turn can go
out over the next few years.
Here we're providing for 3 and
put a surcharge.
On all its policy members within
the state and that's, that's
with premiums going up. I know
that's an issue, but we looked
at it and when it spread that
wide, I think we had one of the
fair plan, um, uh, we looked at
a a sample current fair plan
member and uh their, their
insurance is around 185,000 to
200 for each home, and that
would be about $5 per year for
the next 3 years, um, so I
think.
Those are my points. Thank you.
Just one final thing, Mr. Chair.
Section 12 is a $50 million
appropriation so that don't need
to be stripped, I think, is
this, I was gonna tell you we do
have to admit, so, uh, let us go
to the audience and then we'll.
and
We don't anybody in support in
the audience.
We'll take like 3 of them except
for the fire chiefs cause they
might pull the fire alarm on us.
One of them can come up, um,
we'll take 3 from the audience.
We don't have anybody on Zoom.
Did they raise their hands?
Anybody in opposition.
And we'll take the two that are
in opposition, is there
opposition on?
Alright
So we'll start, I guess let's
start in the room, those in
support will take 3, give me
about 1 minute apiece.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hannah Case Woods. I'm a
government relations specialist
for New Mexico counties. Our
executive committee voted to
support this bill because it is
a crucial
resource for our constituents
around the state, wildfire
property insurance is
increasingly becoming difficult
to access from community members
and counties around the state,
and this bill will provide an
option for them when they don't
have any other options. So we
urge you to support this bill.
Mm
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name's
Danielle Duran and I represent
Los Alamos County.
For his last um
5 or more years, we have
supported the idea of
legislation that would, uh,
effectively mitigate wildfire in
our state, being the victim of
many wildfires in the Hemez
Mountains and having homes burn
has meant that our last fire at
the Cerro Palato was denied some
fuel due to the severe burn scar
that still exists in those
mountains. We've had tens of
community members already
dropped by their insurance
companies. We know this is a
issue and the issue of housing
and the housing market in the
Los Alamos, Espanola, Santa Fe
area is also of great concern,
and I urge you to pass this
bill. Thank you.
Mm
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, uh, my name is Howard
Hutchinson, uh, I am a
registered lobbyist for the
coalition of Arizona-Mexico
counties or New Mexico counties
are fully support this
legislation.
And as a private landowner, uh,
in a wildland urban interface.
Um
I am
Apprehensive about what my
insurance uh agent is gonna tell
me when I come up for renewal
this year, so.
Uh, I'm, I'm hoping that I don't
get dropped or or if my rates
don't go up significantly.
But uh I think this will help,
uh, if that does occur. Thank
you.
the fire marshals didn't want to
come up.
He's been dying to testify for
weeks.
He's in here every day like just
waiting.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members. Yes, I think this plan
is important that we pass this
uh the insurance. One of the
things that we deal with and we
work with is our ISO rents
throughout the state. If we
can't get insurance for our
members out there are monies for
fire departments will be reduced
as you're aware, 3% of that
money.
From insurance premiums is what
points of our departments and if
we can't find our fire
departments, they can't respond.
So this is very important.
We heard you to pass this bill.
Thank you.
OK. We don't have anybody on
Zoom and support.
We have one.
Let's go to the one
Orlando or
Yolanda, you need to unmute
yourself and.
You have one minute.
Um, yes, thank you so much. Um,
I live in Marritas Canyon in San
Miguel County, um, my, um,
At my land was in the um Hermes
PA cannon fire right now it's
impossible to get insurance on
my home. I've been able to get
um flood insurance from the
federal government but not fire
insurance. Our communities are
already dying. We're unable to
get insurance, and this leaves
homeowners at vulnerable risk. I
urge you to pass this. Thank
you.
Thank you. We'll go to
opposition, I guess let's just
stay on Zoom. We'll take 3 in
opposition and who's the first
one?
have
one.
Carol, are you there?
You got one minute.
You have to unmute yourself.
Sorry?
Can you hear me now? Yep, we got
you now.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Carol Walker. I've served for 26
years as the executive director
of the Rocky Mountain Insurance
Association. We represent
property casualty insurers in
New Mexico. I also serve on the
board of the new Colorado Fair
plan, the first new fare plan in
the United States nearly 40
years. We've spent the past 3
years creating a new insurer of
last resort from the ground up,
and I don't firsthand, it's so
much harder and more expensive
than you can imagine. I would
strongly urge you to maintain
the fair.
New Mexico's had in place for
decades, work with them to
implement these changes that may
be needed to address the
expanded fire risk and insurance
availability challenges. This
will also best serve the current
fair plan policyholders. So
please today, I know I don't
have a lot of time. There are
major differences between this
bill and Colorado's new law,
even though they've drawn
comparisons, really don't
understand the new board, how it
would require finding the
individuals with unique
experience such as climate.
scientists, or reinsurer,
actuarial scientists. These
would all have to come from
outside of New Mexico and be
willing to sit on a volunteer
board. Again, I would urge you
to um work with the industry,
work with the current fair plan
board rather than trying to
stand up brand new fair plan
which will be expensive and
require major upfront
assessments to start the plan.
Thank you, uh, in the audience
now, take 3.
In opposition.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association
and Allstate Insurance Company
and the bill that you have in
front of you is a proposes a
fundamental shift in a program,
the fair plan that's been
functioning for 50 to 60 years
and been functioning effectively
at providing property and
casualty insurance for folks
that are on the lower end of the
spectrum with the coverage
limits at $350,000 now, the, the
fair plan is focused.
on those folks and has done a
really good job at providing
coverage with this bill, you're
talking about changing a board
that is run by insurers and
doing a good job and turning it
into more of a uh politically
appointed board. I think that
that is a, is a concern. The
other concern that I would have
is it appears that the $50
million is going to be stripped
off and the bill will simply be
an unfunded mandate to an entity
that is functioning in a very
appropriate manner in providing
coverage.
Uh, lastly,
I would note, you have to
understand the scale of the
numbers that you're dealing
with. The fair plan right now
has about 7000 folks that it
provides coverage to. The uptake
in this program could be
significant. Without the $50
million you could be setting the
fair fair plan on a path to
repeat what's happened in other,
other states like California and
where that fair plan has become
insolvent. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, um, members of the
committee, my name is Sarah
Barnes. I am a sitting member of
the New Mexico Fair Plan board.
I don't want to repeat the items
that have already been stated to
the committee, but I do want,
uh, the committee members to be
aware that one of the issues
that has been raised with this
piece of legislation is the
policy limits currently they're
at $350,000. I want the
committee to be aware that the.
The board is meeting tomorrow to
address this very issue. I can't
make any promises as to what
will happen at that meeting, but
I do want you to be aware that
that is going to happen. Um, I
do think that this bill is a
little premature because there
is a plan that is in place and I
believe that the board that is
currently functioning and has
been functioning since the late
60s is the best mechanism to
keep pushing New Mexico forward.
Thank you.
Um
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Ann
Conway, and I'm the registered
lobbyist for the State Farm
Insurance companies in New
Mexico, um, for full
transparency too, I have also
worked with the fair plan as
their defense attorney for 35
years in New Mexico. I would
just reiterate what's been said
by Mr. Moore and Ms. Barnes, the
current fair plan has worked
very well very well in meeting
the needs of New Mexico policy
holders to the extent that rates
have.
been lower than market on those
rates were subject to approval
by the Office of the
Superintendent. Um, certainly
the fair plan would want to keep
the rates um competitive and
then finally as a member of the
Fair plan board as property
casualty insurer in New Mexico
against whom assessments will be
made, we would also stand in
strong support of allowing the
current fair plan board to
continue its work to address the
problems with the sponsor.
answers that have been raised
with this as uh Miss Barnes said
they are meeting tomorrow to
address some of these very
issues. Thank you.
Thank you, we don't have any
other comment. We do have an
amendment center where you have
a copy of that amendment.
That is Henwood.
in what the amendment does, it
just uh strips the appropriation
on page 1 line 15, make it
appropriation, it strikes that.
Uh, and then renumbers the
sections.
And just, Mr. Chair, if I could
in response to Mr. Moore's
comment about stripping the
appropriation, he certainly
understands that in House Bill 2
there's gonna be money and I
understand that there is money
potentially there for the fair
plan so that you all are gonna
see that coming across. We don't
pass bills with standalone
appropriations. So just to be
clear for the folks that are
listening, that's why it's being
stripped.
it
Emotion to adopt the amendment
for discussion purposes of
motion by Senator Brant second
by Senator Lanier.
Any objection to that motion.
Questions on the amendment seem
none can have a motion to adopt
the amendment.
in a 2nd place in Padilla, any
objection to that motion.
And then they, we're back on the
bill.
Mendon Milson or uh questions
from committee members.
In Padilla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you sponsors, um, and, and
superintendent.
had a question on the uh
So exactly how does the board,
does the board oversee
everything that happens in this
industry or are there other um
Boards or commissions that also
interact with rates and rate uh
rate decisions and
I guess I didn't even know this
board existed, just so you know,
I didn't even realize that, so
Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla,
members of the committee, uh,
no, this is just focused on the
fair plan, uh, and, uh, the
board doesn't do everything.
There's some oversight that the
uh OSI has and we have a member
on the board, uh, I, I would
just want to add.
two things. Uh, one that, uh,
the idea for raising the limits
frankly came from representative
Vincent when he sent a letter to
the uh current plan board in
August, uh, my, my office
started looking at it and went
to the fair plan board in
September asking them to this
current board to raise the
limits. We've been working with
them, actually, we've been
paying for their advisors, Guy
Carpenter, to give them
background in addition with
working with my chief actuary,
uh, so.
Uh, we, uh, we had hoped that
the fair plan board would have
moved, uh, between September and
October, so we could start
issuing policies in Lincoln
County because we know how
desperate the situation is
there's that people can't
rebuild and uh frankly, uh, uh.
We don't understand why they
haven't moved. The other piece
about the composition of the
board, uh, looking at other
states, there's no other the,
the major groups that I've
looked at, uh, there's no, I
don't see another state where
the insurance companies are 100%
in charge of the board as a
matter of fact in in Colorado,
the new board that's been
discussed, the governor names
the members of the board,
including Carol Walker.
So Madam Chair, uh sorry, Mr.
Chair and and Madam
Superintendent. So on the board,
um.
How did we wind up with a
situation where the, basically
the insurance companies are
overseeing themselves is what
it, it, it's what it sounds like
based on what you're saying.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Senator Padilla,
that happened in 1969, way
before my time.
Hm
Very Interesting, um, and so I
think frankly just like you,
people haven't focused on this
because there hasn't been a need
for it, uh, and, uh, talking
about this year, uh, the board
in response to Lincoln County,
uh, there was an assessment of
the industry, both up there was
a large hail storm and then
there was the fires in Riodos
so, and there was a $10 million
assessment on the industry and
then as I think we pointed out,
the industry will then go out
and surcharge all their policy
members probably within the next
year.
you.
In the chair and and the
sponsors and and maybe
superintendent, um.
So on the rate or on sorry
denials. Is there a record
keeping system to know like how
many
folks have not been able or have
been denied insurance or not
been able to or have had theirs
canceled.
Uh
Mr. Chair, um, members of the
committee senator, we are doing
data calls for that, uh,
initially the industry is only
required to tell us when they're
leaving the state. We're now
requiring them to tell us when
they uh give up a policy line,
but we have put out a data call
and frankly, the problem with
some of the data calls that the
OSI puts out as we did, we
didn't have subpoena power to
really get the industry to
provide us with information, uh,
it is accurately and
sufficiently as we need and
we're in the process of, of the
asking the legislature to pass
that.
as well.
And so, um, with the folks that
were able to get policies, can
you give me any data on what the
increases have been for those
individuals. Mr. Chair, uh,
committee Senator, can I add my
chief actuary give you the uh.
The issues and it's Christian
Meyers and he's been the chief
actuary with us for 10 months
and comes from industry.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes, uh, I
review all the rate filings um
from the industry, uh, on the
PNC side, particularly for
homeowners since 2022, uh, our
top 10 carriers have taken
between 50 and 60% of rate
increase, uh, that's not
specific to the policies on the
fair plan. That's just
throughout the state in
aggregate.
Over the last 3 years, there
have been significant increases
in chair, can you just tell me,
uh, if you want to give me just
an average, what is a policy
like this? What did it cost
before and what does it cost?
What it's it really costing now
on average?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, so you're
asked, I just want to clarify
the question so you're asking
what the premium.
For someone on this the fair
plan.
Is before and after. Yeah. You
said there was a 50 or 60%
increase. I think in my scenario
like at full value of a home at
350 on the fair that currently
exists and what that cost is, I
think that's what.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm a
little bit embarrassed. I think
I would need my computer, uh.
I'm sorry, I just cannot
remember what the rate is per
1000. There's essentially a
Um
Yeah, there's a cost, uh, up to
the first, I think it's 200,000
and then there's an additional
charge per $1000 of coverage
over that, um, and I, and that's
gone up 50 or 60% on the full
amount or on, on, on only a
portion of it, uh, Mr. Chairman,
that, so the 50 or 60 is for the
uh the industry, so I'm talking
about the average rate increase
that State Farm, Allstate,
Liberty have taken for people
that are not in the fair plan.
Um, those rates have gone on up
significantly in addition to
that, those companies are
restricting new business,
they're non-renewing policies,
uh, really aggressively trying
to manage their cat exposure,
um, at the same time, the fair
plan is available for currently
for policies below $350,000.
I believe the rate increase that
the fair plan took last year was
only a 10% rate increase.
And Mr. Chair, if I may, I want
to give you an example on the
other side, so a businessman.
In Ridoso
Reached out to me. He was paying
$2000 a year. He's paying $7000
a year now.
And if we don't get the Forest
Service to act.
And start thinning things out.
And who wants to take the risk?
Joey, do you happen to know that
rating scale?
OK.
Mm
But you know, on the other side
of it, Mr. Chair, I, I guess
I'm, I'm also concerned um with
this have insurance companies
leaving the state if we require
these, these provisions to
members, I think everybody's
raising their hand to answer it,
so somebody.
Superintendent, why don't you
answer that question?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, no,
if, if, if, if other states are
indicative of what occurs when a
fair plan is put in place.
Nobody leaves the state. This
really should be a bridge, at
least this is what the agents in
the local area tell us because
we have spoken to them,
especially in Lincoln County.
They will be able to take their
clients who can't get insurance,
bring them to the fair plan, get
a smaller commission, and then
when the private industry comes
back, they'll be able to put
their uh clients back.
With the with the companies that
they represent.
OK, thank you. I think I've
heard enough. Thank you.
Senator Woods.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
OK.
Let me tell you right up front,
and, and we've talked already,
but right up front, my concern
is the overall liability to the
state that this can bring
forward.
OK.
That's just the, the overall
Part of it. Now I know answers
you're going to say, but let me,
let me tell you, let me ask some
questions here.
So that we'll both be on the
same page.
OK.
First
What is the current reserves of
the fair plan, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, committee, Senator
Woods, uh, the Fairplane doesn't
quite work like a regular
insurance company with reserves.
It's, it's sort of an
underwriting association so it
doesn't have the reserves like
you would find in a traditional
company, uh, the way money is
built up to pay claims is by the
premiums that are being paid in
and after the Lincoln, uh, you
know, the, uh, Lincoln, uh, and
Rioso fires, uh, they had, they
had no money to pay claims and
they had to go out to the
insurance industry for.
assessment.
I, I guess I want to clarify
again and I, I, if there's a, if
there's a misunderstanding, I'd
really like to, to make sure we
are on the same page. There,
there is no liability to the
state for doing this, the way
this works is it's, it's funded,
it's, it's, uh, the, the
premiums are, are supposed to
cover claims when the premiums
built up, you know, they pay
claims out of it. It's the and
it's not a capital requirement
like you have in traditional
companies, whatever money is
theirs.
used to pay claims if the money
isn't there, just what happened
this year and after the Riodoso
fires an assessment went out to
the industry. The industry put
in for the fires, I think around
$8 million to pay the claims,
and now they are, they are gonna
be permitted under this
mechanism to go out and probably
next year and put a surcharge on
all the policy owners that they
have currently within the state.
So uh it's, I, I guess I'm a
little
Confused, and this is the way
every fair plan works.
It's, it's never a liability to
the state.
In, in the other states.
Well, on online.
And the line that we struck out
about the $50 million
appropriation. Why in the world
do we need any kind of
appropriation if there's no
liability to the state, Mr.
President, Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods, committee members. This
is the story of no good deed
goes unpunished.
Uh, we were trying to put a $50
million backstop in because we
knew we were hoping there.
Based on the need, we thought
there'd be an uptick in the
number of policyholders and the
amounts and it was supposed to
be a backstop if we had another
large incident before the
premium could, could build up to
pay for those incidents, uh,
and, and part of the 50 million,
40 that was probably gonna be a
backstop and we assume they do
assessments, so hopefully it
would be paid back. The other
piece was 10 million we were
looking for, uh, for, uh,
helping people who couldn't
afford the mitigation, which
we're told.
by uh the experts IBHS, which is
the standards we're talking
about, um, uh.
To pay the 500 to $7000 that's
estimated to fully harden the
home, which means the 5 ft of
To pay the 500 to $7000 that's
estimated to fully harden the
home, which means the 5 ft
clearance around the house,
which means a class A roof and
it means vents, uh, um, uh,
wiring on the ts so that the
embers can't get into the attic
and and caused the fire, which
was a big cause in the LA fires.
So mister
You bring in a lot of questions
when you say that.
So one more question, but before
I get to that, I'll probably
forget about it, so it's OK. But
before I get to that,
You have said several times here
that there would be an
assessment on policyholders.
For for uh not on policyholders
but insurance companies that
carry a, a business in New
Mexico to backfill any losses of
the fair plan that the premiums
didn't cover because we don't
have a reserve. See, there's my
problem.
I'm assuming
The premium creates a research.
And with the reserve.
You want to put uh $50 million
deal in there to backfill, to
start with because
We're gonna have to sell new
premiums. We're gonna have to,
to, to do a new actuarial, uh,
to make sure we have enough.
Money
And, and not a reserve fund, but
a fund.
That will cover
The risk involved.
In case of a catastrophic event.
In my close anywhere in here
Mr. Chair, a couple things. I, I
think it's important for our
actuary to weigh in and I really
appreciate his testimony and the
tax committee about the premiums
that need to be charged. I mean,
this needs to be a system and
that that has a sufficient
premium to cover the potential
loss and that's why he's gonna
look at that, I think that.
The backstop here.
I mean, I think it would be
fantastic if this legislature
put in a backstop here to help.
What is a crisis?
And I, I can speak as as
representing a district that
hasn't experienced it, but when
you hear the horror story.
Of what Representative Vincent's
constituents are dealing with.
I mean, this is a crisis that
all of us in this state are
gonna face because when these
insurance companies start
pulling out and there's not a
plan like this as a backup.
Again, we our constituents who
are in a place where they can't.
Sell their homes, they can't get
financing on their homes. Uh,
they can't rebuild their homes
and, you know, I might yield to
to Representative Vincent on
this, so.
I think your questions are spot
on and we've got a real
Kind of crisis situation here
and this, this plan that you
know was never designed to be
for the lower end of the
spectrum. I disagree again with
Mr. Moore about that. It's just
the premiums were never raised.
It was created in 2000, 1969, I
think the starting cap was
250,000 bucks. If we figured out
what that was worth today. This
is probably a pretty realistic
number, but the pre the actuary
has to be sufficient. People
need to pay a sufficient amount
into this fund.
But you're on to something. I
mean, I, I think that the system
is set up, the fair plans across
the country are set up to allow
an assessment and I think it
might be good for.
Uh, either our actuary or the
superintendent to explain what
the assessment that went out
actually meant because it wasn't
a huge number going out when you
spread it around to the
policies, it wasn't like a huge
number, uh, but I think that.
In the best case scenario, we
would be put in creating a
backstop fund, but I get that.
You know, we're not making that
decision here today. There is
money, as I understand it,
coming over from in House Bill
2.
To do something along these
lines which piece of it is, I
think we need to see what that
language looks like in House
Bill 2 and, and, and perhaps
this committee is going to want
to increase that number if we
can figure out where the
capacity is that's left after
the house is done with their
side of it.
OK, let, let me ask you one
other question.
You keep coming back to the fact
that
There will be a assessment.
On in insurance.
And on page.
10 of the bill.
You actually address the
assessment of fees.
And
You know, it says the board may
collect fees on member insurers,
and I'm assuming.
Uh
I'm assuming that is talking
about.
Is that?
Actually talking about the
The
People who sailed in the
businesses that sell insurance,
is that where you're talking
about that, or is this?
The policyholders of the fair
plan. What, what is this talking
about right here? Explain.
This, this part because down
here below and and in particular
on line 24 where it says a
member insured.
shall not increase premiums
based on a fee assessed pursuant
of this section.
That in particular is what I'm
wondering about.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, Senators, if I do the
last question first, what we're
talking about is that the
insurer can't raise its premium.
It can do a surcharge that is
only there for a few years to
recover the assessment, but
there's not a permanent increase
in premium. We did go through an
assessment process with this,
with this fair plan after the uh
the Riodoso fires and it was
about $8 million frankly, from
what I understand from the
director of the Fair plan, they
ran they
had no money to pay claims, and
I think State Farm wrote the
first big check to have to help
them.
Uh, pay claims, uh, as you can
see for 20 years, this, this
fair point hasn't had any
assessments, so it, it worked,
but the, the, the, we have only
I think 7000 policyholders. We
haven't had new, many new
policies written since the
Riodoso fires, the, the number
was 250,000 until about a year
and a half, maybe 2 years ago
now when my predecessor went to
the board and asked them to
increase the number from 250 to
350.
And still the average number of
uh home we're looking at when I
looked at each county is around
180,000 and under 200,000. When
we spoke to one of the uh agents
in Lincoln County. She said she
sometimes uses this as a
supplement where she can't get
insurance to help people, uh,
knowing they don't have the full
insurance, but at least there's
something there, uh, so the, uh,
so the premiums that the fair
plan people pay, stay within the
group, but it's not to.
level one, I guess my chief
actuary can speak to this. When,
when you set up an insurance
company, there's usually a large
capital requirement. That's not
the way the fair plan works.
It's supposed a little bit of
pay as you go and if there's a
large incident, which we hadn't
had for 20 years, you know, then
the assessment process goes in,
and to give you a and what
happened in Massachusetts, if
that, if you'd be interested,
Massachusetts, uh, has a fair
plan and uh they were very
concerned about hurricanes.
hitting Cape Cod and along that
area, it hasn't come in 20
years, uh, the fair point gave
back, we were, we had the former
Massachusetts director here
yesterday they gave back 600
million to the industry based on
the premiums that have been
accepted because they didn't
have an incident. So that's,
that's how this mechanism works.
OK, so
So the question is,
At the point in time.
When the fair plan
Has got no
fun because it's not a reserve.
And their claims.
Where does the money come from
to pay the claims, Mister Chair.
Mr. Chair, committee, Senator
Woods, where it claimed from
this year in June and July was
from the industry members, State
Farm is one of the largest
member of one of the largest
carriers here, and they wrote
the first big check that got
there then in within 24 hours.
Now they will have the right to
go out and do a statewide
assessment of their
policyholders to recover that
money within the next year or so
you're you're saying that
Under this plan,
You can get a immediate money.
From a state farm.
Because you don't have
The money to cover this.
So not only State Farm but
other, other industries, other
sales.
Insurance companies in the
state, and it's me so that you
can
And
That's where it's always been.
That's the way it worked the
first time we've had an
assessment in 20 years, yes.
They sent a check overnight. OK.
Another question.
On this, Monsieur.
We understand the fair plan
worked.
You had 2.
Degrees of coverage.
If you were so close to a fire
station or a fire hydrant.
You would be able to insure up
to 350,000 if you were further
out than that, you was inured to
250,000, Mr. Chair is that
correct on the present, the
present, fair play.
Mr. Chair, committee members, my
expert who's also on the board,
uh, tells me that is correct.
OK, so what I'm getting at.
It is the same requirements
going to be on any of this
policy today or we're going to
offer different coverages
according to how much fire
protection or how close there is
to fire protection, or are we
going to have a sweeping
Million dollar coverage to
anybody that applies, Mister
Chair.
Mr. Chair, committee member
Senator Woods, we are going to
have underwriting guidelines
that will be put in place by the
board, uh, which is the way it's
done now, um, they have a number
of underwriting guidelines, uh,
insofar as this, this, the uh
this condition of the home, uh,
the ISO issues, but here we're
gonna be focusing much more on
mitigation, and we're gonna be
requiring the mitigation to be
put in place within a year,
which again,
doesn't guarantee that your
house will not, will not burn,
but it lowers the risk by 45%,
we're told by industry experts.
I don't want to keep asking a
lot of questions. I know that
I'm hogging the time here and I
apologize, but I don't mean to.
I don't mean to hammer on you
guys, but
I've got just enough information
in my brain to be dangerous.
So, um,
I, I, I, I understand what
you're trying to do.
I worry about the, the
Adequacy of the actuarial
tables.
The, we keep talking mitigation.
You and I both know the main
risk is out in my world.
The hail and went.
That's been the biggest losses
we've had in the state, even
though the fires make all the
news.
The wind and rain and hail is uh
is the damages that we're paying
off on. So there's actually
I shouldn't say no mitigation
that can be done.
Good.
It's not a fact of uh sweeping
the pine needles there, but it
is a fact that wildfires are in
that country also, so there is
some mitigation that can be
done. But so,
You know, I, I understand.
All of it, um,
What you're trying to do, but
uh, uh, I, I still, you know,
even though you say that you're
gonna collect from insurance
companies right now.
That's the law.
And that means that you have to
make sure that they have
adequate reserves to do that and
that's part of your job too.
And the governor personally told
me that you were the smartest
lady in the, in the world, and I
believe that she has never lied
to me before.
I lattery will get you nowhere.
Mr. Ger, I just wanna, uh, you
know, uh, again,
I, I've been on a big deal about
liability to the state this
year.
And
And though I had it's supposed
to work and I know insurance
companies.
Have big reserves.
I know all that, but I'm still
concerned.
That
We're trying to get into the
insurance business. One last
question, Mr. Chair. It has been
told to me.
That the uh insurance companies
themselves will not offer.
A
Policy like this, equal to this,
that
Uh, this is a non
This is a
This policy
Won't be used for most mortgages
because it's not a replacement
cost policy and most mortgages
will not accept that.
And so
It surprises me that the
insurance companies out there.
Would not offer a policy much
like this.
Um
But they wouldn't have the
ability to assess their brothers
to cover losses.
So
That makes it quite an advantage
for this policy if we miss the
actuarial.
Deal.
So they don't have that.
They don't have that advantage,
so are we giving the state an
unfair advantage, why wouldn't
we just require them.
To offer this policy.
Mr. Chair
Yeah, uh, somewhere there's a
question.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
uh, let me answer one question
about the hail risk, uh, in
mitigation of the big uh
mitigation of.
Action homeowners can take is
have a class A roof and a class
A roof is also something that
you need for wildfires. So, and
we do understand and that you're
making a very good point and,
and it, it's true that.
The, the sad drama of a wildfire
is much stronger than the hail,
but the hail is a higher risk to
insurance companies. Second,
this is a narrow.
Coverage. It's just for certain
perils, uh, so we try to make it
narrow because of it is going to
be, you know, it is, it's
supposed to be uh the policy of
last resort. We're not supposed
to compete with the industry and
you only get in into this plan
if you've been rejected by the
industry. Uh, so that's one
other piece, uh, insofar as the
solvency of the insurance
companies, uh, obviously, uh you
have to understand that
solvency, you have to have
solvent.
companies and then you can
protect the consumers without
solving companies that doesn't
work, uh, that frankly is why
the insurers are raising their
rates so high because they feel
that this is a, a, a tough risk.
So, uh, the requirements for,
for solvency our our nationwide,
and we are following them and
that's one of the reasons we've
actually beefed up our financial
regulation group last year with
the help of this committee.
But uh madam.
Madam Superintendent.
That's your job also to make
sure premiums.
Are not raised above the
necessity to cover their cost,
so.
It's hard for me to buy that.
They're automatically raising it
to get rich.
Because
You're watching over.
Yeah
Is it,
Mr. Chair, committee members,
Senator, I, I can also have my
chief actuary describe how he
reviews rates and how that they
have to be actuarially supported
and we've been actually very
diligent about that. So can I
turn that over to my chief
actuary.
Mr. Chairman, I think that's a
good point. I do want to clarify
that I don't think
Companies are raising rates by
these numbers because they want
to get rich.
Um, the data that they're
submitting as documentation in
their rate filings does support
these sort of rate increases.
We've seen that since the start
of the pandemic, uh, supply
chain pressure has increased the
cost of replacing homes. On top
of that, we've seen uh
You know what, for whatever
reason, uh, there has been an
uptick in uh wildfire frequency,
um,
I guess prior, don't want to say
too much, I mean, there's been
so much growth and increased
sophistication around wildfire
modeling in recent years.
Um, you know, we had the Oakland
Hills Fire in the, in the early
90s and then this long drought,
and then uh starting in, you
know, 2017, we just had this
significant year after year, uh,
increased wildfire activity and
companies are recognizing that
in their rates. So when I review
a rate filing, I look at the
historical data, we projected
into the future, and if the
expected losses, plus the
expenses are
short of what the premium is
they're currently charging, we
allow the company to charge more
so that they can collect enough
to pay for their expenses and
losses. They're not charging
extra, they're charging the
amount that they think is
correct to pay out the losses
and expenses in any given year.
And, and that is the way I
understand it, and that should
be the proper way to do it,
that's consumer protection,
that's protecting industry,
that's a good middle ground.
What I worry about.
And again, can an insurance
company sell a life policy to
the fair plan. Is there any
reason that can't sell that
policy, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
Senator Woods, the way this
works, the we only offer a
policy when the insurance
industry doesn't want to offer
one, they could cut any the
industry could come into the
market tomorrow and offer a
similar plan like this and we
would approve it, but they, but
they haven't. I, I know, uh, uh.
Representative Vinson has been
talking to a number of industry
represent, you know,
representatives, and he may want
to respond.
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods.
I'm just like you, I don't want
to stay in the insurance
business. I want traditional
insurance to come to the table.
And the only reason I'm sitting
here at this table.
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods is
because
Our folks in Lincoln County want
to come home and they've been
burned out since June.
And they cannot get a policy.
They live, I don't know if
anybody's ever lived with their
kids or had their parents live
with them, but they've had
enough.
And they want to come home and
they just keep telling me, uh,
you know, Harlan, I wanna come
home.
But right now there is not an
option there.
Now, I am a fan of the
traditional insurance.
I want them at the table.
And, and I'm willing to push
against the Forest Service to
get them to do their job.
And do it in an A plus fashion,
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods to
where we can take this risk away
from our traditional insurance
and they can come back and then
we're not having this
conversation anymore.
But right now, when you look in
in Lincoln County and there's,
there's worse places.
Um, I'm, I'm concerned about
cloudcroft right now. And when
you drive over there, you just
go and look at that place and if
the, if the fire starts in the
wrong spot.
We're gonna be in deep trouble.
And, and what is all this
revolve around?
The Forest Service.
And not only that, Mr. Chair,
they want more.
They want more land.
And they can't even cover what
they have.
And I, and that's what I do, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, I laugh
because they can't take care of
their business, but I think as a
body.
If we, if we press them and we
open up.
timber industry
And we start doing our due
diligence and pulling.
That timber out of the forest
and instead of there being 11,
you know, 1000 to 1100 trees on
an acre of land.
We need to reduce it down to
about 50 trees.
And when we have those fires,
you've just, you've taken all
the fuel away and they're gonna
be low impact fires. They're
actually probably gonna be good
for the environment. So,
I just wanted to make sure that
I was super clear. I don't want,
I don't want the fair plan as
much as anybody. I want
traditional insurance to come
back and I think if we pull,
pull it all together, we can get
them to come back to the table.
Yeah.
You know,
We've talked this before.
You know, why in the hell did
they ever take the goat and the
sheep off of the forest.
You want to cut to the
underbrush cheaply.
Sorry, Mister Chair.
I guess I'm done.
And Mr. Chair,
Thank you for cowboys.
Cowboys are the best stewards of
the land in my opinion.
I thought sheep herders were.
In tom and is it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Woods, Senator Padilla, you've
asked really good questions in
about half of my, at least, um,
I heard you say several things
about the current fair plan and
that board.
And I feel like I'm at a
disadvantage, especially as a
new member, learning about all
of this for the first time. Is
there someone that
On the current board that we
could ask specific questions
too. Is that allowed, Mr. Chair?
Cause I feel like they, you all
have represented a certain
picture of the current board and
I don't, I don't know whether
it's true or not.
I mean,
Mr. Chair, uh, senator, uh, I
have a member of my staff that
was put on the board by my
predecessor when they raised the
350,000. You also have the chair
of the board here, so you have
both people.
That you can speak with, um,
Melissa Robertson is here if
you'd like to.
I'd like to ask her some
questions. Which one do you
want, the chair or a member?
The chair.
Melissa, right?
Um,
Mr. Chair, Senator Melissa
Robertson is a member of my
staff, the, I don't know where
the chair is. She was here
before. You got one other person
raising their head that's a
board member, but
I don't just come when you come
up because I don't know where.
I don't know what's
I thought that was Melissa, but
OK.
No one wants to be the chair.
This is
the plan
the
underwriting association, um,
this, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Annalisa
Cisneros, and I'm the speak up
just a little bit.
OK, so I'm trying to rack my
brain after all of this
conversation and remember all
the things they've said, but I
do remember they said they
either had a meeting with you or
some kind of correspondence with
you or the board as a whole, um,
Is there something that you all
refuse to do. I mean, you're
talking about, I think I heard
someone say tomorrow there's a,
a vote or something is coming up
with the current fair plan board
about rate increases. Has there
been a history of a back and
forth on that Mr. Cha, members
of the committee.
I don't believe there's been a
refusal, I think what the fair
plan board has done, and I'm
not, I
I'm not a member of the board
again.
Um, is do the due diligence of
getting the information that was
needed in order to make the
changes that were requested.
And so, in doing so, getting the
reports.
And the analytics done for it.
And you all have been in, Mr.
Chair, you all have been doing
that?
Or
It was requested of you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
yes, it was not requested. It
was uh.
It was a request of the board to
do so, not a request from the
OSI.
OK. And
Mr. Chair, have you come?
Forward with all of that
information.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the information is
going to be discussed tomorrow.
At the board meeting where they
will discuss the
Results of the tests that have
been done, and also discuss any
coverage changes.
And Mr. Chair, how, how long did
it take to do that and is it a
standard length of time? When
was it when was it requested?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the New Mexico Fair
Plan board received the official
proposal from the superintendent
at the end of November. From
there, the request has been made
to get the reports from um Guy
Carpenter to do the analytics on
catastrophe modeling and also
further information to know what
type of capital that the New
Mexico property insurance would
need in order to do a change of
this magnitude.
OK, I
So Mr. Char is at a fair amount
of time for it sounds like
that's a lot of work and I'm
gonna account for holidays over
that time period. Is it, is that
a reasonable amount of time from
end of November till through
tomorrow to have put that
together, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, I, I believe
it was in order to get the
information needed for the
analytics. I believe we received
the information in a fair amount
of time, um.
I, I
Again, I'm not here to put a
position on the bill. I'm just
getting the information, but I
believe it was a fair amount of
time.
Sure. Um, so, Mr. Chair, and
from your, what you've heard
today, and I can't remember all
the things they've said about
the history of the board. I, I
don't know any of it. Um, is
there anything that you feel we
need clarification on, uh,
mister.
Chairs and members of the
committee, I would like to just
do a little bit of clarification
on the process of an assessment.
When an assessment is deemed
necessary, the board comes
together and votes on that. From
there, I do have to send out
letters to all of the
corresponding companies along
with figuring the exact amounts
that they owe based off of their
percentage in the state. Those
letters go out giving them 30
days to make payments. Um, it is
not an overnight payment that is
sent. The overnight payment that
the superintendent is referring
to is when the fair plan did run
out of money in um July.
I actually contacted one of our
investments and was able to sell
portions of the investment to,
in order to get the money, that
is the money that came to the
fair plan.
To help pay for the claims that
were outstanding.
OK. And Mr. Chair, is there
something in the history with
this board, how it's been
functioning for all these years.
That did or didn't happen that
got us to the place where now
we're talking about politically
appointed.
board
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, I don't know where, I
guess.
It
The disagreement was that the
board was doing.
Anything that they weren't
supposed to. I feel that they
were getting the information
necessary in order to make an
educated decision. I, I.
would pass that along to the
superintendent to answer.
OK, thank you. And
I think I'm done asking you
questions specifically you're
off the hot seat. Um, so,
Mr. Chair, ma'am, I heard you
say earlier, um,
With the 10, with the $50
million appropriation, that's no
longer, but we think it's coming
over in HB 2. We don't know
exactly what that figure is in
the budget. Um, you said
hopefully, if there's a
catastrophic, if and when
there's a catastrophic event,
you said, hopefully it'd be paid
back. And I don't like hopes and
dreams. I like plans and facts
and accountabilities, so how
does that hopefully get paid
back.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
hopefully was a misstatement. It
would be paid back the way we
were going to set this up. I
guess I would say hopefully, if
you recall what the chair of the
board said is hopefully
tomorrow, uh no guarantees what
they would take uh action and um
uh.
I, I would say, uh, in my board
member is here if you'd like to
hear some of her.
The information that she gave us
when she came back from board
meetings and what she, what
happened when she went with the
former superintendent to try to
get the limits raised that this,
this board, uh, we went to the
board with, we thought a fair uh
to discuss a proposal in
September, and we were willing
to stay there the whole day, uh.
They let us, uh, it was an
outline to have started a
dialogue, uh, the dialogue
didn't really happen, uh, we
sort of left the meeting. We
went back and uh they keep on
saying a formal proposal didn't
come until November. All the
elements of the proposal were in
a presentation, a slide
presentation that I made in
October. We thought that would
be more clear to the board
members about exactly what we
were asking for and then
they're, they're their counsel,
I think, came back and said,
Well, give me a formal proposal.
We thought the presentation was
a formal proposal, and then we
sent them another piece. So this
is all the elements of this have
been discussed, uh, in, you
know, had been a.
Presented to the board, uh, in,
in, uh, I, I guess in the full
in the slide presentation in
October and again I know
Senator, um, it's Representative
Vincent sent them a letter, uh,
in August asking for them to
raise the limits, and they got
a, he got a response prepared by
their general counsel, who also
was one of the lobbyists that
spoke here basically saying
they, they weren't able, they
would have a meeting. The
meeting that they had was the
one that we went to and made the
first.
Proposal about these are the
elements that we'll be thinking
about. I will also say that
there is no other fair plan that
I know of where the industry is
100% in charge. It's usually
50/50 and they say they
politicized it. I'm, I'm open to
whomever wants to help us
appoint who should be there, but
we do want industry
representatives on the board and
we were looking for experts
because of the sophistication
that's coming through on the cat
modeling and what has to be, you
know.
What
The climate shift.
Climate shift.
Yeah, financial and actuarial
expertise.
The, the people that we have on
the board know the industry, but
they know it much more in the.
Retail dealing with the
policyholders. What we're
dealing with now, I think is
what Senator Woods keeps on
pointing out what's going on
with the modeling, what kind of
premiums should be paid? What
kind of sophistication, uh, I
would say that until my chief
actuary came, we weren't looking
at the fair plan as close. I
didn't with the, the OSI didn't
quite have the expertise, uh,
which, which Mr. Myers brings to
the table about looking at the
premiums and the actuarial
pieces.
And in addition, Melissa
Robertson, who is a member of
the board, we've been learning a
lot about mitigation in the last
year and she's been incredibly
active, not just only on the
board, but, but going out and,
and working with the other fair
plan boards, including Colorado
and, and Carol Walker.
So
in my
And
Mr. Chair
Am I remembering this right? Did
Carol Walker from Colorado,
she's appointed by the governor.
Did she say for us not to do
this, that it's very expensive,
so
Someone appointed by the
governor in our neighboring
state, Colorado, who has dealt
with many of these challenges
and will continue to, um,
Why is she warning us? It kind
of reminds me of, now I wasn't
in this, in this uh body then
but when we passed um legalizing
marijuana. I know that our
neighbors in Colorado came in
mass. Many agencies and warned
of some of the problems that
this state would, would see and
realize because of what they had
done and some of the mistakes
that they had made, um, and how
they rolled that out. Um.
So I'm, I'm wondering, this
seems very rushed to me. I, I'm
not.
I understand this is a horrific
situation. These are New
Mexicans that are in trouble,
right? There's not a perfect
solution because this is just
not perfect. It's Mother Nature
that we're dealing with, but it
sounds like you haven't even had
a lot of time in conversations,
um, with the current fair plan
board, um,
To me as a businesswoman, if I
were signing a contract, I would
never consider a slide deck, a
formal proposal or contract. Um,
I never put my signature on
that, I would consider that a
first conversation, a deep dive,
which it sounds like you all
have just started in the last
year doing a deep dive in a very
complicated serious situation.
And I'm wondering why it's just
this dive into something that
Seems unusual to me. I think
that we have a history in the
state of when we continue to
Put layers of bureaucracy on
departments when we
take private industry out of
things and put the state in
control. I don't know that we
have like the best track record.
So why are you not, are we not
holding the current fair plan
board accountable? Are there no
safeguards for New Mexicans.
A lot of questions in there, uh
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, we have
been trying to reach out to the
fair plan. Melissa has been
going to those board meetings.
We have not been able to really
in, in my view, come to a
meeting of the minds, uh, I, I
guess I'm a little surprised
that the meeting is going to be
tomorrow and our hearings today
and things couldn't be done
sooner. I would say Carol Walker
has, has two roles. She is on
the board of the Fair plan.
She's also
uh, representative of the Rocky
Mountain
industry, and I think that's
really as she's representing
herself. The second at the 2nd
point is our fair plan is
already in place. They've
started from nothing, so we
already have a history of how to
operate, uh, and I will, uh, you
know, and I, you know, very.
I know the commissioner in
Colorado very well and uh we, we
are on the same committee at the
NAIC, uh, and, uh.
He certainly thinks a fair plan
uh with this kind of limits is
what he's asked for in his
state.
So, again, they're starting from
scratch. We already have a
process in place. We've had it
in place since 1969, a very
different situation.
In Mr. Chair, but we still need
another $50 million.
So man, Mr. Chair and senator.
We we've got a crisis here.
And I've got constituents that
are being denied we've got a
plan that.
Been there. This is, we created
this 1969 with $250,000 caps,
it's a $350,000.
That is not a realistic number.
I think we need to be careful
here about what's kind of also
happening, which is a little bit
of a slow play.
And yes, they're meeting and
certainly would pay attention to
what they're gonna do. We're in
a 60 day session Representative
Vincent has folks that can't
move home.
I've got people who are their
policies are being terminated.
And I just think
You know, I would suggest and I
would ask that we have 2 tracks
here.
And certainly we're gonna pay
attention to what they do
tomorrow.
And I think we have to.
But I also think
The idea that this is going to
get slow played, so we dropped
the bill.
is a disaster for my
constituents or the agent that
walked into the town hall that
the chamber put on and said he's
got $20 million book of business
walking out the door.
We have got to address this, and
so
I hope the fair plan is going to
meet tomorrow and maybe they
come back and they've got
revised limits that are in a in
a range that makes sense we
could agree on some tweaks,
modify a few things, tune this
bill up as it continues to move
forward, I hope.
Uh, but if we just sit and don't
do anything, I think that's why.
Representative Vincent is
sitting here. He's so frustrated
with what he had to deal with.
This is, we, we've got a, we've
got a crisis situation here and
again it's happening throughout
the West we saw in California
the magnitude of the crisis, but
our constituents are asking us
to help.
And Mr. Sheridan and Senator
Tobias and if I may.
I personally have met with the
fair board.
That's how desperate I am.
I've met with them.
I, I'm praying that they come up
with something tomorrow, and if
they do, and, and whenever you,
whenever you heard the state
fire marshal.
The, the fire service don't have
enough money.
For equipment and stuff now.
When you take 3%.
Of everything that the insurance
service has to offer our our
fire departments.
And I'm talking firefighter
paramedics.
When you, when you hit 911.
Your day's gone really bad.
And you want them there right
now and so we'll talk about fire
service.
We talked about financial
institutions, we talk about
realtors, we talk about people
not being able to come home.
And
I'm anticipating that something
happens tomorrow.
I really am.
And I told you at the very
beginning, I, I'm not sitting
here saying that this is the
sexiest bill I've ever seen.
It's just we had you admitted
that
and Mr. Chair and, and Senator
Tobiasson I
I didn't know that much about
the insurance.
I know quite a bit about
insurance now.
And again, I want to remind
The chair as well.
As the committee
I am a big fan.
Of the traditional insurance
coming back to the table.
And I'm gonna do my best and
that's why I'm saying it
publicly to push.
The fault
Is the Forest Service.
It's their fault.
That we've gotten to the point
we're 30 years behind.
And we live in an overgrown
forest and they keep putting uh
delegations for wilderness.
And the way the wilderness stuff
reads is you can't take
mechanized equipment up there
and do and when you get these
big dog hair thickets in there.
It doesn't turn into a
firefighter show, it turns into
an air show.
So do you have another bill?
Does is someone carrying a bill?
How do we hold the fire service
accountable because I think
everyone would agree with what
you're saying there, um, and
then this wouldn't be needed,
um, I, I
I kind of have a feeling that if
there's a meeting tomorrow to
look at rates, I would be
shocked and I think everyone
would be outraged to think that
the current fair plan board
would not be increasing um those
numbers tomorrow, um, but how
are we holding the fire service
accountable then? I mean, do we
all need to have our own herd of
goats and just let them loose or
what?
Well, Mr. Chair, I'm more of a
beef cow guy myself, but uh uh.
I've never heard of goats, Mr.
Chair. I don't know if you ever
have you know that might be
another endeavor you might want
to get into, but
Mr. Chair and Senator Tobiasson.
I want
I just want this to get fixed.
So my people can come home.
And I know that a lot of them
are listening right now.
And we have to make something
happen.
It has to happen.
I need to go home with something
there has to be a fix and if you
take.
A roughly, let's just say uh
2500 square foot home.
And the going rate right now is,
is about 300 bucks a square
foot.
That's 750,000.
Now that might work in my area.
I'm not working in his.
And I think that that's why
we're both sitting here at the
table.
So are you telling me though,
um, Mr. Chair, and I know I'm
interrupting you, but there's,
there's no way for us to hold
the fire service, the Forest
Service accountable. There's,
I'm not hearing an answer to
that question. So we're just all
at their mercy.
Yes, ma'am. uh, Mr. Chair and
Senator Tobiasson, when you,
when you factor in all the
environmental groups.
And I feel bold enough to say
that right now.
I am sick to death of every time
we put in for a thinning
project.
That there's a lawsuit.
To pretend
The spotted owl.
The endangered Species Act. I
that thing needs to be reformed
so bad, it's not even funny and
in Lincoln County, if you go
looking for the spotted owl, you
might find a few.
But if you'll go over to
Mescalero.
You'll find 50.
Because they do their due
diligence, they do go in there
and in their forest and believe
it or not, those owls, they
don't wanna be in a big canopy
of trees where they can't hunt.
They want it to be opened up
where they can hunt and go eat
and they thrive over there.
So
Yes, our, our, uh, ESA reform,
it needs to be tackled and we
have got to as a state.
Push against the Forest Service,
and if you want to be stewards
of the land.
Then I would highly recommend
maybe you go out to.
Senator Wood's house.
On his ranch and let him show
you how to manage.
The lands
He might be able to teach some
of our biologists something
really, really good. Thank you.
So just Mr. Chair and one other
thing that's important that you
know last Thursday, 3400
employees of the US Forest
Service were terminated.
As a result of the current
administration and what's doing
those employees were out there
specifically to thin forests.
Something that this past.
Big bill that the infrastructure
bill had funding for that's a
scary thing too. So again, I
think there's, there's different
parts to this on all sides, but
getting the forest in is
something that I have seen over
the years finally thanks in
large part to our state forest
or Laura McCarthy.
Before she was there, she was at
the nature conservancy and
finally you had environmental
groups sitting at the same table
with the Forest Service, and
that's why we have worked and
passed and watershed restoration
Act I carried with Paul Bandy,
Republican House member, finally
got that put in place. There's a
whole package of bills that are
all targeted towards exactly
this issue hardening, thinning,
we've got to be proactive at
all, it all ties in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Brent and they have Senator
Sindo we're gonna kind of wrap
this up kind of quick.
Thank you, Mr. President.
Yeah, you're the president now.
Sherman.
Um
So, um,
Vincent, you, you brought up,
um.
One of the things I was gonna
actually bring up and that's
the, the environmentalist
lawsuits constantly.
Um
And, and I will say, um, Senator
Wirth, to your, to your comment,
um, if they were out thinning
the forest.
We wouldn't have the problem we
have.
So, sorry, it sounds more like
they were trying to thin the
forest from home.
Um, but, you know,
You have the spotted owl or
report came out about 15 years
ago.
At the National Forest knows all
about, so do all, all the
attorneys and the
environmentalists.
That said, um, the spotted owl
was actually being killed off by
the Canadian horn now coming
across the border.
Not
From dead trees.
Yeah.
Every time, and I've talked to
our.
Mm
National Forest Service
representative.
A couple of times about this,
and she said it's still
happening every time they try to
thin the forest, every time they
try to put a
National Forest Management plan
together.
The environmentalists sue and
stop it.
So apparently our
environmentalist groups think
that burning down the forest is
the right way to manage the
environment.
Because that is the only thing
that they allow.
They're not out there fighting
it, they're not out there doing
anything to mitigate it.
So, so I agree with, with all of
that.
I'm also gonna say there's
nothing we can put into law.
To force the the federal
government.
To manage their for properly.
Because we as a state.
Decided 6 or 8 years ago when
there was a representative that
went to Congress eventually.
Not in Congress anymore who was
run bills that she was laughed
at about.
To have the state take control
over our own lands.
But most of our public land is
controlled by the federal
government, not by us.
And what was the reason for
that? Because they could manage
it better.
Yeah.
Right
Their way of managing it better
is to burn down and burn out
everyone up north.
Which they still
Haven't paid those people back.
And you know what, our, our
wonderful attorney general.
I'm saying sarcastically.
will sue over what this
president's doing now, but he
won't sue the federal government
over the fact that they're not
paying those people who they
burned out.
Yeah
What happens when we put
politics ahead of actual doing
our job.
So the only real question I have
is why should people that live
in my community.
Which is a low risk area, pay
more.
To subsidize your communities.
Interesting.
Mr. Chairman, um,
Yeah.
Uh, so when I review rape
filings, uh, companies will, you
know, certainly have a certain
rate for different counties, uh,
obviously a county like
Lincoln or Rotero will have a
higher risk than the county like
Sandoval because of the
increased fire risk. Uh, the
goal of this bill is to ensure
that
The consumers of New Mexico have
insurance.
Um, so by expanding the limits,
people have access to limits
where they cannot get insurance
anywhere else, and you are
correct that someone in
Sandoval, if there is a, I'm
just making up numbers, uh,
there's a $15 million fire in
Otero, uh, the industry is
assessed, uh, let's say State
Farm has half of the statewide.
Premium, they would pay $7.5
million of that loss, then State
Farm would turn around and
spread that amongst the
I don't know, $800,000 800,000.
I know they would spread it
throughout the whole state. So
the impact to a policyholder in
Sandoval would be a couple of
dollars a year for 3 years.
So that those people in Lincoln
County can have insurance.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Um,
I, I will say, you know,
homeowners insurance rates have
gone up everywhere.
Um
My brother-in-law lives in in my
parents live in Northern
California.
Um, he, he got a shock last
year.
his homeowner's insurance went
from $2000 a year to over
$12,000 a year.
And there was only one company
that would even insure his home.
And they've done all the
mitigation.
Oh
So
Um
Yeah.
There, there, there's a problem
that we have.
With
Not managing and, and I'm glad
you brought up the Mascale tribe
because I bring him up all the
time.
In fact, I've brought them up to
the federal government. I don't
know how many times and said,
you know, maybe you ought to
send your forest people to learn
how to manage a forest by
sending him to a class at the
mascaleo tribe.
Because they know how to manage
the forest.
And it's kind of common sense to
me that we can't have as many
trees as Georgia has in our
national forest here since
Georgia actually gets rain and
we don't.
Archeries are not healthy.
Archery has all kinds of
diseases because we quit
managing the forest.
And the environmentalists who
claim they care about the
environment.
quite frankly, they're a bunch
of idiots.
Who don't care about the
environment, obviously.
Because the actions that they
have taken directly.
Have caused the problem we have
today.
I was
Too
I think Mr. Chairman, I think,
uh.
Both of my questions have been
answered with a question on the
board and I think the question
from this whole pretty much and
cleared that up.
Um, and then the other question
I had was, I think just got
answered in terms of the, the
assessment and and the the new
material on section B where
The surcharge on policyholder,
that's pretty much then it
statewide is what that was my
other question.
Um
Yeah, those are answers, so I,
I don't uh.
Thank you. Let me ask you some
questions.
Can they cap the surcharge or
the surcharge is gonna adjust to
the actual study that you need
to fund the fund.
Mr. Chairman, the surcharge
would be based on the dollars of
loss that would be paid for that
claim.
From the fire.
So it's not, it's if it's a $50
million fire, the surcharge is
gonna be $50 million to the
whole industry, carved up based
on the market share. State Farm
pays 50%. Allstate pays 25%,
whatever it is. There's no cap
on the surcharge. The cap would
be
That when State Farm turns
around and says, OK, I'm gonna
recollect that from the
policyholders throughout the
whole state, that has to be
done.
Within a 3 year time period. You
can't say, OK, now we think
there's gonna be a wildfire
every year, so my premium is
gonna increase by $10 and that's
gonna remain in perpetuity. We
say, no, no, no, you, you can
collect it over a 3-year period,
but after that 3 years, the
rates have to go back down
unless there's another wildfire,
um, but that, that would be the
only cap. The assessment would
be the amount to cover the
amount of the, the event.
Whether it's a wildfire or a
terrible hailstorm or or
whatever it is.
And, and so what?
What's currently the balance of
the fund right now?
7 of Mr. Chairman 7 million.
I'm, I'm actually not sure. I've
heard it's, it's 7 million is
the
head,
so that's the balance of the
fund. What was the cost of the
real dos of fire that we know of
that that anybody that was in
the fair plan not that had
private insurance, Mr. Chairman,
I do know that number it was 5.5
million and then the assessment
was actually 8 million just
because they wanted a little bit
of uh extra to
for the next house fire or theft
or or whatever it was, but it
was 5. I'm sorry, it was 5.4 or
5.5 million, uh, but something
in that range was the
South Fork and Saltfire.
in and then on the policies I
don't know because I don't have
one to write. Is there a default
language that they don't make
the payment or they don't have
the right levels that
I mean, if the fund is
insolvent, that, that they can't
collect. I mean, there's some
Should be some time language on
the policy. I'm actually one of
the only maybe.
Crazy guys actually reads
insurance policies because I've
been in quite a few times with
insurance companies and so they
always look at the details of
policy and have my attorney's
review them and.
So is there a default language
at the fund becomes insolved
that they can't, they can't get
paid out.
I mean they, they made me
immediate fun so just say that
we do some fire was a $10
million claim, right? And
there's $7 million in the fund,
but you can't pay every claim.
Immediately, right? It's gonna
take time to get that money in.
So their default language on the
policy saying that the funds
don't exist, you may get a
portion, you may get 0, you may
not get paid at all.
Mm
Well
Mr. Chairs, uh, senators, uh,
committee members, I, I don't,
I, I, I, obviously, we can go
read the policy, but I, I don't
like to read the policy, but I
don't.
There's no in the, the way
you're asking, I don't think
there's default. They are
entitled to the payment of the,
if they've paid the premiums,
they're entitled to payment of
the claim if the insurance
companies do not meet the
assessments, they, I think they
ultimately are, our final
mechanism for enforcement is
they lose their license.
to sell.
OK.
And then
Somebody mentioned it and I
can't remember who, but so you
can also have another policy,
but I don't think you can have
two policies on the same
property.
Mm.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I'm,
I'm, I, I will go look into that
deeply, but she's using it as a
supplement. So I don't know if
there's another policy or
that's, that's, I think that's
the only policy she can get, so
it doesn't really meet the full
needs of the policyholder.
And, and so there's a policy
also cover uh
Uh, liabilities for the for the
what's in the house, personal
possessions or is it just the
structure of the home only.
It
Uh
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh, committee
members, yes, it does.
It covers personal property
inside um.
Yes
And builder's risk.
Miller's risk is different
policy but
But you know, representation,
this isn't gonna bring your
people home.
They didn't have insurance.
That's
They call the insurance
companies aren't paying. They
have to have a policy in place
to, to get back. This is not
going to pay out for homes that
burnt when they didn't have this
insurance policy, correct, Madam
Secretary?
They did not have a policy.
This is not gonna pay out for
them. So
So
Mr. John, I think Representative
Vinson should answer that.
Certainly the policy that was in
place when the fire happened is
gonna pay out, but now they've
got no house. They need to
rebuild, they've got to go get
in order to go to the bank,
they've got to get a policy, the
only place they can go is the
fair plan. But they had to have
a policy in place for them to
pay. You can't go back and say,
you didn't have a policy, you
never made a payment, and now
we're gonna cover you. Is that
what?
happening. So Mr. Chair, whether
they had a policy or not has
nothing to do with
with where the situation that
he's in right now, his
district's in, so if someone had
a policy, the house burns down,
it pays out. They're trying to
go back and rebuild. They can't
get coverage. They can't get
that portion of bringing people
back to say, oh well, I didn't
have insurance or
And come back and say, oh, we're
going to make a claim against
this. They cannot do that. So
that's not gonna bring back
people back if they want to come
back and rebuild and they had a
policy in place and can't get
reinsured. I completely
understand that because believe
it or not, in the middle of
downtown Gallop, I had him tell
me my insurance was gonna be,
uh,
Not renewed because I was in a
fire in a high risk area, and
then I'm like, well, there's two
properties, you're the same
insurance company and they're
right next to each other and
you're denying this one for this
reason, but then you're, you're
redoing this one and I, I'm
like, I think I called you on
that and we had some real big
issues, I mean.
I don't have time to sue people
over.
s
Whatever, but I think that's it.
And then,
Let me ask you one other
question. The board appointed by
9, what is the current makeup of
the board right now? How many
are on there and then who, who
chairs the board?
Can I have a Melissa Robertson
answer to that question. She's a
member of the board.
Or one of the board members.
Oh she's a member of the board.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, members of the committee
right now, there are 9 members
on the board. The board is
comprised right now the actual
chair is um she is an agent for
an independent company.
It is
And I'm sorry, I don't have my
paperwork, but we have
A representative from an
independent organization.
We have a
two claims adjusters from
different companies.
We have
A member from
Essentially, they're all from
companies in the way it reads
right now, they have to
Be in New Mexico, so we don't
have
The expertise on the board,
which is.
Part of why when we were looking
at this, we wanted the
expertise. OSI had to go out. We
actually contracted with the
same company that helped put the
Colorado numbers together.
And we looked at the expertise
that was lacking, so.
Right now on the board, there is
not an actuary.
Um, we have found out that the
company that helps determine
their rates.
was not able to.
They were approached by
Colorado, but they were not able
to determine the rates because
they didn't have the
Modeling for wildfire and wind
and hail.
So we went and, again, we went
to this separate company, Guy
Carpenter, who actually has, and
it's a group, it's Guy
Carpenter, it's Oliver Wineman,
and they are able to pull in the
experts that are really needed
now.
On this board to assure that
this.
Association runs properly.
Why isn't the super in insurance
allow you to use their actuary.
And not have to go, that's why
is the board have to go out for
a different actuarial
members of the committee, the CA
modeling is becoming so
sophisticated, you know,
Christian can.
Look at the models, understand
some of the variables, but he
can't create a cat model, uh,
and I understand the modeling,
but the actuarial study can
still be done by him once the
model is done.
Correct.
Yeah, Christian I mean you're
gonna model for the fires and
then the actuary is gonna say
this is the risk, and here's the
numbers and so the actual arrow,
why doesn't turn it back over to
Christian. I guess Christian, my
question is why does not the
officers superintendent for
issues an actuarial. I
understand you can't do the
modeling. Why aren't you there
actually also.
Uh, thank you, Senator. I, um, I
did do some actuarial work, uh,
that we shared with the fair
plan.
Uh, in October.
Uh, and there were 2 key pieces
of that one is that the, the
fair plan is currently
underpriced.
Um, and you know, one thing
we're really trying to encourage
is that, you know, the fair plan
doesn't become a a California,
California's fair plans issue
was it was dramatically
underpriced, it grew so rapidly
in these high wildfire exposed
areas. We want to make sure that
the fair plan uh is charging
actuarially adequate rates, so
it's not competing with the
industry. We want it to be an
insurer of last resort, and
that's it. If it's too cheap,
and we're offering it to
everyone, it's just gonna
continue to grow and it's gonna
compete with the industry. So we
went to
Fair plan and said it's 20% too
low. We need to fix the pricing.
The other thing we did, even
though I do not have a cat
modeling expertise. I was able
to take the incurred loss from
the South Fork and salt fires. I
was able to look at some
exposure growth, given what we
had seen in the California fair
plan and over like that in
different counties, essentially
estimate uh what the exposure
would be given some different
growth scenarios, um, I admit it
was not, uh,
To the level of the
sophistication of what Guy
Carpenter is going to present
with the cat modeling, but I
think it's still an actuarial
analysis to give some uh rough
idea of how much exposure we
could see after these ideas, uh,
after this expansion, um, and,
uh, yeah, I am happy to do more
actuarial work with the fair
plan. We presented that in
October. Uh, I did not get any
questions on it, um.
And that's that. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, can I
also supplement the OSI is
supposed to approve the fair
plan rates, so it would be a bit
of a
I think it's more appropriate
that we review them and we don't
do the work. Well, the the the
board is pretty controlled by
the insurance industries, right?
And so they're going to keep
those rates low.
And then, and then the rates are
gonna be low because they don't
want you taking from
Their portion of the income
supporting another industry. I
mean that, that's just real
market talk right there right
and so I, I mean.
I'll ask you a question, but I
mean, that's the problem with
the current structure of the
board that I see everybody from
the insurance industry is on it,
that's the fox in charge of the
chicken coop, right? How many
chickens are we gonna let out to
the, to get eaten today or are
we gonna, how many we're gonna
eat ourselves. I mean, that is a
business model that I don't
think is fair and sustainable to
anybody.
Uh
When you have them in charge, I
mean, unless you've dealt with
your insurance companies quite a
bit, I mean,
They're very difficult to deal
with. I mean,
They're very hard to get claims
out of, I mean, claims are not
your fault or, or anything, I
mean, so unless you've dealt
with that, it's a different
Molly, but when this goes into
place, I mean,
Let me ask one question before I
forget you. So does this cover
flood too, or do they have to
buy an additional policy for
flooding somewhere else because
I mean with fires come floods.
And you can rebuild and if they
Take the word from New Orleans
to Florida, hurricanes and
floods. I mean, if this does not
cover flood insurance, then can,
that's why I asked you, can they
get two policies, right?
Or if your policy doesn't get to
their limits, and you have this
is a basic and maybe the market
will change, that'll accept an
additional policy on top.
I, I don't know if that's
something that you could require
or something that
So that this doesn't come flood,
but have you looked at the flood
deal, I mean, in Senator Wood's.
Scenario, you may not have, may
have hail and rain, but with
rain comes flooding, and so.
There's flood insurance covers
it.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so right now I don't
even know if you can get it
because our, our emergency flood
waters have changed.
And um now you know where you
were within the flood.
Now you're outside the flood
plain, and they're trying to
figure out all of the, you know,
how the headwaters are gonna
show up and you know what the,
the um.
Mm
The
So the flood plain has changed.
Let me just put it to you that
way. The floor plan is changed
and they don't even know. I just
need to understand, I mean, it,
it people want additional
insurance on top, I mean, in
Senator Woods's district, it may
be flooding and not maybe fire
and not be total destruction,
but if that's a separate policy,
then maybe they can issue that,
but um so what what, let me ask
you one question now.
And you want to see what the
fair.
The board does tomorrow in
making adjustments before we
roll this out to the floor, or
do you want to send this to the
floor and
So Mr. Chair, what I'd like to
do is
Move it. I think it's important
to move it on. This has been a
good discussion and I've also
committed I'm, I, we, we clearly
are gonna watch what happens
tomorrow and adjust accordingly,
but given
Even where we are, I'd like to
move it along if that's the will
of the committee and then let me
ask you one question. I mean,
the, the banks and and loan loan
mortgages.
They will not accept this plan,
right?
And so everything has to be
rebuilt in cash and hopefully
they had enough insurance on
their prior policies. You keep
shaking your head no, but let me
finish my question.
So the, the banks will not
accept this as insurance.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the banks have to
accept fair plans for for
mortgages.
Oh, answer my question very
shortly, OK.
I think that's kind of it.
I just want to make sure we're
kind of setting it up right and
now I completely understand
where we're heading, I mean.
Should the state be in the
insurance market? No. Should the
state make sure that people are
eligible for insurance because
most of the insurance companies
are owned by hedge funds.
International are large hedge
funds and hedge funds are
designed to make a lot of money
and make it very quickly. And so
how do you, how do you get by
that? I mean,
In my business, you may be
shocked, but I pay almost
$600,000 a year in insurance,
right?
And so a large consumer of it,
and I know when I have an issue.
And my sons are in business too,
and you get for no fault of
theirs, they're gonna strangle
you and try to hold those claims
and do everything said worse
than shaking his head.
And hold those claims in until
you really twist on them pretty
hard and, and
They're really not gonna want to
pay in and so I, I want to make
sure people can live where they
want to live, right?
And they need to have insurance
because they're gonna have to
borrow money to rebuild, I mean,
uh, and so we gotta, we gotta
offer something in 1969, right?
I maybe 3 years old, they
decided that they needed this
plan, so.
They knew it was a problem then
and still continues to be a
problem, I think.
My biggest worry is the makeup
of the board because everybody's
from the insurance industry.
And so if they raise it on this
side, it means less income on
this side, and how do they
adjust those fees and in
It's not really a fair plan when
you come to the open market.
This will fix that, Mr. Chair.
are there any public members on
the board?
No, no.
OK
Hold on one second, you have a
question, sir.
Gonzalez, you have a question,
motion. OK, let me just
Let me just wrap up, so.
I just wanna make sure that,
that I understand this, so
they'll base it based upon the
total amount of claims.
And
If Rido was a $50 million claim,
they'd come back and say this is
the amount of money we need to
to get to that claim and the
insurance companies would make
that adjustment, make that a
payment to the state in order to
pay out those claims.
Right.
Uh
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, they would pay it to
the fair plan and then the fair
plan would pay out the money
they'd pay the plan and plan
would pay to the, OK, thank you.
Senator Gonzalez or.
Chairman, I make a motion for a
due pass on Senate Bill 81 as
amended a second on the motion.
That was 2nd place in Steinborn.
We call the real.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes no. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes yes.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Lanier.
No. Senator Lanier votes no.
Senator Padilla.
Yes. Senator Padilla Botia,
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasin.
Senator Tobiasson votes no,
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujillo votes yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes no.
Senator Schendo. Senator Sendo
votes yes, Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz votes, yes, we
have a Du pass 7 to 4.
Thank you chair.
Represented Vincent stay right,
oh no, there comes Senator Stan.
You wanna go, you can go.
You don't like the house? Is
that why you want to stay over
on the Senate side.
Senator Stefani, you better be
careful.
OK.
He doesn't live in the district.
All right, we're gonna go
through the Senate bill
amendment, right? It's where we
left.
Mr.
So we have a.
Let's make sure we're working
off the same one. I forgot to do
that the last 1, uh, 1081.1 is
the committee sub we have. Yes,
right. And uh the state forester
can go through the changes in
the committee sum.
Real quick, real quick.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, on Monday, you asked
for 3 specific changes to the
composition of the task force to
clarify that it is decision
makers, that's in now in section
3 on pages 4 and 5.
You also asked for mapping and
that is now on.
Page 6 under the duties section
3E.
You had a committee sub that
Senator Woods introduced that.
You, sorry, an amendment, my
bad, uh, and
The drafter in.
Legislative council services
found an error in that, so that
error is now fixed.
And the 4th change is you asked
for language on liability, and
that is now on page 8 in lines
20 to 24. That's new language
that we vetted through uh staff
here, staff in judiciary and
with legislative council
services as well as Emner
General Counsel.
OK.
Any questions from
We need to move, I need a motion
to, to move the committee sub.
And motion to move the city
and the finance committee
substitute for Senate Bill 3 for
discussion purposes. We have a
second vice senator
Stein.
You explained the committee sub,
any questions on the sub.
none
have motion to adopt the
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 333.
And motion to move.
The up to pass, you pass.
We've already, we've already
opened it up for discussions
needed a motion for you pass on
the Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 13
so it's a sub. We have a motion
bike in.
Mr. Chairman, do we have to do a
do not pass on Senator.
OK.
It's a do not pass on
substitute.
So
I'm, I'll explain. I'll do the
motion. I need to do not pass on
Senate conservation committee
substitute for Senate Bill 33
and it do pass the Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 33.
The motion Steinborn, so I get
my Senator Trujil any objection
to the motion.
See none.
We're back on the bill, it's
been adopted. Questions on the
bill.
I have one quick question in, in
the last presentation, they said
they were going to do hardening
of the homes. I don't want to
see duplicate services and
agencies, right? That's putting
10 million here and 10 million
there, 10 million over here, so.
This bill doesn't have an
appropriation, so we're gonna
have to figure that out Senator
Stefani as we move forward. Who,
who do we really want doing
that?
Well
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, for
that, and it's, that's why we
put in the mapping language
thank you.
can have a motion for a due
pass.
compos. So, Mr. Chair, a motion
my in compost second by senator.
Shindo, we call the role.
Senator Brandt,
Thanks.
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
votes yes. Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Yes. Send it to Lanier boats,
yeah, Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Senator Tobias
and Botia, Senator Trujillo,
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes.
Senator Brandt
Yes. Senator Brandt votes yes.
Senator Shando, Senator Sendo
votes yes, Senator Munoz.
Senator Munoz votes, yes, we
have a due pass 92.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee and
thank you to the uh sponsor.
Uh, 2:20, we're waiting for an
amendment fixed, so we'll come
back this afternoon and hear it.
Uh, water infrastructure, what
time is it?
11:05. What time are we going to
the 4?
Marquita, do you think how quick
can you get the presentation is
2 minutes enough or should we
move you to this afternoon?
OK, let's
Mhm. We're doing the water
infrastructure here.
Mhm.
OK, yeah.
That's nothing.
AJ, you're gonna sit with
Marqui.
OK.
gonna do a little present.
Maybe you can give the PED
secretary of Education on water.
She's hanging out here today.
Let's go.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee AG 40 with the
missal League. Today I'm wearing
a different hat though. Vice
Water Trust port, no hat.
Yes, sir.
Well, and
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh.
We have two hands on. Marquita
has her hand out. I have one,
just for.
It's this sheet.
Water Trust board.
We're gonna make this easy on
you all.
You have a system in place that
works. You have a funding stream
in place that works.
Thank you to oil and gas.
We cities.
Uh, we are 10% of the systems,
but we serve 70% of the
population.
And what we're seeing.
Right, if we go and Marquita has
really good data sets on this.
What we're seeing is we actually
have revenue coming into the
Water Trust Fund. So the Water
Trust board can actually fund
projects at a much larger scale
than we saw in the past.
Why this is so critical.
Right, the one thing that keeps
me up at night is water in our
communities.
Great thing about Water Trust
Board is it helps.
All systems.
Big and small like
Or I worry
we have communities, large
communities today.
That are at risk of running out
of water.
Some because of wildfire.
Right? If that system goes down,
and we're actually
Seeing that this week.
They may not come back on.
We have systems
Just location wise, there's a
lot of straws in the ground. If
you're in Portalis, you have 48
wells, the aquifer.
They're on the edge of it. So
every year,
I think they have had a 60% drop
off in recharge rate in their
oil field.
Right? Portela submitted a $60
million request, and this is to
get them to you.
This is just to get them to that
2030, 2031 timeline to make sure
that community has water.
We don't have water, we don't
have economic development.
We don't have housing.
We have communities that are
waiting for the changes that you
all made last year, right? You
opened up Water Trust board.
Wastewater. This is a big deal,
whether it be the communities
ravaged by wildfires, who are
operating at 50% capacity.
Or you have small communities up
north.
That want to improve housing
developments, but they don't
have the capacity and they don't
have the funding. And that's why
I hand out this sheet of GRT,
right? GRT makes up roughly
3 quarter of our revenue for
local governments. There's no
way the majority of your cities
could afford a 20 to $30 million
wastewater system.
Or water system. It doesn't
exist.
So your community still have
lead braising in your pipes.
Those communities don't have the
money to do it themselves, but
yet we have to provide them. And
this is where the system of
water trust board.
In the funding stream that you
all have carved out for it is
working.
And Mr. Chairman, your bill
helps. We don't have enough in
the current distribution.
To provide all of these
increases and updates to these
systems that are required. Every
little bit helps.
And your bill is a little,
right? These are big bills, but
it's only taking a bite out of
the apple.
Right? The apple's big on this
just for local governments, we
have probably 1.2 billion in
water needs, and that's just
what we have documented. There
are systems that don't have the
ability.
To apply for the grants to do
the NOIs. We will do that for
them, right? Cause we wear
multiple hats, where their
insurer.
I want to get into that
conversation again.
Uh, but we insure the cities,
right? 95 of them.
We do. We can't lose the water
wastewater facility. If we do
that, we lose the city.
We do everything we can to make
sure they're they're hardened,
defensible spaces, um.
run satellites to figure out
what we need to clear.
At the same time, it's all about
funding and that's where
Marquita has the data on what
you've given us and how you've
helped over the years.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, um,
I've got a little presentation
here. I will spend just a couple
of minutes on the first page,
the first two pages before we
get into data just to give you
a, a sense of who the water
trusts board is and what it is
we do before we bring projects
to you. So on page two of my
handout, you'll see on the left
hand side the Warust board
members, um, and you'll, uh,
And they represent a broad, uh,
constituency of water users
across the state. Um, are the
duties of the Water Trust Board
are to evaluate projects, make
recommendations to the
legislature for projects to be
funded and then um ultimately
direct the finance authority,
which is the of which I am the
CEO to make grants and loans
based on the conditions that the
finance authority sets to the
project's recommended. So it's,
it's a multi uh step process. It
takes about a year.
Um, historically, the funding
that comes through and goes down
to our communities, goes down in
the form of grant loans, some
are 100% grant depending on the
kind of project and the others
are grant loans. I think on
average about 15% of the funding
goes out in the form of loans
and 85% goes out in the form of
grants. Um, we are funded
primarily from two different
sources, the lion's share of the
money comes from severance tax
bonds, uh, the fund receives the
water project fund receives 8.
1 % net.
Of the senior severance tax
bonds, um, 9% comes down, but
then 10% gets shaved off and
sent over to the office of the
state engineer and then further
to the administrative offices of
the courts. So 8.1 net falls
into the project fund for uh
loans and grants to be made, um,
and then there's the water trust
fund, which is a
constitutionally protected fund,
it's managed by the State
Investment Council and over the
last several years, you all have
put a significant amount of
money into it. It will take
several years before we start
kicking off.
Uh,
any more than $4 million which
is the by statute, uh, the
amount that goes over to the
water project fund annually.
Um, for years that $4 million
really made a big difference.
Recently, of course, with the
high volumes of oil and gas, it,
it really hasn't been a very
large percentage of what we end
up uh being able to fund.
As AJ mentioned, uh, you all
last year added wastewater
projects as an eligible use of
the water project fund, and so
that now, um, beginning in the
summer, we'll be able to start
accepting applications for
storage, conveyance projects,
that's the majority, about 75%
of our money goes there, uh,
endangered Species Act every
once in a while, a small project
will come through.
Um, restoration and management
of watersheds, uh, there's
usually a handful of steady
handful of projects that come
through for their flood
prevention is another one, and
then water conservation or
recycling treatment or reuse of
water. So those are the projects
that we fund, um.
I'll just skip down to page 3,
I've told you a little bit
about, uh, on the bottom there,
um, the kinds of projects that
are eligible, you can see that
by policy the water trust board
sets out targets of funding
because we receive typically we
receive more in applications
than we have in available
funding, um, and roughly as I
said earlier, about 75% of our
dollars go to your typical pipe
projects, storage projects, um,
and that's uh where we.
see the greatest amount of need.
Um, what you will see later,
this session is a bill. It's a
House Bill 206, which
authorizes, uh, which takes the
projects recommended by the
Water Trust board and asks you
to authorize them so that
eventually the finance authority
can make grants or loans. It's
not an appropriation bill in
the, in the typical sense
because the money's coming to
the fund regardless of whether
you take action on that bill.
But I can't actually make grants
and loans until you pass a bill
and tell me which projects um
are eligible for that funding.
So it's, uh, it's uh a silent
partner to the appropriation.
Um, those projects come through
as a result of a really uh
significant or rigorous vetting
process. There's a planning
document that's required to be
uh submitted with an application
and we have an evaluation team
evaluate, they look at all the
applications and rank them based
on primarily health safety and
welfare, um, criteria, but each
project type has its own
specific criteria.
Um
Then they get authorized.
Then we make a final decision
based on um the order in which
they prioritized. We look to see
that they've met regulatory
compliance, and then we make
awards. So that's really the
process. It starts in July of
each year.
And the finance authority then
makes funding approves funding,
usually by the end of May.
So it's not a fast process, it
is, but it is a rigorous and a
well vetted.
process.
Page 4 is where you'll see the
total funding and looked at it
10 year snapshot, um, beginning
with 2015, and these are the
total funding needs by dollars.
That first big blue line in each
of those subsections is the
notices of intent. So we start
in July, we ask folks what kinds
of projects do you have out
there? Um, what are the costs of
those projects, um, then we give
them access to the application
based on that notice of intent,
um, and we get to
typically a shame off that not
everyone that submits an
application ends up, uh, submits
a notice of intent to actually
files the application.
Not every project that files an
application gets recommended to
this body?
And then ultimately not every
project authorized is able to be
funded, and that's based on
dollars.
Um, up until about 2019, the
average award was about a
million dollars. Obviously, the
larger amounts of dollars coming
in have allowed projects to
actually get bigger projects
done and that average has jumped
up, um, to about $2 million in
22 and then in 24, it jumped up
to $3 million. So we're starting
to see larger projects being
able to get completed um for
many years, you just couldn't,
if you had a, a large project,
it would take you many
many years to assess uh uh
aggregate enough money to
actually take on that project.
Um, last year, our largest
project award was $20 million to
the city of Farmington.
Um, and you'll note that that
$20 million was larger than what
was received in 2016 in total,
2018 in total and almost what we
received in 2019 altogether, uh,
Portalis was right behind with
$19.5 million. Um, those are
really large awards, but they
are just um a part of the
project that for instance
Portalis applied for. We shaved
down in some instances the
application by almost 10%, um.
Uh, let me see.
I think the other thing I would
point out there, Mr. Chairman,
is that a lot of the uh monies
while they projects may not have
dropped off. I guess I can get
you to the next page. I
apologize. OK, I'm on page 5.
It's basically the same snapshot
except by numbers of
applications or numbers of
projects received.
And you can see that, um, for
instance, in 2025 that there
wasn't a significant drop off
between our notices of intent
and um the applications that we
received and I'll note that all
eligible applications uh appear
yet again on the authorization
bill. So for the last several
years, we have fully authorized
every project that is eligible
because the amounts of dollars
are so significant, um, in the
application sizes are so large,
we did not necessarily want to
have.
um, a lack of authorized
projects to access all those
dollars, um, but what happens is
that people then shave down
their projects. So while they
have a need for 30 or $40
million they end up having to
shave it down because they know
they can't qualify for that much
because there isn't enough money
in the fund to get that those
dollars out to them. So they
reduced their project needs, um,
and I would just say last year,
uh, we saw 10 projects which
totaled.
About $145 million ultimately
from their notices of intent
down to their rewards, they in
in total were uh $14.5 million
of awards. So the shave off just
continues to happen. Uh, we
whittle away at it until we have
um
Until we have enough, uh, doable
projects we look to fund full
complete phases. Uh, lastly, on
page, uh, well, not lastly,
second to lastly, uh, page 6.
Uh, the House Bill Authorization
bill that you're gonna see um
has projects listed in 25
counties, um.
They uh represent primarily
water, storage, conveyance, and
delivery projects is typical.
Um, we're seeing a significant
number of municipalities. We had
20 apply last year. There are 39
on this year's application.
Um, we're seeing a lot of small
projects as well, um, mutual
domestics made up.
Uh, 17 of the list last year and
it's 26 this year.
Um, again, and the rest of them
are about the same numbers.
And then just for a snapshot on
page 7, the awards from
Inception, which we began
funding in 2002 through last
year's awards.
Uh, total just under 850 million
and if the funding comes through
as we expect about 160 million
this year, we will have um
awarded more than a billion
dollars since 2002 to projects
across the state and again about
65% of those dollars will have
occurred that.
Actually, without even this
year's 65% of the money that's
been awarded to date, um, has
come in place since 2015.
So Mr. Chairman, um, wanted to
give you an understanding of the
kinds of things that we're
seeing, um, there's unusually
high amounts of dollars in this,
in this fund, which allows us to
tackle some really large
projects that otherwise would
not be able, uh, to be
undertaken. And with that, I'm
happy to answer questions.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members.
In what
The, uh, the amount of
The amount that you have listed
here.
847,000 on page.
It has been awarded to date.
But it's not the amount.
Per year, that's the total that
you've rewarded.
So
A couple of years ago.
We held up
The awards altogether, we didn't
pass a bill to determine what uh
projects would be funded.
Have we got the, the bill that's
coming this year.
Have we got enough money to fund
all of those projects that you
have coming in your bill, Mister
Chair.
Um, Mr. Chairman, no, um, uh,
what will happen is that we will
likely downsize a significant
number of the applications, um,
in order to fund any portion of
those projects. We are currently
about $100 million shy of the
applications uh that were
submitted and um more than
double that, um, in the projects
in the initial scope if there
were more money, we would have
funded larger projects.
Can you remember the reason why
we turned that list down.
Mr.
Mr. Chairman, you can actually
see it in this chart here in
2015 on page 4, for instance,
uh, you'll see that the blue
line of notices of intent is the
exact same as the uh orange line
of applications and the gray
line of authorization. What
happened in those instances is
we got a very slim application,
we looked to see that it was
eligible but did not put it
through a rigorous vetting
process.
Um, and then that year there
were um
Roughly 100 and I'd say 25 or
130 projects on that
authorization bill, um, and the
sponsor of that bill, um, given
that there was only $32 million
felt that it was um.
That that was not a prudent use
of the legislature's time. They
wanted to see an actual bedded
list, um, and so that bill did
not go through that year, and
that's, we ended up funding
prior authorized projects in
that year. Um, since then,
actually, ironically, uh, we, we
made changes to the program in
2016 to allow for these um
really specific policies by
project type, um.
And those would have come and
play in 2017, so the first
really vetted list went to you
for the, for the 2017
application cycle, Mr. Chairman,
and in that you all that money
was swept for solvency. So $0
were um awarded in 2017, though
we went through a rigorous uh
application process and vetted
more than 80 applications, um,
So now we are doing a, a rig
with bedding.
policy
Um,
And these are.
Kind of tell me the point
system, this.
That you determine who gets
what.
Which ones are?
Awarded
I know that you're all worthy
projects.
So Mr. Chairman, the, the
criteria set up again by project
types, so the, the criteria we
have in place or uh.
Water conservation projects is
different than what you'll see
for the water storage and
conveyance projects, but it's
predominantly about health and
safety, ensuring that the
projects are serving as great a
population as possible.
Um, that there is that it's
fixing an existing need or
mitigating uh an impending um
issue, um, so those are, that's
where most of the criteria fall.
Yeah.
OK.
Right.
been
I'm good, thank you. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, just, uh,
very quickly and Marquita, maybe
we can go ahead and visit
offline in regards to some of
the projects for the
northeastern part of the state,
but quickly in terms of the
applications that have gone to
the water trust board if as an
example a project uh would
require more than what is
available and within that you're
gonna be phasing that in. It's
not to say that there's a
commitment, but for those
projects to be fully funded and
complete.
Will they continue to go ahead
and remain, uh, if you will,
within that application process
or do they have to reapply in
order to continue after the
funding uh would be appropriated
through this particular measure.
Mr. Chairman, that's an
excellent question. In fact,
they have to reapply and that's
really what has stopped a lot of
folks when we had smaller dollar
amounts from using, uh, this
project. So if you were a city
applying every year for about an
average of 1 or $2 million
really isn't a good way to spend
your time waiting to fund a
project. Now that the dollars
are bigger.
It's becoming more um uh uh more
helpful source of funding for
those larger projects. And
again, those are generally uh uh
cities or the regional projects,
the ones in Gallup and, and
eastern New Mexico, um, but
otherwise, yeah, you, you, you
get awarded one year and then
next year you may not get
awarded for that next phase and
it makes mobilization pretty
expensive. So, so Mr. Tru I mean
I'm just gonna close with this
here we go again, another issue
and we start talking about bully
funding the.
projects that are in essence,
uh, depending on our, our life
safety, so, uh, again, I really
appreciate that and maybe we can
visit offline to see if there's
some other ways we can help to
rectify some of that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you the front page of the
Santa Fe, New Mexico is there
hauling water into Las Vegas
this morning, so Senator Shindo
good thank you very much so so
much sir, just very quickly. So
since last Thursday, we've been
taking water in from Santa Rosa
from Santa Fe, from the
surrounding areas have about 50
trucks doing that right now.
It's, it's, it's emotional.
It's, it's heartbreaking our
community needs uh more of the
infrastructure improvement.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Shindo.
I think Chairman, thank you for
the presentation. I, I think I
had a similar question, but
the central composite ass.
The applications come in you
review and then uh I
I think you said that.
If
Projects come in and you don't
available, you start shaping the
projects down.
I think this speaks to the fact
that
Me
Can't you just fund those
whatever projects so we get them
completed as opposed to freedom
law,
then there was some, you know,
that's similar, you're, you're
bored in the tribal
infrastructure port very
similar.
And, and what happened was that,
you know, there's certain
projects that they would shape
up a million or whatever and
those, those projects are now
stall for another year, and now
they're coming back this year
asking for that money that the
tip board had just funded them
they will be underway and and so
I, I think, you know,
We have so much money stranded
out there.
Rather than spreading the money.
out
To get
buy more projects funded
partially.
I think just fully funding those
projects that are eligible will
do more for our communities and
trying to spread the dollars out
and serve more and then now
you're stranding 5 projects as,
as opposed to getting these
projects done, so I, I mean, I,
I think, you know, there's
something that the board needs
to look at, uh, and so what,
what are your thoughts on that,
Mr. Chairman, I would say we
shape projects by shaving the
scope, so they may apply for
planning, design, and
construction.
And, and we say, you really need
to get your plan done before we
can give you money for
construction or they need design
and construction and so, or they
need two phases of construction.
So what happens is we fully
phase, we will fully fund a
phase, but will shave down,
we'll do will limit and reduce
the scope of the award from what
they requested. OK, I appreciate
that explanation because I
thought you maybe you were
ashamed, you know, the project
down, but you're kind of
Part uh what departmentalizing
and say, OK, you need one for
planning, you get your planning,
get that done, you come back for
construction and so forth.
OK, and then on the
authorizations. So basically,
The process now is you present.
projects, whatever that number
is to the legislature.
And we just sort of
Legislature gives you the
blessing. These are fine, and
then your board actually picks
and chooses what projects you
fund. Is that correct, Mr.
Chairman, what happens is after
the bill is authorized, the
Water Trust board goes back and
ensures that all the projects on
that list are compliant with all
regulations that are pertinent.
So are they, are they in good
shape with the office of the
state engineer with this auditor
with um drinking water bureau.
If they've passed those
regulatory hurdles, then the
water trust.
board using a team, that same
team that reviewed them plus the
LFC makes a recommendation, uh
for how big a scope to authorize
and then the kind of money to
put aside and then the finance
authority structures it, uh,
based on, you know, grant loan,
uh, policy set by the by the so
for the time projects that
authorized, what percentage of
those projects fall off based on
not meeting any of these.
Audits or whatever uh.
So, Mr. Chairman, that you can
really see graphically on page
5, which is the number of
projects so that gray line, uh,
the third of the 4 bars there
are the number of projects
authorized and then you can see
the drop and decline. So
certainly in the early years, it
was about 50% that we were
unable to fund. um, and as we've
gotten more money, um, again,
we've been really lucky that
we've been able to fund more
projects. So the drop isn't as
significant, um, but there is a,
a.
drop in applications that we
can't fund.
OK, so, so of those applications
that meet all the criteria.
They're not fully funded. It's
just a fraction of those as
well.
Mr. Chairman, if we can't fully
fund a phase, then it gets
bypassed. We know that that will
stall a project immediately, so
we'll only fund.
Uh, uh, standalone phases.
All right, appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just, I
just need one little
clarification. I've got too many
questions for here today, so I
would really appreciate meeting
with you at some point. Um, but
my clarification was
Senator Tobiasson had asked you
a question, and you made it
sound like you were making your
decisions off of population, not
off of need, is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, um,
regionalization is an element.
It's about 5 or 10 points out of
the 100, um, but we are looking
to see if, if they're serving as
many people in within a uh uh
geographic region as possible,
but it's primarily about 60% is
uh health and safety.
OK, so Mr. Chair, so
May I'm
I feel a little like Mr. Woods
right now.
I think I understand, but I
don't really get it.
So are you saying smaller rural
areas.
Have a less chance of getting
Projects approved, then say Rio
Rancho or Bernalio Fanta Fe.
Mr. Chairman, I'm trying not to
say that. What I'm trying to
tell you is that we look as a
percentage of population served,
so it's a, um, if you have, if
there are two mutual domestics
in the rural area and they're
across the street from one
another.
That's gonna be a more difficult
conversation than a mutual
domestic, that's 10 miles from
the next mutual domestic. So
the, we're trying to stay away
from the first kinds of projects
and fund those second projects.
So we're looking for, you know,
geographic areas that are, um,
reasonable to serve and some of
them, again, we used to have a a
number of small mutual domestics
within a couple of blocks of
each other.
So if there was a Mr. Chair, so
if there's a a mutual domestic
that say has.
15 customers.
They probably wouldn't.
All 15 are gonna get served.
Is that where would that put it,
put it on your scale then.
Mr. Chairman, it the size of the
underlying project is not really
the important part, but it's
whether or not they are next to
a community of 45.
Um, households. So if it's 15
households as a percentage of 60
or 15 of 15, I think is the
difference, but I again, 10
points, um, that are, that falls
to regionalization and.
Most of very few of them, uh,
get hurt as a result of
regionalization. Health and
safety and readiness. Thank you,
you know where I'm going.
No, sir, I don't actually,
because you, you just covered my
whole county.
Ah
I mean, I'd literally have um
Some people that served 15
people.
And they started their own
organization, they filled out
all the paperwork, they might
even have done the audit and
everything like they're supposed
to.
And
11 person moves or dies.
And that, that whole thing
becomes in a shamble because you
have no maintenance now, you
have all kinds of things.
Then I have, you know, other
water associations that are
huge.
That are tax-based or whatever.
Argument that we want to make.
So that, that's my problem.
And and what I'm having a hard
time understanding is
How do I help all?
Of that district, not just one
or two. So Mr. Chairman, I would
say two things. One is that last
year the legislature broadened
the act to allow the finance
authority to hire contractors,
uh, with the water project
funds. We've set aside about
$3.5 million to do two efforts.
One is to help very small
systems, uh, get in the position
to actually apply for some of
these funds, so we'll send an
engineer out and, and have that
document, a planning document.
done on your behalf so that
applicant doesn't have to apply,
um, and, and for the dollars,
they just have to apply for the
project and then we'll send out
um a competent uh engineer to do
a plan. So that's one way in
which we can help those really
small systems, and then once
they've got a plan, they're able
to apply if they're serving 15
homes, um, and that's the
population that is around them,
then we're, you know, that's
they're gonna get the maximum
points under the system. It's
not about
The size of the system, but
about the percentage of
population within a geographic
area. We are trying to encourage
as much as possible, um,
appropriate regionalization and
cooperation, the policies allow
for um all kinds of uh
additional subsidies to flow
down to projects that are
regionalizing so that we can
reduce that number of small
systems that can't really
sustain themselves, um, due to
the, to do to their size.
Right, and Mr. Chair, thank you
very much. That, that helps me a
lot. I really do would like to
meet with you at some point if
you get some time, I think that
would be great. Um,
You know, those smaller
projects.
The smaller
Area, so if we use my 15.
Cause I, I actually do have one
that's 15.
That one, their cost is gonna be
a lot smaller too.
So does
Does that kind of tie in?
Or do you try to fund the larger
projects.
Mr. Chairman, um, our, uh,
criteria is, um, is size blind
if you will. We don't look at
how much money you're asking for
until we're saying is that an
appropriate amount of money for
the project or the project costs
sustainable, um, but it doesn't
really matter how much you're
asking for. We're looking to
fund the projects in greatest
need first. And so that's how
that prioritization works.
Mr. Chair, thank you. I really
appreciate it. That's all I
have.
Thank you, Senator Trujil real
quick before we go to the floor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Marquita, for being here.
It's good to see you guys. Just
23 quick questions. Um, I heard
you say that the size of the
request, if it's too small, then
the, the application process
could be too onerous for the
size. Is there a cutoff for that
that you
Have a recommendation for?
Um
Mr. Chairman, I, I,
unfortunately, I don't think
there is because the process of
having a document and going
through it and making sure the
dollars are going to the
greatest, to its greatest need,
um, sort of requires this annual
process and, um, you know, we
haven't been able to come up
with another um way in which to,
to do that because we'd be kind
of setting aside money for a
number of years, and it may not
be the greatest need that year.
Um, so that the water transport
is chosen to have them come back
each year, and I'd say that the
onerous process.
It is unfortunate, but it does
put us in a position of being
able to spend on the money
pretty quickly once they were
able to get authorized and
approved, um, the spend starts
pretty quickly and we have a, a
good pace of spending. OK, so
you've kind of, uh, Mr.
Chairman, you've kind of
answered my second question,
which is, is that requirement to
reapply each year a statutory
problem or an internal
administrative problem, and it
sounds like it's an internal
administrative, and I'm not
saying that it's a problem. I'm
just saying it.
would be much more onerous on
our communities, and I'm
wondering if there's a way that
we could get a program approved,
knowing that they're still going
to have to come back the next
year, but they don't have to
fill those documents and go
through that process again.
Well, I think they would have to
because it costs may change,
right? They may run into some
base that changed and so, I mean
water projects like this, I
mean, if they're replacing water
and sewer lines, you could run
into utility issues, you could
find stuff from
1901 Mr. Chairman Marquita, that
just seems like it's an
administrative update of an
application, though instead of a
whole application, are these
electronic or paper?
Mr. Chairman, they are paper,
and the, the, I'm sorry, they're
electronic and, and, and the,
the basis of them is a planning
document that shouldn't change
very much. Updating the
application doesn't seem to be
the hurdle. It's just waiting
for the process to start because
they start in July and they
don't find out until basically
June 1st, and that is, that's a
statutory issue, and then the
other part is, you know, given
our statutory framework of
needing authorization.
We're not sure how we would do
it any other way, Mr. Chairman,
uh, Marquita, thank you. I'd
love to talk to you offline
about maybe how we can get that
statutory dates change so that
it's more efficient. And then
the last question I have is in
regards to, because I'm
beginning to ask my community,
you know, have you gone to the
water trusts board and because
you have the expertise that I
feel comfortable knowing that
this project has been vetted, so
my question is if it's vetted
and it meets.
the standards, but you don't
have the funding. Do they get
some sort of a letter of denial
that I can say, could I see that
letter? um, that at least shows
that they meet the standards
that you just didn't have the
funding at that time before I
start issuing capital outlay.
So, Mr. Chairman, um, they don't
get a letter that says you met
the standard and we lacked
money, uh, but the documentation
that's provided by the Water
Trust board is very public. Um,
it's very transparent. We say,
who had to be bypassed because
of regulatory issues or audit
issues. We say where we ran out
of money, we say where we had to
shave projects down and scope,
um, so our annual authorization,
which is on our trust on our, on
the finance authority's website
shows you exactly what happened.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you, you know, Senator
Woods, I want you to stay for a
minute because we put another
222 million in this. So those
projects that fell short may be
able to get completed. I don't
know what the house did. I keep
hearing rumors, but I don't know
what they did, uh, so they were
short 1080 million.
For this year's project, so that
would backfill those and allow
them to, to maybe complete some
other projects that have been
sitting there, so we put
additional money. I think the
whole key to point of this, uh,
you don't want to dummy this
down in any way, shape or form.
You don't want to change what
they're doing cause it's
functioning really well.
And so if we want to change
dates, maybe that's something
we'd look at, but if you want to
change statutory things where
they have to comply, I'm not
interested in any point in your
time, um.
So, but I think we're gonna head
and I think we're gonna talk
about this on the floor today
about how capital projects with
water that come in capital
outlay, do not get completed
because there's just not a money
to do that. So if we fund it in
the right places, and they do
the right things and they plan
in their processes are there,
and they'll be even more
eligible for money if we put the
money in the right place. Maybe
we take the 1% away from the
court zone, what they need STBs
for, but they're.
Kind of overfunded, uh, the one
other 1%, I forgot where it
goes, but
We'll look at that, but we're
gonna have to head in this
direction, so we're not burdened
by 5.9 billion that are gonna be
6.4 billion in capital outlay
projects.
Maybe even higher.
That are just sitting there
stranded with nothing but
attached to us being able to
wave the flag, I funded your
project and
We don't ever turn into dirt.
Do you think we should put
crisis money in this in some
way, shape or form, allowable
language for like what's
happening in Vegas.
Uh, what happens during
wildfires. Do you think that?
That is something that you could
manage if there was a crisis, or
is there already dollars
available somewhere for that.
Mr. Chairman, there's almost no
money available in the state for
emergency projects for crisis
projects, that is one of the
things that we have all
recognized that we lack, um, the
finance authority's programs are
annual because they.
And so we're not in a position
to do that. But, but if you did
put a, a carve out, we might be
able to, we'd be able to
administratively handle that.
Senator Cabos, make sure we
draft that amendment because
that would like apply to you
today.
So maybe we should
Set aside a certain dollar
amount, maybe you can get with
Senator Compost and look at a
number to what he thinks, I
don't know what that costs to
haul water in there every day
for.
But we should look at something
in here so that we have
something set aside. I mean,
same thing when flooding
happened in Roswell. Do they
need emergency money to get
their system up back and running
and what were the issues, right?
That's something we learned, so
now it's just.
apply it.
OK. How about all your board
members, they attend all your
meetings when they do this or
are you short on members and
That's one thing. So let's just
go down the list of state
engineers show up.
Mr. Chairman, always.
Right
AJ Forte.
Secretary Stallone,
uh, Mr. Chairman, yes, he shows
up. Mark Thompson is a very good
attendance record. Mark
Thompson, yes, he does.
Greg Ebers, the areas where we
have the, the most difficulty is
um in the areas of the
conservancy districts, um, they,
so we should remove them.
They're not gonna show up. Joy
Esperson.
Uh, they always show up.
Melody Kinderine. Yes, they have
designees that show up and they
show up and vote or not most of
our cabinet secretaries send a
designee, Mr. Sloane comes in
person, um, but most of our
cabinet secretaries send a
consistent designee is allowed
to vote for them, uh, Mr.
Chairman, they are.
OK.
I, I, I think the cabinet
secretaries ought to show up
when you're doing this large
amount of money, so maybe we
should.
I don't know if we could look at
that bill in a minute. James can
he show up?
Mr. Chairman, designees of all
the cabinet secretaries show I'm
just asking the names, do they
show up? No, no, Mr. Chairman,
he never shows up.
Tricia Luceroscilla shows up
herself.
Timothy McGinn, that's one
that's a conservancy district.
Uh, President Nyre.
Um, Doctor Nyren has a, um, uh,
a designee that.
Depends on so he doesn't show up
either.
ropes
Mr. Chairman, he has a
consistent designee.
Nope.
Keta Russell, I show up.
Brent Van Dyke my staff knows
where I live. No. Jeff Whitty,
um, a designate a consistent
designee.
And why are they sending there
and the other one is vacant, the
water users. Mr. Chairman, that,
um, he resigned from the board
about
8 years ago.
And nobody's ever made another
appointment.
Note to the executive and one of
the secretaries is here that
governor doesn't appoint people
to boards.
So I'm gonna look at the
designee situation because
I, I think those, they're
appointed for a reason and they
should be the ones voting and
not a designee and
There may be certain times that
That they needed designate
because they can't be there, but
They should be the ones voting
and listening to this. That's
where they got appointed,
otherwise we could just say,
here's a list of anybody in your
office that can show up today.
And, and make decisions and it's
we, we gave that to the to the
secretaries for a reason and to
the point so
I think that's all my questions.
Let's see what happens at 2:22
to to backfill that, but we are
gonna have a conversation about
how capital is really stranded,
so.
Thank you guys.
We should we.
