Passed out please staff.
Thank you so much madam chair.
So this is a bill that would
increase the salaries of our
statewide elected officials yes
thank you excuse me Sir do you
have let us get the amendment
first and then we're going to I
need a motion to to put the
amendment on for discussion.
Okay there are some motions
Senator share second by Senator
Gonzales for discussion unless
the amendment first and then
we'll vote on it and then you
can do the bill with the
amendment has that yes so the
amendment
you would make clear that that
the changes proposed in this
bill would go into effect now
rather than in twenty twenty
seven are they would do that by
striking that reference to
twenty twenty seven from the
title and then in fact there was
an effective date added and so
it would strike the second ****
Amendment the added and that
affected date with no effective
date in the bill it
automatically will go into
effect ninety days after if if
it is not passes and is signed
it would go into effect ninety
days after we adjourn okay thank
you but before we go on and make
sure that the amendment we have
actually captures the two things
you spoke about strikes and.
Amendment to.
I guess one amendment is
suffices for both of those yes
requests of sanitary and are
both of those changes are in in
this okay and then may be out
for you and then nine five not
ninety five point one yeah thank
you are any questions on the
amendments from any comments
from the Senate Senator see here
okay move sure one one of the.
The.
And madam chair Senator because
we have people doing these jobs
now and being paid far far less
than they would ever get
certainly on private market but
also in comparison to our our
surrounding states.
So.
Madam chair and senator.
They all volunteered.
I volunteered for the army known
I could make a lot of money not
doing that but I volunteered in.
Volunteers.
Madam chair Senator I and I
agree with that I I volunteered
for for this role has did you
knowing that that we weren't
getting paid I still think that
it be a good idea to the
professionalizing are and pay
our legislators but but the fact
that someone is willing to do
public service shouldn't
forclose their ability to ever
be a appropriately compensated
for that public service.
Thank you madam.
Thank thank you very much Madam
chair and just very quickly on
the amendment if we can go into
a little bit more detail so with
the amendment if you could just
talk a little bit more in terms
of some of the findings related
to this particular amendment I'd
really appreciate that.
Absolutely so madam chair
Senator and one of the one of
the things to to keep in mind
with with this amendment is that
SO would go into effect
Mid June ash but that does not
mean that that that these
officials would get retroactive
pay at this higher level it
would only be the increased pay
level going forward pro rated
for that for the rest of of this
year because these are annual
salaries so there would be no
issue about you know have pain
making up for for the lost
additional wages in the past or
anything like that.
Great thank you very much for
that explanation on the
amendment madam chair whatever
it's time I'd like to move for
adoption of the amendment.
Motion to move the U. S.
secretary of what you have.
Sorry this is.
A quick question have you see
from Madam.
Chairman.
Chair what.
And senator how do you see this
fitting into the budget.
And into these individual budget
tried here.
Madam chair Senator honestly you
all probably know a whole lot
more about that than I do.
If we could begin on finance but
I will know that even though
these additions are mass that
will make a significant
difference to the the the
officials who will we'll get
them out as far as being part of
our overall state budget this is
not a fraction of the drop in
the bucket agree overall state
budget that Mr here these people
come in here hello Sir a few
dollars to school kids.
So you know you're telling us in
this get money out from the
up for HSD so I just.
Long as you understand that that
it is of.
A budget item.
That we're changing here and
it's getting pretty late in the
year and madam chair Senator I
think the thought is that this
will come from the existing
agency budget budget so they
would not be requesting any but
any agency budget changes to
accommodate this they would they
would need to figure that out I
think themselves using the
that they've already submitted
at and madam chair yes Senator
and senator.
You're right.
Same to make changes all the
time.
Additionally in their their
salary part of this and you know
on one side they complain to us
for the state personnel office
dictates to us and then in a
minute they'll say well we have
We have we don't have as much
money and that funded liability
is is we thought because somehow
we gave someone more money
because we needed it to get on
the work force so you're right
about one thing sometimes they
ask for bars.
After the fact.
And I'm assuming that's how they
would pay with for this
especially if it passed into
legislation no doubt but that's
my problem with it that.
They could ask for this in your
budget.
And when they didn't ask for in
a budget I'm not inclined to
vote for.
And and madam chair center you
should blame me not them because
I.
They.
And I think I don't think they
thought that they could ask for
in their budget given that
there's their salaries are
statutorily sent
and and I did not go go around
to to the our secretary of state
auditor treasured Attorney
General or commissioner of
public lands and state.
Make sure you ask for this and
in your budget so that's that
all right I apologize for the
and the and I and I agree with
that I am.
Very
capable of sticking my foot in
someone's face when she doesn't
so I understand where you're
coming from but that's won't be
able to support your bills thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you senator all right I think
Senator Padilla had some
questions or comments on to yes
madam chair are we were still on
the amendment yes or sell the
amendment so madam chair so it
does.
This is affect every statewide
official.
So we would want to add one
understand that parks and we
have a lieutenant governor that
is outstanding but doesn't
necessarily have to be in Santa
Fe all the time and how does
that work with what you're but
the amendment would do so madam
chair Senators it affects the
governor secretary of state
state auditor treasurer Attorney
General and commissioner of
public lands it does not include
the that lieutenant governor
because he's dealt with it and
NMSA I think it's eight dash
three dash three it's a whole
different statutes
and I'd I don't want to try to
shoehorn him into this one I
think that if if the the body
feels that the his that sellers
should be adjusted as well we
that should should probably come
as a separate bill sure.
So
yes so then it would essentially
the lieutenant governor what I
know that we're on the amendment
though madam chair so I do have
questions on the bill
I think that's actually all I
have on the amendment I think
you explain it very well thank
you very much any other
questions on the amendment no
all right then do can we have a
motion for do passively that you
are to make the motion all right
there's a motion do we have a
section on it earlier there's a
motion the second for the
amendment yes Senator Gonzales
seconded okay anyone opposed to
the amendment all right you have
an amended bill Senator and now
we can get on the bill.
All the you voted no I'm sorry I
didn't see okay sorry so how
many you to mark the nose on
your face okay any other nose or
do we just have sent all three
okay sorry about that yeah I
didn't see your hands go okay
thank you very much now we're
going to go to the bill.
Thank you and so madam chair so
what this bill does that is that
Ninety days after we adjourn
assuming this passes and signed
the salaries for those statewide
elected would increase if you
look on page two of the bill you
can see the but that the current
amounts are and and what those
increases would be as up being.
I figure that the percentage
increase now I can't remember it
but.
The last time these salaries
were adjusted was twenty one
years ago so I can I I can't
remember if that the increases
is just accounting for for for
changes in the past twenty one
years I think it's it's it's
more than just accounting for
inflation since then it's also
trying to match them to to be a
comparable to it to some of our
surrounding states.
And I'm sorry Madam one of the
change that was made in fact
that is still in there is when
the lieutenant governor
secretary of state built in for
the governor if the governor is
out of state they used to get to
an extra two hundred fifty
dollars a day have a with the
change change back to get five
hundred dollars today when
they're filling in this gap.
Right.
Thank you very much yes center
share.
Madam chair first I want to.
Question two hundred and five
hundred because did not this
amendment to say strike health
and public affairs committee's
amendment.
Madam chair senator we struck
the second amendment and and sh
back which was the the effective
date language
but we didn't strike the first
amendment.
Which the all the all could do
it if you soften I don't think
it really changes it does not
change the intent of the bill or
for all so madam chair we have a
couple.
As much as I love Lieutenant
governor moralis.
Do I love in the next fifty
dollars a day.
He is my favorite lieutenant
governor I.
But I do I know he's well he
just sort of kind.
So Mister chair welcome change
on that much for my at please.
You know.
So if my math is right.
That means the governor's
getting a fifty four percent
increase.
All at once in ninety days not
waiting for another cycle to see
if what's going on just right
now.
Secretary of state state auditor
auditor state treasurer they're
all getting almost a seventy
percent increase.
Right now.
Of the attorney general's
getting a sixty two and some
percent increase.
Right now.
Those are huge numbers.
I never got an increase like
that in fact the only people
that ever got to be increased
anywhere near that is ECECD's
EDD budget whatever their.
That's a lot of money all at
once.
We're not doing that to the
state employees we're giving
them you know three percent or
seven percent or you know
in one case we gave sixteen
percent but that was a pretty
small group of folks.
Seventy percent of big increase
all at once.
So Mister chair we've got
Senator not senators governors
and other states but what's the
population of those other states
and what do they.
Mr chair Senator I don't know
off the top of my head.
So I do notice I apologize for I
do know that setting are looking
specifically at the not not the
governor specifically but but
the other statewide elected
elect as this would make New
Mexico comparable with our with
surrounding states.
Mr chair.
Arizona has what six and a half
million people Colorado has six
million people Texas now has.
Thirty five million people and
we have to.
So we're going to compare this
to the to the governor the even
governor Colorado Democrat
governor governor in Colorado
right now been there for awhile
we.
We should get about one third
are governor should give out one
third of the Colorado governor
because we have one third of
people.
A little bit more land mass but
no humans to Care.
So I'm just.
I'm concerned by these what
appear to be colossal.
Pay raises.
When we're struggling over are
we going to pay the the person
that does all the work in the
state.
Three percent to five percent or
even eight percent.
Versus fifty four point seventy
or sixty three.
Well five seven six that might
work.
The fifty four seventy and sixty
three.
All right Mr Madam however chair
thank you.
Thank you senator are ever going
to go to Senator Padilla Senator
Steinborn.
Madam chair I'm I'm actually
ready to make a motion to to
pass.
All right all right before
requesting them yes four but we
need to go to the audience to
yes we need to get public
comment from the audience before
you can we have that for
discussion at least and then I
had Senator Steinborn on the
list also.
Yes why don't we do this why
don't you go ahead and ask your
question because I want to get
that that's the last one I have
thank you madam chair so.
You know it's interesting we've
had a lot of pay raise bills
comes come before us
I again find it ironic that.
That we're offering they were
pledging we're proposing to pay
governor hundred forty five
thousand years we just passed a
bill to pay pay a PRC
commissioner hundred ninety
thousand a year.
But a but I think we hearing
this a colossal pay raise I
think right now our statewide
officials are colossally
underpaid and you know the fact
that a governor makes eighty or
ninety thousand a year is just
astonishing we think about the
demands on that job and
So.
So I support the bill and I can
only hope that the people that
are bringing all the pay raises
put as much value and our
legislative public service.
As they are in these.
You know respectable salaries
for other for these executive so
we'll see.
We'll see thank you very much
thank you senator right now
we're going to go before we vote
on this we're going to go to the
audience anybody supporting this
bill.
In the audience okay there's one
person would you like to come up
quickly no okay thank you anyone
against the bill.
All right no one to anybody on
zoom.
Do you know when I was in
Morris's a motion on the floor
from Senator Padilla we did have
a second Senator by the second
by senator Munoz this call the
roll.
Please.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share New.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Yes yes eight to three.
Thank you have a do pass Senator
thank you thank you members the
committee thank you all right.
Which.
All you guys.
I am still check with the only
thing I want to say is we have
charter school principals with
two hundred students that make
sixty nine thousand or more here
right they don't management
people you have superintendents
that have less people in this
in small rural districts to make
just as much as the governor
that on and have as many people
not including the students
themselves if you want good
people to run for office and you
got.
And not say oh just because they
wanted for this is if you want
better people right.
Okay which.
And we.
What about.
Are we going to going to Senate
bill one twenty four as.
this as amended
and it is public employees
returning to work and we have
Senator Padilla.
Three I want to get us to the
next three.
Six nine.
Yes I Senator Padilla it's.
Here okay give me a sec I think
we have and then.
Before we go we want to
consider.
An amendment to first.
Okay this is Senator Campos
amendment okay so let's that we
usually look at amendments first
and see what we can do with that
so tell us Senator
Have you seen management
explained yes why don't you do
that yes and then we could just
move on with the amendment thank
you madam chair members of the
committee yes I'm here today
some folks from the
administration on a governor
bill the came forward to me to
attempt to.
Yeah that's the amendment so to
make an attempt to help the
various departments with that
seem as we all know department
after department have come in
sap in front of us here and
talked about their incredible
work to fill the vacancy rates
in their departments we thought
we would come forward with
another tool for their tool belt
to do that that has a sunset of
six years we amended in a sunset
or whatever a repeal day
whatever your preferences in
which want to call that for a
six year repeal date from
January until July of this year
through July twenty twenty nine
which is a six year period to
help them to to ideally bring
either keep folks that want to
work up to a one hundred percent
of the their high three average
as we all know or come back into
the the state government in some
sort of a position after twelve
months of retirement we do know
that we did this had this in
enacted previously were folks
could be out for ninety days
come back and work for as long
as they wanted to this actually
has great guard rails on it
basically you have to be retired
for for twelve months you can
come back for a maximum of
thirty seven thirty six months
in those thirty six months the
employee and the employer would
pay into the pair of funds on
behalf of those the amendment on
behalf of that position you know
that jobs and so would
potentially shore up the pair
account and help them to begin
to close their gap that they
have right now on some of their
deficits that they're looking at
so again the person has to be
retired from parent and the pair
position with for twelve months
the employee and the employer
like it like I said make non
refundable contributions to pera
that does not accrue any
additional time but you know for
their retirement or any
additional retirement pay but
before they retired the first
time they could work up to one
hundred percent of their high
three average years
and again the member could come
back can only come back for a
total maximum of thirty six
months in their life that they
have to retire permanently from
state government the fiscal
impact is there is none there is
no non refundable contributions
are actually this helps the
fund.
As I mentioned
the pension cap provisions that
allows the member to continue
working like I said and work up
to one percent of their final
average salary the cap is
currently set at ninety percent
it takes thirty years to work up
to that ninety percent this
would take thirty three years
madam chair to work up to your
average of your one hundred
percent there and it applies to
all employees not justice
section the reason I felt like
it was important to to have an
effect all employees is that we
can take a look during the six
year kind of sunset period you
know six years later and we can
figure out which departments to
to work for us so if if it
didn't work for some areas maybe
we can make changes then the
fiscal impact again as it does
not have a negative impact I do
have my experts here I'm gonna
ask them to introduce themselves
I do have great Trujillo from of
the executive director and
president CEO of of the pair of
Fund that'll be here retirement
organizations I'll talk a little
bit also more cabinet secretary
here someone asked me to say
just a few words Mr trio thank
you great
want to say it was good to see
you thank you madam chair
members director here with P. E.
R. A. of the happy to answer any
questions I do want to note that
the the paperboard is a neutral
on this of bills but happy to
add any text technical expertise
that may be needed.
Thank you Secretary madam chair
members of the committee thank
you just both secretary for GPS
I want to thank sponsor for
bringing this bill fourth this
is a governor's bill and a party
for the governor as it addresses
the opportunity to hire
experienced and qualified people
to provide those essential
services to the state of New
Mexico as we talk about
recruitment and retention of our
talent throughout New Mexico for
many years as I served in this
latency I always thought of this
problem those kind of specific
to law enforcement and the
having served now as a secretary
for year and a half I'm finding
that we have issues across our
agency as a whole not just in
law enforcement as all the exil
repositions or non sworn
positions of their just as
difficult to get people through
the door as it is for law
enforcement and I believe that
exhilaration staff is integral
in our organizations and and all
those people are just as
important keeping everything
moving forward it's not just the
uniforms and again I'm just
speaking for DPS currently but
this will benefit the entire
state for DPS alone we need tele
communicators dispatchers many
parameters we need a support
staff and a is the our records
peer H. R. laboratory all of
these people are essential to
make sure that we provide the
services the state of New Mexico
that our people need I can give
you just one quick example of
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy director.
I've been trying to fill that
for a period of time and it's
been very difficult to get
people to come to the door to
willing to suspend their their
para and I've had some really
great people that I've
interviewed on the hook and I
just can't get around this piece
in order to get New Mexico
offers academy director and as a
result of my deputy cabinet
secretary has been serving the
interment of the session this is
one example of many I know that
we have other cabinet
secretaries years will lease it
for the service here today for
corrections and as we speak to
our other of collies and cabinet
secretaries they have the exact
same challenges with recruiting
I don't believe this problem to
be specific just to
to the state when you speak with
this place is in counties share
some cheese they're complaining
all really about the same thing
they all have the same concerns
for bringing staff back to work
so I really believe this is a
entire state of New Mexico issue
state county municipal problem
and if you speak with boots on
the ground people are out there
are working I think they'd be
very happy to have the
experience expanding Maximo
speaking to Montana for maybe
this morning he was saying
exactly that we're the be very
happy to have the experience
that the next them to be able to
of the get control of this crime
problem throughout the state of
New Mexico so I think is very
important this bill.
Provide support for the entire
state of New Mexico public
safety is courses what I'm here
to advocate for and and for
police corrections juvenile
corrections far and so on it's
very important in this the
Sanchez said those have all the
guardrails in place and
safeguards against some of
challenge that we've seen in the
past I will repeat would all the
safeguards are and we sort of
get into more that but I believe
that of the return to work in
combination with raising the
average salary really believe
that this will have a positive
impact on the challenges with
the New Mexico and the
throughout state government as a
whole without it would stand for
questions about thank you thank
you madam chair and something
experts that are here with us
the only thing we did in the
Senate health and public affairs
committee madam chair is that
the six year sunset the six year
sunset is it or or or repeal
date I know as legislators we
call them different things I
think what you do is you have if
if the way this legislation
works is the day that it's
enacted and it becomes effective
if you've already been retired a
year then you could potentially
get yourself a job back in state
government and work for three
years and that point or from
that date if you're not quite at
you know where you're you're
wanting to retire whatever you
can find yourself a little bit
of window of time they're
retired for twelve months and
then come back you can find
yourself a position for thirty
six months it gives us that six
year period to actually measure
the thing see how it's going for
us and if it's not working for
us it just sunsets.
All right thank you senator all
right then we do have an
amendment at this point we need
to consider this first so.
Thank you very much madam chair
and course members of the Senate
so at this point I move a Senate
amendment this would be what
number two are actually the
first one and then Senate
finance Senate the first
amendment to Senate bill one
twenty four is once amended.
In the Senate finance committee
and I open that for a
explanation they do have a
second for discussion.
Okay there's motion a second by
Senator Gonzales for a
discussion of this ammendment
and comments for questions from
the committee so.
I'm sorry.
Senator describes will give you
my opinion yes thank you of
course but thank you very much
madam chair members of the
Senate finance committee in
essence what this would do is
just a those individuals that
are working now if a decide to
go ahead and retire the enter if
you will the back to work
program they would be able to go
and get the percentage of which
they re uh retired that's
basically if this amendment does
madam chair.
Thank you all right thank you
any one else you before we got
Senator Padilla okay Senator
Padilla can you tell us.
This is a friendly amendment or
friendly at the moment this
amendment I know there were a
couple of iterations of it and
with all due respect my
colleague Senator Campos we have
to say that it's unfriendly.
Unfriendly it begins to affect
the the in fiscal you know the
value of what we're trying to
accomplish that's item number
one one of the reasons why it
it's it doesn't
It does it is unfriendly and and
it also just kind of it.
It just puts too many things in
play to better the and and
prohibits us from understanding
what this is actually do force
over a six year period because
of its retroactivity with what
Senator is proposing as okay so
it's an unfriendly to hear you
say that all right thank you all
rights are respectfully I love
center yeah he's one of my key
mentors in this building so okay
thank you all right so any
comments or questions to the
committee before we can without
on the amendment.
To to yes.
Yes okay thank you yes I was
going to go to pulp thank you
said I was going to go to
probably come out of the whole
thing but we'll go separately
any public comment on the
amendment anyone for the
amendment.
Anyone opposed the amount to the
amendment anyone on soon.
Thank you thank you all right
so.
I'm sorry CENIC press yes of
course thank you for bringing it
up yes and we have Senator
Woods.
Thank you.
What what I see this ammendment
doing is.
Allowing someone that.
Had come to work after.
The after the.
They have.
Retired.
That the trump when when they
can only pay in so long and
still get retirement and this
would allow them to keep getting
credit for the amount of money
they paid in.
Is that sat close to being mad
about got that close to being
right senator Senator with his
yes whenever they that they're
allowed to go ahead and continue
to go and build a service
credit.
And and madam chair maybe some
of the experts would also like
to indicate in terms of the the
fairness issue the issue of the
solvency of the fund possibly
some of the other issues that
that they see is maybe
burdensome regarding this
particular amendment.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator can I also have one of
my experts respond yes thank you
please great madam chair and
members of what I interpret this
ammendment is doing is allowing
a member that is currently still
active still employed that were
to be on the thirty years to get
credit for past years so the the
way the bill was.
Originally right in is you would
start getting credit beyond the
ninety percent as of seven one
twenty twenty three if somebody
today has thirty one years of
service on seven one they would
get ninety three percent of up
to that hundred percent for for
previous years that have already
been worked and I believe the
language in the in the amendment
is clear that it doesn't allow
retirees that you know somebody
left with thirty five years of
service retired they're not
going to get this this
additional amount if they are
retired it's those those
employees are actively employed
that could take advantage of
this C. okay thank you very much
all right so you have all right
I don't have anyone else on my
list so can we vote on the
amendment please.
Yes did you have a comment.
Tell me that well.
Just like the sponsor to just
explain this amended to me one
more time what it does for as
per okay so madam chair the
bottom line is if someone is
working today.
And with this with this
particular bill and they decide
to retire then they'll be
eligible if you will to continue
to go ahead and build that
amount so would be capped at
seventy five percent they could
go up to ninety three percent of
possibly a hundred percent of
what their retirement would be
so what it does is it provides a
fairness issue an incentive for
employees are working today the
opportunity when they do retire
then to return to work and
utilized their valuable life
skills in order to go ahead and
also help with one of the
agencies as is already been
explained so so madam chair
etcetera etcetera so I think the
bill says that when you go back
to work you have to pay but
you're not accruing.
Credit and expanding that right
but this ammendment what have
you actually creating that
credit.
Madam chair and senator you're
you're the first part of what
you said is correct if if you're
with the legislation you can
work up to the average of your
high three.
B. for the first time you retire
the state any state retire he
does make that decision to do
that wherever you are in the
ninety percent of the night
whatever that then you then you
have to be out for a year you
come back from Mexico over
thirty six months you you pay
into the fund as you normally
would in your employer pays and
but you get no additional
service credit or no additional
time into your average for your
high three say you were to get a
job that was paying would be
paying more than what you were
making when you had your average
of your three.
And it would would add to it
again I'm still just trying to
understand this and them and and
and madam chair I believe
possibly one of the experts also
questions second part your
question as Mr tribute to
respond.
Chairman here members so if if
you are retired can you come
back to work you're not ruling
any additional benefits so
you're not going to get to this
hundred percent if you were
actively working today new at
thirty one years you're gonna
get ninety three percent once
this is enacted and you can
continue working up to the
hundred percent to get to
approve that but but I know
point are you ever going to be
getting a pension as well as a
salary and increasing your
pension it's it's one or the
other it's a choice for the
employee I could stick around
longer increase my pension I
choose not to do that I will lay
out of a year come back get a
salary and a pension but myself
my pension is frozen it be it's
not going to increase as a
result of additional time worked
I see so that's how this that
you're you're referring
specifically to the amendment as
it is.
Correct thank you just one thank
you very much madam madam chair
and and again this week we talk
about salary increases which in
in many cases are long overdue
when we talk about bringing
people back to work from to work
if you will of the whole issue
is how do we find the fairness
initiatives so that we can keep
up not only with the cost of
living but also tap if you will
those people that do have the
resources at all levels if it's
going to go ahead and be for one
class and one group and not the
You and so we hope that we would
at least consider that within
this ammendment thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
Senate finance committee all
right I don't have anyone else
on the amendment can we vote on
the amendment please thank you.
Senator Burt
no.
Senator Campos yes excuse me was
there a motion on the floor
before we don't Senator the size
just reminded me was our motion
I think there was a motion for
the.
It marked down want to discuss
it up for discussion with that
we need to motion okay we a
emotion for do pass them or non
do pass whatever fraction I
guess at this.
K. on the amendment self who for
a do pass we can get it right
for the record we haven't to
move a do pass on the amendment.
Is that what you're asking yes
some yeah we needed a motion for
a due pass or or just action on
the amendment action okay I to
to pass the thank you madam
chair and we need a vote on it
thank you.
Senator Burt.
No.
Senator Campos is.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales the.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla no.
Senator share.
State board now.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez.
Yes is excused for yes six now.
Do not just R. thank you madam
chair thank you can at this
point proceed with the bill
Senator I think that's home.
Okay there's a motion for a
pastor that we for we do thank
you again I don't think we can
plug public comment we need to
go to the audience before is
there anyone in favor of this
bill.
All right there oh my goodness
okay I'm gonna have to I'm gonna
have maybe how how many there's
this you raise your hands okay
all my goodness let's see we're
going to go to how about I'm I
have four from each because I
don't know how many are against
the bill so we can see cases
three all right my goodness okay
let them try to be fair here but
we only have so much time to so
why don't we go with let's hear
from there's three opposed dry
and that I can see hands and so
let's go with three that are
supporting the bill three
opposing the bail and that this
is fair as I can make it so here
we go.
The your support JD Cape state
your name here on the record on
the phone to.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is JD
Bullington registered lobbyists
for the City of Santa Fe.
in Santa Fe today is COVID
nineteen Memorial Day we've lost
almost four hundred people due
to comment in Santa Fe County
alone while the worst of the
pandemic is behind us our city
our local government is still
reeling with some of the after
the facts and the ramifications
of this pandemic in terms force
in terms of the hat on our
workforce we believe that this
legislation is badly needed and
will assist not to Santa Fe but
other local governments in their
efforts to recruit and retain
more employees for the work
force thank you thank you JD.
Thank you all up my name's John
Ramon Vigil I'm the mayor of the
city of Espanola I'm here
speaking in favor of Senate bill
one two four I was just to
highlight again what Mr
Billington mentioned earlier
small governments municipalities
like the city of Espanola been
suffering since COVID to be able
to staff our departments fully
up sometimes for the city of
Espanola being close to Los
Alamos and Santa Fe is often
occurs because we are able to
offer the competitive wages that
other communities can
constantly we're losing
employees are might
municipality is constantly a
training ground for police fire
for public works employees we're
asking for your support of this
because I believe that moving
forward it's it it starts the
process which Senator Padilla
mentioned it'll open the door
for what we can do hopefully
after the three year passionate
the sunset date really excited
about this opportunity I could
possibly have a fully staffed
police department to secure my
community we have a growing
crime epidemic throughout the
state in New Mexico.
Thank you for your time today.
Thank you I'm good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee and grace Phillips I'm
general counsel for New Mexico
counties and we support this
legislation counties are really
struggling with staffing
vacancies that's especially true
in our detention centers where
half have dangerously high
staffing vacancy rates Dona ana
county's over thirty percent
Santa Fe County over forty
percent Bernalillo county over
fifty percent at the
metropolitan detention center
that's over two hundred missing
officers needed to operate that
facility so we're really
struggling with these vacancies
and it's not just limited to
detention in all areas of public
safety and other and other
aspects of the essential
services government provides
we're really grateful for the
governor and the sponsor
bringing this bill it sounds
like it's got some good good
bumpers and it but to give us an
opportunity to try to dig out of
the the very serious staffing
crisis that we're experiencing
and we are just support.
Chairman of the committee I know
you said three the rules
Independent School so the third
one I count that high but
All all speak for them to ma'am
So just real quick you all heard
this bill many times maybe some
of the people by me have it
since two thousand nineteen we
have seen a forty to fifty
percent decrease in interest the
first step to get into law
enforcement is being interested
in it before we do anything else
we currently have eighty four
vacancies this time in two
thousand nineteen we had five
more people than we had.
What happened in between there
we all understand what happened
so I wanted to talk about a few
things law enforcement is in
crisis of you all you all ask us
to tenuously during committees
in the hallways what you can do
to help us all of you say that
to us every single time.
Return to work is something you
can do to help us.
There's twenty five bills
floating through this building
right now to help law
enforcement with recruitment and
retention.
This is one of those things that
I think will help us immediately
versus some of the other things
that will help us down the road
return to work is that
important.
It's likely that the easiest way
to get more officers will have
those right out the gate there
experienced officers rather than
new ones to take time to train
which we want those to and as I
stand here as I mentioned we're
eighty five officers down that
is a dangerous levels I'm sure
APD's a dangerous level I think
law enforcement in the state is
at a dangerous level to provide
the services to the folks we
serve and the folks that you Sir
so it's important that we get as
many people on the streets as
fast as we possibly can.
We simply cannot do all the
functions that we once did and
although some of you may not
feel this in your communities I
know that you do Senator Diamond
I know that you do Senator
Campos some of the things you
pay us I feel the state police
to be assessed and have the
expertise the some of the
smaller rural agencies don't
have that's how we get funded.
But I'm here to tell you some of
those functions will have to
stop here pretty quick because
we're so short we will have to
start saying no to some of those
things matter of fact some of my
colleagues with other
departments have begin to come
not necessarily complaint voiced
frustrations that there is a
lack of state police presence
and I could tell you know
district in the state all twelve
on we have missing gaps in our
ships we don't have twenty four
hour coverage you may not on no
that are understand that some go
home at midnight because we
don't have enough people some go
home at two o'clock because we
don't have enough people that is
not safe for the community that
is not a state for the sheriff's
departments in the PED's that
are out there relying on our
folks to back them up.
That's the state we're in.
And I and and.
I'll close with.
Are retired officers are are
already returning to work.
They're either going to other
states to be police officers for
their going to the private
sector and we're losing all of
that experience it's going
somewhere else where it could
stay here with guardrails I know
we're all worried about what
happened in two thousand ten but
this bill does not create two
thousand ten we had to repeal
this I appreciate y'all's time
we obviously support is built I
apologize those long winded but
this is important we need people
we need them right now thank you
thank you chief all right
opposition we had three people
that were going to come up with
if there's four I want to be
fair and do equal but I don't
know if there's a fourth one so
there's three of them please
line up here and state your name
for the record hello my name is
Sean will be in the president of
the Albuquerque police officers
association madam chair thank
you so much for the opportunity
to speak today we do not like
this legislation this is a
groundhog day legislation this
is failed public policy the
public does not like double
dipping and exacerbates the
problem what happens is that we
see laziness when the past is
going to be our future we need
to be focused on retention we
need to be focused on the next
generation of law enforcement in
the state we need to change the
conversation in the state to get
that interest we have a governor
that makes eighty thousand
dollars a year we have a police
departments all over this state
that are not competitive in rate
they're not competitive we have
to focus on the real problem not
a bandaid fix it's going to
exacerbate the problem we saw
this affect our morale what a
slap in the face you get to work
a whole twenty years in law
enforcement and to make a
respectable wage you get to come
back and do it again we lost the
twenty year retirement for law
enforcement because of double
dipping.
Do we need a twenty year
retirement if the answer is
double dipping if a seventy
percent pay increase for police
officers is the answer where's
the money I'm I'm ready I could
you seventy percent and so could
my officers we are the most
definitely staff police
department in the state
Albuquerque is a specific
problem on its own my officers
are miserable they don't feel
supported and they don't feel
they have a recipe for success
in the City of Albuquerque
police department I have less
officers that we had in nineteen
eighty nine this state is in
crisis Albuquerque is in crisis
but this is going to exacerbate
the problem and continue the
crisis we have kids and tried to
advocate against this bill for
the last decade is this all we
have Mexico this is it failed
policy from the past to fix our
future I am asking you to not
vote on this legislation I know
there's pressure I know that you
have elected officials and you
have administratively appointed
officials that are telling you
that this is the answer this is
not the answer I represent the
largest number of rigs and file
officers in this state and I am
telling you I would not be here
without their authority to be
their advocate and they don't
like this legislation thank you
so much.
Madam chair members of the
committee Carter bonding with
us.
I'd like to our first of all
thank the governor and senator
PDF for bring this in this sense
we have a massive staffing
problems and for the people of
stood up from the counties in
the state Halliday's we
completely agree with that.
It's our members who are
corrections officers who want to
be the first ones to die when
there's another right because
it's understaffing so the good
news is that I think there's a
shared goal here to fix our
problems with staffing but as Mr
will be said we think this
actually makes it worse and I
want to talk about the
mechanisms of how this makes it
worse because the details of
these bills are obviously
incredibly important.
This bill doesn't have any of
the guardrails would stop people
from just having incentive to
retire right now.
Which also has negative
consequences for pair because it
doesn't say you have to have
already been retired so let's
say about twenty six years and
and I'm planning on working
mothers for this bill allows me
to sit out for twelve months
basically vacation because para
when you work that many years is
basically the same take home pay
do you have right now so I get
twelve months with my kids my
grandkids work on my golf game
but over the twelve months maybe
you get the idea.
I have a great year and then it
is a virtual certainty that I
can be hired back twelve months
later or maybe I checked before
I leave twelve months later come
back in now and pulling down
almost twice the take home pay
for the next three years.
Every single person can do that
ought to be correct and we don't
blame anyone who does it be
crazy not to of course you'll
take a year's a year off and
three years double pay instead
of working for single pay for
four years everybody would do
that virtually everybody.
So that's one of the mechanisms
where this particular bill but
not having one of those
guardrails seem you have to be
previously retired actually will
spike.
Or vacancies in the short term.
In the longer term this just
sets us back because.
Mr will be has a up stronger
iron fist about this and I do so
I want to say it nicely there's
no incentive to ever really fix
our recruiting and retention
problems if we have this group
for nine years remember to
secure sunset but if you get in
under the wire you have thirty
six months for nine years now
we're going to rely on double
dippers to fill by the way will
be frontline jobs we management
jobs but will have nine years of
having a lot of payroll
essentially subsidized by pair.
That means we're gonna fall
farther and farther behind and I
want to leave on a positive note
of what we can do about this and
your the Senate finance
committee so I'm I'm double
dipping bring this up.
Okay lungevity pay changing
health care percentages things
like that because in the City of
Santa Fe which you heard from
today.
When they raise police officers
salaries sixteen percent last
year they went from a twenty two
percent vacancy two or ten
percent vacancy in one year
there's nothing special about
Santa Fe I mean they got rid of
the no beard one sure that
helped with one or two people
but basically what they did was
raise pay they brought it to
market rates that's what we need
to do and I know that's a longer
process.
We're not even talking about
even with some of the nice
things were talking about doing
Senate finance which we
appreciate when I am going to
match inflation from last year
and a half.
So we're way behind market to
start in passing this for the
next six or nine years just puts
us further behind markets not
only to their great incentives
to spite vacancies in the short
term what we're going to end up
creating a bigger problem down
the road thank you.
Thank you Carter all right one
more person back here thank you
for coming up and for the
patients.
Thank you Mr madam chair members
of the committee John let's use
with The New Mexico federation
of labor there's not a whole lot
more technical that I could
bring to the conversation that
Mr Willoughby and Mister Bundy
is already brought I'm just here
to remind you on that you know
my organization Representative
over twenty six thousand union
members now both in the public
and private sector we represent
over I want to say thirty some
odd affiliates this is a value
issue for our organization we
have stood against this effort
ever since two thousand and ten
when we saw it go horribly wrong
this is something that we will
continue to stand against now
and into the future we very much
respect the sponsor here the
governor we understand the need
that is that is a reason to
bring this up.
Change how we feel about this
this is unfortunately the wrong
way to solve a very serious
problem again I won't go into to
all that it's been said in the
past but we really do hope that
you take a long look at this and
understand that as I said
workers private public sector
all workers across the state do
you believe that this is just
the wrong answer to this problem
so thank you very much thank
you.
Turn this back on thank you very
much for that all right I think
before we vote and he's been a
motion for discussion and second
just for discussion for now but
I think senator Munoz had a
question.
Also monitor start we want to go
as it might just forget.
Nobody on zoom so far respond
chair with your yes but you go
ahead to respond before Center
Manassas questions I think that
be fair to you thank you thank
you madam chair and I think you
heard the pros and the cons very
laid out very well by the folks
at spoke in favor of the ones
that spoke opposed I I have a
great expecting work very
closely with the folks that you
heard that were in opposition
this just happens to be one
thing that we disagree and we
agree on about ninety nine
percent of the other items.
I will say that
Some of the comments I heard on
the opposition side were that
you know about that we tried
this before or groundhog day I
think was the term that was used
there this is not at all we're
not we're proposing here is not
at all what we used to do there
are
requirements that should be
retired for twelve months you
could come back to work after
ninety days previously that is
if you know what happens to you
madam chair in the year you have
a birthday you might it have
grand children at that point you
might get into a rhythm and a
routine the these are folks that
are going to really want to come
back up so I just wanna make
sure that that's one thing
that's pointed out that's
differently there's also
motivation for the Human the
nature and motivation that we're
looking at here now you have the
option of not retiring and
actually shoring up the account
really helps the pair account if
folks work longer so and they
continue to receive that
paycheck that lord there likely
toward the end of their career
there or or before they retire
there probably at the highest
rate that they've received so
they continue to receive that
and they're also able to take
the average one hundred percent
of their average of their high
three so there's motivation
there talked about you know the
the twelve months you know that
things happen for seasons maybe
start a business maybe you have
a grand child at that point
maybe decide to move out of
state who knows you know a lot
of things happen to people
you know when it comes to some
of the suggestions here in terms
of let's fix the root of the
problem this legislature has
been increasing employee pay for
for at least the fear that we
were here in this enrollment
period of our of our state I
have voted countless in multiple
times to increase pay for for
our state employees in every
department in every aspect of it
so I just wanna make sure that
we mentioned that and I also do
want to say I I respect the fact
that the Mr looks it's six
shoots from the the federation
of labor mentioned the twenty
seven or forty four twenty seven
thousand points they represent
their eligible for this to madam
president madam chair they are
all eligible to take on these
additional benefits to work
their retirement up to one
percent.
For the rest of their lives and
so this doesn't have it doesn't
favor one class or group over
another that's all I have thank
you thank you thank you center
for that response and senator
Munoz you have a question before
we go on to vote because I think
we have a motion on the floor
and then we have a second but
with four discussion to proceed
thanks I'd like to.
In let me ask you this and I I
see this one one committee
raises.
pay on officer.
Albuquerque raises that.
How much exes you see from your
agency because that's a shifting
I see Santa Fe may increase
their but how many state
policeman they pull or did they
pull.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I don't have the numbers in
front of me.
We've only pull in we got a
decent raise last year would be
if we're able to pull in one APD
officer I have lost zero
officers to Santa Fe PD we said
the last year that a high tide
rises all ships you guys gave us
a very healthy race
unfortunately didn't necessarily
affect retirements and
separations
but we you know we are told you
this before we have a very loyal
organization
but they need help right now.
I guess.
I've seen this happen in Gallup
because we raised ours
Albuquerque razors I mean
officers the Gallup to go to
Albuquerque because the pay is
better so we're all we're doing
is arranging people around right
they're going to go human nature
is human nature they're going to
go or the highest rate and so
when the state rooms officers
hearings officers there well
we're shifting the page order
dean of officers but we're not
using that that tells me we're
not using our current retention.
money correctly correct you said
that.
Mr chair up I'm I hate to keep
saying that members of the
committee last year when we
discuss this
The state police I can't speak
for everyone else came to you
saying that we can no longer
like we're fighting over the
same few people in the state and
that we needed to have
competitive pay so that we begin
to pull people from out of state
I don't think we're there yet
again I'm not complaining of how
much you gave us is it's very
much needed we appreciate it but
we haven't seen a lot of folks
from out of state coming here
otherwise you're going to
continue to see what what you're
talking about senator Munoz so
we have retention and
recruitment money and we're just
shifting more money for
retention officers we're not
ever going to get the approval
and we need we're talking about
a hundred million dollars
improvement retention I we're
not ever even return to work on
fixes never gonna recruit
officers we need.
Yes but I think this by this I
think this by this a little bit
of time so that maybe
depreciation the law enforcement
feels or doesn't feel at this
time maybe gets evened out with
the pendulum because we're
obviously going through a lot
the last couple of years as a
profession hoping that at that
time maybe that pendulum kind of
season the middle and more folks
want to do this versus being
afraid to do because of the
perception.
Thank you madam chair yes thank
you and you have a question says
thank you chief.
Thank you madam chair so a point
is been made with I want to just
follow up on a little bit more
which which could be a good
point.
which is that this could maybe
make things worse have an
unintended consequence and I
guess my question is.
If somebody were eligible to
retire.
And they knew they could come
back to work a year later and
still get that retirement.
I mean.
Would that not be an incentive
for someone to.
David Lee start collecting that
and then be able to.
Click the seller it's up to them
Mr chairman and senator that's
certainly one way to look at it
sure I mean but you would you
would be stopping wherever
you're at I mean we have built
into the legislation the ability
to shore up your retirement for
the for before you retire for
the first time so there's
there's motivation on both sides
of it would be a very personal
decision in terms of how this
would affect an individual and
just Mr three oh to respond if
you wishes.
Madam chairman in the center
state Morton correct this this
could incentivize people to
leave earlier than they
otherwise would but as Center
Pollio said it also can entice
them to stay longer than they
otherwise would have going up to
that hundred percent you know
returning for three for thirty
six months is a nice of carrot
but when you look at what your
pensions gonna be over a
lifetime so so yeah it's an
individual decision they'll have
to put pen to paper figure out
what's better for them long term
Mr chair Senator but would like
to see.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn you
know know a lot officers like
this and I'm just use myself as
an example I I started him on
twenty year retirement in twenty
eight years and that every
opportunity to leave and
collected pension the commission
and try to find other
opportunities in order to you
know have a pension and you
double dip in the private sector
so to speak and and I know a lot
of people that stay with this
job because they believe in the
state in this job because they
want to continue contributing
billion what we're doing it is
maximize my retirement left at
seventy percent at this at this
point I've been capped out and
there's not a lot of sense for
me to continue to the fact that
we want to do this job and so in
that there might be some people
that want to leave you know I
twenty years but I think you're
gonna find that anyway there's
some people that just can't
tolerate job any longer no
twenty five year retirement they
may just want to be done for
that for that purpose those are
still believe in what we're
doing I think will continue stay
around Mr.
Thank you all right said thank
you very much madam chair thank
you Mr chair as we go forward
just to.
Question it's all of the
relevant to the urgency that we
continue to go ahead and here on
both sides of of this issue
what what do we have the
emergency clause attached to
this particular bill thank you
madam chair Senator by the.
Your chair and senator you know
it's we never occurred to me to
add that with this one I think
it gives the department of the
just a little bit more time also
to get prepared and heard of
over the.
a little bit more time to get
themselves organized on this
matter and get them a little bit
of you know daylight in there to
get things ready for July one.
So madam chair Mr chair as we we
move forward the intent is that
first of all we see the urgency
across the board and and that's
a very evident.
But within that with this kind
of time and and maybe madam
chair deferring to the expert do
you need that extra time in
order to avoid and prepare for
these people that will return to
work.
Mr chairman Mr through madam
chair and senator Campos it
would be helpful because we will
have to educate our employers
what the guard roles are what
people can come back and also
put the in place some controls
within our pension
administration system to to be
able to
make modifications to allow for
this.
Chair and and if I may just
again Senator so so within that
if you can just kind of walk me
through what those guardrails
are going to be and what that
time is going to be in terms of
preparing for educating if you
will you work staff so that were
able to go and undertake this
and then have there been any
projections in terms of the
numbers of people that may be
returning to work.
Mister chair Mister through.
Madam chairman Senator Campos
we've used historic retirement
trends on what we anticipate to
how many people are going to
retire it is human behavior so
until we until this is
implemented we don't know what
that behavior is going to be so
we've used historical trends to
see what what that could
potentially be as far as a guard
rails it's it's working with our
employers to make sure they're
educating their employees that
are gonna be hiring these
potential return to work
employees so they they
understand what they're doing
they're understanding we're
making sure they are retired not
retiring prematurely we're
putting you know safeguards and
into place in our system to make
sure we we have is little
mistakes as we can once once
this occurs.
Chair and senator the last
question tied directly to all of
this is the indication that with
the people that you'll be
working with our within your
department and others through V.
E. R. A. R. we indicating that
you're short staffed or is the
indication that within this we
just don't have the tools in
place yet to to return to
something like this.
Mr chairman and senator less Mr
through here to respond as well
but there will be you know the
little promulgation of of the
framers of legislation I know
that parents also has been a
vacancy rate as well there's a
number of reasons but I you know
Paula and respond it's his day
to day work so.
Thank you madam chair it again
then there's an accomplice it
not so much that we're short
staffed it's whenever anything
is new there's always a lot of
questions whenever there's new
forms that employers are gonna
have to fill out he there there
is going to be that rush of in
the beginning we just need to
make sure that our staff is
prepared to handle that to make
sure we have the controls in
place to handle that.
Thank you very much chair all
right thank you I don't have yes
center diamond thank you madam
chair and thank you guys thank
you Senator Padilla for bringing
us I I hate the way I look at
this I I feel like the recent
political climate is really
largely responsible for this
work force void that we see I
appreciate Senator Campos you
mentioning an emergency clause
and I understand why it's not
necessary here but you know
these are the consequences of
removal of qualified immunity a
D. fund the police movie like
these are real consequences that
we're dealing with here and I I
will tell you that when border
patrol in my region calls for
back up in the first ones to
come inevitably our state police
they don't care if he's double
dipping when I called for
someone to respond to somebody's
breaking into my home with two
girls is inside I don't care if
the officer retired last year it
is has come back all I care is
that came back and it is there
and so I think we have a role to
play in this work force void we
have created some of this and
it's our responsibility to
command and and while I agree we
need to emphasize on recruiting
retaining what we have right now
we're facing an emergency and so
for any officer who wants to
come back and and provided
protect for the citizens of New
Mexico I don't care if they were
to before that's what we need to
do thank you senator Padilla for
bringing us forward and happy to
support it thank you madam chair
Senator Diamond all right I
don't have anyone else on the
list that we do have a motion
for it to pass from Senator do
you have a Senator share we had
a second from Senator Campos can
we call the roll.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos is.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill.
Yes yes.
Senator share this.
Senator Steinborn yes.
For what.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
There are many of us no.
Nine to to to pass starboard's
cleanable.
Thanks.
Really.
But yes on this bill and I'm
really torn because.
Because I I trust the experience
of.
Guys like Carter and Josh so
much I think this the first time
I ever have have maybe had it
just a different feeling and
it's just because I know how
crucial our our labor shortages
are with our law enforcement and
others and and I.
I hope that the increase in
pension will help calibration
offset that urge to maybe fault.
So we're gonna find out if this
passes we're gonna find out once
again if this works or not to
help out but
I know that we're facing crucial
circumstances that are
affecting.
A lot of public services so
voted yes in that spirit thank
you Mr thank you Mr.
After.
Okay we're gonna center that
was not an emergency clause.
After the January twelfth and
one year waiting period all stop
watching my driving.
I don't think that.
All right Senate can Mr Chairman
the committee because your
renewable make some noise in the
left lane for the rest of the
year.
Leave it.
Usually with that gun
immediately I may have one to.
We're going to go on to house
bill one twenty seven education
assistance salary increase
representative and a thank you
and Representative Baca is it
yeah I guess so Senator Baca
thank you for page who survived
Representative.
Yes Representative.
I know I know just to.
Thank you madam chair
I thank you for your house bill
one twenty seven it is it is at
a salary increase for all
educational systems a minimum
salary requirement of twenty
five thousand and what you
should know is the educational
assistance is everybody knows to
kind of the unsung heroes of our
school systems there are some
call it the glue that holds our
our school systems together you
should know that we have
probably about fifty four
hundred educational assistance
in our state this bill would
provide a raise for almost
eighty percent of them there are
over eighteen percent that make
less than twenty thousand
dollars a year I need to
introduce my on experience
when Warniment who is a director
at the alley S. C. and with that
madam chair I'll stand for
questions thank you
Representative where would you
like to say anything no just
quieter tired about.
All right thank you
can we first go to the audience
I can't really we don't have an
amendment on this and I'm like
looking we've had so many
amendments to jail you madam
chair this this past unanimous
unanimously and three house
committees commerce education
appropriations passed
unanimously on the floor and and
Senate education analysts and
LISC endorse bill thank you very
much for that information
Representative for all your hard
work in this regard the
appreciate that all right we're
gonna go to the audience first
do we have anyone supporting
this bill the audience all right
can oh my goodness we're gonna
have to can we have at least
three people come up to the Mike
here if we may and then how many
opposed to this bill no one okay
great well then come on up and
yes.
Yeah yes second you the yes
ma'am Mr Chairman but I mean Mr
chair Senator share as yeah but
I've already called so I'd like
to just have a quick
Where are you where did you go
the three come on over let's
have three state your name
because I know you wanted to
speak on this and want to give
you an opportunity have about
three people and that's and
anyone as can't stand you want
to come to some long you talk
the more info.
I understand madam chair.
Members of the committee stand
around the school
superintendents we're in favor
of this bill is supported along
to your hospital to thank you
thank you all right that was
shortened good so we can move.
All right next thank you madam
chair members of three genders
related to New Mexico we're also
it's for this bill and that's I
think all the to be sent thank
you thank you all right next
person.
The committee see signs with the
New Mexico and we on behalf of
our members we stand in strong
support of this bill we think
the sponsor for bringing this
legislation forward and we have
so you go to favor thank you
very much thank you Steve all
right anyone on soon.
Okay zoom let's let's have the
person on zoom speakers one
person in support.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Emily wilt thou with New
Mexico voices for children and
we support each be one twenty
seven and we also like to thank
the sponsor for bringing forward
the bill and hope that you will
join us in your support today
and voted to pass thank you
thank you very much all right in
committee members.
The
motion can we have there was
been a motion on the floor we
had a second right there's a
motion.
Okay there's a motion centers
there Here second from Senator
Padilla in this take a vote.
Yes.
Senator Campos.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator share yes Senator
Steinborn your Senator Woods yes
there are three guests yes the
new equipment is excuse tend to
their thank you Representative
thank you grant thank you very
much committee appreciate your
hard work all right we're gonna
move on to where are we here
okay we have Senator Kernan you
have been so patient I was
watching you there in the
audience committee substitute
for Senate bill one fifty seven
gross receipts tax distribution
to Hobbes the.
Expert witness on the.
One is.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee this is
basically a replica of what.
Our office and it's just one
time appropriations for your
consideration to come to get us
through we have several bills
that have been presented during
this session for more of a
permanent fix and they're moving
slowly.
Take another year for that.
Thank you very much for that if
you want to say something okay
fine audience anyone as part of
this bill.
Anyone opposing this bill anyone
on zoom.
Nobody is in committee members.
What what are the wishes there's
a motion for the past by Senator
Gonzales we have a second.
There's a motion and there's a
second from Senator share.
So there's a question for
discussion so.
Senator Steinborn yes what will
the one we already heard and
miss madam chair and senator
Steinborn we felt like it was
important to do one for Carlsbad
and one for Hobbs just to make
sure we defined the lines and we
there's no difference between
what you did for Carlsbad with
this bill.
Representative let me ask you
with all the oil and gas madam
chair Senator how we think that
this taxes are through the roof
and madam chair and Senator
Steinborn for the last two years
we have been
We've been presented before both
LFC and revenue stabilization
committee the details on the
facts related to the fact that
because of destination by
sourcing all of that revenue
related to mining is now being
paid to the county and so we
have lost over two hundred
million dollars in match gross
receipts and this is courting to
the LFC staff report to the LFC
and so that those dollars have
actually not really even going
to the county because their
point three eight percent those
dollars have been.
Basically sent to the state of
New Mexico and if you recall
last year I carried a bill that
would have asked the state of
New Mexico to return the one two
two five that we had lost
because of destination by
sourcing to the municipalities
of Hobbs and Carlsbad just for
the mining issue in the cost of
the state was over fifty million
dollars that's what we're losing
and that's why this is so
critical for Hobbs we're not
asking for recurring
appropriation we're asking for
one time appropriations to help
us get through as we try to
figure out how we're going to
replace those phones thank you
mentioned senator Dino is the
money in the budget.
And I.
What is a discussion what is
under discussion there's no
nothing definitive Center
discussion.
Thanks triplex in the right
thank you anyone else from the
committee on this no okay we
already have a motion we had a
motion reduce hazardous seconded
is just for discussion so can we
take a vote please.
Senator Burt yes.
There are couples yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator share over.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes
thank you members thank you
thank you senator all righty
includes Adrian okay so we're
gonna move on to Senate bill one
seventy six a second fund for
disaster response Senator Campos
and had a meal.
Okay and there is an amendment
but I'll let you talk a little
bit about your bill before thank
you very much madam chair
members of the Senate finance
committee and I understand that
maybe Santa how to me should be
on its way if he's not he's
fully support of this in essence
Senate bill one seventy six
proposes then to amend section
seventy two dash fourteen dash
twenty four
point one or if you want NMSA
nineteen seventy eight the
second community ditch
infrastructure fund along with
that what this basically would
do is it would to help us at and
support if you of the use of
these resources for disaster
response recovery and hazard
mitigation information meeting
of field funding availability
from other state and federal
programs along with that as we
continue to go and deal with our
seconds we're in one of those
situations that is definitely in
need of the resources but more
importantly if you are madam
chair for us to continue to use
those resources as soon as
possible and I if I could just
going to for quickly to my
expert and then from there we do
have an amendment so I'll leave
that up to you madam chair style
you want to proceed thank you
very much for thank you I don't
have the amendment if I can just
okay thank you all right so you
can move the amendment for
discussion we have a second just
for discussion at this time we
can talk about it thank you
motion a second to hear the
amendment so
all right.
I
have no doubts about.
Staff is been extremely busy.
All right senator and chairman
of the Senate finance committee
in essence what the amendment
will do is go ahead and strike
if you will the language
therefore increasing the
transfer from the New Mexico
ation works construction fund
for the second community ditch
infrastructure fund and also
strikes making appropriation
that's what this ammendment does
madam chair thank you senator in
a
Any comments or questions from
the committee on the amendment.
Okay then at that so you think
there's a motion for the past
present a petty and a second by
Senator share call the roll.
So you can.
Hope you moaning okay then yes.
There are couples yes.
Senator David yes Senator
Gonzales Senator Hemphill.
Is excuse Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share.
Senator Steinborn yeah.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes chairman I
mean yes the amended bill said
very much tell us about it we
have policy to thank you very
much Mr chairman Senate finance
committee if I could I'd like to
first to my experts Public RC
right now who is the CEO if you
will for the Mexico sick SO in
and she will go into more detail
in terms of what this particular
build us and why we brought it
before you thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Santa Paula welcome
thank you good afternoon madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm the executive.
In the bill in front of you is
an important bill for a second
across the state of New Mexico
there are close to seven hundred
seconds and twenty three
different counties across the
state and this fund is a very
important resource for a seconds
for planning design and
construction of a second
projects this is even more
important now that there have
been so many disasters in the
state we had numerous is sick is
damage from different fires and
subsequent flooding last year so
this bill what it does is is it
changes the existing Fund yes I
can committed infrastructure
fund with us some some
additional language it adds the
the term disaster recovery to
the purpose of the funds and it
also clarifies that the fund can
be used for state and federal
matching and it ensures that
there would be no local cost
share requirements for a second
that participate in this funding
program so those are the three
language changes that we're
proposing with this bill madam
chair and I'm available for
questions thank you Paula
appreciate all your work to do
always for a second so many
people in the rural areas to
thank you all right so do we
have any comment from the public
anyone of supporting the bill
would are you a support will
come on you want to come up and
just briefly is something that
we have someone against the bill
okay no one okay so tell us
briefly members of the committee
my name is Mike Hammond on the
New Mexico state engineer and
and the vision works
construction fund is the
absolutely right place for this
funding to come from for this
use we we totally support that
we have a the staff were working
hard
at the Interstate Stream
Commission to implement all the
funding dedicated for this
purpose.
And I want to thank the
committee for the amendment to
help
Of the sure this long term
solvency of the fund with the
understanding that the fund is
still being used to address
staffing needs and other
overhead at the Interstate
Stream Commission and that we
need to address that in the
future to make sure the solvency
of the fund so thank you very
much madam chair.
Thank you thank you very much.
Your next madam chair and
members of the committee so all
I I'm here to stand in support
of of the bill also I did want
to mention just two items in
that regard as Mike is mentioned
you know the the long term
solvency of the irrigation works
construction fund is always a
concern for the Interstate
Stream Commission we think the
work activities of the I think
you program the construction
projects are the appropriate
kind of expenditures from those
funds but we know that that's
not all that it's been used for
today and what we do thank you
for bringing that up and making
the amendment I just want to
mention one other item I so the
disaster relief peace on this is
really important because we've
been looking at ways to utilize
some of these funds and we
haven't had that ability and we
know we're likely to have more
fires going into the future we
think that having no cost share
for disaster relief for planning
and design is absolutely
appropriate we do have a concern
about no cost share for the the
construction and I just want to
bring up one piece there it's
obviously your decision in that
regard but having skin in the
game for construction when the
state is themselves are
responsible for that design
element in the construction work
makes a big difference if you
have somebody who is there at
the safety of it has a loan for
some amount of money that
they're putting into their gonna
make sure that that contractor
works the state within budget
because we can't do that and and
that's our only concern with the
bill is that aspect of of no
cost share for the construction
piece and we think some amount
of car sure would be appropriate
in that regard but not for the
other pieces happy to work with
the the senator in the sponsor
on that work go with the
decision of this committee.
Much for that all right next
thank you making.
Yes absolutely is that better
good afternoon Madam chairman
members of the committee thank
you for this opportunity to
speak my name is Gillian Joyce
I'm with rocky mountain farmers
union we stand and whole hearted
support of this bill most
certainly and we do this for
disaster relief we can see this
particular after the fires we
saw this past year we feel we we
understand philosophically and
agree with the the importance of
skin in the game and a lot of
situations this is not one of
those situations where we think
that's important are secular
political subdivisions of the
state they aren't they're not
private entities and they are
largely unfunded the way other
political subdivisions of the
state are these are political
supplicants subdivisions run by
volunteers often with absolutely
no real staff and so anyway we
can support them access
accessing this funding to ensure
that we continue to have
agriculture in parts of our
state where we don't have many
agricultural wells or other
opportunities for your patience
essential so thank you very much
thank you very much all right we
didn't have there's one more to
speak yes go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Lawrence
guy of course and I.
Work within us Latino farmers
and ranchers and with New Mexico
Food Network Policy Council and
I I I I I'll also was I I
wrenched for thirty years in
southern Colorado on and as the
president of two different a sec
just and this this bill and in
the funding for the sickest is
very important especially and
in disasters and we we think
that there should be a matched
it in especially during it.
The a disaster like to happen
this this past year and so I I
think we've been very much we
she would approve that thank you
thank you very much all righty
we don't have anyone in
opposition do we have anyone
else in person for the two of
anyone okay one person is
assumed can you state your name
please.
Anyone on zoom out we hear
there's one person in zoom
giving you a chance to to speak
and Marcos thank you all right
so used in of that we got out of
our see on the on the SAT of New
Mexico in Rio Arriba county a
delegate to the New Mexico
acequia association in New
Mexico's soil health champion
associated with New Mexico
healthy soil working group
please pass bill S. B. one seven
six I have to agricultural LLC's
it will add disaster recovery to
the purpose of the fund it will
expressly allow the fund for
matching state and federal funds
it will ensure that there is no
cost share requirement for us I
guess which is a real burden of
so please support this bill.
Thank you very much all right
twenty.
I'm sorry we still talking.
No okay do any committee members
yes center for.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple quick questions
Does any of this money revert.
At the end of the year or does
it stay in the and in the front
thank you senator Byrd ongoing
defer again to my experts please
madam chairman Senator Burt the
the the thinking painted
infrastructure fund received two
point five million dollars from
the irrigation works
construction fund any unspent
funds revert back to the
irrigation works construction
fund.
And madam chair may ask also but
on an annual basis usually end
up spending that two point five
you rarely revert or is the
money that it's going back each
year.
Madam chair Senator Burt the the
fund it was created in with
legislation was passed in twenty
nineteen with the delayed
enactment in the first year
fiscal year twenty to the
Interstate Stream Commission was
not ready to implement the funds
so in fiscal year twenty to the
two point five completely
reverted in fiscal year twenty
three the the the program is up
and running and they've done one
cycle of funding for fiscal year
twenty three with two point one
million dollars of projects plus
an allowance for cost overruns
so this year will be the first
successful here that we can see
that most most of not all of the
funding will be spent and the
Interstate Stream Commission has
also been using a special
appropriation that was
L. appropriated in the last
legislative session for disaster
recovery of mostly focused on
the black fire and I am in
future years when those special
appropriations are not there
these this irrigation sick at
committed infrastructure fund
will be a good source for that
type of purpose.
and madam chair thank you very
much for the answer I I I I just
know that help for the sake is
our for the entire state quite
frankly and being able to have
those extra funds especially for
margin sees and things like that
are as a sound like a smart move
to me so thank you madam chair
thank you senator Senator Woods.
Thank you madam chair and then
Senator all of.
We're making a new fund.
The creating.
We're moving money of the New
Mexico works construction fund.
And that funds had is that fund
get appropriate that word is
that money come it's an annual
appropriation and where does it
come from.
Madam chair Senator Woods the
irrigation works construction
fund is a trust fund was created
in statute it's and it's in the
same chapter as as the the water
code and and the Interstate
Stream Commission
fourteen article fourteen and
that was that was created
Some years ago I don't know the
exact here but it receives
funding from the of oil and gas
proceeds from the State Land
Office so it is currently if you
look at the table and the LESC
Booklet that they put together
in the in the appendices there's
one appendix devoted to the
irrigation works construction
funding you could see our for
the past three to four fiscal
years how much money has been
coming in and right now that the
trend is around nine million per
year that comes into the
irrigation works construction
fund and then
At one point it had a
significantly large corpus but
since two thousand eight R. two
thousand nine around that time
the fund has been tapped through
the appropriations process to
fund operations of the OC and I
just see so that started during
the the Great Recession I was
there when that happened and it
was explained to me that that
was going to be temporary that
that the irrigation works
construction fund with engine
it's intended for irrigation
projects it was going to be
tough to temporarily to fill the
budget hole and to to fund the
agency and so
in in that same table you'll see
that the appropriation out of
that fund has has varied from
year to year but at one point it
was up around ten million in
recent years it's been between
six and nine million so.
That most of the recurring
revenue that's coming into the
irrigation works construction
fund it's going to support
agency operations but in twenty
nineteen
there was a bill passed by the
legislature that we advocated
for that set a two point five
million recurring appropriation
to this newly created fund just
to ensure that the LESC as we
continue to get funding there
was a line item in the I just
see budget for many years prior
to that going back to the late
eighties early nineties that was
allocating a year to year basis
as part of the icy budget one
point nine million dollars to
icy but A. twenty nineteen it
was codified as part of this new
law this new fund at a recurring
two point five million dollars
per year so most of the fund is
going towards agency operations
but part of it's going to be a
second Pollock can we try to
keep your responses a little
shorter so we can be able to
move on the bill because we're
gonna have a hard stop and I
hate for your bill to be okay
delays thank you so much miss
yeah and and this follows
telling the exact thing that
need to be told and why it needs
to be told the only other
question I have is the
irrigation fund how was it
distributed who was that
distributing body was that I
just see that distribute that to
the projects.
Was water trust board that
distributed that to projects who
was the designated board to take
the project to distribute that
money to.
Madam chair and senator woods
the legislature appropriated the
money to I MC and then I just
see appropriated to the just
seconds threw up through a line
item that was in their budget
and now with this fund the I. S.
C. it's administered by the
Interstate Stream Commission
okay and the safety of board has
nothing to do with distributing
the money Madam chair Senator
that's correct okay thank you
madam chair thank you senator
thank you Paula all right
Senator Padilla I just moved to
pass madam chair Hey there's a
motion for.
I'm sorry there's a motion and
there was a sack motion from
Senate body and there was a
second from Senator Diamond can
we call the roll please.
Thank.
Senator couples Senator Diamond
yes Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill yeah.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator shares excuse Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Sen Rodriguez yes etcetera
minocin excuse to nine zero to
pass thank you madam chair
members of the Senate finance
committee.
Thirteen.
For.
Okay well thank you madam chair
no questions.
All right so tell us about your.
Thank you madam chair committee
members first of all of that to
improve my expert witness
regulation matches Department
director.
Lee Bailey thank you okay madam
chairman committee member's
house bill tool one as amended.
We did professional licensure
course extending the termination
date of licensure boards for
dental.
very Medicine architects
professional engineers
professional surveyors private
investigators public
accountability that's
accountability.
Real estate appraisers funeral
services eliminating the
termination date of licensure
board for them all little health
care.
Comma creek but I agree pharmacy
that could puncture oral
medicine and without madam chair
you might use for was was that
anything.
You madam chair members the
committee thank you for allowing
us to be here.
Thank you so you don't want to
say anything at this point.
Well it what I can say is madam
chair that the the sunset's
coming up right it's very
important is that we get these
past the program we have to shut
him down the bottom side for the
Representative Garcia was
talking about is the the.
Medical side of it you know the
point of not bringing him back
for sunset yes very much so
thank you so much for that very
important bill thank you
Representative for bringing this
and before I go on again thank
you for your service of the two
done for us thanks.
Yes of course okay do we have
any one in the audience in
support of the bill anyone
opposed to the bill anyone on
zoom.
Support okay can we have okay
people on zoom can you state
your name.
For the record.
And be very fine your comments.
Thank you.
Hello.
Sure yes.
holders on the executive
director with the New Mexico
border licensure for special
engineers professional surveyors
and we are part of this bill
because it provides the wife of
our agency to proceed on we have
been funded since nineteen
thirty five of eighty eight
years of existence so we're the
appreciate your to pass on this
bill to extend our life the HSD.
All right very good thank you
next person on soon.
One one more person on zoom.
Hello there this.
On.
I am the chairman Mexico board
of examiners architect and I
requests there or that you have
built architecture important to
the health thank you well for
the public in a public building
private buildings that are
constructed around the state.
I would ask you to support us
this bill thank you.
Right thank you thank you for
that okay any questions I think
I had a motion for a do pass a
little bit earlier from service
order is that we're going to
hold on to yes it was a motion a
second for discussion but I
think Senator Campos had a
question just real quick thank
you much madam chair members of
the committee I just want to let
you all know that I service the
representative is vice chair
during the interim on this
particular measure and he did an
excellent job thank you very
much Mr.
Thank you all right we have a
motion for a do pastor center
Gonzalez in the second from
Senator Woods of course you had
a question is this will stand
discussion how you fit madam
chair this may be a dumb
question but why are we
extending this at sunset instead
of just removing it.
Sorry federated to questions.
What what why are we extending
the sunset instead of just
removing some of the sun sets
all together.
Definitely madam chair and
senator until they went through
this and look at the we want
like the dental the the medical
side of it took to get away from
the sun setting can explain
exactly why we didn't go with
the others I mean open to it if
you want to but I think brought
it back up every year to see
it's much like some of the ones
that have since that in the past
I want to be able to come back
and re evaluate and see the need
I mean right now I believe they
all are absolutely as you've
heard from the individuals on
this and.
Thank you thank you and I do
know it's been discussed in the
past I kind of felt the same way
we keep doing this and in just
risk in the you know the the
fact that we could forget or
summer one border another may
not get it so yeah wish we did
it that way but we appreciate
you bringing this forward
Senator but to that point madam
chair
I was on this committee couple
years ago and what we found out
of some commissions and boards
work very well they they are
committed to the meeting X.
amount of times per year the
commission or the board is
filled up they they participate
and they run like they're
supposed to other commissions
and boards don't necessarily do
that and so it was explained to
me that those boards and
commissions what you want to
have a sunset on it because it
is a someone incentive to make
those boards and commissions
comply with their rules and
regulations and meeting the
appropriate number of times per
year and making sure that the
commission positions are are
filled up so there's some good
players and some not so good
player sometimes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much we have a motion from
Santo Gonzalez's second for
Senator Woods can we call the
roll.
A Sonya can we call the roll
please thank you.
Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes there are
three if yes Senator ministers
excuse tent hazard to pass thank
you Representative and thank you
gentleman she thank you madam
chair and committee members.
Thank you for this good bill all
right okay we're gonna move on
quickly we got three more bills
here we're going to go to a
committee substitute for Senate
bill three thirty seven water
security planning act we have
centers to fantasy here and it's
from that room Representative
have at a.
Senator Stefanics tell us about
your bill thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
With me today I have.
I'm presenting the water funding
bill there is no I need to
appropriations bill the word
appropriation has to do with
groundwater appropriations so
over the year the Interstate
Stream Commission the office of
the state engineer and many
individuals universities around
the entire state hello of
meetings and workshops on water
planning for the next fifty
years and one of the results of
those workshops was to come in
and asked for some changes to
their state agencies statute so
this is a state agency bill it
is a change to the strategic
water planning statute and of
the committee some of the or the
amendments that were put on in
the Senate conservation has to
do with involving tribal
consultation which is been left
out of the first bill so with me
today I have several experts
from the Interstate Stream
Commission and I would like to
hear from them we can get into
detail okay thank you very much
all have you because of time
were little strapped for time so
one person maybe briefly thank
you okay thanks madam chair and
excuse me members of the
commission the committee my
name's interment and the manager
the water planning program at
the Interstate Stream Commission
so the the reason we're trying
to put this bill forward here
that we have put four states
already experiencing less water
this is a trend that's expected
to reduce water supplies by up
to thirty percent or more over
the next fifty years and then
it'll continue we're expecting
rates across the board to
increase so that includes
drought flooding challenges to
existing dams and infrastructure
more fires and more uncertainty
to plan with uh Senator mention
of planning conducted for the
fifty year water plan identified
regional planning is a really
popular way to tackle some of
those issues and that was also
the kind.
Asian of the water policy and
infrastructure task force the
current statute which is from
nineteen eighty seven has really
met purpose the revised statute
is needed to help confront the
existing water challenges
this is really important because
our present water uses based on
the level of water availability
that's not going to come back
the challenges around the state
depend on where you are within
the state and as to the values
most of the water use in New
Mexico's for agriculture and
farmers worry about cities and
grow threatening Rights large
municipal systems of
sophisticated staff who can
pursue really sophisticated
Water at applications and
projects interstate compacts are
different in each basin industry
working to develop alternative
sources included treated saline
water and regional water
security planning as a way to
move forward independently so
underlying all water planning we
do our values related to risk
future generations and property
rights regional planning allows
regional water users to work
with their neighbors and develop
plans to match their values
rulemaking called for in the
bill provides opportunities for
public involvement with specific
requirements as they're
developed
now it's also a really critical
time because we have this once
in a generation availability of
funding this is really large
infrastructure projects large
water projects tend to remain in
use for fifty to eighty years
fifty years now we're looking at
really different water situation
we have today and we really need
to be building for that
So with the actors question turn
thank you thank you very here
are other sponsors you
representative who.
Thank you Representative
Herrerra all right and just for
the record just introduce
yourself for the record I know
you're not going to speak with
him chair Rolf Schmidt Petersen
I. C. director thank you madam
chair Hannah Riseley why I see
deputy director and of course.
Incentives to sing thank you for
being here again all right just
real quick for gonna go to the
audience is there anyone in
support of.
All right in anyone opposition
of the bill so we know all right
my can you be quick on your
comments thank you thank you
madam chair thank you sponsors
for bringing this bill for.
It is an agency bill it's the
top one of the top priorities
recommended by the water
policymakers structure task
force and the governor supports
this this bill as well thank you
thank you very much anyone on
soon.
For people I would like to see
more people okay.
Yes is that we already asked
Senator if there was anybody
opposed but sometimes people do
want to make their comments so
they've been waiting for hours
and I feel compelled to allow
them to say a few words thank
you okay we go to zoom can we
come up and briefly state your
comments your name and a brief
comment and will allow the for
people thank you.
Yes.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Bob Wesley
as president of the Middle Rio
Grande water advocates and we're
really in favor of this bill.
it's been through many dozens of
drafts starting back in the
twenty nineteen session and it's
been tailored to satisfy
multiple constituencies please
do Raul do press.
Thank you.
When.
Next person
on the side of the showed up
with the okay so that was the
only one that showed up from all
the ones assigned upset okay
then we have a motion we had
Senator Campos did you wanna
make a comic as we had a motion
to set aside is just a district
quick madam madam chair members
of the Senate finance committee
I just again want to go ahead
and think of centers to frantic
senator Wirth representative for
the work that went on during the
interim in order to go ahead and
prepare if you will this
particular measure countless
hours of not only testimony but
continuing to Gordon to rewrite
if you will our to make this a
better bill so with that madam
chair and full support thank you
thank you very much Senator
Campos okay we have a motion for
a day pass and one still had
proceed Senator there's a motion
Sierra Stallis Afridi pass in
the second from Senator Campos
all right can we call the roll
please.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos this Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Hemphill.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes that me
notices excuse ten zero do pass
thank you senator
representatives for all your
hard work all right.
All right.
Yeah we're going to go on to
Senate bill four thirty three
expand rural air passenger
capacity we have Senator Burt
and Senator Griggs.
Forth.
The.
If you needed a different for.
Best I can get on short notice
they both smile at this time of
the day we're all like beats and
then thank you all right tell us
about your bill.
Thank you Madam you want to go
I'm if you being a man of faith
Senate bill four thirty three
actually is a bill that I think
Senator Gonzalez the put
together about three four years
ago.
Providing funding for local
airports.
For support fund that
can help them expand their
airports and and do some special
things to accommodate their
growth.
all this bill does is not an
appropriation or anything like
that it simply moves the
capacity the aircraft from
thirty to one hundred and that
is because there are regional
airports like Hobbs and Russell
right now the regional flights
from their local airports into
commuter airports into hubs such
as Dallas and Phoenix there are
other airports that are looking
to do this as well but we need
the capacity moved up so that we
can attract these funds of for
example Alamogordo is in that
mix they're looking for
regional air support to to get
to either Phoenix and or Dallas
fort worth we have about three
times the number of tickets sold
out Alamogordo no chairman
County every year that is a
minimum to get this done so we
should be able to handle this
and it will give us an
opportunity to do some minor
modifications on our small
airport that would accommodate
security
of TSA requirements and a few
other things like that and my
partner Senator great may have
some additional comments are at
Senator thank you madam chair
members of the committee is just
real quick Alamogordo angel fire
Farmington Clovis all of
expressed interest in in looking
into the grant the grant has not
been fully utilize yet to read
about half of it's been I
accession other have to still
available that runs for two year
period to two issues these
communities in in bringing this
size of aircraft and could
Alamogordo to go to Phoenix for
instance Senator Steinborn Los
crucis same same type of deal if
they're all trying to go that
far the need this regional J.
act and that regional jets
larger than a thirty thirty
passenger sure that's.
Thank.
Senator thank you very much as
everyone in the audience
supporting this bill.
Anyone opposed and I heard
there's no one on zoom.
Either way that we're going to
go to comments from the
committee please Senator
Gonzales then Senator Steinborn
insiders you madam chair of.
We initiated this about four
years.
Very successful.
Small the airport.
The Gallup.
Others that are.
I think this is going to be a
big window.
If it works.
Well forward to a state.
State so.
I really support the strong.
Thank you senator are ever gonna
go to Senators Time Warner
center share and Senator Campos.
Senator Steinborn air just in
the bill Senators.
I'm struggling because and and
it's just because they don't
know the answer but it's rural
air service which kind of
implies smaller towns we're
trying to the commuter rail or
commuter now with this we're
picking this up to a hundred
passenger plane which to me
sounds like.
Pretty big points I mean.
Then I know the commuter service
that just came to Los crucis.
gosh I think they're playing
sold.
I don't know what fewer than
that these jets.
So I guess first question I'm
asking is and I'm seeing a
little bit of a definition on
page three of the bill.
What communities are eligible.
This municipalities or counties
on the minimum population of
twenty thousand.
Only thousand people.
So I wonder coming Bernalillo
county I purchased some in if
they recruited seven thirty
sevens are.
The where is the limit on who
would just open up that could
suddenly get this and this is
what I'm worried about.
It madam chair and senator I
think number one even if you
want to open your airport for
aircraft that have thirty seats
or even less it's still covers
that so it's not knocking them
off the the bottom in the larger
airports when you get to a metro
airport the the whole thing
changes quite frankly and and
there will be other funds
available for something as large
as state Albuquerque and and and
and a community the size of a
Paso for example.
Senator Madam chair
representative courting R. our
expert down Alamogordo this
issue hundred number is a is a
natural breaking point but most
of the aircraft that would be
flown out of places like
Alamogordo for actions would be
more in the sixty seventy
passenger regional jets size so
when they get to a hundred
they've got to have an
additional flight attendant
maybe go to have other things
show that the economics of that
airplane and that is
it probably won't work in a
chair and senator at one oh one
coroner's
our expert
everything changes the you go
into a whole different ball game
or something.
Well it's interesting because
even Dona ana county Mr chair
you know come with other issues
I mean still we just finally got
commuter service and we're the
second biggest city in the state
so how do you define you know
big in New Mexico when it comes
to cities and we were all rural
some aspects most of us with
maybe the exception of one.
Madam chair Senator you would be
eligible for these funds right
but if you had to have bigger
just like a seven thirty seven.
You will not be eligible you
would have to go into a a
different ball game all together
I and the well so I guess I was
just openly pondering the other
problem is there's a minimum
population requirements but not
a maximum population requirement
in this program that would
ensure out of the sun port
wouldn't take advantage of this
but.
I think they're the only one in
thinking about it that would
actually kind of concern me for
the second biggest city and we
can do stuff like this but in
and madam chair center yeah you
do you will be available for
this if you have commuter air
service in your airport and you
grow out of that capacity and
you jump too much larger jets
the would not be able to access
these funds at that point right
so but if we can jump start you
to get regional air service
through this bill more power to
you thank right okay thanks sure
thank you very much Senator in
center share we are next to the
remembers and compass thank you
madam chair so in the case of
Farmington.
We we're working on regional jet
service right now very close
fifty passengers.
With contracts that you gonna
take twenty seats out of the
planes with a thirty passenger
point.
This fixes that so you can have
a real plane with the can fill
up with fifty people.
I think it's a great idea.
It can can I appreciate the
comments madam chair.
This is what most commuter jets
Slide.
The low one hundred and one
passengers there ninety nine for
their fifty.
Thank you very much all right we
have less Senator Campos had a
COVID remove it would and I just
going to go ahead and move that
we approve Senate bill four
thirty I'm cert missed I already
have a due pass motion yes I'm
sorry that we have a due pass
some Senator Gonzalez and that
can you yes Senator Campos with
sack of that is that the one let
him do okay well it's already
done so now let's go with
Senator.
One of them wants to a little
bit.
I'm gonna have to make the
decision ever gonna keep or it
was there goes out as do bass
Senator Campos if you all know
that we have for all right so
let's call the roll.
Sierra or love in.
Okay please call the roll
Senator yes Senator Campos yes
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yeah Senator Padilla.
Senator share.
Chairman Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz.
The past eleven zero thank you
senator speaker chair.
All right.
Thank you very much will.
Thank you
you may choose to like it right
there's a regular leave you
there for a while okay thank you
last bill here for the evening
and we're gonna have a stop
after this we are gone the next
item down just in case
somebody's waiting House Bill to
the discussion we're going to
have we're going to roll that
over because of time and also
because the staff needs more
time to continue to look at
things and prepare for us so
we're here that likely tomorrow
at some point okay senator Munoz
or next thank you we'll send the
bill for new shape extends a
return to work for teachers from
thirty six to sixty months for
that will stand for questions.
Right.
Is there anyone in the audience
in support of this bill stand
in.
Come on over well well okay
there is already but before we
do let's see if there's anyone
in opposition to this bill
anyone on zoom.
Nobody on zoom all right did we
really have a due pass already
that weekly.
Not again.
Okay that okay work you know
what we're gonna do we're gonna
go to Senator Padilla because
this is too confusing with for
so state senator but do I do
pass and Senator share a second
okay this call the roll
instanton you for your comments
I know you're gonna stand in
support of it.
There will.
But you were stopped by right in
the middle you were stopped and
turned around.
All the rules Sonya.
Yes Senator Campos this Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
seven Senator Hemphill
Senator Padilla.
Yeah.
Please Canada share.
Senator Steinborn is X..
Well it's.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz.
Zero do that all right there we
go that was quick we've got the
agenda that I could believe is
here Representative tells.
And for tomorrow House Bill.
Please for for house bill two we
got an agreement on the tax
package so we're really gonna
start racking that up tomorrow.
so maybe plan on going on all
around the floor more about
maybe coming on awful really
gonna have to start getting all
the house bill two language
timed up everything kind of for
the tax package statutorily it's
due to them by Wednesday you may
be a day late but.
It's because of the house
holding up the tax packages is a
reason we're late so if anything
body once complained that will
suit House tax.
