will receive those spreadsheets,
we're, we're not on this
subcommittee, but we're here in
chance we could get copies of
these to look at so, so I
totally understood and again uh
the way that we had this uh
developed was the subcommittee
would be meeting, we would be
going through the, the staff
would be explaining uh the
recommendations and then, of
course, the uh reports would go
ahead and be given to the full
Senate Finance Committee, uh,
when we started.
when we would start to go ahead
and take action on that, uh, not
to go ahead and dispel or to
indicate that we're trying to
keep the information from you,
but again, the intent was that
it would be the subcommittee
that would be presenting this,
uh, so I would hope that you all
would, uh, bear our indulgence
as we go forward, uh, because
there was only 3 copies that
were developed and presented
again, uh, Senator, please, if
you have uh additional concerns,
please raise them at this.
Uh, uh, no charge. I just wanted
to be able to see what you're
talking, what you, because I
submitted several. I want to
make sure that they're there and
I mean, unless they can be
verified, and then I'll just
Watch from afar.
Uh, and again, uh, thank you
very much, uh, Senator Padilla
as we go forward, I, I realize,
uh, and, and it would be nice
for everyone to go and have
these copies, but again, as we
review them there could be some
additional changes and so as we
deal with it, the members of the
subcommittee would be reviewing
these and then again at the end
of the uh session today, uh,
they'll be presented to everyone
and then the uh formal
presentation.
To the entire Senate Finance
Committee and to the uh to the
public, that's when it would be
presented. So right now this is
gonna be the informal
presentation, uh, by our staff,
and it'll be to the subcommittee
in case there are questions and
then of course, uh, I will also
entertain those type of
questions that you may have, uh,
regarding those specific
amendments that maybe you, you
have concern with, and we'll try
to answer as many of them as
possible, but at this time
they're.
3 cents of the amendments that
have been presented and that to
the subcommittee.
Any other questions?
See and then please proceed, uh,
Mr. Avila, and of courses
Director Silly.
So before you, you have two
spreadsheets along with LCSA.
Wait,
Adrian, we don't have a sheet.
Correct, so it's just a
subcommittee.
Um, in the big spreadsheet.
Uh, it's titled so this
subcommittee was tasked with
looking this only primarily
captures changes um to give you
kind of a lay of the land.
Uh, it has the agency, the
business code, the type of
requests, which in this case
could be in most cases these are
bar requests from the executive.
Um, it gives you the page number
within House Bill 2 in case you
want to track language change
and then notes why they wanted
those changes.
It also has a column that has in
regards to it as well as um and
then it also has a call to give
you some history. And then
lastly, in the blue, the last
column is.
You
recommendation at
this time, changing the
language, so, uh, if you go for.
Those are all items that you as
a subcommittee
sat through multiple uh
individual meetings to kind of
fine tune. And then in the
purple starting on line 55 on
page 7.
These and in there right now, it
has a potential action with a
question mark.
And those are things that this
subcommittee, um.
Would need to recommendations of
reauthorizing those um
reauthorizing online 55.
The money we're here.
Thank you very much and uh
Director Sali, do you have any
uh comments to make in regards
to the uh the amendments as they
uh have been presented.
Mr. Chairman, I'll stand for
questions. Thank you very much
and again I'm just going to the
committee members, but if there
are questions by any members of
the full Senate Finance
Committee, uh, I will go ahead
and entertain those after I go
to the members of the
subcommittee. So first I'm gonna
go to uh Senator Tobiasson in
case there are any uh questions
regarding any of the information
that uh has been presented to
you, uh, and it could be about
process. It can be about
specific uh items on the list,
and again as we go through this,
the intent is the subcommittee
would make the adoption, uh, if
there's any change, of course,
that, you know, I would consider
that. And then along with that,
when we take this to the full
committee, then they would have
their opportunity then to um
work out the recommendations
that we've made and or
additional information that they
wish to also have considered so
going to Senator Tobias and
Senator Tobiasson.
please.
Thank you. And do I call you Mr.
Chair in this instance? Yes,
thank you, Mr. Chair, um, I
think.
Correct me if I'm wrong, we, the
ones in purple, we have recently
discussed at least some of these
that I'm seeing, right? We've
talked about them.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Tobias
has a subcommittee. OK, got it.
I'm just reviewing those based
on our individual conversation.
So right now I don't have any
questions.
Thank you very much going to uh
Senator Trujillo, Senator
Trujillo, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
yes, I did um.
With Adrian.
And staff um for those 4 items
that are on the they're in the
purple 55.
59, so.
Whenever you're ready for a
motion to approve. Thank you.
What I'm gonna do is go back to
uh the
Items in purple, uh, and if you
will, please explain those
because I don't believe that the
subcommittee had an opportunity
to go through those
specifically, and then we can go
over in case there are
additional questions and then
from there, uh, I'll be going to
use uh Senator Trujillo for that
motion, but we'll go through
this through the purple, and
then that'll give center
Tobiasson an opportunity to
review more of the information
and then I'll go to you, Senator
Trujillo.
Please proceed.
Mr. Chairs to extend.
Uh, it could be that the numbers
were drawn down.
But as of right now
the uh energy transition money
for workforce solutions
department.
Uh, uh, that was appropriated
originally in.
23
For 14.5 million, they've
expended 8.4 million.
would actually be since their
intent for this is to um.
Collaborate with sending the
money directly to San Juan to do
the work. That's for the
Department of Health.
And that is uh 2022
appropriation statewide.
Of that
So the intent right now is to
repurpose that money.
To include the ability for them
to use it for good fentanyl.
And then also to allow 1 million
to be used for sexual assault
services and.
23 for medication assisted
treatment for $1 million
specific type of.
Uh, medication that they would
use and they're starting to
receive uptake, he authorized as
given.
On line 60 for UNM.
Uh, this is, uh, repurposing,
uh, 1.5 million.
That's in recurring currently
within you all gave a $3
million. So it's shifting the
purpose, uh, line 61 is uh
Department of Transportation.
And this is an appropriation
from 2021.
Um, so DOT just got within there
and the idea is to uh
reauthorize this money so this
way that money could be shift
transportation project within
District 6.
Uh, this way we're not in
federal dollars.
Line 62 is for the economic
development department, $10
million for quantum Venture
studios, the way it's currently
written studio,
this would just say studios and
allows.
And line 63 is, this is for the
fair plan and it's just.
Thank you very much for the uh
presentation and the
explanation. Uh, one question
that I have regarding the
additional uh request for
language change or uh purpose
change, if you will, uh, when,
when did these particular uh
items come in, was that within
the last 24 hours.
Uh, Mr. Chair,
Last 48 hours, the.
Thank you very much. I really
appreciate that, and that's,
that's part of the uh concern
that we continue to have with
this process. I know that the
chair of the Senate Finance
Committee continues to indicate
to all of us that planning is
very important as we move
forward and oftentimes when
there are a lot of the last
minute changes or requests, it
makes it difficult for us not
only to follow that, but also as
we deal with the planning aspect
of this, um, oftentimes.
some of the things that should
be in or left out and so
unfortunately, um, there'll be
some issues I'm sure that will
be surfacing later on as we go
through this process. So what
I'm going to do is go to um
Senator Tobiasin, in case you
have.
Any other questions or you'd
like to elaborate a little bit
more in terms of the process
that we followed, and then from
there, and I did indicate to
Senator Padilla that uh I would
go to members of the full Senate
Finance Committee, uh, just to
maybe ask some general questions
now.
And then hopefully we'll have
answers for that. And then uh
whenever we finish hearing the
bills this afternoon and then we
gather as a full Senate Finance
Committee that we'll go through
the uh the spreadsheets, uh, as,
as I discussed. Soenator Tobias
Mr. Chair and Adrian, I
appreciate the work you've done
and even the conversation that
we had over these last items and
reaching out to some of those
agencies, so we had better
transparency of what was
happening.
listening with some of the
exceptions and I'm satisfied
it's all congruent with what
we've spoken about and I really
appreciate your work.
OK, and I indicated I was going
to go to Senator Trujillo for
the motion.
Yeah, OK, so what we're gonna do
is uh we're gonna go to Senator
Trujillo for the comment and
then after that, uh, if any of
the members of the Senate
Finance Committee have some
general questions. We'll try to
respond to that, but again,
these lists then will be
available, uh, as we prepare for
the full presentation of the
Senate Finance Committee, and
just keep in mind as a
subcommittee, what we're doing
is we're meeting to take action
in order to go.
go ahead and pass that
recommendation on to the full
Senate Finance Committee.
Senator heel please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
and again, thank you guys for
really helping us walk through
this. Um, after we spoke, I, I
kind of looked back on some of
these numbers and I'm just in
regards to line 58. Mr.
Chairman, what I'd really like
to see happen is.
The Department of Health only
spent $466,000.
And I would prefer that we leave
them with 3 million and then we
put 3 million additional.
Or the sexual assault and the
victims of domestic violence.
That would put them to a total
of 4 million.
And what I've spoken with the
communities that provide these
services is that their federal
funds have been shut off
already.
And that they really could use
$9 million.
The function
I think the 1 million came from
the house, and we have this 9
million that's not been spent.
And I do think that the opioid
prevention is also included.
And some of the healthcare
funding that we've provided, um,
specifically for those purposes.
So I'd like to see the
Um, sexual assault be 3 million
and the domestic violence be 3
million.
Thank you very much for the
comments. So I'm going to the
procedural aspect of this, uh,
would either of our presenters
here to, to respond to to that
recommendation.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
for sexual assault services and
First Incorporated here.
And then 2.
This would move things, so, uh.
Realistically you could bums
they need.
could handle this. Go back to
Senator Trujillo, Senator
Trujillo, please. Yes, Mr.
Chairman, um, I, I, I think, um,
what the information that is
that at the very least, they
were gonna need 1 million to
continue functioning.
And honestly, that was before
the federal funds were closed,
and they've been unable, those
funds, they're not even going
out for RFPs and so they're
really in a position that
they're gonna have to cut back
on services, even with $4
million.
Um, they're not gonna have
enough to do all the services
that they've done, so.
I, I just think it's for me,
it's just a. So in terms of
that, uh, what I'd like to do,
uh, because we don't want to be
moving things around too much,
but I would ask the uh staff if
you would go ahead and take a
look at that between now and the
time that we come back for the
full committee so that we're
able to go ahead and take that
into consideration, uh, you've
expressed, you, you've
expressed, uh, the thought
process for it. Let us see to
make sure that that's gonna,
gonna work as we, as we move
forward. I, I.
Appreciate it. Thank you. uh,
just general questions, uh,
well, I'm gonna go back to, uh,
Senator Tobias and I believe she
might have another question, and
then once those questions are
answered, I'm gonna just open it
up in case there's just a
general question from many
members of the Senate Finance
Committee that are present.
Tobiasson. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, and that was exactly what I
was gonna ask is can you look
into this? I'd love to have the
actual specific numbers in
Senator Trujillo, I mean, I
heard from
This group lobbying for the
sexual assault and domestic
violence, actually they were
Very persistent, um, to their
credit, and every time they were
asking for 1 million. So if
something has changed in that
time period, I have not heard
from them, which kind of
surprises me. I'd love to know
what is the exact amount that
they are being cut and has it
actually happened, or is it a
fear that it's going to happen.
I, I think it'd be helpful to
know just all, all the cards in
the deck before we make a final
decision. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much well taken
by both senators Trujillo and
Tobiasin.
the uh Senate Finance Committee
general questions going to
Senator Padilla and then Senator
Munoz, Senator Paa please.
Thank you chair some simple
questions and so I'm assuming
that all of us send information
into Adrian or someone on his
staff, um, chair, uh sorry, the
committee chief of staff, excuse
me, uh, Adrian Avila, was
anything um not included in, I,
I can't see it to know whether
it's there or not, but it was
anything um eliminated from what
was submitted.
For any of us.
Mm
So Mr. Chair, most of these
submissions from committee
members are incorporated and
that's going to be handled by
the special subcommittee. Uh.
From your specific request,
there is one that the exec sent
down that matches with what you
were asking for and that will
appear here and I will happily
highlight it for you just one
more question then um to Mr.
Avila. So, uh, the information
around the roads that I had
submitted, uh, what are we
intend to do, how do we intend
to deal with that? I had some
sidebars with the committee
chair and
I mentioned it
So Mr. Chair, when it comes to
roads, House Bill 2 did not come
over with money in relation to
roads, right? So this special
subcommittee.
Will ideally carve out the money
and then.
You walk in roads. Is there any
uh a chair and Mr. Abela, is
there any amount on the table?
I want to get from point A to
point on it.
Of course, the the ones I
submitted were local and
collector streets. So if you
want to talk about the
difference between those and the
longer spans.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, in terms of
the amount that's still in flux,
so at this time I can't disclose
the projected amount.
I'll just ask the chair then.
So, so again just going back,
going back, thank you very much,
Senator by the points well
taken, so two things, of course,
working with a special uh
subcommittee in terms of the
issues there and as you indicate
some of these uh
requests that have been
submitted by members. They're
going to be included there in
terms of the resources for
roads. I understand that they're
not available right now through
this process.
Uh, but again, those are
legitimate concerns. We need to
go ahead and look directly at
those to uh work with you on
that center by the end.
And then chair, this will be my
last question. Is there any sort
of estimate on all of these
language changes and what what
we're going to need to make up
here in the Senate to make some
of this work.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so these are just
language changes, they don't
make substantive changes to
appropriation. So there's no,
there is no change here that I'm
on actually does that, that
work.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
uh, Senator Padilla going to
Senator Munoz, our chairman,
Senator Munoz, please. Thank
you, um, Mr. Chair. So the
sexual assault services this
morning in the hall.
They told me 1 million is what
they needed, the other
appropriation was sexual
assault.
Both of them told me this
morning in the hall as we were.
So they should be happy with
what.
They got.
Thank you very much. Any other
questions, Senator Lanier, do
you have?
Any, any broad questions that
you wish to ask at this time?
No, I just, thank you, Mr.
Chair. My only question is the
kind of in the process. So,
When they adopt it today.
If they adopt it today.
The language is locked in or is
there still gonna be changes?
So Mr. Chair, um, the
subcommittee would adopt this to
send to the full committee for
consideration and review.
This is just their
recommendations, the full
committee would then either make
tweaks.
Uh, in public later today.
fully adopt the recommendation
and instruct LFC staff to begin
making those fixes.
OK. Thank you. Thank you very
much, Senator Lanier. Senator
Brandt, do you have any
questions, any thoughts, any
ideas, any?
Nothing is sure at this time.
Thank you.
I, do you have any thoughts or
ideas or um.
I know that
I I know that there may be some
additional considerations that
you're looking at as well
regarding language.
Senator Gonzalez,
I'll wait until we're in the
full committee.
Thank you very much.
Uh, just going back to the
presenters, uh.
Director Sale, if you will, um.
What would this process entail
once the full committee takes a
look at the report, we move on
with language.
How, how is that gonna process
in the same question to you
also, uh, Mr. Avila as we deal
with this.
Mr. Chair, when the full
committee makes its decision and
presumably adopts this.
Then staff will go start
executing it as it prepares the
overall.
Uh, Senate Finance amendment.
Or if there's things that you're
not adopting, we would not
execute them. And, and along
with that, uh, as we move
forward, Mr. Avila.
Maybe also to express the
urgency of the time frame that
we're looking at because it does
take time in order to go ahead
and prepare, if you will, uh,
our recommendations for uh HB2
at all and and some of the other
uh considerations that we're
making, so you might talk a
little bit too about maybe the
time frame that you're looking
at as well as Mr. Chair, in
terms of time frame, uh, this
will handle the, the big piece
of language.
The special subcommittee will
actually meet after committee
today to go through their work
and begin their process in terms
of funding, the negotiations
with the executive are almost
complete. They should be
wrapping up tomorrow morning.
So the financial pieces can
start to.
Finalize it and hit the mosaic
accordingly. So what will come
forth before the full committee
will be the recommendation of
the special subcommittee and
also any catchup cleanup that
would include the language that
members have requested, um,
based on the recommendation of
that special subcommittee. OK,
thank you very much. So what I'm
going to do now is go to um
Senator Trujillo for the motion.
We do not need a second, and
then from there we'll go ahead
and ask the uh uh committee.
secretary or the uh if you will
please service the subcommittee
secretary as well and uh and
then uh we'll be.
calling if you will, for the uh
for the vote on this.
Senator Trujillo, thank you Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I move
that the recommended technical
changes be adopted as.
Um, provided for on.
And and along with that, is
there a caveat because I know
you wanna have some of the other
information looked at very
closely. I'm just the motion for
the technical changes there.
Good. So we're gonna be taking
the 2 votes then. So we do have
a motion to go ahead and adopt
the technical changes. So if uh
uh the clerk would go ahead and
call the roll.
And it's just gonna be the three
of us. It'll be Senator Tobias
and Senator Trujillo and myself.
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Tobias and votes, yes,
Senator Trujillo, yes, Senator
Trujillo votes yes and Senator
Campos. Senator Camposos, yes.
Thank you very much. So we do
have a uh due passed by the
subcommittee, uh, moving on the
recommendation to the full
Senate Finance Committee going
back to Senator Trujillo for the
second motion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
just gonna read what the title
says I I I think that's OK. I
moved, um, uh, approval of the.
Executive ad requests for Senate
Finance Committee.
And along with that, I know that
you had some concerns.
With the understanding that the
money that's needed for the
sexual assault and domestic
violence will be looked into and
we'll
As a full committee.
Thank you very much for the uh
for the recommendation for the
motion, and then uh the clerk
will call tomorrow.
Senator Tobiasin.
Inserted by a symbosia, Senator
Trujillo. Yes, Senator Trujillo
votes yes and Senator Campos.
Campos votes, yes.
Thank you very much. So we have
adopted, if you will, the
language changes and the
technical changes, and this
information would be forwarded
on to the full Senate Finance
Committee later on this
afternoon and to the presenters,
thank you very much to all the
individuals that have worked on
uh this, the language changes.
We really appreciate your time,
the due diligence and the hard
work that you put forth. We
really appreciate that.
We stand adjourned. Thank you
very much to the members of the
committee and to the Senate
Finance Committee and those in
attendance.
We're back to the regular
committee.
We're gonna, everybody's been
here for the language. Adrian,
you're gonna pass out the rest
of the sheets for everybody
else. We pass those shoots out
we'll make that motion to adopt
right now.
So LFC can start drafting
language.
Kelly looks very excited about
it.
Maybe you should have a
creamsicle on the back.
We're gonna give him a second
just to look at it.
compos in the cherry would you
make the motion for us.
When we're ready, me too.
So Mr. Chairman, um, so we're,
we're in the full committee now
we're in the full committee
right so we're in the full
committee and uh with that if
you wish to go ahead and call on
me for the recommendation, I,
I'd be more than happy to go
ahead and make the motion.
so you you make a recommendation
from the language subcommittee.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair,
members of the full Senate
Finance Committee, uh, as we
went through thoroughly over the
last several weeks in terms of
the language that has been
presented to us, uh, we do have
two reports that have uh been uh
recommended by the uh language
subcommittee, one of them was
the uh recommended technical
changes. Uh, the second was the
executive ad requests for the.
Senate Finance Committee. We
have gone through the language
uh thoroughly.
Uh, one of the recommendations
that came out of the uh
subcommittee was that we do take
a look and verify some of the
information that has come out in
section that is, uh, colored in
purple, and because those were
some of the more recent um.
Requests that have come in and
so within that, uh, we do
recommend that we continue to go
ahead and take a look at that
information, verify the numbers,
and if there's the possibility
to go ahead and make additional
changes regarding the, the
amounts and the language that
that be done. And so uh with
that, uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the Senate Finance Committee,
um, I would just defer to staff
in case they wish to go ahead
and maybe highlight some of the
comments that came out of the um
language subcommittee.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so in the blue,
the last column that you all
see, that's the recommendation
of the SFC subcommittee. Uh,
you'll notice on line one, it's
like keep the bar language
within the SIC as is not
expanding their foreign language
beyond.
Um, in
3 contingency.
Um, on Senate Bill 217.
Mm
And then the rest of that page
either.
Disagrees with allowing the
expansion of our language.
Or, um, keeping things as is.
On 2.
Um,
line 9, this is uh an economic
development tool.
That hasn't necessarily been
utilized up until this point,
but this provides them with the
bar language to be able to
respond to emergencies and uh
support businesses in the event
of a disaster. So, uh, the
suggestion was to provide that
authority, but make sure it's
limited to a declared emergency
and not just something they can
use willy nilly.
Um
Line 13. This was a special
reauthorization request within
the office of the Superintendent
of Insurance, um, providing them
an extension of time.
To implement a salary
adjustments.
Uh, line 16 within the
Department of Cultural Affairs,
provide them with the
opportunity to implement the bar
request line 17 in regards to uh
uh grants for rural libraries.
um, the language was shifted to
provide the uh department more
flexibility to provide grants to
rural libraries that can range
in amounts instead of being uh
set at a certain amount.
Mm
Yes, extending Rio and Emer in
18 and 19.
As well as 2.
And 21.
Through 24.
So those are all riots.
And bar languages.
Uh, within the natural
resources, um.
Agencies on page 4.
Uh, so with the.
Line 25, this is the
appropriation to the Indian
Affairs department related to.
Uh, the ETA and it's giving them
more time to expend that money.
Um
Line 30.
This is just clarifying the uh
contingency language or the pay
for performance program for the
Uh, supplemental hospital, uh,
payment system and.
31,
it's, it was a great language to
the allotment within the house.
authority.
Related to the comprehensive
analysis.
On page 5.
Uh, giving the special reo to
DOH uh related to uh their
accreditation for residential
treatment centers.
Um, clarifying language in
relation to the natural
resources trustee to make sure.
They can utilize their funding
appropriately.
And then.
The highlight on the next page
line 6.
In regards to out of school
time, the language was made as
broad as possible to capture the
intent of what was being brought
down.
Um
And then
44 broadens the purpose of the
broadens the purpose as well
information system.
45.
Provides them with the time
extension, uh, PED requested.
In regards to tribal libraries.
This is just clarifying the
adulted uh funding and how
that's allocated.
And
Line 49.
For higher department.
And then line 54 strikes the
contingency on the special
Education Act.
So that money can flow. Um, it
doesn't need to be attached to
the act cause the money is not
intended to be tied to that act
as is and then the purple are
the specific items that were
reviewed just recently during
the subcommittee, but to provide
some highlights, it's extending
the money for the AOC to
continue the money you
appropriate during the special
session for uh outpatient
treatment and competency
diversion.
Um, it's uh.
Proposing to.
Allocate the remaining 3 million
from Workforce Solutions
department related to the ETA to
San Juan College directly so
they can actually implement the
funding.
Um, line 58 is the item that's
at question in terms of the
specific earmarks for sexual
assault services and victims of
domestic violence.
Uh, which currently are at 1
million each from this 9 million
appropriation that hasn't been
used. And there's also 1 million
that came over from the house
for each of those.
And then uh with corrections
department, this is providing
them more time to implement
their Medicaid assisted
treatment program.
And then on page 8, the money
for UNM earmarking, uh 1.5
million that's already existing
within their recurring budget.
So that project Echo uses it for
behavioral health purposes.
Line 61 is uh removing a
specific earmark within an
appropriation from 2021 for the
Department of Transportation
within transportation District 6
because they got federal money
to fully fund that. So this is
just moving that money to a
different project that'll be
determined by the transportation
commission line 62 is expanding
the economic development
departments.
Um, quantum request, so multiple
uh potential quantum venture
studios can receive the money
instead of just one entity and
then the last one is adding the
word mitigation within the fair
plan at OSI.
Questions.
Uh thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. I don't know if you want
to go ahead and uh uh ask for uh
any, any uh input, any
questions, uh, if not, then
whenever you're ready for a uh
motion, I would like to go ahead
and defer to the members of the
subcommittee to uh to possibly
make those motions or I would be
open to to make the motions for
that as well, but again going
back to you, Mr. Chair, let's go
back to questions on the full
committee, questions on
language.
See none
which subcommittee member wants
to make a motion.
And Mr. Chair, what we'll do is
we'll go ahead and we'll have
two different motions as was
made by Senator Trujillo and the
subcommittee.
We just need one motion.
to adopt the subcommittee
recommendation.
Mr. Chairman, I move that um the
subcommittee recommendations be
we have a second.
by Senator Tobias and
we call the.
committee on recommendations
from the Senator Brent
Senator Brandt votes, yes,
Senator Campos. Senator Campos
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator Lemer
Senator Lanier votes yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson, yes, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo. Yes, Senator Trujillo,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes yes. Senator
Shendo. Yes,
Senator Senator Munoz.
Senator Woods votes yes. Senator
Shendo. Yes, Senator Senator
Munoz.
Senators votes, yes, we have a
do pass on your subcommittee
recommendations.
Now LC working county there's a
principle and ice cream sandwich
for you to burn the midnight
oil.
That should cover you.
Let's see.
Senators and you're a
Republicans here to raise taxes.
Let's hear about that.
Something I never thought I'd
see you in my entire life.
Tell somebody you tax increase
bill, Senator.
Senate bill committee substitute
for Senate Bill 383. Senator.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I do appreciate y'all
hearing this bill. I do have a
um.
We do have amendments, so tell
us about the bill and we'll move
there.
Mr. Chairman, I am presenting
the Senate tax, Business and
Transportation Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 383
with an emergency clause and I
do have an amendment for it.
There are 2 changes that tell us
about the bill first and then
we'll move the amendment.
That'll work, Mr. Chairman.
It's not a tax.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, October the 21st,
2004.
Roswell experienced.
Serious flood which has been,
they haven't had one like that
since 2001.
It dumped, uh.
close to 6 inches of rain in a 4
hour period in that time frame.
They said they uh experienced
serious flooding with
substantial property damage and
two fatalities. It was declared
a federal disaster area on
November 2, 2024.
The Spring River channel
overflowed, causing extreme
flooding in downtown Ross, first
responders performed more than
300 water rescues in that
particular area.
It inundated roads that swept
away cars that damaged bridges
and buildings, the flooding left
much of the city under entire
layer of silt.
It blew out sewer lines. The
streets were.
I, I don't know how you say that
buckled.
Uh, bridges were.
Just
Washed out
It filled up the convention
center with over 5 ft of water.
It totally destroyed the Roswell
Museum.
The collection that was in that
museum was valued at over $300
million in the cost to rebuild
that museum is.
Estimated at a bare minimum of
$600 a square foot.
square foot to rebuild that.
Mr. Chairman and members.
What we're asking for in this
legislation.
This will provide a financial
tool which is a flood recovery
recovery revenue bonds funded by
a dedicated local grocery
receipts tax to help you
municipalities recover from
significant flood damage to
their property.
A temporary tax deduction offers
additional financial relief for
the during the recovery period.
What we are needing is we have
to get help from FEMA.
And the reason we are going down
this avenue to follow what we're
wanting to do here.
We're trying to get the
appropriation from FEMA since it
was declared a federal disaster.
Before all the
Disaster wants from the
California fires go up.
Mr. Chairman, that is what this
bill is trying to do, we have
to.
Start working on.
things that
We're gonna take a long time to
rebuild and whenever I was able
to.
I was heartbroken at everything
that I saw the devastation that
did take place.
What caused the major
Flooding down there with the
spring river and everything.
is west of town that draws out
there.
Approximately 20 miles outside
of Roswell.
There was over 8 inches of rain
that hit in a four-hour period,
which caused all of those draws
to start running, which caused
the effect of what happened in
Rossly.
Mr. Chairman
The that is the basis of what
this bill does. It is actually a
bill that will let Roswell.
Help Ross.
That's where we're going with
this bill, Mr. Chair, and if you
would like me to go ahead with
the
to this substitute, I'll be glad
to do that.
Nelson er this bill actually
allows you to attach your
citizens to cover with gross
receipts.
That's what the bill does. Uh,
do you wanna tell us what the
Gonna have a motion for the.
The amendment.
Uh, motion for
To discuss amendment.
For discussion purposes.
The number is 908.1 is the
amendment we have. It's not the
amendment you have Senator.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, it is.
Mo
We, we already have a motion by
Senator Gonzalez. That's
Amendment number. Do I have a
second? My Senator Woods.
Any objection to the motion for
discussion purposes, explain the
amendment, Senator.
Mr. Chairman, whenever this was
first put together on the
original bill, it did, uh, have
on page 8 of the substitute
we're working on it is
substitute, not the bill. The
committee substitute did state
on page.
8 of the bill of the committee
substitute, excuse me.
Page 8, line 14 and page 8, line
18, changing the 14% to 38% in
both instances.
And what are the reasons for
those changes, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
The mayor and the city attorney
both did some figuring and for
them.
be able to proceed, they needed
at least.
With the 3 8s, it brings that
total of what was be presented
before FEMA up to $66 million.
And FEMA is needing the money up
front to be able to proceed with
help from FEMA.
OK.
Questions on the amendment.
See that can have emotion.
Emotion by Senator Gonzalez, 2
by center.
Was any objection to adoption
amendment.
Joiner Brent.
Injection of
You'll just have to squirt on
this show him in the negative.
Uh, we're back on the bill
anybody in the audience and
support.
the
OK. Do we have any on Zoom I
imagine yeah.
Come on up, we got one person in
support, tell us why you want to
raise taxes and.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Bernard Treat. I am the
registered lobbyist for Xcel
Energy SPS.
In Roswell
Um
day here, um, I'm supporting the
community in which I'm the 5th
generation of and um in this
case.
The only way we're gonna be able
to get things done right is to
help ourselves first and so
that's why I stand in support.
Of the the bill today. Thank
you.
Thank you.
How about on Zoom, we have that
one person.
All right, Mr. City Attorney,
you want to respond real quick?
I think he's our city manager.
Are you there, Hess?
54321. Hess is not there.
Oh, senator, right, yes, far
away.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I'm actually here with uh
Mayor Jennings, and I will hand
it over to him your name is on
the screen and that's what we'll
intend to do.
All right. Well, thank you
Sandra, again, uh, I just
reiterating what uh Bernard
mentioned. The um based on the
uh FIR the amount of bond money
uh for the 5/8, uh, would not
be, oh sorry, for 3/8, uh is an
improvement and again FEMA will
repay 75% of what we put in, so
by being able to put in 66
million of our own dollars, we
would be
getting about $43 million back.
From the federal government and
that would go a long way in
helping roswe rebuild itself.
Thank you.
Thank you, we understand that,
thanks the mayor, we didn't let
him talk because he'd be here
till sundown.
Uh, he talked us to death,
talked to to death, and then
we'd have to kill the bill.
Questions from committee members
on the bill.
Senator Tree Hill first.
Uh, thank you, Senator, for
bringing this forward. I, I
recognize that your community
needs some help and, and I
appreciate you advocating for
them.
I have a question though in
regards to page 8, line 12.
Um, it seems like you're giving
the, the governing body.
of the town, the authority to
make that, and I don't question
that being a bad idea.
Um, but I will tell you just
from prior experience of my own.
That the education technology
equipment Act gave the school
board authority to do that, and
we came back to the legislature
and changed it so that the
school board could have
authority.
Or they could take it out to a
ballot, and I'm wondering,
You know, why you don't want to
take this to a ballot. I know
it's quicker to have the
governing authority, but I know
our community was a little
incensed that we
devoted to expend a bond for $55
million.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Trujillo,
I appreciate what you had done
right then.
Um
As far as what we are trying to
get done here. We're trying to
get there in a hurry. I know.
And that is imperative because
the city did lose over, let's
see, what is that number again?
It, it just stuns me. Over $370
million in losses.
And so what we're trying to do
is there have been lots of
emergency meetings with lots of
public input.
And so we're so far everybody
has been.
We need to get this done. We
need to fix our town.
Perfect
No, that's good. So long as you
feel comfortable with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
have a couple of questions.
So, uh, uh.
Senator, the bonds would be for
10 years.
I'm sorry, I didn't quite hear
that.
Any time that you your bond.
That'd be for 10 years.
Let me see if I can find that
senator. I, I tried to find it,
I didn't see it.
Let me look up
Do you have Hes still on the
Zoom.
All right, yes, answer the
questions we're gonna allow you
to do that since you're alien
spaceship didn't allow you to
land in Santa Fe today.
answer to that question. Yes,
sir, uh, some, uh, some members
of the committee, uh, chairman
members of the committee, but
the FIR has it for 20 years if
uh we would potentially try to
negotiate a longer period, but
20 years is the anticipated
amount right now.
the reason we have
was terminal the
next question that I have is um
so you mentioned some artwork
and did you have any insurance
for that?
Mr. Mr. Chairman and Senator
Gonzalez there was in Vincent
off right now in the collections
that were donated to the museum
many, many years ago.
All of those, uh,
All of those pieces have been
sent and.
Mr. Mitin helped me out on this.
I can't remember where they were
shooting to for clean up and
restoration
elected.
No, keep going,
they're gonna keep I didn't know
if he was responding or not, no.
OK. Uh, those have been sent off
and I.
We served with Tim Jennings long
enough. We know how the story's
gonna fold out, so you got to
speed it up that they were
shipped off to Chicago for
restoration purposes. I don't
know if the insurance is going
to cover everything.
At the museum is a total loss.
It was filled up with mud up.
4 ft 5 ft in some areas, so.
Anyway,
Uh, there is a
thought process here that
whenever that collection does
get cleaned up that we might
have some benefactors that can
help.
With the rest of it, I hope, I
hope that's what we're
anticipating.
Very well, thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator.
Thank you.
But, OK, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Senator, how are you?
Um, I just had a question
because he he had mentioned.
$66 million.
Mhm
From us
Before FEMA will give you 43, I
believe it was.
Why, what, what is that about?
Why did, why does it take FEMA?
This long and why do we have to
do?
Um
Actually, the majority of the
money.
OK. According to what I have.
I'm reading right here what I
have garnered from going through
all this 75% of the reimbursable
flood recovery costs available
from FEMA.
We have to have that money up
front before that they will step
in and help provide additional
funding.
It was declared by President
Biden as a federal disaster.
So that's why we had to raise
that figure up to 3/8 instead of
the 1 quarter.
OK.
Just meet that much and Mr.
Chair and Senator so
By moving it to the 38, I
understand how you, how you're
gonna get to the money.
Once all of this is raised.
And paid back.
Is there gonna be a tax?
Decrease
Mr. Chairman and Senator Lanier,
I am assuming that there will be
because I think that what we're
just trying to do here is just
do the, do what has to be done
to put Rossell back the way it
was.
So I'm assuming that it would
because there is a 20 year.
limit on that. Right. Thank you.
Yes.
In the woods move a pass.
Ser compost, did you have a
question?
The most of Perdue passed by
Senator Woods.
So I can buy Senator Tobiasson.
That the Republicans raised
taxes for the first time in
their life.
They have a roll call from the
committee.
Senator Brent.
Senator Campos Senator Campos
votes, Senator Gonzalez. Yes.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes,
Senator Linier.
No
Senator Lanier boats, yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson
Senator Tobiasson votes yes,
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes.
Senator Woods. Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Sendo, yes.
Senator, Senator Munoz.
Yes, Senator Triel to explain
her Republican vote.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I just, I just hope
that you don't regret that you
didn't put in an option for your
community.
For this. And if you decide at a
later date that you want to add
that to it, come and visit and
we'll do it together.
I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, thank
you so much and the city of
Roswell, thanks you as well.
Lightning didn't strike anybody.
Nobody died, and we increased
taxes. It's a miracle.
Thank you, uh.
Mr. Chairman,
Yeah, that's twice for the
Republicans. We're keeping track
over here. We haven't done it
once and you've done it twice.
Miller
We don't have mailers. We just
made that illegal in the other
committee, so if they throw it
over my fence, it's now trash
and we charge them $250 fine.
Senator Bermans, you're up,
you're here first.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the Senate 214. We have no
amendments, correct?
House Bill 214.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
214 creates the Jula
credentialing and Access Act.
This act to me and they said the
Department of Health established
a voluntary credentialing
process for in House Bill 2 in
2024, the legislature funded the
healthcare authority to provide
doula services for Medicaid
members. However, the state
needs to still provide.
Prudentialing options for these
doulas.
The jewel dungeon is voluntary
and it would allow do us to bill
Medicaid. It is not required to
practice as a doula in the
state, however, without
certification, A doula would be
unable to bill Medicaid for the
services provided.
The bill also creates the doula
credentialing Advisory Council
to advise the Department of
Health and require hospitals and
free-standing birth centers to
develop policies allowing doulas
to accompany patients during
specific services.
The bill also creates the Doula
fund to support these
initiatives, and there's also
money in this year's House Bill
2.
which is $600,000 for DOH to
administer the program.
And
I'll ask if my expert wants
anything. If not, we'll stand
for questions.
Right, OK, uh, we'll go out to
the audience, uh, first, anybody
here in support of House Bill
214.
How many, uh, 4, go ahead, come
on.
Anybody else
OK, all right. Go ahead. Give
you a minute.
Well, the mic uh
Right there in front.
No, no, is that a portable one?
Yeah, that, that one's portable,
yeah.
Mhm
OK, there we go.
OK.
Thank you. Hello, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Melissa Marie Lopez Sullivan,
and I serve as the executive
director of the New Mexico Doula
Association.
I'm also a full spectrum doula,
a certified lactation counselor,
a student midwife, and a
commissioner on the New Mexico
commission on the Status of
Women. I've personally supported
many families through birth and
postpartum and have seen
firsthand the many benefits of
dua care. I urge your support
for HB 214, a bill with strong
bipartisan support that is
rooted in evidence, equity, and
cost-effectiveness. Doula's work
alongside patients to reduce
medical interventions, improve
birth outcomes and enhance.
patient and provider
experiences with Medicaid
covering roughly 70% of the
births in New Mexico, HB 214 is
a smart investment that expands
culturally congruent,
community-based doula care,
improving outcomes while saving
the state money.
This bill is also a workforce
development, uh, investment.
The New Mexico Doula Association
alongside a coalition of over 20
organizations is prepared to
train, support, and sustain this
workforce.
We have built infrastructure,
training and mentorship programs
to ensure that doulas are well
equipped to integrate into
healthcare settings, while
preserving the community-based
care model that makes this work
so effective. Thank you for your
leadership, and we ask for a due
pass on HB 214. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jennifer Raphael Goetz,
and I'm the executive director
for the New Mexico Commission on
the Status of Women. I speak to
you today in support of the new
Doula credentialing Act. When we
hold events and speak to a women
around our state, one of the
most important issues they
raised with us is the lack of
birth workers in their rural
communities. Doulas are
culturally and medically
significant in these
communities, they are trusted
members of their communities,
and it's time to
recognize and reward their
importance by providing cre
credentialing for their work.
The funding has been allocated
for this program. All that is
left is to vote for the
infrastructure to be put in
place to allow dolas to continue
to serve their communities. The
commission on the Status of
Women asks you to stand with us
and vote yes on HB 214.
Good afternoon, Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you for your time. My name
is Gwendoliomania. I served as a
reproductive justice program
manager at the Women United, a
nonprofit in northern New
Mexico.
In rural communities like
northern New Mexico, where
access to maternal healthcare is
scarce. Doulas are livelines.
Families here face delayed
prenatal care, transportation
barriers and limited building
options leading to higher rates
of emergency interventions and
preventable complications.
At the Women United are
Avicaguindidula training has
been working diligently to close
this gap. Training doulas who
are rooted in their communities,
providing cultural grounded
evidence-based care. These
doulas provide educated
resources to the families,
ensure they reach birth centers
and hospitals on time and reduce
unnecessary medical
interventions, improving
parental and infant health.
We can also sustain this work
without HB 214. These bills
ensures Doulas can fully
dedicate themselves to these
critical role without having to
juggle multiple jobs just to
survive. It means more doulas
expanded services for rural
families and real stepped
forward to strengthening the
health of New Mexicans. This is
a commitment to saving lives,
strengthening families, the
economy in the state, and
cutting long-term healthcare
costs for
our state. HB 214 is an
investment in the future of New
Mexico.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the Senate Finance
Committee. My name is Colleen
Lambert and I'm deputy director
of policy at the Early Childhood
Education and Care department.
At the early childhood education
and care department, we
recognize that perinatal support
is early childhood support.
Investing in children and
families from pregnancy onward
yields lifelong benefits. That's
why we stand in strong support
of House Bill 214.
Community-based doulas are an
evidence-based strategy.
to improve child and family
outcomes. Do this play a
critical role in improving
maternal and infant health
outcomes. Their work ensures
families, especially those in
historically underserved
communities have access to
culturally responsive
community-based care, research
consistently shows that Doula
support leads to better birth
experiences, fewer medical
interventions and long-term
health benefits for both parents
and babies. Creating a voluntary
doula credentialing process.
will expand Medicaid
reimbursement for these
essential services, making Dula
care more accessible and a
limiting barriers for families
who need it most. ECCD urges you
to expand perinatal care
options, reduce disparities and
ensure every New Mexico family
gets the support they deserve by
supporting House Bill 214. Thank
you.
hate advertisement by state
government.
We have one on Zoom, you got one
minute, who's on Zoom?
Nicole Martin.
Yeah, it's a go to sayhopa. My
name is Nicole Martin. I'm a
full spectrum indigenous doula
located in Rio Rancho.
I am also a community member of
the New Mexico Department of
Health's maternal mortality
Review Committee. If you're not
familiar with that, I suggest
you start getting familiar with
it because New Mexico has the
highest rates of maternal
mortality across the country.
Uh, for the past 2 years.
I have been reviewing cases of
pregnant people who've been
failed by our healthcare system.
Um, and it got worse during the
pandemic. A lot of male a lot of
malpractice, um, and a lot of
these
deaths were preventable.
I urge you to support HB 214
because
We need to make sure that our
pregnant people are receiving
the care that they need, the
safe care that they need, that
they're not coerced into other
things that they don't want to
do.
The, and that we can save lives,
we can save lives as the mother,
and we can save lives of their
newborns too as well.
No children should have to grow
up in this world without the
loss of their par without their
parents, so I urge you to
support House Bill 214.
Thank you.
OK.
Lord, thank you. Goodbye.
Questions from Senator
Tobiasson.
I have one question. Where did
the word dola come from?
Mr. Chair, I don't know. I know
what a doula is cause I've used
them, but I don't know where the
word comes from. Do you?
Mr. Chas Tobias and I looked it
up because I had that question
in judiciary.
Not formally, but afterwards.
Doula is a Greek word.
And that's, it's never changed
it's been, it's the same.
Greek word standing for what?
this is
Women serving women.
OK,
Senator Tobiasson fire you Mr.
Chair.
Well, especially since I'm the
only female sitting here um in,
in the membership at the moment,
if you're not familiar with A
doula, um almost 23 and 21 years
ago, I used Doulas. Um, I gave
natural birth in a hospital
setting and I can tell you there
is no way my first child, who
was 9.5 pounds. Would I have
been able to do that. I almost
had a C-section, that's another
story, but I would not have been
able to get through that without
my doula in.
the training that I received and
the support because um I can say
definitively that
Most men in that experience are
there's a disassociation to what
that woman is going through, and
I was very committed to
understanding biologically what
was happening to my body and the
baby's body, so that I could
manage the process of natural
labor, which none of you would
probably live through. So, um,
and we know it, we know it. Um,
so I am in full support of this.
Um, it is time, more than time
it's past time, um for this
legislation to be passed.
doulas serve a critical role for
women and to hear that we have
the highest mortality rate
during childbirth. I had no
idea, um, in doulas are a
critical part of making sure
that the woman has the safest
experience possible. Um, so I am
100% in support of this bill and
thank you so much for bringing
it forward.
Compos. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and of course members of
the Senate Finance Committee.
Over the years in rural New
Mexico, we've used uh doulas and
there have been many of them who
were actually helped so many uh
persons through not only
childbirth but the entire family
to better understand what all
that was going to entail, so,
uh, it's a long standing
practice and uh just really
appreciate all the doulas as a
uh as they continue with the
the work that they do. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair.
Senator Shindo.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for
letting me, uh, say a few words.
No, this, uh, I certainly
appreciate this, you know, I,
uh, reading this, you know, I, I
was one of the probably
My generation in Haus is
probably the last to be
delivered by one of our
traditional, uh, you know,
doulas or midwives and so forth,
so, you know, um.
They're gone, but I think you
know that that whole process,
you know, in fact, this lady
that delivered me pretty much
delivered, I think all the uh
babies in Havis Valley on the
Hispanic communities in that
valley in Hama, you know, and so
forth, so certainly here to
support the product.
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, senator, is there, how is
there an appropriation to this
fund?
Mr. Chami, there's not an
appropriation to the operating
budget you sent the Medicaid
money to Medicaid for the actual
services. This is just the, um,
the fund in this bill is just
created if somebody or another
entity wanted to invest in
something to help the dual
infant.
And you can have a motion,
Senator.
And motion for new passed by
Senator Tobiasson, seconded by
Senator Woods.
OK.
Senator Brent
Senators
Senators Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Lanier. Senator Lanier votes,
yes, Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes as Senator
Tobiasin. Senator Tobiasson
votes yes, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
votes, yes, Senator Schendo. Uh
yes.
Senator Senator 8 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Thank you.
Anybody know where Senator Mayas
just went.
Yeah, coffee break. Mr.
Chairman.
Yes, sir. Um, if I may, how, how
does Senator Woods get a chance
to second the motion, if you
will, and he doesn't even lift a
finger.
You know, at the end of this
committee meeting, for Senator
Woods's wife is sitting out
there. We're gonna take up the
hat.
So we can buy her some cable TV
because there's probably a lot
better things to watch on TV
than to watch Senate Finance.
Talk about birthing corrections
and taxes. See, she's even for
it.
Senator Woods.
Why haven't you bought that
young lady cable TV yet.
I don't know what to tell you.
I'm, I'm waiting for you to
allow me to pass a tax to do it,
I guess.
Well we can amend Senator.
My this is Bill right here.
Well, we could, we could do
that.
The messages, make sure you get
to the point.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman members
bill that was all about flooding
but really never talked about
taxes. All amendments will be
unfriendly. This is a probation
reform bill as it relates to
this committee, we have parole
costs, believe it or not, our
parole.
He program was funded by the
parolees historically, there's
been a national movement against
that parolees are better off
spending their money on.
Uh, restitution for victims,
counseling or child support with
that, I will turn over to
Secretary Tafo Lucero to get
into the, the weeds on the uh
parole costs. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I am Alicia Tafoya
Lucero. I'm the secretary of the
Corrections department. Uh, very
grateful to be sitting here with
Senator Maestas in agreement on
this awesome reform bill, um,
so, uh, as it relates to this
committee, I just want to share
with you that we have already
been moving towards eliminating
parole costs uh for people that
are transitioning out from
facilities back into
communities. Um, I also believe
that the there's a provision in
this bill that would allow
probationers to be released
early from probation.
If they're on minimum
supervision, which we believe
will reduce case loads and I
believe that the cost of
dropping parole costs will be
offset by the reduction in
caseloads for probation and
parole officers. And with that,
we'll stand for your questions.
Anybody in the audience and
support.
Anybody in opposition.
the state policemen have no not.
Raise their hand or did nothing.
Any bands soon?
Everybody on Zoom questions from
committee members.
bison.
OK
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You didn't
look thrilled about that. Um, so
I'm, can you explain to us?
Like the numbers of people that
this.
Would affect and
I'm hearing you say shorten
pearle time, is that what I
heard you say?
Mr. Chair, Senator Tobiasin, so,
uh, as far as the numbers of
people that it would affect with
respect to the parole costs, uh,
that would be about 1400 people
at a given time is what we're
supervising on parole. Uh, it
would not shorten parole terms,
um, but for people on probation,
which is just when the judge
sentenced the person to complete
a certain number of uh tasks
while they're on supervision, so
they come to visit us. They
maybe have to go to counseling,
they have to pay restitution,
things like that.
nature, uh, in order for a
person to be released from
probation early, they would have
to complete all of the tasks
that the judge ordered,
including full payment of
restitution and and they would
have to completed at least half
of the amount of time they were
given on probation and then uh
they would be automatically
removed from probation, so it
would it would uh make probation
end sooner, but doesn't touch
parole time frames.
So probation is cut in half,
basically that time, right? Like
they, they only have to do half.
Under supervision and then how
is there a follow up to them
doing the rest of what they're
supposed to do?
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman Senator Tobiasson. So
it's a scarce resources
argument. People are placed on
probation for 5 years in New
Mexico.
Uh, probation officers have 80
to 100 probationers uh that
they're they're supervising. If
someone completes 2.5 years of
probation.
These restitution does
everything right. The
statistical probability of them
recidivating, recidivating in
those last 2.5 years are
incredibly minimal. But if they
were to be released,
That would then
help the, the, the department
and the system and that
probation officer to focus on
those.
20 or 30 probationers that have
a higher probability of
recidivating. So it's a much
more focused attention to those
that need the attention, uh, and
it's, it's, it has uh incredible
public safety outcomes uh
verified through many, many
other states. So that was my
next question, Mr. Chair, is
have other states done this and
do we have their data to show
that
Cause I'm thinking maybe I have
better odds of
Not reoffending or finishing
whatever I need to do because
someone's, I'm having to report
to someone, but if I'm not
having to report to someone for
the next 2.5 years.
Is there a higher chance that
maybe I might slip up.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Senator
Tobiasson. We have data from
many, many other states.
I want to tease the sick, but
we, we may be 50th in this
regard, but we've learned from
frankly, the red states have led
the way on these efficiency
models in on probation,
Oklahoma, Mississippi.
Uh, Texas, they're all over, uh,
there's examples all over the
country.
the same.
And that's kind of what we do.
If we treat those 15 or 20 or 25
probationers with a higher level
of intensity.
By alleviating uh the workload
on the low end, it, it creates.
Much better public safety
outcomes uh that are proven in
other states, those folks that
get cut loose early early there,
we're never gonna see him again.
OK, and Mr. Chair, do you have
anyone in the law enforcement
community. I mean, I know you're
involved, obviously, but is
there anyone else that's in
support of this? Who, who's
behind this idea.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Tobias saying, well, I'm sitting
next to the Secretary of the
Department of Corrections or
probation department is under
the prison system. We also have
the director of the probation
department, uh, who's been
working on these issues and
there's a tremendous leader. The
sentencing commission, Mr.
Chairman, uh, as you all know,
One of the more reputable, uh,
Boards when it comes to law
enforcement and public safety,
the sentencing commission, which
is made up of judges.
Uh, prison officials, district
attorneys, police officials.
Uh
Public defenders.
Uh, and, and public members
voted unanimously for Senate.
OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Any other questions?
And what's, you want parole or
yeah,
this, this is real simple. All I
need is an explanation of the
Validated scoring instrument.
Mr. Chair and uh Senator Woods.
This may be something I've
spoken about with you all before
during Compass assessment, which
looks at 246 separate criteria
to determine how a person is
supervised, and so using that
scoring instrument, which is
validated for our populations in
New Mexico. It determines
whether a person needs to be
supervised low, medium, uh,
high, whatever their level of
supervision is, and so this
would impact only the people
that are being supervised at
minimum based on that, uh,
scoring assessment and we
do it all the time, like they,
they do it when they first start
on probation with us after a few
months if something changes
about their sitting, we continue
to reassess them and reassess
them using that validated
scoring instrument.
Good
I guess, I guess the real
question is,
You still require them to come
in.
We just don't charge.
Is that right, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, what's
exactly? They don't have to pay.
Or the government service of
being on parole.
so to speak.
But they still, they still.
Serve out their parole by.
Checking in with the parole
agent.
The
People, Mr. Chairman Senator
Woods precisely, and the money
that they would have paid
parole, uh, is gonna be uh
enforced through restitution or
domestic court orders with
regards to counseling or child
support. Yes, they will, they
will still have to come in,
they'll still, the regimen is
the exact same.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know further questions can
have emotions.
Certain
do pass by sinner Gonzalez.
Sharply and quickly second in by
Senator Campos.
No Republican seconding the
motion.
call the rope.
Senator Brent.
Yes
Senator Campos Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalezia, Senator
Lier. Senator Linier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasson Senator Tobias
Sibotia, Senator Trujillo.
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
votes yes, Senator Shando.
Senator Munoz,
Senator, yes, we have a due past
7 in the affirmative, 0 in the
negative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Kelly, were you saying
something?
We adjourned, I think Adrian did
announce a subcommittee that's
gonna meet this evening which is
uh.
My brain, I got brain fog today.
No,
not capital
specials.
We'll probably meet right
afterwards.
And then hopefully tomorrow
we're gonna meet with the exec,
we're supposed to meet yesterday
and something happened.
And they can't meet today to
wrap up everything for House
Bill 2 and the Capitol.
OK.
Any questions?
Senator Cumbus, good job on the
subcommittee today. Appreciate
all your help.
Woods
Where'd your wife go?
I'm not alone in my 200 bucks to
make sure you get cable TV, huh?
OK.
What time is
my.
Oh thanks, thanks.
What time is dinner tonight?
Oh.
Oh.
Make sure you buy you some
flowers.
We're turn.
