Are we good on Zoom?
You do.
Literary
Mr. Chairman, I've been here
since 9:30 and I already went
through all the bills, so you
don't have to do anything
All right, yeah, yeah, just make
the motions. All right, uh,
senator.
You know,
it would have been nice if all
the committee members got a
shirt. I don't know, maybe,
maybe this thing.
That's right.
Well, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee, while the exact
origin of low riders are often a
subject of debate in the 1980s
MTV coined the espanil of
Essences. Um, the title
hydraulics, the mixing of paint.
And so it's an expression of
state.
Lowrider culture Mexicans are
proud of.
Lowrider and car enthusiasts
from New Mexico and beyond of
teachers, women.
stooping up there lowrider. And
OK, great. Anybody here in
support of this bill?
Oh, OK. Anybody in opposition?
Nobody? OK, so we'll just take a
handful of folks.
Anybody want to get up, maybe 3
or 4 of you.
Hi, my name is Sam Lee. I'm a
city councilor in the city of
Espanola for District 4, and I
just want to stand in strong
support of this bill.
Espanola is the heart of
northern New Mexico and low
riding and bike culture is in
the veins. We need to support
our um community.
Gathering around such a positive
um hobby.
And I know the rider's origins
may scare some folks, but it has
become really strong and really
powerful to the people of our
community, these cars, these
projects are people's
livelihoods. They have dedicated
hours and hours and hours and
thousands of dollars to make
these beautiful pieces of art.
And they introduced practical
skills to our children as well
growing up in these cultures.
They learn how to work on cars,
they learn how to build things.
And that's really what we need
in this country again is to
learn how to make things with
our hands, and this is where we
start by supporting this culture
and by supporting this hobby and
by showcasing the beautiful art
that we have in northern New
Mexico.
You are instrumental in building
a future for our valley and for
our state. Thank you.
With respect, good morning, Mr.
Chairman and committee members.
My name is Scott Lopez. I am the
founder of Vida Mejoor Capital.
We are a 501c3 nonprofit located
at Okeowena Pueblo in Espanola
and operate across multiple
infrastructure sectors. I am a
native New Mexican who grew up
in Espanola.
Attended Paul Walker High School
and graduated from the
University of New Mexico. I am
also a Marine Corps veteran. I
am fiercely loyal to northern
New Mexico and the Espanola
Valley. Many of my family
members and friends build and
Omoriders. I enthusiastically
support the creation of the
Lorider Museum and respectfully
urged the passage of this bill,
as it will bring more national
awareness to our unique cultural
heritage as well as drive
economic development and tourism
to the region and state overall.
Thank you, Senator Jaramillo for
your uh uh sponsorship of this
bill. Thank you for your
consideration, Mr. Chairman and
committee members.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
John, and a native of the
Espinol uh county treasurer for
Reba County. And I send in
strong support of this bill. Um,
Uh, thank you, thank you for
your time.
OK. Thank you. Oh, and so
anybody, no opposition, so uh
we'll go to committee, uh,
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh.
I stand in very strong support
of this legislation.
I just want to mention a couple
of things, so.
That are very important when uh
when you see um.
All this uh with hydraulics and
that takes a lot of science.
You know, and a lot of physics,
you know, that going into this,
so you know, uh, we talk about
outdoor education, you know, it
could be more closer to.
That science, and NSL.
Senator Jaramil mentioned the,
you know, the different textures
and paint and uh the designs and
so it's a combination. It's an
integration of um
You know, many of the science
and the education put together.
But I think 11 part that to me.
It's very, very valuable.
I some of these are going into
the 3rd and even 4th generation.
That it was their fathers or it
was their uncles or their
grandfather or.
Um, you know, and some of the
ladies that have become very uh.
Grown into this and attached to
it.
You know, they say, I really
take care of this with a lot of
pride because um this was my
grandfather's and so there's a
lot of history to it, but the
important part is um that family
connection that family value,
and a lot of the assets that are
invested into this. It's not a,
a very um
Part of just, you know, putting
something together, there's a
lot of pride that goes into
this, and I'm sure that there's
a lot of um trial and error
things that happen, you know,
and uh doing this work, but the
learning process that goes with
it and.
Um, you know, it's a big
success.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Padilla.
Thank you, chair. I just will be
very brief. I'm fully
supportive. I want to thank uh
Senator Janillo for really the
love, passion and energy he
brings to support, you know, his
area, but I know that he doesn't
just look to this uh license
plate is something that will
benefit his or. I think it it's
something that will be
recognized on the other side of
the planet and how wonderful is
that for us? We should
capitalize on every single thing
that makes you unique uh New
Mexico unique and I think this
is absolutely one of them. I
can't think of another place in
the world.
That would have
This sort of derivative, so I
fully support it, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Brent.
Mr President, uh, senator, you
know how I feel about these
license plates bills, right?
So, um, and, uh.
So I, I'm not gonna, you know.
So, so how many of these things
do we have now?
Mr. Senator, are you asking how
many license plates would be
specialty license plates do we
have?
It's, it's at least 40,
um, you know, you got, uh.
You know, one for Santa Fe, one
for Cruces, plates for autism,
wildlife fish, Children's trust
fund, pet care, breast cancer
awareness, Route 66 organ
donors, the cumbrances, uh,
cumbr and Toltec railroad
railway farm and heritage.
Uh, adoption, firefighters,
pollinators, smoky bear, and
other causes.
I think we have enough. Senator,
if I may, for a long time being
from us when kids in the valley
sometimes feel when they hear
their senators say he's they can
connect with me.
And their little one might seem
like another uh for them when
they see that their culture
license plate bill, it becomes a
win for kids who need a win in
their best. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
I, I, I thank you, Mr. Chairman
and Senator. I love how you made
that about children, as you
know, that's, you know, where,
where to get me. Yeah, I, I
know, yeah, you know me a little
too well at this point, um.
But uh
Yes, they, they are, but why not
just make this like more of a
familiar plate that you can sell
and make money from and in
Espanola instead of an official
license plate, um, my concern on
all these plates is we have
stacks and stacks of them at the
The MVD warehouse. Mr. Chairman
Senator, you'd be amazed to have
said they're willing to
purchase. So I think it would be
a very popular.
This, this one's hard for me. I,
I just don't ever support these
bills, as you know, um, so I'm
I'm probably gonna vote no at
this time, um, and I will
definitely be voting no on the
next one coming before us, so
thank you.
All right, thank you, Senator
Steinborg.
Mr. Chair. Well, Senator, good
morning, and I, I love your
pride for your community.
And, and I, uh, you know, I
represent the Hatch Valley and
in fact, I'm gonna go run off,
put on a bill to celebrate Chili
Month.
It's not my bill. Remember in
the other party, it's about
hatch and it's about promoting
one of our essential brands and
things that we love and we're
proud of in the state.
So I think it's great. I think
it's great for your community.
It's great for the state. I
support the Lowrider Museum or
whatever is also, you're also
working on for Espiol. I think
that's brilliant.
It's good to see Sam back there.
Um, and, uh,
So, yeah, I'm, I'm all for it
and supporting hatch and chili
and.
Everything else in New Mexico.
Let's do it.
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Senator
Graham, why do you have to be
like that, OK?
Um
I'm white and tall and not
loaded the ground, but I think
that this is a phenomenal bill.
I love that it's celebrating a
pocket of culture within our
state and we have so many things
that are so special about being
New Mexican. This is just 11 of
those things. It's, it's a
special, um,
Part of being from your neck of
the woods, if you will, um, but
I think there's other parts of,
of the state that would like to
claim this too, probably, um,
and now you're making me think
that I need to take my old Dodge
Corne and make it a low rider,
that'd be kind of fun. We can go
cruise together, um.
As a kid, we used to cruise the
beach in Clearwater, that was
the thing, um, and we didn't
have low riders then, but now I
know they do, and even in
Florida they're doing it. So,
um, I applaud you for
celebrating um this important
part of New Mexican culture, um.
And
The children are our future
Senator Graham.
Um, and I think that this is a
wonderful bill. I fully
supported and hopefully my vote
will negate Senator Brand's. Mr.
Chairman Senator Tobiasson this
is official, an official
invitation for you to join me in
Espanol and. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator, and I
absolutely accept that'll be
fun.
You might wanna take Brent
hostage and give him, give it to
change his mind. All right, and
I don't have any questions, so
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Chair. And so I, you
know, Senator Branton.
Senator, uh.
Shindo and I walked into the
building on the same day 13
years ago.
I'm sure we'd all been here
before. I know Senator Shindo
had, but um I, I, I wanna just
for my good buddy, you know,
Craig Brand, who was also a whip
for portion of his time here.
There was a session where it
seemed like a 25% of the bills
were on license plates. I don't
know if you remember that
session, and so we kind of have
some PTSD on this stuff, but I
like the fact that we're
negotiated that we're debating
all of these one at a time. It
just seemed like that year, it
was just every time I turned
around, we had a license plate
bill. I don't know if you
remember that one senators that
were here at the time
and so I, I again, I do fully
support.
This one, and I, again, I, I
love the fact that it's going to
really distinguish a portion of
New Mexico all over the planet
and let's just make it happen.
So, thank you.
But that that's where all this
PTSD and license plates come
from.
a motion for Senator Gonzalez,
seconded by Senator Truhill.
The color
Senator Brent
Oh
Senator Brant votes no. Senator
Capos.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Liar.
Senator linear votes yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes yes. Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson
Senator Tobias and Bosa, Senator
Trujillo, Senator Trujillo votes
yes, Senator Woods.
Senator Sendo. Senator Sendo
votes yes, Senator Munoz.
We have a Du past 7 in the
affirmative, 1 in the negative.
Thank you, Mr. Congratulations
of the world, Muchisimas gracias
go on that.
I do too actually.
Thank you so much, thank you. So
we'll move on to Senate Bill 30
434.
Center near.
device
Believe we have a uh
Proposed amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It, it's a whole different look
from here.
I do have an amendment.
OK. I move amendment.
In case we have a motion to uh
last Amendment for discussion
purposes, seconded by Senator
Tobiasson.
In the opposition to the motion?
See none. That's uh we explain
in a moment. All right, so on
the amendment, um, we just.
We realized that
Um, I'm
If you look on page 3 line 4,
after day, insert.
out of school, we had left that
out of there. Mm.
not all students will be able to
be
um high impact tutor during.
The day
Some
I'm sorry.
Um
OK, so
some public comment public
comment.
Anybody here in support of the
bill.
Hm
Mm
Anybody in opposition?
Anybody on Zoom?
Did he?
gonna hold it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. I'm JD
Bullington speaking to you today
on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
that supports Senate Bill 34
high impact tutoring is an
evidence-based solution that is
proven to maximize student
learning, boost academic
proficiency, and improve
attendance.
Here's just a few reasons why
the chambers supporting this
bill. University of Chicago
found this program can double or
even triple student learning
within a single year.
Tennessee test scores increased
8 points in English, plus 10
points in math after
implementing high impact
tutoring. Louisiana jumped from
50th to 16th.
In 4th grade reading.
In a recent study at Stanford
University found that high
impact tutoring had the largest
impact on chronically absent
students, improving their
attendance by at least 5 days.
There's a lot more reasons to
support this bill, those are
just a few. Thank you.
Any questions, uh, from the
committee on the amendment. OK,
so if not, there, I need a
motion to move the memo.
Um, uh, motion by Senator
Gonzalez, seconded by Senator
Tobiasin. Any opposition to
adopting the amendment.
See none. You have an amended
bill.
Now we're back on the bill.
I
Um, question, uh, Senator
Padilla on the bill. Thank you
chair and thank you, Senator,
uh, good to see you, Amanda.
So I just want to make sure I
understand the senator, um, I'm
looking at the um our committee,
um, analysis in, in Senate
education, I don't know why I
think I see a do not pass then a
do pass.
Or was it just to do pass motion
there?
Mr. Chair and Senator, it was
just a do pass. OK, then that
must be an error here.
There's a DMP and then a DP so
I'll just take your word for it
that it was just to do pass
motion.
And it was unanimous. Oh, it's a
substitute. OK.
Oh that's, that's what I was
trying to figure out, Mr. Chair.
So we did have we did have a, a
sub in there. So I think all I
see here is the original bill.
Do we have a substitute? I'd
like to see it.
Thank you.
So what changed from the
original bill, Mr. Chair, to the
substitute.
So there was some language that
we changed in there.
Let me see if I can find it on
here.
Oh, that's right. So we, we had
to change, Mr. Chair, Senator,
we had to change, we originally
had.
Accelerated tutoring, and we
needed to change the lan
language to high impact
tutoring.
Oh, that's right.
So and the other one was we had
low.
Um, what was low performance
level, and we had to change that
to lower, uh,
OK.
So then chair um on page one of
your substitute, I see a
definition called high quality
tutor. Is that already a job
title or role within our public
schools or where do we find
these people?
Mr. Chair, Senator, as far as I
know, no, I don't think that
was.
common in public schools. So is
that Mr. Chair, is that a
position and role and, and, and
job that's gonna be done by the
public schools, or is that
another, is it a company, an
entity, a nonprofit, who's gonna
provide the high quality
tutoring.
It, it, it's a multiple, it can,
it can be used by several
different her explain exactly
the.
Good
if you can uh introduce yourself
so that the public also knows
who
allows for flexibility staff.
To provide high impact tutoring,
they may do so. And if they
don't have that capacity and
they'd like to contract so and
thank you Chair and thank you uh
senator and thank you, Amanda,
um, and so the school is
responsible for managing this
process and making sure that all
this is taking place.
Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
that's, that's correct. Um, we
tried to leave it very flexible
because you have large school
districts, medium sized school
to smaller school districts and
so we wanted to leave that
flexible so that if somebody had
somebody that was trained as an
aid, they could also step in and
do it. It wouldn't have to be
it's hard to get the
professionals there.
Um, so with the.
OK, so on then, and then on the
funding, I'm gonna come to that
in a little bit, chair, but um,
so I think it was Saturday all
the days just kind of, quite
frankly, I.
Been here every day for the last
how many weeks, but uh I think
it was Saturday, we had my bill
on out of school time
programming. Is that something
that would help to fund this
type of activity?
Yes, sir.
It would, um, and that's why we
changed that language so that
that funding could be used for
that.
Um
And, and keep in mind that
Again, in some of those areas
like I have one streak.
Those students sometimes are on
the bus too for them in bus
and so.
We wanted to be able to pull
those individuals out.
Deering schools, we want to run
parallel to your bill so that
they can qualify for in-school.
Tutoring
Or out of school, do the out of
school because it's just too you
could put the tutor on the bus.
If they'd be willing, I mean,
but of course they'd have to get
home. Um, so, so the, the
ticket, the, the, you know, the,
the ticket price for this is,
is, it's a lot of money, 35
million a year, 71.
Over the two year, uh, is it a
pilot or is it an actual ongoing
or uh
We'd be doing this all the time.
Mr. Chair and senator, it, it
would be all the time to get
into the weeds with you on that
Padilla,
the idea would be that they
would, um, and hopefully at the
end of that 10 weeks.
Um, tutoring or doing another
school district or a local
school decides, um, it
Depending on how the public can
divvy up the high impact
tutoring funds and the out of
school time. OK.
So I guess the final question I
have here, maybe others have
questions and how do you plan to
pay for this? I mean, that's,
this is somewhere in the budget
already that you're aware of? I
mean, mine hasn't even been
approved yet, and that's only a
portion of what could happen
here, is that only came in at
about, so you, you've got a
Single item here with a price
tag of 35 million a year. So, um
And so you may wonder.
What we did when we moved out
from, from being eligible for
high impact, half of New
Mexico's students are.
it's getting the results that
we've seen in other states in
the future.
OK. Thank you and thank you
Senator.
Amanda, so what, what do you
think of, let me respond just a
little bit, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
We really want this to get, we
want to have the impact that
every year our.
You know, we would be at at
the time and money from the
students that are not up to
Well, chair, I mean, you know,
our purpose, the key purpose of
this committee is to get you the
money to do if we agree with
you. So what, what is, is there
a current estimate versus the 35
million that was uh in the
original FIR and just for the
senators uh uh edification, Mr.
Chair, um, and I didn't discover
this for 3 years, so I'm lucky
you, you're gonna find this out
in your first couple of months
here.
Uh, you can actually call LFC
and just request that they
re-score your legislation.
Just so you know, so I just had
them to do that the other day on
a very critical piece of
legislation in mind that this
big CYFD though.
And so you you can have them do
that, just so you know, but you
have a a new estimate on what
this is gonna.
Based on the changes you made in
education.
the type of contracts put in
place with the tutors that a
statewide uh ticket price or?
I'm gonna want to understand how
that's gonna work cause that
that's a big shift. I'm all
right, thanks, that's all I had.
Thank you, Senator, very
interesting and I, I love this
high intensity, high quality
tutoring is very valuable for
our students. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, for bringing this
legislation forward, um, I do
think I do agree with you that
we need to have this high
intensity. Um, I do have a
concern about the
The, the definition of what high
quality tutor means, um, and so
I, I like Senator Padilla. I see
that it says means a person
licensed. I'm not sure what
licensed means. Does it mean
teacher? Does it mean
educational assistant, doesn't
really specify what the
licenses.
Or approved by the Department to
provide high impact tutoring.
And the reason that I'm, I'm,
I'm kind of stuck on this is
that we have a program here in
Santa Fe called Math Amigos.
And it's a, it's a group of
volunteers that have been
working.
Really working hard with
students to try to get them up
to math, and these are retired
doctors.
They're retired professionals,
they're not licensed and they
can't get licensed by PED and my
concern is we haven't given any
criteria for PED to approve
them, and I would hate to see
the work that, that these
volunteer organizations are
doing.
Um, you know, kind of get shut
out because
There's this other requirement
that they have to do, um, you
know, that the schools have to
adhere to. I'm a little
concerned about Matheos, um, and
where it fits into this because
it has been so successful.
Um, but what, what I'm more
wondering is
How does this fit in?
With
222 C6, which is the remediation
programs, promotion policies and
restrictions. And I'm wondering
why you didn't try to blend
this.
Into that.
Because they're very two very
distinct different things and
two very distinct requirements
for the district.
One required I'm and I'm sorry,
I'm just gonna one requires the
local school boards to approve
school district development
remediation programs and
academic improvement programs to
provide special instructional
assistance to students in grade
1 through 8 who do not
demonstrate academic
proficiency, and this one is
telling the school boards what
they have to do specifically.
Senator Trujillo, um, licensed
high impact tutor. We agree in
the substage 3,
line 2.
Removing the H3, page 3 line 2.
Be provided by a high quality
tutor, but then
The definition on page one of a
high quality tutor is still
there, and that means someone
lies.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Truhi in
there that it would include
And so they already kind of have
the licensed staff to do it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Senator, but that means
that a nonprofit group of people
that provide it without er
without.
Cost, right? There's no, they're
not the only organization that
provides this kind of tutoring.
They would be cut out of this
because they're not.
wouldn't contract with
I think it just completely.
Throws them out.
So I, I, I hear what you're
saying, and I get it, and that's
fine, but I do think that we're
now eliminating from this.
Uh, program that is in fact
providing high quality tutoring.
Doctors, my former doctor is one
of these uh math amigos, and
she's been very dedicated for
many years, um, but I, I still
think that the bigger issue is
that it doesn't blend already on
the books.
I'm, I'm, I'm just struggling
with this. I would love to see
this go forward.
But it just feels like it's not
blended with the requirements
that are already in place.
the senator device.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, well,
first off, I think if it's 5 to
$7 million a year, um, I'm gonna
math it and say that's free.
Because what it costs the state
to have students graduate high
school who are not even close to
proficient in math is, I don't
even know how to add that up to
the to the value of the state of
having educated children, um,
graduating from high school, so
5 to $7 million a year seems
like.
pittances. Um, it's a no-brainer
for me. Um, I love that it's
high impact and it's
evidence-based. I think we need
a lot more evidence-based things
happening, um, not only in PED
but in several other departments
within the state, um, as a
whole. And when it comes to some
of the points that Senator
Trujil pointed out, I'm not
quite sure of the legalities,
but
To me, we're failing across the
state.
In reading Anne's mouth.
And this at least addresses the
math portion, um, and Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo, Mr. Chair, hi,
um,
sorry to interrupt your
conversation over there, but I'm
interested is there some kind of
amendment that we could suggest,
um, obviously I'm, I'm a sponsor
on this bill. It's important to
me that we help our students
however we can. Is there
something that we can talk about
right now that some language
that could be added to this bill
to satisfy some of those
concerns, but we're
We know that students are
getting the appropriate help.
Mm
Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes,
Senator, that's what we were
just looking at over here, and I
think to, for the definition for
the high quality provider, we
could take out online 25, um,
after personnel.
Eliminate or.
A and put a comma.
And then after private tutoring
provider, put a comma or
nonprofit or volunteer provider.
That would include that, that
would open up for communities
and schools for Math amigos. I
mean, there's a number of those
types.
So
that we could. I still think
that we have an issue with this,
um, remediation.
And I'm happy to try to look at
how do we blend that in, um.
But I think that's like
overnight or, you know, this
afternoon I'd be happy to work
on that.
OK, I think what we like to do
is, I think.
Uh, like to move this on, and
you guys talk about it and we
could do a floor memory, OK.
That way this movie we're not
installing it here. So let's
let's do that and
Come up with the language so
that way we can keep this thing
moving.
OK.
OK, OK, with that, Senator
Gonzalez, Mr. Chairman, I move
forward do pass. Motion for due
pass, seconded by Senator
Devison.
recovery.
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Linier.
Senator Lanier votes yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes as Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasson Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator to
you. Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Sendo, Senator Sendo
votes yes. Senator Munoz.
We have a Du past 7 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senators.
OK, moving right along, we have
uh
Senate bill.
377 Senator Maesters.
Thank you Mr. Chairman honorable
members, this is a license plate
bill.
Uh, regarding our United Soccer
League team, New Mexico United.
The, the license plate will be
black with yellow letters with
the united symbol. It would cost
$50 to the, to the, to the fan,
$12 would go to MBD to cover the
cost of the plates and $38 would
go to the tourism department to,
to promote uh our state's Mexico
to tourism brand. The um
The initial 100 plates, I'm
pretty sure Mr. Chairman will be
covered in Mexico United has a
tremendous
Uh, email blast system, they
have a tremendous fan base,
tremendous social media
presence, and they are in the
top, uh, they've been in the top
2.
Uh, cities in attendance the
past 4 years, um.
With that I stand for questions.
case at this time we'll go up to
the audience.
Anybody here in support of the
Senate Bill 377.
Everybody get up at once.
Anybody in opposition?
OK, go to committee questions,
Senator Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I just
wanted to go first since um
Senator Brant is not here to
rain on our parade, um.
You know, there's states that
have
Quadruple the amount of
specialty plates that we have,
so this is not an issue to me,
and I love the fact that this is
really our only true
professional sports team. This
is a no-brainer and I want 100%
support it and I thank you for
bringing it forward.
Right, Senator Gonzalez,
Chairman, I move for a due pass.
Motion for due pass.
by Senator Steinbor want to make
one comment. Oh, OK, I got one
comment by Senator Padilla.
It was
I'll 3 it when it's time, Mr.
Chair. No, I just want to thank
Senator Mas, Mr. Chairman. I
mean, I think this is, we should
do everything we can to build up
these, these, uh, these teams,
these efforts, uh.
I guess do you have any data on
what percentage of the attendees
come from somewhere else that
bring money into New Mexico.
I'm, I'm, it's got to be through
the roof, I'm sure the brand, I
think is the number one brand in
the USL.
The United Soccer League, which
is not necessarily below MLS but
kind of, kind of equivalent,
unlike the isotopes who were
owned by the Colorado Rockies
United Soccer Club is, is
independent, and they could
literally play friendlies
against any team in the world.
Uh, so, so the new stadium will
be online probably 2027.
Uh, people will realize how
horrible it is to watch a soccer
game from a baseball park, but
we won't tell him just yet.
Um, but it was kind of fun the
first time I went, but, but, uh.
But yeah, the brand is
tremendous, uh, and the fan base
is crazy and if you go to a
United game on the road, there
will be hundreds of.
Again, chair, I just think that
this is terrific. Good job,
Senator. Um, again, a lot of
economic-based jobs are created
out of this because money coming
from all over the world to come
in and see this team, and we
should be highlighting that we
should be celebrating. Right, we
have a
uh do pass motion by Senator
Nodales, seconded by Senator
Steinborn.
color
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator
Linier.
Yes. Senator Lanier votes, yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
votes nested yes, Senator
Steinborn.
Senator Steinarton votes yes.
Senator Tobiasson.
Senator Tobias Sibos yes,
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Shino
Yes Senator Shindo votes yes,
Senator Munoz.
We have a do pass 7 in the
affirmative, 0 in the negative.
Thank you.
