Um
Uh, this project process has
been a truly collaborative
effort, uh, in house reparations
and finance, as you all know, we
concluded our work.
Uh, last week.
Uh, in committee, and then, uh,
voted on House Bill 2 and 3,
yesterday. Mr. Chair, I, I'm
really proud that in uh house
corporations and Finance
Committee, we were able to do uh
the entirety of our work in a
collaborative, open and public
process. We ended up having 4
subcommittees, 6 working groups,
um, for instance, with our uh
public education working group
and on the public education
budget.
As you all know, Mr. Chair,
committee, we included the
legislative education Study
Committee, uh, PED, other
stakeholders, the full committee
heard that budget twice. The
work group heard uh their their
work twice, um.
And uh I think all of this was
done across a wide range of
areas really to ensure that we
can implement funding, uh,
effectively, quickly and in
targeted and strategic ways.
Mr. Chair, I want to say thank
you to you for a great LFC
session. I thought this past two
years was really strong. It set
us up, uh, to come into session
in a very good place, uh, and I
wanna thank Director Bri and Mr.
Avila, uh, their ability to
collaborate and communicate
multiple times a week,
continuing our work through the
summer, um, I think it's been
very positive, and I know that
we've shared, uh, sort of our
approach, uh, and then.
Of course, everything has been
public in the work that we've
done.
Um, the ability to share working
documents in particular.
Has been very important chair
and committee, uh, and I also
want to thank Director Sali and
the LFC staff.
The ability to um to share work
product has been super
important. Uh, Mr. Chair, I'll
go through some top lines really
quick.
Uh, are the budget came in at
5.6% increase. That was with the
legislature approved.
Um, it leaves the house at 5.8%.
So 0.2% recurring growth.
Mr. Chair, uh, of course that
comes within an overall 6%
target.
And so that means obviously
there's capacity and we're
excited for uh you all to do
important work on the recurring
side of the budget.
With our um.
Uh, non-recurring in the
specials. Right now we're at a
31.2% reserve.
This comes within a 30% reserve
target.
So there's uh capacity there
roughly equal to what the house
uh worked on in terms of
non-recurring capacity that
we're really excited, uh, and
appreciative for uh that comes
over here to the Senate. So
there's capacity in both areas
to make important and needed
adjustments.
Um, that keeps us very much sort
of in that same space of uh what
the LFC budget envisioned and
gives a lot of space for for you
all to work, Mr. Chair, um, one
way to see the house's work.
is sort of how we chose to
approach the recurring new
investments.
Education, overall, uh,
received, I think it's a 6.
Yeah, yeah, 6% overall increase.
Much of that was in the LFC
budget uh through a 6th grade
SEG adjustment and increase in
that factor.
The committee, our largest
recurring increase was an
additional 10 million or
secondary education factors with
within the SCG.
The 2nd largest increase that
the committee decided upon was
1.6 million recurring or step
increases with the Department of
Public Safety for our state
police officers.
That's followed by a $1.5
million recurring increase to
the Office of the State
engineer.
Um
For their uh or their budgetary
needs.
And then followed by economic
development and then our uh our
subcommittee work dedicated a
little over a million dollars
new that was led by a $721,000
recurring investment in the uh
livestock board to support
in-state meat inspections.
Mr. Chair, in terms of the uh
non-recurring.
Um, specials, some highlights
there. The committee chose to
dedicate $50 million to abandon
uranium mine cleanup.
And uh none uranium mine
abandoned.
Sort of abandoned contaminated
site cleanup.
Um
The
Uh, there's, uh, Mr. Chair,
committee, uh, after a great
deal of work, uh, housing
presentation with folks from
across the state and the
executive, one of the
committee's big priorities is
$110 million
specifically for housing.
And uh with a focus on uh the
unhoused or homeless
populations, particularly in
Albuquerque and Bernal Leo
County.
Um
And so that money is meant to.
Uh
Bill community, um.
What they, what they brought to
us. They said we've been working
together extensively.
Uh, we can get folks off the
street in the housing if we get
funding and that's what the
committee chose to do.
Um, Director Briding is here. We
can go through, uh, water is
another big part of this.
Uh, budget, in a bunch of
different ways. Much of that
carries over from the LFC,
including a $200 million water
trust board allocation, $19
million for aquifer mapping, um.
And uh
A number of other
appropriations. The total water
investment, uh, is well north
of.
Well, North, thank you, uh, $420
million.40 of which is within
the strategic water supply. So
the vast majority of water
funding is dedicated to other
priorities, most of them.
Um
Mr. Chair, we're excited to
support the Senate's work around
the behavioral health
investments.
Those are reflected in the
budget, and that was one of the
main areas where Director
Briding, Mr. Avila worked very
closely together. I know the
work that you all did, so that
should, that is in the budget
that's coming over your way.
Um
Uh, Mr. Whip, uh, we're talking
about just sort of the capacity
that's coming over to the
Senate. We're at a 5.8%
recurring spending increase.
Came in from LSC at 5.6, our
target is 6% early leaving
capacity for uh the important
work here in the Senate, the
same way when it comes to our
non uh.
To our reserves were at 31.2%
was the target of 30%.
So, really important work. I
know that you all are uh engaged
in and excited to see that.
Uh, director writing, uh, yeah,
uh, and the director is um
reminding me there was a great
deal that the committee did, uh,
in order to address and um
Support, uh, executive
priorities.
Uh, and we were able,
particularly in the
non-recurring space, also in the
non-recurring space, uh, to
address those on the recurring
side, I want to highlight the
healthcare Authority, the
Medicaid projection came down.
And because of that decrease in
the Medicaid projection, we were
able to fulfill basically the
entirety of HCA's, uh, executive
budget request. That's mainly in
SNAP.
Um
Beneficiary sort of
administration so new positions
for SNAP.
Um, that's for all of the
provider rate increases. It
includes a $9 million nursing
home rebasing to support uh
nursing homes across the state
that support our elderly New
Mexicans who are on Medicaid.
So HCA was all ultimately it was
rearranged because the need for
more Medicaid decreased, so
we're able to reapportion that
to other priorities within the
HCA.
And then um
Within
Uh, within the, um,
The non-recurring and of ECCD is
another uh good example. We
allocated 50% of the expected
additional trust fund.
Distribution, leaving half
obviously for the Senate uh to
look at administering.
Um
So
Uh, happy to go through
questions, Mr. Chair. I think HB
2 leaves the house. This has
been our most collaborative
process ever. We were able to do
all that work in public.
Um
It leaves in a way where
executive priorities in almost
every area, there's been
extensive progress made.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I think, you
know, seeing some of the
reporting regarding CYFD.
And that remains scenario where
there's new investment, but that
investment is focused through
the grow and others, um.
Ways that are more transparent
and easier for the legislature
to track.
Yeah, thanks Amanda for working
guys are all you need when
you're always in touch every
day. I don't know if I've seen
the funding sheets that quickly
or.
What happened in the funding
sheets, but we'll start to go
through this center to buy and
you have a question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, can
you give a little more detail,
um, under the HCA but you were
just saying about um the rate
increases were improved. What
were those rate increases?
Uh
Thank you, Chair, Senator
Tobiasson, uh, broadly, it's the
150% vectors getting it for me
here. Um.
It is the
150% for three core areas,
that's, uh, child and maternal
health.
Primary care and behavioral
health.
So every one of the codes within
those three core areas that has
a Medicare equivalent.
Our state reimbursement level is
set at 150% of that Medicare
equivalent reimbursement rate.
Thank you, and Mr. Chair, what
is the percentage rate, let's
say if someone is a specialist
of some kind of surgeon, um,
let's just take like a
neurosurgeon, for example. Are
there set rates across the board
for specialists, Mr. Chair,
Senator Tobiasson, I know, uh,
Mr. Sale is here, um, my
understanding is that in other
areas that are outside of those
three core areas, the attempt is
to go to 100%.
Of the Medicare reimbursement?
Um
So yeah, if there's a Medicare
equivalent, then we're looking
to set that at 100% for outside
of those three areas.
OK, and Mr. Chair, has there
been any discussion of raising
that percentage because let's
say a specialist um in other
states would be making
definitively a lot more money,
um, and they're, they're here
for a reason, right? So they're
at a disadvantage financially,
um, is there any conversation
around how we're able to raise
that percentage for those other
types of providers. Senator
Tobiasson we're just getting to
the point.
now of the 150% and 100%.
Um, but great question. I think
there are ongoing conversations,
one instance, this would be sort
of more in the child maternal
health, but they're, you know,
there's legislation that's been
introduced to raise um sort of
the uh OBGYN uh rate to like
250% of Medicare.
So there are ongoing
conversations. I think those are
balanced by one.
We're just getting to one of the
highest reimbursements in our
region and in investing a lot of
state money to do so.
To, uh, there's a great deal
obviously of federal uncertainty
right now or sort of federal.
Back and forth
But Mr. Chair, Senator, I think
it's, we've started down this
road, so it's fair, those
conversations are starting and I
think should happen whether or
not we can meet those needs.
Uh, remains to be seen.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
and thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you so much for all the
work you guys do over in LFC and
everybody else there. I just had
some follow ups on the um.
The site readiness, $24 million.
That's obviously contingent.
Right? I mean, so.
Any of that can roll into sort
of the quantum science area, so
I'm just trying to figure out
what
I don't see anything listed for
quantum.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
Senator Padilla, there is a
great deal specifically for
quantum.
That's in this budget. Uh, I
don't know off the top of my
head, it is well north of $15
million so um and probably
closer to 20 or 25.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, one of
our points of pride, yeah, in
building on a lot of the great
work that the body has done is
sort of a broad economic
development, uh, investment.
Focused across a number of
different priority areas with
the 1 million new recurring for
EDD to support sort of this new
special allocations in their
work.
Uh, I was, uh, totally undershot
it, Mr. Chair, Senator. There's
$48 million in here for quantum.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, and I say amen to that,
and those are my bills, as you
can imagine, I'm very sheer on
watching those like a hawk, uh,
when it said multiple
investments into quantum, so I
didn't see a figure, so that's
very exciting to hear. Thank you
for doing that. I think that's a
very positive, um, and then on
the uh just uh full stop
shifting uh over to ECECD. I
think I heard you say uh half
was allocated.
by you there was half left or by
the house and uh you.
What, what was the first half,
directly to the department or
what do you, Mr. Chair, Senator,
as I recall, it's mainly
distributed around childcare
with some other, um, you know,
the other parts are in expansion
of free K slots.
Um, but
In the family infant toddler,
uh, rates and thank you, Chair,
and I just want to make sure
that's what that, what you were
referring to because I was uh
made aware that there might have
been some attempts to
Utilize some of those funds for
other initiatives that are going
on in the, is it left to the
purpose of early childhood
education and care or there are
other things you're trying to do
with some of that money. Mr.
Chasenator, this is very much
within the wheelhouse of early
childhood. OK. Thank you, and I,
I really wanted to stay that way
as you can imagine one of my
primary swim lanes here, um, and
then on uh CYFD I think there
was a
uh, and we don't
legislate based on what the news
articles say, but I was caught
wind that maybe there was
A flattening of the CYFD budget,
uh, what, what, what is CYFD
look like in the final analysis
coming from the house. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Chair, Senator. There's
$37 million new dollars spread
out over three years for um
their uh most important
recruitment and retention needs.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, this is
an area of, of sort of a
different approach. The
department wants all that money
in the base.
Broadly speaking, Mr. Chair,
Senator, uh, the challenges with
that are numerous, including the
fact that in the past few years
there have been a number of
reversions there shifting to use
state funds where federal funds
are available, Mr. Chair,
Senator projecting.
10+ million dollar deficiencies.
And so the sort of the
confidence level speaking
plainly, Mr. Chair, Senator.
I
Um, low to be able to make those
investments in the base. On the
other hand, the committee also
very clearly acknowledges the
need for more money.
And uh as a time of sort of
transformation and change. We
need, there needs to be more
money, so that's where the $37
million.
Over 3 years.
Um, in a way that we can track
and engage and support with most
closely was the choice that was
chosen.
The route that was chosen thank
you Mr. Chair and, and, and Mr.
Chair on the uh the initiative
to, and I have the legislation
on the uh tax credit for the
fostering families. I think uh
one of the biggest needs we have
right now for that department in
the the protective services area
is to, to create
A desire to provide additional
foster homes, high quality
foster homes. Is, was there
anything built into the
House Bill 2, the version of
House Bill 2 that we're seeing
now. I mean, I have read through
the whole thing yet, but um that
will help with that. The
estimate was somewhere in the
ballpark of about 19 million to
satisfy that requirement.
You have anything you want to
say about that, uh, Mr. Cha,
Senator, that was a topic of
conversation in HAFC that's
probably administered through
the tax code and that's not
currently part of the house bill
too.
But obviously on the capacity
like like having dollars to do
that is where I'm asking you
guys about that. Uh, I don't
know, maybe Mr. Sali wants to
comment if you're OK with that.
Uh, sure.
Mr. Chairman
You all appropriated money last
session.
for that very purpose of being
able to um help train and get
more.
Foster families, particularly
for
Hard to place, uh, it, so that
money has already been
allocated.
Uh, one challenge with CYFD's
budget is.
There is a number of items that
were cited in that news article
that we're not part of the
department's request, so they
were not part of the
deliberation, nor were they in
the executive budget
recommendation. So you haven't
even seen those, those came.
In late and um.
The Buster family uh payments is
the biggest one that uh is new
uh to this body.
OK, um
I guess I didn't quite still
hear, is there $19 million to
incentivize additional
high-quality foster homes.
Mr. Chair, Senator, there's
31.2% in reserves, 5.6, 5.8% out
of us. So there's capacity in
different areas.
Alright, I appreciate that would
be my sort of the overall take
Mr. Chair, Senator, because
that um particular sort of
dedication is not set out in the
bill as of now. OK. And thank
you, Chair and Mr. Chairman, and
this will be my last line of
questions on transportation. Uh,
can you give us a framework on
what happened with uh sort of we
have the bigger projects and
everything, but we all as
individual legislators, we have
local and collector streets that
need, I mean, some of mine if
they were put in when Truman was
present.
and they're still the same road
when President Truman was there.
I need some help there, so we a
lot of us do, so Mr. Chair,
Senator, uh, the $100 million
that's in there for sort of the
local roads support, which many
of those might fall under that
stays in place in the
committee's really excited about
that, Mr. Chair, Senator, um, we
heard that there's believe it's
$330 million out of roughly 1.6
billion.
Going back to 2021.
Of funding that's been set
aside, general funds.
For the most part
Going to um.
Department of Transportation,
that's unencumbered.
Uh, and I think it's Mr. Chair,
Senator 5 call.
555 million that's unspent.
And this goes some of these
projects go back to 2021 with
unspent funds, Mr. Chair,
Senator, so the $100 million for
local roads is uh is in the bill
that that is coming to you.
Those are great.
There's enough sort of unspent
dollars that are uh.
That are slashing that that are.
Dedicated to DOT for important
projects primarily road
construction, although not
entirely. Some of that's rural
air service, which Mr. Chair,
Senator, we added $5 million to
that.
Um
So there's a lot of unspent
money that's there right now,
the local roads, there's a new
$100 million allocation though.
Appreciate that chair and Mr.
Chair, what did it start out as,
uh, when you did your the
original framework, was it 188
million or 100 million? So there
is a few, Mr. Chair, Senator, in
a few different areas, the 100
million for local roads stayed,
uh, so that's, that was what was
in the LFC framework. There was
an additional distribution that
uh was focused some on
maintenance, some on new
construction because of the
amount of money that has been
dedicated and
not yet encumbered and certainly
not yet spent.
Along with the bonding package
that's making its way through
the body, uh, that 188 million.
Uh, was no longer dedicated to
those purposes.
Because there's 500/500 million
dollars unspent.
$300 million unencumbered.
Um, going back some of these
projects going back. Uh thank
you, Chair and Mr. Chairman on
the $550 million in projects. I
mean, some of those are very
large projects that don't just
start up, you know, at the
moment the
You know, overnight, I mean, so
I've got, I've got 1 or 2 in
there, I think, and these are
large regional things that will
help regionally. So it takes a
while to get those off the
ground, but thank you very much,
Mr. Chair and thank you for all
the work that you and your
committee did. Thank you. Thank
you.
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
the same, you know.
you to
For your
work and our staff.
Um, a couple of questions on the
line item 421.
And 422 and 4:25.
Uh, um.
Port 21, you mentioned that you
put in 5 million.
And how much was there last
year?
Uh, Mr. Chair, is that, that's
for the rural Air Service grant.
Um
I'll ask Director Sali for the
amount.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, there's
about 5 to 6 million that's uh
unspent from prior year
appropriations for the adds to
that.
I think there's
At least
One larger rural air service
that's slated to come online up
in the Four Corners area the
summit.
So then, Mr. Chairman, our
number there would be 11
million.
In terms of uh total amount
available, uh, should the, the
bill pass in this formula. OK.
And then with the
beautification, is that the same
thing that's on 422.
I would need to check on the
status of that particular
balance. We're running that
right now, Mr. Chair.
So we ended up with uh.
From all of see there's so.
00 and from how appropriations
the same.
That's correct. It was just in
the exact funding for
Advertising so that we don't
have litter in the first place.
That was.
And with a 4:25.
Is there additional funding
somewhere else.
And this is uh to purchase heavy
equipment.
Within the 6 districts.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, this is
um this is stayed at that amount
from the LFC recommendation that
we passed through, Mr. Chair,
Senator, I do recall hearing
about the department within the
road fund having some that
they're focused on heavy
equipment, but.
Um, this is unchanged from the
legislative recommendation that
we made back in December or the
budget we adopted in December.
Uh, very well, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, just on uh.
On 4:25, uh, you know, if
possible.
You know, you really would like
to see more in there.
Uh, 2 million doesn't really do
too much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You.
see anybody else with their
hands up.
Indo
And just a quick question on the
Sticking with the transportation
that 423.
The project fund for 100 million
is that is that is that the same
as the local road fund.
Yes, OK, just want to make sure
because I thought somewhere I
saw project fund and local rope
fund.
Separately, but OK, just want to
clarify. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
One question to ask in DOT is
they moved a lot of money
around. I understand they're
underwater and they're
operational budget side right
now.
And, and how much did they
testify that they had the 500
million still sitting there that
they haven't used any of that.
Um, Mr. Chair, that was from the
RLSC documents.
And they, Mr. Chair, I think.
There was an acknowledgement we
didn't get, I didn't ask them
for an exact dollar figure sort
of as of.
You know, whenever it would have
been February, whatever, but Mr.
Chair, I think there was an
acknowledgement that there was
still unspent dollars in some
cases going back to, you know,
as far back as 2021.
If I believe correctly, we
appropriated.
80 million to maintenance last
year.
And like 10 million to
beautification.
I mean that's operational money
for those agencies, so 50% of
that 80 should be gone half your
mark in December, right?
Charles, do we know where any of
that is tracking for the
maintenance money cause.
I mean it's like a, it's like
shifting sands at DOT you never
know which greenish sand moved
got which moved uh which road
and
Right, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, we
would need to run a report to
see where they're at with those
two specific items. They
obviously have money to.
North of a you can see that in
section 4 where.
Uh, this year, the House chose
to break some of the line items
out the other.
In um
Maintenance and uh that service.
Those items, but we'll follow up
on the special and
representative that the bill
coming over is just a general
fund of uh cost cost to the
general fund. I haven't seen any
bonding.
In a road packageless that bill
changed last night.
And then, uh, the big question
is going to be the agency CYFD.
When they had your budget
request or you had them before
and and you made these
adjustments. Did they come back
to you and still say we need
more adjustments, or what did
they tell you?
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
I, I don't know that we've sort
of
This roughly uh sort of follows
what the legislature came in
recommending, which is new
funding, but in a sort of a more
clear transparent way.
Um, we did add some money, if
it's a small amount, I think
it's like 500 to $600,000.
Or a deficiency, uh, but Mr.
Chair, we didn't do their full,
I think in this case there a
full amount that was where they
said they sort of overspent.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I think.
This is still an area of a lot
of back and forth with.
And really one of the only areas
of back and forth with the
executive, but it represents
maybe Mr. Chair, a bit more of a
Different approach.
The administration seems to want
to put all of the new funding
into the base of CYFD.
In the legislature is broadly
saying.
The concerns are substantial
enough that we need to do new
funding, but do it in ways that
are
Transparent and can be tracked,
so I wouldn't say that they're
in full agreement with the
budget, but Mr. Chair, I would
say that we're um putting new
funding for high need and high
priority areas and trying to
make it as functional as
possible. We do continue, Mr.
Chair, I think what uh this
committee and what we adopted
last year, but what you all sort
of.
Uh, pioneered, which is
disallowing some of the program
transfer authority within CYFD
specifically.
And again, that's just
I think it comes after a very
long time of.
Trying to find a workable space
and that being difficult.
OK.
Any other agencies that
back for a second can buy the
apple that you think we ought to
be made aware of that are going
to be pushing.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I, the, so
actually a couple of uh
non-recurring things that I
didn't uh mention, but I think
are important. Uh, water again
was a dominant theme in the
committee and in the in the
summer.
Uh, office of state engineer and
received our 3rd largest
recurring increase, uh, Indian
water rights settlement, we
added $25 million to that in
large part because the testimony
that they can do work.
Whether or not the federal
settlements
Separate from the federal
settlement timeline.
There's important work that can
be done in different communities
across the state where those
settlements are in play.
Um
I would say, you know, um.
Within PED there's
A lot of similarities, but some
pretty core differences, Mr.
Chair, PED recommended a 3% um
Ras we chose and you know, you,
you brought in the 4% overall
raise.
I don't think PED has the
licensure increases for
teachers.
At 5000 for each tier. And so
they have different funding
levels going in other areas.
LESC ultimately we ended up.
Um, between PED above PED's
recommendation for K-12.
Uh, but a little bit below,
although we moved closer to the
LESC recommendation.
There's some very large numbers
there from a recurring
standpoint that are very
difficult to do this year.
Um
Just and stay within that 6%.
But that was by far the biggest
uh new funding we did.
Mr. Chair, we, uh,
I'm, I'll ask the director. I
don't know that there are.
Um, other agencies, we did a
great deal of work including in
non-recurring, a great example
of that is aging, where we added
5 million to the Kiki Savera
Dignity Fund.
The committee did a lot of work
when it came to investing in
local food and local
agriculture.
Um, including using some of the
kiki Savera dignity fund for
that, but we will refill the
fund.
With aging
Back through HCA, which is
outside of um EED, one of the
biggest areas of
Increased demand on general fund
and because of the decrease in
Medicaid forecast.
We're able to meet that agency's
needs. I don't anticipate
necessarily a number of agencies
with um
Significant challenges.
OK.
I don't have any other questions
start our journey through the
house bill too and see where the
sawmill and the athletics budget
ends up and equalization and
We'll go through there. That's
great.
I think I wanna say thanks,
really appreciate the work that
you all do, emphasizing the
collaboration that's led us to
this point.
And our ability to share
spreadsheets and to share sort
of our thinking and approach.
Uh, to have, uh, members from
each committee be able to uh
sort of be in committee while
each is doing their work. I
think it's led us to a point
where we're very much on track.
Uh, a 6% recurring spend. This
leaves the house at 5.8.
So again that capacity for you
all to do important work. 31.2
reserve reserves with a 30%
target.
There's, uh, I think the
framework that you set up, Mr.
Chair, through the interim, we
stayed very close to that and um
it's put us in a good spot to
continue to do really good work
and deliver for the citizens in
New Mexico.
Thank you. We know if we stay at
6% that we can do this for 5
years or more.
We go above the 7 or 8% mark.
We know that we're going to
begin the slide even quicker
where we'll start going even
lower and lower and so.
That's a good target that way.
You know how it goes. We got to
figure out where the holes are
and how to fill the holes and
what the fixes are and so we'll
see where we end up.
Um, we don't know if there's a
tax package out there. We hear
there's a tax package out there.
We don't know what that looks
like, what it's gonna cost, um.
So we'll see where we end up in
that.
the end of the day.
OK, thank you, thank you all.
Thank you.
He just wrote these to this
afternoon. We only have one bill
on this this afternoon.
So we'll just roll these to the
afternoon and then
If you keep
busy, right.
OK.
So we'll roll these to the
afternoon I think sender Shindo.
You want to do yours?
I guess.
Senator Woods is not here.
I don't have my folders my
folder.
OK, go get your folder.
OK come here so we can get the
other one I guess.
I come in.
Um
Very well, Mr. Chairman, uh.
Senator Gonzalez because he's
gonna do next.
I've been, uh, notified by staff
that you have an amendment.
Yes, but let me go over the bill
and then we'll.
OK.
Um,
so we're very well, so we were.
Senate Bill 143.
Senate Bill 142.
Pretty
The POC currently collects its
general fund money.
A mill assets from the utilities
and its current rate, the PRC
collects between 14 and 16
million each year. This bill
creates a reverting fund that
will be used to the subject to
the legislative appropriations
to fund the operations of the
PRC.
The bill also increases the mill
assessment for both utility and
telecom assessments to uniform.
0.5 of the utilities.
Gross receipts. The bill allows
the PRC to adjust annual fees up
to the annual employment cost of
index with a sunset of July
2031.
The Bill gives the PRC authority
to set administrative hearing
fees and amounts that do not
exceed the cost of
administrative proceedings.
The the amendment which makes
the fund reverting allowed us to
move the amendment from Senate
tax.
So this amendment strikes the
appropriation in its entirety.
would get to that.
OK.
While we're doing that, the last
year, the PRC had about 400
cases which acquired fuel.
adjudication
Uh, in the the PRC's vacancy
rate in 2024 was 6.
6% in as low as 3% in its
currently about 6.9.
So
That's the
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'll move, uh,
Amendment number 1 for
discussion purposes to
Senate Bill 143.
And the members were looking at
a 0.231208.2.
And uh
Is there a second?
One second.
OK, so, uh, proceed with the
amendment.
Thank you.
I my expert witness explain the
amendment.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. The
amendment, uh, strikes all of
the Senate tax, business, and
Transportation Committee
amendments as, uh, the chair
mentioned, that's because uh it
makes the our amendment also
makes the fund reverting rather
than non-reverting.
Um, it strikes online, uh, 21 of
page 2, the before and April and
inserts July instead so that the
payments are due by the end of
July in the given year instead
of April.
Um, and it adds an effective
date of January 1st, 2026.
Or any.
Discussion on the amenity.
Pa, thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair.
And um
Madam Chief of staff.
Adrian, um, so I guess the, the
only, so these are striking all
of the signs I'm sorry, the uh
tax business and Transportation
Committee amendments.
Like all of them?
Mr. Chair, Senator, that's
correct. It strikes those, the
amendments from Senate tax, um,
took out the funding mechanism,
so the fees were going in to the
fund and then Senate tax took
that out because at that point
it was a non-reverting fund.
So now this amendment makes it a
reverting fund, so we're taking
out all of the amendments from
Senate tax.
OK.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator for the,
I can elaborate a little more as
to the reasoning.
Sorry,
go ahead, um, so Senate tax was
very concerned if the funding
was gonna be non-reverting, then
it's a general fun impact. Here
it's reverting. So now the fund
can go and it's not a general
fund impact anymore.
I just, you know, I, I always
get very nervous when we strike
another committee because then
that's
They could get really worked up
and I want to make sure that
they had a maybe they had a
reason for whatever, but that
makes total sense. So thank you.
I think that was our.
Mr. Chair, that there's two
different versions of how you
approach this, this one just
makes the most sense.
or any other
Number
Um
Let me go to Steinborne first.
That's it's not on you.
Oh
That's a that's in the mail.
OK, very well say no, sir,
motion to adopt the.
Amendment. 231208.2. So moved.
We have motion, we have a
second. Is there any opposition
to it?
See none, it's been adopted. Now
we're back to the bill as
amended.
Discussion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and good
morning.
Um, so essentially this is to
raise more revenue to be able to
do your job, is that?
The purpose of the bill.
different.
Mhm
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, yes,
this, the fees haven't been
raised since 2003. So it's one
to keep up with the fees that
are currently being collected,
uh, make it modern. And then
secondly, to fund the PRC so
that it also can keep up with
modern, uh, duties.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you.
The trio.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Um,
So in regards to the fees, it
looks like uh we're giving
A 5 year.
Opening to raise the fees. Is
that correct?
Trying to do the math real
quick. Looks like 5 years, Mr.
Chair, Senator, that's correct.
OK. And um, Mr. Chairman, the
The increase
Yeah, I will.
is dependent upon this cost
index.
So you're trying to cover the
cost. Do you increase those fees
via rules or do you just
increase them and notify the
public.
How does, how do the, how will
the fee increase happen so that
the public knows that it's
happening and has an opportunity
to comment.
Mr. Chair, Senator.
Those because they affect uh.
people outside of the PRC, those
would have to be increased via
rule. I would also note that the
bill allows fees to be increased
but does not require them to be
increased.
OK, um, Mr. Chairman, um,
Senator, I'm wondering.
So based upon what the fees are
when this bill goes into
A fact
That's what that.
How they can be raised will be
determined the index for that
will be based upon what they are
on that day, and then you can
raise them at any time in the
next 5 years.
Seems like a pretty open.
Option.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, they
can, they may be raised up to
the index amount, so, um,
Assuming that the raise is
justified through the regulatory
process through rules, um, and
again, it doesn't take away any
authority from this, uh, body in
that our budget would still be
subject to appropriation, and
the, and any fees that were
raised above what was utilized
at the PRC and appropriated to
the PRC would revert to the
general fund.
OK. All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mhm
No.
We'll go to the audience in
favor of this legislation.
This is uh Senate Bill 143 as
amended.
Favor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
Camilla Feibelman with the
Sierra Club just want to lend
our support to SB 143.
This change really falls in line
with the way that many other
states uh run their PRCs and pay
for them, the utilities are
already paying these fees. It
just makes it easier and more
efficient. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, members Dean
Archelet on behalf of P&M. I
just want to stand in support of
this bill. We feel that this
really helps PRC do the good
work and continue to do that.
Going forward, thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition?
Go to
OK
apparently we don't have anyone
on Zoom.
So, uh, members of
What is the pleasure of the
committee?
As amended.
of motion for.
Du pass in a second.
Or
Uh, Senate Bill 143 as amended.
Through here.
Is there any objection? See
none.
We do.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We're going to do Senate Bill
142.
Yeah.
Chairman 142, Senate Bill 142.
Yep.
Bill 142 seeks to make the
electric grid grid more
affordable by making an
investment in modernizing the
states, electric grid and
infrastructure.
Bills ensures that the PRC and
Emner will consistently work at
the table together on
establishing a grid roadmap for
modernization for New Mexico.
Expands the definition of grid
mod to ensure actual
distribution and transmission
infrastructure can be purchased
with funding.
It also ensures the speed of
deployment is a factor that that
is taken when the agency makes
funding, a funding decision.
I mean this is an investment in
New Mexico.
Um
What happens currently, we
cannot tie in the community
solar.
So a community has a community
solar project, you have to
modernize the grid for them to
tie in.
him and
And they will not allow you to
tie in their grid, uh.
been a problem for a couple
years. There's a couple bills
out there, the prior bill was
dealing with the PRC to make
sure we fund them correctly. Uh,
but this appropriates money that
is already in house Bill 2.
Uh, in
And so it, it allows us to
change the way we do in New
Mexico.
We know in Mesa Del Sol.
They cannot get P&M to set
substations to generate power.
When that economic development
comes.
We're waiting for
electrification.
Um
Data centers to
Solar centers and so they
invested in Los Lunas and look
what happened with.
With meta in that growth and
down there.
And so in other regions in
southeast New Mexico.
Excel is not expanding at the
rate that oil and gas companies
are and this allows them to do
uh a temporary natural gas power
plant.
Uh, and it modernizes the grid
throughout New Mexico, so.
that I think we'll stand for
question.
members, so we do have an
amendment and that is um.
2311351
May have a
Motion for discussion. Uh, so
moved.
So moved their 2nd.
Mhm
Very well.
Um
Chairman, you want to go over
the amendment. Chairman,
this just strikes the
appropriate any questions?
I move adoption of the
amendment, Mr. Chairman. We have
a motion to adopt the amendment.
Is there a second?
Second
Is there any opposition to the
amendment?
See no, uh, let's go to the
audience first in favor of this
legislation, as amended.
anyone in favor, please, if you
want to come up.
I
Deborah Condit, um, the
registered lobbyist for Inner
West Energy Alliance, where a
trade association that
represents wind, solar storage
and transmission. We stand in
strong support of this bill in
order for us to get to the goals
that we need to get to. We need
to modernize our grid and allow
for better transmission
throughout New Mexico, so we
support this bill. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Dean Archletta on
behalf of P&M, we support stand
in support of this bill. We
believe that these grants and
opportunities can really help
our customers move forward with
development. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairs, members
of the committee Camilla
Feibelman with the Sierra Club
also standing in support of the
bill, maybe with just one small
recommendation, um, that AI
methane pipeline monitoring
might not have exactly to do
with grid modernization,
something that would be very,
very cool to do, but might be a
bill unto itself. Thank you so
much.
Very well thank you um in
opposition.
See none for.
OK, there's no one on Zoom, so
uh committee members, so.
Discussion
board.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It didn't so, um, question, who
may I ask, uh, one of this bill
to be introduced.
Senator, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, when we were starting
to work on the community benefit
fund, right?
Adrian helps Center Stewart
develop that. And one of the
things necessary to get New
Mexico to, you know, zero carbon
and where we are places that we
really need to work on the PRC
was one of them prior Bill you
heard how to get them the
revenue and how to make sure
that they can increase their
revenue to get them.
modernization came up throughout
every conversation we ever went
to from.
Community solar, nobody can tie
in, even the PRC the money and
authority to make the rule, and
we're going to modernize that
grid on it in Santa Teresa. They
have they have to have the
ability to to move rapidly and
this will allow them to apply
for grants, um.
Amner in, in the PRC to do that.
Mm
The ETA um defines a lot of
elements what can happen or and
so a lot of these are gonna be.
Solar.
How do we tie into solar? How do
we tie the grid in to solar.
Uh, and what does it really cost
and, and so that's kind of where
it came out of uh community.
In electrifying.
So Mr. Chair, who was there
somebody who wrote the bill or
asked for it to be introduced
specifically.
No.
That was Senator Stewart, uh, in
conversation with.
Uh, on the community.
In plan, right? OK.
Adrian,
Senator Stewart's chief of staff
and some other people came up
with.
this is one leg of that
community benefit plan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, question, um, the
grant, the modernization grant
program. Can you?
Talk about that and how much
money is funded in that and how
that works.
I'll ask again cause I know
you're checked the uh
Modernization, the great
modernization grant program that
these new definitions would make
would be eligible for. What is
that grant program and how much
do we fund it?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator
Steinborn, so currently the fun
doesn't have funding, right? So
within the community benefit
fund and Senate Bill 49, the
transfers that you all tabled,
there was $100 million
appropriation, and the house uh
bill too as it came over from
the house, maintained that
portion within the community
benefit fund hasn't been
delineated, that's something
that will be done in this
committee.
But the idea is to see this with
$100 million to really start
getting our electric grid
modernized and mobilized and
there were specific targeted
change within the bill that I
kind of want to highlight for
you to better understand it. So
for example, the initial version
of this bill never consulted the
PRC.
And they're the regulators of
the electric grid. So there was
a huge disconnect on like how
this works. So that's one of the
reasons why the
It never got any funding. So we
fixed that on page one. Another
change that we did is on page 3,
we incorporated an element for
consideration for funding on the
speed of deployment.
Let's move money quick to
modernize the grid and targeted
areas where we can do it most
effectively. So for example,
There's at least 2 projects that
I know of. I can't think of
their specific locations, but.
Two projects that I know of
where they instituted local
solar.
Right? They tried to do local
solar access, but they couldn't
really connect it and finish it
because
The utilities in that area just
Didn't want to connect it, you
know, and they didn't want to
connect it because they didn't
have the capacity in the grid,
the reliability, and other
things. Um, so this is providing
state funding to try to get that
ball rolling and really connect
the grid in those aspects. And
then, um, as Senator mentioned
with Mesa del Sol.
You need
More capacity on that grid in
order to really drive up
economic development. So this
allows both the environmental
renewable aspect of things to be
connected and at the same time
the economic development aspect
of it.
And we also expanded the
definition to make school
districts eligible.
And schools eligible to connect
to the grid. So for example, a
Trisco Heritage in Albuquerque
in the southwest quadrant.
They use solar and they need to
be able to connect to the grid,
and this will enable them to do
that.
OK.
I want to just ask and this
maybe.
I think I, I mean, I see what
the words say, but I just want
to make sure I understand that
on page 4, line 11, the sentence
requiring a new project to
To give notification.
To
Um
An electric service provider in
the region.
Is that all that really is? It's
just notifying, hey, we exist or
is it trigger some sort of
Absorption of that new resource
by the provider. Have any other
strings attached or is it really
just notification?
Uh, Mr. Chair, so that was a
recommendation from I wanna say,
was it the PRC?
Yeah, I think it was a piercing,
um.
That basically
If you're developing local solar
in an area at some point in
time, you're going to need to
want to put that on the grid. So
you need to notify the local
providers so they can start
thinking and projecting out in
the next 5 year plan, how
they're going to bring the
transmission line over in the
event that this doesn't connect
it directly.
So that's the idea, trying to
create the synergy between our
systems.
But Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
there's no requirement that it
be absorbed or connected to the
grid.
Is that correct?
The correct choice. We don't
have the authority, the PRC has
authority to require that.
And and so you can bring Troy
up, but I think this is part of
the problem that we have is we
don't have any connectivity when
we want to tie into the grids in
the PRC.
In some other bills that are
coming through the session.
Require them to to tie into Mr.
Chairman, with your, with your,
uh,
Latitude here, I would like to
ask Choya because this, this
kind of gets to
What we're hearing about the
other day and.
creating an unfunded mandate on
other PRC customers and I don't
read it that way, but I just
would like to just ask the
question, Ms. Joy.
Hey, it's
I'm going to ask the question
again or?
Mr. Chair, Senator, could I have
15 seconds to look at the bill.
This is page 4, line 11.
Mm
Mr. Chair, Senator, um, we
recommended this because anytime
a energy project is going to be
serving someone, a third party,
it falls under the purview of
the PRC. It becomes a public
utility. So if there's not
currently electrical service at
the site. At some point, the
practicality of it is, it's
gonna be need to be connected to
the grid. So,
When we were working with the
senator, um, and Adrianne, it
was
Making sure that the
practicality of this bill made
sense in the scheme of
What the electric system looks
like.
OK, but again, the question,
I'll ask the question again.
Thank you, Ms. Corey. I
This notification, this just
says if no service exists, the
notice shall be given to the
electric service provider.
Where it's located, that's all
it says. It's notification,
that's, hey, we exist, we just
created this system.
From your standpoint, from a
regulatory standpoint, does it
trigger a process where it gets
absorbed. Does this mean more
than what the words here say.
Does this trigger that
independent activity being
absorbed into a utility nearby.
Mr. Chair, Senator, uh, I read
this in light of the entire
statutory scheme regulating
utilities, and that is, um,
Yeah, utilities are obligated to
serve.
To serve reasonable loads. And
so this doesn't say
Utility, you have to absorb
this. It doesn't say utility you
have to purchase this, um, but
what it does is it just triggers
the utilities' normal operating
obligations.
OK.
I'm gonna thank you, I'm gonna
put this question a little bit
different, Mr. Chair. My, my
concern a little bit, uh, tying
in what
Previous bill we've heard about
data centers.
Let's say somebody built a major
data center.
Um, independently, you know,
being absorbed the, the
assumption that of course we're
gonna pull it onto the grid or
pull it into another utility. I
mean,
That scenario can have big costs
to customers who are already on
that system.
So that's where I asked the
question.
Is this another way to try to do
that.
Doesn't sound like it.
Does that make sense? My
concern.
I mean this is just notification
if that data center is going to
go there and then generate
solar.
And then do battery backup
storage in one to tie into the
grid and I have to send this
notification.
If it's someone else that's
building solar community solar
or whatever solar here we
notifying you that we're going
to generate however many
megawatts or kilowatts or
whatever solar does, and it's
gonna be here in that we may
want to tie on to the grid in
the product they'll have to
start the process at the PRC in
order to do that. That clarify
it for you. I think so.
That sound right with you?
Mr. Chair, Senator, that sounds
right. OK. Thank you for that.
I appreciate it. I'm giving you
Corey.
All right.
So it sounds good. Thanks for
the explanations. Thanks, Ms.
Jimmer.
the Vice Chairman Sheno think
think Mr. Chair and thank for
the presentation. Uh, really no
question, but just to make some
comments because I think, you
know, the whole
Modernization and, you know.
I've got one example uh after
the uh
Uh, we passed a bill for the 2
200 megawatts, yeah.
Uh
with their PRC and also with the
investment utilities that was
broken up and, you know, we were
working with uh Pueblo of
Cochiti cause they wanted, they
were one of the first, but one
of the big cost initially was
the interconnection study which
cost somewhere between 2000 and
30,000 and so we ended up
raising money from nonprofits
just to get that done and then
of course, then that will
determine whether, you know, the
system, you know, has the
capacity to do all that and all
that, so that's really.
I think that's one of the things
that uh really prohibiting, you
know, tribes from Luna cause
these are costs that
You don't really know it exists
until you start working at all,
and all of a sudden the
responsibility of those funds
are from
You know
folks that are wanting to do the
interconnection whether it's a
uh uh.
Mm, uh, uh, what do you call it,
the community solar.
Or or any kind of connection and
stuff like that and so.
Just want to make that comment.
I know, I think right now
there's.
Sled might be interested in
doing something uh using that
to.
Love and um in Santa Anna I
believe is currently in
discussions about that, so I
just want to make that comment.
Thank you.
Thank you, Ester, uh, Senator
Brent.
I think he was chairman and uh
Mr. Chairman, I my question on
this is, so the state would be
using taxpayer dollars to
Modernize the grid, would we own
the portion that we pay to put
in or would one of the utility
companies then buy that section
from us.
Or pay us back, we would not own
any portion of that, we're just.
Pushing rapid deployment and
saying,
Interconnect that he's trying to
push that power out and to get a
branch to tie in.
I don't know what utility that
is, but uh or what.
We're trying to
So same thing in Southeast New
Mexico.
Everybody wants cleaner air, and
we know that they need power.
They're currently running on
natural gas, but gasoline
generator.
And so they're running air
actuated.
Mechanisms, and they know that
they need power. And so they got
to make this push into there to
make the power for them, they
could come back and say we have
no in.
And up 10 heads within that
range, but you got to get the
connectivity to send the power
out over the line. She's been
kind of slow into the into that
market, um.
P&M has been slow into Mesa del
Sol.
Uh, those are investments that
we want because every economic
development projects needs
power.
Period. End of conversation, we
all need power.
To do this and, and so if we
don't lay the pathway to get
power and the
And the ease to get power in
Syria.
Uh, then we're not a simple
fact, Mesa del Sol had been
hamstrung by.
hour for for quite a while.
But when we made the investment
with Meta.
With Amazon with all the P&M
made the $200 200 million
dollars investment. Look what
happened, right? Now we need to
push that.
In in that situation, Mr.
Chairman, um, D&M is the one
that went in and modernized the
grid though, right?
Because they knew they had a
customer there.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, yes,
they knew they had a, they knew
they had an end customer.
They didn't know how many
megawatts they would, they would
see.
In the expansion, right? They
had one.
And as one came, 5 came,
probably looked at that and see
how it was gonna happen and and
took the risk, but it was a $200
million investment. P&M has
been.
Slow to make those investments
in New Mexico because.
You gotta have that economic
development driver in order for
them to make.
Everybody's gotta make money on,
on there.
solar selling back or.
Whoever's selling back to the
grid.
So, so we would go in.
I guess would in cooperation
with whatever utility company,
the north, it's not P&M.
Maybe the long
Um, but we'd go and work with
them to to get.
Electricity to the site,
basically.
If Mesa del Solis, I'd like to
use me it also cause it's.
It's a lot of topic of the
economic development, right?
Mesa del Sol and P&M has not
made the investment for a
substation there.
Of Mesa del Sol came and said,
OK, well, this bill is passed
now.
Now we have grant money to start
this modernization for the
substation.
We know that the governor in
Mesa Del Sol.
We know that the solar company,
I can't remember their in is
those high energy users start
moving in.
And come back and say, OK, well,
here's some money to start
planning that substation, and
here's the future of Mesa del
Sol looks like.
But once you have the power,
The water in the sewer already
existing.
And so you now you have the
power to say, OK.
We're gonna do a data center, we
need center.
You may know how many megawatts
or gigawatts or.
That they're gonna use daily.
Currently that doesn't exist, so
let's plan for that. Let's get
ahead of it, right?
And if somebody comes in,
instead of saying, oh, here's
Lita.
And let's wait 5 years.
Let's start getting ahead of.
Where we think we're gonna be
at.
I'm, I think I understand. I, I
agree that we need to make sure
there's some infrastructure
things that we need to do. I was
just a little bit concerned that
the state was gonna own these.
Power stations and power plants
and no, no.
I, I would support you if we
were like.
Putting some money in.
fun to start building a nuclear
power plant.
I'll be all on board with that
because that's actually our
cleanest and
Probably at this point what we
need if we're going to go after
these data centers because
They take massive amounts of
power.
I, I'd be more than willing to
bring you as many much uranium
as you want if you hike to the
hogback and gallop and get some
yellow laying on top of the
ground and
It's everywhere and Enron has
now has an egg.
And his nuclear power that you
haven't heard about.
Thank you.
Very well I see no other one
through comment, you know, uh.
Brent, you know, when I asked
the Hey Mount Electric Coop if I
can put two poles to get, you
know, they charged me, you know.
I think 3500 bucks.
About a quarter 33 or 4 polls
and I thought I could own it,
but they said no, you pay for
it, we own it.
OK, it's the pleasure of the
committee?
were on Senate Bill 142 as
amended. I move we do pass.
Yeah
Motion for. OK, yeah, but he had
a question, right,
I apologize. I've been out of
the room. You probably discussed
this bill thoroughly.
So, uh, don't let me hold you
up. Thank you very much.
Uh, we have a motion for Senate
Bill 142 as amended and the
second.
It's a pleasure of the
committee.
Say no objection, we have a do
pass on.
Senate Bill 142 as amended.
Mm
Sherman, do you want to go to?
Woods.
And
Mm
All right, Senator we're on the
Senate Bill 101.
Decrease certain livestock fees.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and I,
I, uh.
I have with me today I've had uh
two of the livestock board
people with me today that are
going to be my.
Expert, uh, Blenda Garland,
she's a director of the
livestock board and Sean Davis
is a deputy director.
I do have a uh amendment.
Do we want to do the amendment
first before I explain my bill.
Someone can move the amendment.
I move the amendment.
Motion by Senator Trujillo and I
was seconded by Senator
Steinbold.
To move the amendment for
discussion purposes so.
And what this amendment does,
uh.
It adds uh.
Of on page 4 line 18.
Well, at first on page 4 line 15
after a insert place for and
strike an allotment.
And then on page
For the second part of it is
page forward line 18, after the
period in search for the purpose
of this sub session.
Seasonal grazing means a
movement of livestock from one
grant location to another
grazing location provided,
however, that both grazing
locations are under the control
of the same producer and the
ownership of the livestock does
not transfer upon movement of
the livestock and.
What that does, uh, well, let
me, let me let my experts.
Explain this. It's a little bit
of a technical deal.
So it, it sounds easy, but it's
a little bit of a technical.
So
Morning, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, thank you for,
uh, hearing this bill this
morning.
This amendment actually
introduce yourself so that folks
also listening know who who's
speaking. I apologize. I'm
Belinda Garland. I am the
executive director for the New
Mexico Livestock Board.
So to clarify why we uh proposed
the amendment is that we don't
want to restrict the seasonal
grazing 50% payment just to the
allotments. This will be for any
type of seasonal grazing. What
that means is that if producer
owns a pastor in this district
and must move them to another
district, they'll pay half the
price if the cattle are not
changing ownership that way when
they move back probably to their
winter and uh summer pastures,
they'll.
pay 50% to go back.
That way they're not paying the
full cost just to move their
cattle and livestock across
district lines.
So, um, we wanted to remove the
word allotment, so it doesn't
just restrict to those
allotments up in the northern
part of the state that this will
allow producers across the state
this this um 50%.
And Mr. Chair, if I might, um.
What we've got.
Is uh
A lot of cattle move in this
state.
And a lot of cattle move.
From one pasture to another.
And the the
Kind of the reason that we
inspect them is.
If we draw the state up into
districts.
And if you move across that
district line where we want.
Some kind of inspection.
For for many reasons, not only
ownership, but inspection for
disease, inspection for
different things, um.
I'm, we've got a, a disease or
two in this state that, that
needs some.
Further control
And
Not that this particularly does
that.
But we need a reason for people
to call the inspector.
So that he can inspect cattle
for for disease and ownership.
Um
I can tell you all kinds of
stories, but I don't want to
spend the time today to do that.
The, the, the amendment is a
sound amendment. I'll tell, I'll
put it to you that way.
It's a sound amendment. I've got
uh
Cattle and in 3 counties.
And
Many times I move those cattle.
From one place to another just
trying to find a.
Blade of grass sometimes, but
most of the time it's, it's
wheat pasture cattle that I
moved.
I start those cattle on grass. I
put them on wheat pasture if
they're not big enough to sell.
I have to take them back to
grass.
After the grazing season, so.
This, this helps me.
Uh lightens the burden a little
bit on an inspection.
As I do that. So that's what
this is all about.
Any more discussion on the
amendment.
If not, we have a motion to.
approve the amendment.
Senator Til and then the
seconded by Senator Tobiasson.
Any opposition to the amendment.
and if you have an amended bill,
so we're, we're back on the
bill.
On the bill itself, madam.
year
Been a long morning already sir.
Uh, on the bill itself, what
essentially does, it raises some
caps that we put on.
Different inspections and
different things.
And it's not saying that we're
gonna move all this direction in
one time fact is it even limits
how much we can move many of
these inspection caps at a time.
And
Um
You can read all that. I won't
bore you with reading exactly
what they are, uh, I assure you
that.
My overall goals.
is to keep these guys off the
general fund, tell you the
truth.
That's my goal.
I'm trying to give them
independence.
And have a, uh, uh.
Producer
funded agency.
Because I want them to be.
Close to the people they govern.
If that makes sense to you.
If, if, if they will be more.
Um
Responsive
To the people they govern if we
do it this way instead of.
I've retired somewhere saying,
by God, you're gonna do this or
else.
So that's what I'm trying to do
here is to make to to keep so
much general fun going into this
agency and having the producers.
Bo.
Be on this board to govern it.
And be on this board to be
responsive to the people.
That they're regulating, Mr.
Chair, that's.
Where I'm standing on. OK.
Senator Campos, thank you very
much, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much, Senator Woods for bringing
this particular piece of
legislation forward.
The only question I have, and
it's a big concern as we go
forward with the uh livestock
inspectors.
With this solvency and to
continue to keep it, if you
will, self-sufficient.
What about the livestock
inspectors, uh, do we have
enough? Are they, uh, able to go
ahead and keep up with you with
the inspections themselves and
more importantly, as you're
trying to go ahead and make this
uh sustainable at this level and
with the increased fees with the
caps.
Uh, can you talk a little bit
about that? It may not have
anything directly to do with
what the bill and it is, is
intended to do, but it does play
some additional uh work, if you
will on the inspectors
themselves. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and, and
senator.
Yes, I'm going to let the
experts.
Answer that question, but after
they asked that answer that
question I asked for public
comment.
Um, because I've got some
producers here that that
apologize that's my fault. I
should have got up early, so
alright, OK, thank you, I don't
mean no criticism, sir, at all,
but
Uh, I will have my experts
answer that question first.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator Campos,
thank you for that question.
That, that's a really good
question.
So since my time as being a
director of this agency, which
has been about 5 years we have
worked really hard alongside our
deputy director, Mr. Sean Davis
here to ensure that we have
inspectors active in every
district, so we have some
districts that are much busier
that we have more inspectors in
than just one, but we try to
fill every position that we have
available to us.
Um, every now and then I do hold
a position open just for budget
reasons, but typically we are
filling every position that we
can fill.
Um, we currently have, I think,
4 positions open now that are
inspectors that we are actively
trying to fill.
Our inspectors have to pass a
written test and a field test
and background checks in order
to work for us. Uh, they are a
lot of them are law enforcement
certified, but we are very
committed to our producers and
we're trying to make sure that
we have inspectors out there
that are available to perform
these inspections.
Our other commitment to our
inspectors has been that we
improved our fleet.
When I came to this agency, this
fleet was in dire need of um
some repair might be the word.
There was a lot of vehicles that
had over 200,000 miles on them.
We are now consecutively rolling
10 vehicles every year to keep
um good reliable vehicles
running every day for our
inspectors. We're they're
showing up to to the inspection
sites every day that they need
to.
Uh, thank you very much and, and
again, my apologies, uh, Mr.
Chair for
Uh, being recognized and of
course, uh, asking the question
out of turn, but I'd have a
couple of other questions. I'll
come back later after we hear
from some of the uh advocates,
if you will, and uh if there are
any opponents. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. So we'll go to
the audience, uh.
Nobody in favor of this bill can
come up.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members, my name is
Tom Patterson. I'm MCatchen
County cattle rancher and
president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association, cattle growers
supports SB 101.
The New Mexico Livestock Board
is charged from their mission
statement, among other things
with promoting greater economy,
service, and efficiency in the
administration of the laws
relating to the livestock
industry of New Mexico.
With controlling disease,
preventing theft or illegal
movement of livestock and with
overseeing the New Mexico meat
inspection program.
It's a broad mandate.
And there have certainly been
some issues, but by many
accounts and from many corners
of this state, the industry's
view is that the livestock board
has worked diligently,
responsibly, and generally
successfully to fulfill that
charge.
The livestock board in many
respects is a model state agency
for the livestock industry.
The Livestock Board hasn't had a
service fee increase since 2002.
Its service fees are among the
lowest in the region.
Cattle growers don't want to pay
more money for anything.
But we recognize that the
livestock board needs to have
the resources to efficiently
administer the laws relating to
the livestock industry in this
state.
And for that reason the New
Mexico.
Cattle Growers Association
requests that you approve SB
101. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Lord
Patterson. I am a producer from
Lincoln County, uh, San Miguel
and Guadalupe counties, um,
small family ranch that we move
of cattle from ranch to edge on
a fairly regular basis, but
today I'd like to, to tell you
that I formerly served on the
New Mexico Livestock Board
during the Martinez
administration.
We were capped out then.
It became ever more difficult to
meet our requirements
statutorily from the general
fund then we always had to rely
on on the generosity of LFC and
and Mr. David Abbey to to get
our funds and uh.
This is long since overdue we
want to modernize. We want to
keep up, uh, the high level that
the livestock board provides us
in theft and health and with the
uh new, new diseases we're
seeing coming in like avian flu.
Trikemanias, uh, the new world
screwworm that's coming from
south of the border, uh, we need
them more and more every day. So
I, I stand in support of the
Bill as mended.
Mr. Chairman, fellow committee
members, my name is Bronson
Corn. I am a rancher in Rosville
area. Uh, we encompass two
counties as well. I'm also the
acting president of the New
Mexico cattle growers, and it
sounds kind of funny to have an
organization stand up and say,
hey, we would, we're
volunteering to pay more.
Uh, it
Typically not something that you
see.
But we understand exactly what
the livestock board does, and we
also understand that New Mexico
is home to some of the largest
influx of livestock coming in
from out of our country.
Crossing over the border at
Santa Teresa.
The Livestock Board is tasked
with making sure the food
security in the state of New
Mexico is secure.
And I think that all of us can
appreciate that standpoint.
And with that I, we stand in
support of Senate Bill 101.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, uh, I'm Phil
Biddigan, a rancher from
Qua Guadalupe and San Miguel
counties.
I, uh, I stand in support of
this bill.
Uh, I think the reasons have
been covered, so I stand in
support for the previous reasons
stated.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, anybody in
opposition?
Mr. Chairman, uh, David Sanchez,
uh, members of the committee,
uh, thank you for allowing me to
speak today, uh, Mr. Chairman,
do you happen to be my senator.
I come from northern New Mexico,
uh.
We
I represent myself today as a
rancher in the board of
directors from Northern New
Mexico Stockman's Association.
The Livestock Board uh for our
annual meeting came to northern
New Mexico, uh.
And proposed uh this bill.
So we had the opportunity to.
Discuss uh the legislation with
him in our membership, our
membership consists of uh.
16,000 families in the
agriculture industry from Anton
Chico to San Juan County.
So we're the voice for those
families today, uh, our
membership after the
presentation from the Livestock
board uh voted unanimously not
to support this bill.
And today I've been asked to
give you the reasons why.
First of all, uh, it is an
increase in fees to the
producers.
After speaking with our
secretary of agriculture, uh,
Mr. Whitty.
He identified that from 1997 to
present.
The state overall has lost
approximately about 400,000 head
of livestock in the state.
So fundamentally of the
livestock Board wants to support
uh their operations, they need
to face the fact that we are a
very fast and.
Decreasing industry in this
state, we are, our numbers are
going down.
Uh, rapidly and that was
attested to by the USDA census
and by uh secretary Whitty. So
with that said, I think this
bill trying to sustain the
livestock burden the future has
a financial fundamental problem.
The other problem that uh I was
asked to voice, uh, Mister
Chairman, is that this bill has
come to, to the committees twice
before and has failed to pass
for another.
Uh, financial fundamental reason
is that.
The the counties in northern New
Mexico basically uh north of
I-40.
Have
An abundance of district lines,
so we asked, uh, New Mexico
State.
University to do a study on
that.
And they determine that the
northern counties were, it was a
disproportional burden against
the northern counties and the
producers. We were paying more
fees than anybody else. So, uh,
and then, uh, a third, uh.
If you look at where those
decreases in livestock have
taken place. Some of the hardest
hit counties or San Juan County,
Ria Riba County, Taos County.
Uh, Santa Fe County, Bernalil or
uh decreases in our numbers in
our industry anywhere from uh
the high 40% to 80%.
So
I think it's a.
Fundamental question to this
committee, how does the
livestock board intend to
sustain their growth of
inspectors, their operations,
uh, solely on the backs of the
producers. It's not gonna
happen. Uh, we have to have
funding.
From uh
You know, from, from LFC.
The other, the other problem
that uh we've had an
experienced, uh, Mr. Chairman,
is that.
I and others, uh.
Have served
In the livestock board, I was
appointed twice, first by
Governor King and then by uh.
Uh, Governor Richardson, so we
have an idea of the operations
and the functions of the
livestock board to some degree,
and the question is.
How does the livestock board.
Intend to increase with
inspectors and especially uh
with sending uh livestock
inspectors over to the academy
for law enforcement.
I, we can't understand how they
intend to fund that. The math
just isn't there.
Uh, with that said, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh.
With regard to the law
enforcement part, uh, northern
New Mexico has had some big
start wrapping up, OK, in, in
conclusion, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Northern New Mexico has had some
severe issues with the livestock
board. Uh, they have been very
handed on some of our producers
and our members currently there
is a multi-million dollar suit
against the livestock Board, uh,
Archuleta versus the Livestock
Board, uh, this gentleman, uh,
from Rome Mesa, uh.
warrants were issued his cattle
were taken, and then at the end
of the day, uh, Mr. Chairman,
the livestock Board was in the
wrong. They had to return his
cattle, but the way he was
treated, uh, this is a, this is
a decorated veteran, uh, that
served in, in the Marine Corps,
and I, I mean they.
I can't say enough about how he
was mistreated by the livestock
Board. Thank you. We asked, we
asked that uh this bill, uh
either be tabled or uh or it it
not passed because of the issues
that I mentioned and the fact
that uh this doesn't work for
northern New Mexico. This is
probably maybe a good bill for
southern New Mexico, but not for
northern New Mexico. Thank you.
We're gonna take one more
testimony, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I'm Carlos
Salazar. I'm the executive
director for Northern New Mexico
Socc Association.
And
I'm not gonna echo uh what's
already been said. I just want
to say that we have a lot of
small northern uh livestock
producers in northern New
Mexico.
And not every and having to move
seasonally from one allotment to
the other or pasture to another,
it's gonna be a very costly
endeavor for these folks because
we're not able.
At any given time to move all
our animals or truck them at one
time to the pasture that they're
going. And for these uh
producers that are poor, this is
gonna be uh create an additional
burden. It may even put some of
these folks out of business, I
would like to see an amendment
on this part, Mr. Sanchez talked
about the district lines. I
think if we uh.
Met with these people at the
onset when this bill was first
crafted, we could have agreed to
something like this. I, if we
could, I would propose one
inspection only.
And then we can move.
Uh
In the spring and then back in
the fall, but we only pay one
inspection, rather than have,
even if you reduce by 2 by 25 or
50%, still gonna get costly if
you have to move 3 or 4 times in
the offspring and likewise in
the fall. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anybody on? No, OK, all right,
so back in the committee,
Senator.
compost, you still had the
floor. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, members of
the Senate Finance Committee.
So, so going back to the issue
when we start talking about
Livestock inspectors. Now I'm
gonna elaborate a little bit
more in terms of the cost, if
you will to uh our ranchers uh
in the state.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Senator
Woods with the increases.
That you're talking about, are
they tied to a CPI or or.
How are you thinking of having,
if you will, the increases
passed on, if you will.
Uh, to the ranchers.
And, and Mr. Chair, uh, Central
let my expert answer that.
Mr. Chair, Senator Campos, um,
there is no CPI tied to these
increases. These are, um, a
maximum that we can go to this
we think this is like a 20
possibly 30 year plan to reach
these caps, um, in order to do
any type of increase, we have to
do a rulemaking process. Our
fees are set in rule that is all
subject to the 30 day comment
period and um unanimous vote
from our board in order to adopt
any fees.
On the livestock inspection
fees, they can only be increased
10 cents annually. They cannot
go past that 10 cents.
For an annual increase on the
sheep and goats, it's a 4 cent
increase.
Um, the board has no intention
of going to these cap fees right
away, um, what we're trying to
do is just put out like a 20
year plan, possibly that we
reach them in 20 years, maybe
even longer than that.
So Mr. Chair and Senator Woods,
as we talk about this, we're
talking about a 30-year plan, it
sounds like, but in terms of
that, going back to, if you
will, some of the public
comment, particularly the
disparities for uh ranchers
within northern New Mexico, uh,
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, if you
could further comment in terms
of uh how you see the the way
there could be the disparity and
if there isn't, please also let
me know how this is, uh, done
in, in proportion. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator
chair, uh, I'll let Sean answer
that.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Sean Davis, deputy
director of the New Mexico
Livestock Board.
Address those concerns. Thank
you for that question, Senator
Camples, uh, to address that
those concerns we've done our
own analysis, uh, and, and I
don't see the disparity that's
being brought up here.
Um
We have a, a really good system,
uh, with our inspection system
we can draw and pull from those
numbers very quickly with our IT
crew, which I've done over the
last several months, uh, talking
to, uh, some of the folks that
talked here today.
Uh, I didn't mind those numbers
out.
In about 2000 or 20002, some
district lines were removed to
address the concern that was
brought up earlier.
Um, and, and so we have one big
district really in the area that
we're talking about up there, it
goes from I-40 to the Colorado
line, which is real.
Difficult for us to manage the
movement of cattle in that, but
we did make that, um, uh,
happened several years ago to
address that situation. I don't
believe that situation exists
now.
Um, in order to address the
situation that was brought up on
the, on having to have
inspections for multiple
movements. That's why we put in
the amendment.
Or the statement of the seasonal
grazing movement.
To help those producers that are
going to allotments for a
seasonal grazing.
And back in to help the
producers that are going to
wheat pasture we still need to
inspect those cattle because uh
of our movement needs, our
traceability needs.
And that's what the New Mexico
Livestock Board is all about
being able to trace movement in
a disease outbreak.
Which happens uh not that often,
but it does happen.
And uh we need to keep those
district lines somewhat intact
for that and so uh you know I'm,
I'm glad to share any
information beyond that, sir,
uh, but I don't think the
disparity um really makes sense
to me. There are plenty of small
producers all over the all over
the uh New Mexico and we have
plenty of small producers in Quy
County in Union County and they,
they pay the same price that
every producer has to pay for an
inspection. It's a fair and
equitable.
uh system.
Yeah, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Woods. Thank you to the experts
as we go forward with this,
just, uh, Mr. Chairman, a couple
of other questions and uh
Senator Woods, you alluded to
the fact that you want this to
become as sustainable and
self-sufficient as possible, uh,
but a couple of things that I
see in order for us to ensure,
if you will, the quality of
inspections in a timely manner
as we move forward two things
number 1, I really believe uh
this particular uh initiative
is.
Um, it merits uh additional
general fund money, 12, in terms
of dealing with capital outlay
and of course the replacement,
if you will, of vehicles and
equipment and other things that
are necessary, uh, I hope that
you would possibly reconsider
that statement and hopefully
would be able to go ahead and
help and support down the line
in terms of more resources uh
for these inspections, uh, it
definitely helps some of the
concerns that have been raised
to me have been the timeliness
of the uh the inspection.
and it always goes back to do we
have the FTEs? Do we have the
support in order to go ahead and
uh and conduct those
inspections, but again, Mr.
Chair, uh, Senator Woods, I
congratulate you on the work
that you've been doing on this
bill, #2, thank you very much to
uh the work that you're doing
internally to continue to deal
with this, so that's all I have
right now, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Senator Steinberg, thank you,
Mr. Chair and, and uh Senator,
good to have you here and your
experts and them you've done a
great job, you know, educating
us all about this bill and
building support within your
community. I mean, it doesn't
generally work out much better
than that, although I realize
it's not unanimous in our
respect the voices of concern. I
was gonna ask, but I thought the
amendment did kind of address
some of the concerns about
moving around a lattes.
Uh, or the, um, the animals, so.
Hopefully that kind of addresses
it partially, but, but maybe not
totally, um.
So no, I, I support the bell and
I'll just say, Mr. Chair,
there's other departments that
are kind of trying to do the
same thing more in an enterprise
zone kind of spirit, um, raise
some fees.
To be able to help them do their
job. I know the environment
department is trying to do some
things with solid waste
operators and we might be seeing
a bill dealing with that, but
same kind of stuff occasionally,
these do have to go up, um, to
help them do their job and
that's just reality. So, but I
support your bill, so thank you
very much. Thank you.
Mr.
Thank you. Senator Padillo, uh,
move a do pass.
OK.
Thank you, Senator Woos in other
states you're able to write your
own papers.
Why doesn't New Mexico just go
to that?
I want to hear the, the real
reason why.
Well, I tell you.
I have an opinion.
But I don't have the, the
scientific knowledge that you're
looking after, so I'm gonna let
my expert answer that question.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, that is a good
question and uh I'll just put it
to you like this. I'm a member.
Of the International livestock
identification Association, a
matter of fact, I'm the
president of that association
this year.
And we meet with Western states
and parts of Canada and parts of
Australia, New Zealand.
Once a year to discuss livestock
inspection.
And New Mexico has the best laws
when it comes to inspection and
we have the best enforcement.
Bar none, no one even comes
close to what we do and so
writing or uh writing your own
inspection would essentially
just mean that you're sending
the government.
Uh, 50 cents a head for right
for doing the job yourself.
And uh that doesn't make sense
to even the states that that
write their own inspections so
I'm very proud of what the New
Mexico Livestock Board brings to
the table. We offer the best in
theft and disease traceability
and uh I wouldn't give up our
program for any of the Western
states at all.
Well, I might argue with you
about that.
Depends where the livestock
inspector is and what he's
doing, right? Cause a lot of
times cattle come in.
He get inspected in there at the
auction that morning and they're
gone, they're already somebody
else's and, and they don't know
where they went. This has
happened several times between
Gallup and Farmington, uh.
Everybody shaking their head,
yes, so that's why I'm saying,
all of a sudden cattle are in
the sale barn and
There's somebody else's cattle
that got there.
Um
So I mean, writing your own
papers won't really fix the
problem and probably increase
the problem because
You smile because everybody,
whoever gets to the cabs first
and get Brandon their their
cattle, right?
As you happen to catch him on
the mama coming off the mama,
you can match them up.
Um, what about to this
gentleman's questions, will you
get us a report on what
happened. I want to see an
incident report. I want to see
what happened, uh, in that
situation.
Um, that he mentioned.
You don't need to do it now. I
want to see an incident report.
I want to see the police report.
I want to see the background
information. I want to see what
happened in that incident, uh.
We know.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OK, so I don't have anybody else
on the list. It's close to me.
I have a motion for due passed
by Senator Padilla and a second.
Is.
Any opposition to the motion.
So you know
I didn't call the wrong called
the rule
that way we get it right so we
don't tie again.
All right.
Senator Brent.
Consider
The
Consider compos posia Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez senator.
Senator Lanier votes, Senator.
uh
Senator Steinborn.
Steins, yes, Senatorship to buy.
consider tobiasys, yes, Senator
Trujillo.
So to senators.
Yes.
In
There.
Yes.
10 to 0.
Thank you.
