We continue to go ahead and use
every ounce of our wisdom of our
knowledge of our strength and
our health so that as we move
forward we continued to
complement each other with our
wisdom with our thoughts with
the direction that we can lead
with all these things are
incumbent upon what our future
is going to entail and within
that it means that each of us
has the energy this energy and
most importantly the wisdom to
to lead in a very positive way
and if we do that together the
collaboration that we all have
then ultimately serves the best
interests of the people of New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman
thank you to each and everyone
of the.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Senator.
State senator Pete Campos
representing all or parts of
seven counties in northeastern
New Mexico.
A good morning Mr chairman and
good morning everybody Center
Michael for the representative
that southwest corner Bernalillo
county also the Senate majority
whip and I will be running
between this from an external be
right back thank you.
Senator I fell from silvercity I
represent Senate district twenty
eight which is Grant County
catching County in most of
Senator county thank you Mr
chairman.
Morning Mr chair good morning
everyone good to see you here
I'm state senator Jeff Steinborn
from Dona Ana County
representing from central Los
crucis through the historic
neighborhoods and through the
hatch valley this year County.
Thank you.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman good morning to
everyone state senator road to
love the table inside this
Senator six this is part of the
Santa Santa Fe Rio Arriba and
Taos.
Would you want to.
Thank you Mr chair.
My name is Pat Woods
Representative curry quay and
with the new district
redistricting that will
Representative part of Harding
so thank you I appreciate the
opportunity thank you Mr chair.
Good morning Mr chair and
everyone my name is bill Burt I
am the sin district thirty three
live in Alamogordo and the
district thirty three
encompasses the note the
northern half of those rural
county and all of Lincoln County
just a smidgen of Travis county
in pleasure to be here this
morning up right now.
And I am not Senator crystal
diamond but she's on her way
here just a moment but I am will
share from Senate district one
which is important.
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman good morning to
everyone I'm Nancy Senator.
I'm from Santa Fe thank you
morning I I don't think any of
us would have a problem
different training center share
from Senator Diamond.
We do we need to have our eyes
checked.
So good morning everyone and and
I'm glad Senator is awake
cinnamon you know sign from
civil McKinley in San Juan
County we're going to house bill
one first we do have some
amendments for house bill one
we'll see what happens as they
go along the way just inform the
sponsor and
Madam floor floor leader and
trying to floor leader you want
to go and receive Mr chairman if
I may just say I think the
flexibility they need the
amendments to see what's in and
to get in two months if it was
going to do it or not we don't
know that right yes in the thank
you so much good morning Mr
chairman and committee members
it's a pleasure to be here this
morning we have Raul Garcia aka.
Our webcast does not live okay
let's wait the knowledge is I
know.
Our server is down.
And since we have the council
guy here if we proceed is there
any issue.
Mr chairman members of the
committee good morning no three
percent is not a problem with
the webcast will record and it
will be archived and then posted
on after.
Your.
Okay it will proceed mission for
more turns.
Want to care in rural New
Mexico.
This is not a legal opinion.
Mr Chairman happy to be here
this morning with hospital and
Raul Burciaga Director
Legislative Council Service is
here because he is the expert on
this budget from this budget
request I should say you have
before you complete breakdown of
all parts of the bill but I'm
going to go through a
quick synopsis of a major us of
course we want to get house bill
one of to pay employees and and
and have the appropriation of
the necessary session costs so
the entire budget appropriates
eleven million seven hundred and
forty seven thousand one hundred
dollars for these expenses
including five million.
Nine hundred sixty three
thousand eight hundred for the
Senate four million two hundred
twenty seven thousand for the
house of representatives one
million five hundred fifty five
thousand four hundred for the
Legislative Council Service for
it session expenses running the
joint bill room mail room and
Legislative switchboard.
The bill includes annual
appropriations for permanent
legislative committees and the
expense of the legislative
department.
For the Legislative Council
operations eight million five
hundred forty eight thousand
eight hundred dollars for
additional interim committee and
operational support for fiscal
years twenty three and twenty
four seven hundred and twenty
thousand dollars for interim
legislative expenses four
million dollars for next year's
session preparation five hundred
ten thousand dollars for the
statewide legislative internship
program fifty five thousand
dollars for dues and fees of
national organizations of which
we are member four hundred and
thirty five thousand three
hundred dollars for the
legislative information system
for fiscal years twenty three
and twenty fourth two million
one hundred and forty three
thousand nine hundred dollars to
the Senate rules committee
thirty five thousand dollars for
fiscal years twenty three to
twenty six for the ongoing
planning design and development
of the Legislative processing
system nine million five hundred
thousand dollars for committee
room audio visual upgrades one
million five hundred thousand
dollars for the contractual
services at the capitol
buildings Planning Commission
one hundred fifty thousand
dollars for the purchase and
installation costs of a
constituent constituent services
platform five hundred thousand
dollars for the upgrade of the
house and Senate chamber display
boards one million three hundred
thousand dollars and for the
hiring of a consulting.
To study the feasibility of
district staff offices for the
legislature two million five
hundred thousand dollars the
bill also includes
appropriations for the
legislative finance committee on
five million six hundred and
seventy three thousand three
hundred dollars and for the
legislative legislation
education study Camilla
Committee one million six
hundred ninety eight thousand
dollars to House chief clerks
office and house leadership
office through math three
million six thousand dollars to
the Senate chief clerks office
and Senate leadership staff
three million eleven hundred
eleven thousand four hundred
dollars and for the legislative
department share of the
compilation commission expenses
four hundred thousand dollars so
with that we've given you a very
quick summary and we're ready
for questions.
The both the already having.
Mr Chairman at this point
questions from committee.
Chairman.
I would first like to offer just
a verbal amendment because I
didn't get it.
Get done in time but it's pretty
simple
It's on page seven point
nineteen to twenty four.
Of which is expenses of to hire
consulting indicate consider the
fist feasibility and
recommendations for the New
Mexico Legislative Council on
the districts and resources
needed for district staff I
would I I move Mr chairman that
we delete lines nineteen through
twenty four.
On page seven just just take
that out I believe that belongs
to HB to.
No
Making as a motion yes yes Mr a
verbal motion.
We
have a second by internal.
Call the roll the mid.
Thank you Mr chair
I think it feels to me number
one I appreciate that this was
put in
New Mexicans are being short
changed by the fact that they
have at this point time created
part time volunteer of
legislators that any staff to
help work through very complex
issues helped deliver the best
services to New Mexico to help
solve the really challenging
issues that we need for our kids
for our prices for economic
development future so this is
one piece in this which starts
to address that immediately and
I feel like the reason it's in
this bill is so that we can get
that funding and get that work
started right away as opposed to
budget which we kick it down the
road.
Even farther so my question to
you madam Mr chairman some of
the leaders that whites in this
bill is going to let me do some
corrections Senator I need you
to move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
I move but amendment number one
to house bill one for discussion
I then the second by Senator
Burt and so now we're back on
the man okay thank you secretary
rusty but I'll catch up.
Next to this so we're back to a
question yes Mister chairman
Senator Steinborn
what I have described to and
during the house floor debate is
that the idea here is to
Issue and if once this is
appropriate if it's appropriated
and signed into law to issue an
RFP to provide consulting entity
that would do a study of
legislature's throughout the
country and to look at New
Mexico for our unique challenges
where the fifth largest state
geographically we have districts
of house districts in the state
not mention Senate districts
that are actually larger
Representative Gail Armstrong is
district is the largest
geographic house district in the
country we have districts that
are larger than the state of
Rhode Island so and and are
equivalent to the state of
Massachusetts so how are we
meeting the needs of our
constituents whether it's
constituent services or Policy
Studies I know I have a contact
district but I have the need to
two research issues that my
constituents bring to me as a
person who was practicing law
full time and serving the
legislature I simply wasn't
getting the job done for my
constituents but
it's to look at whether there's
policy staff or office support
what's needed and we don't have
those answers so it would be to
make recommendations to us along
the sides.
Thank you very much so Mr chair
colleagues I just feel like this
is a smart move for us to have
an in this bill so that we can
get this work started right away
as opposed to.
months later so I suppose
propose the amendment spec fully
thank you Mr.
Thank you Senator Campos on the
amendment.
Thank you for.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and I do have some similar
thoughts when it comes to how
we're going to be addressing
policies districts size and the
other issues and I believe that
the urgency is important for all
of us to consider this and to
move forward with it so again I
commend you for bringing this
part of the the bill before us
thank you very much that's all I
have Mister chairman Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator share up so do I think
did I hear correctly and little
rusty the moment to because
we're just getting back into the
groove here
did I hear the sponsor of the
amendment say that just doesn't
feel like it should be here but
should be in the actual budget.
It HB to guess Mr chair that's
that was my only sponsor would
fully support it if it were move
to the actual budget to the take
me to I wouldn't have heartburn
with me put it that way by
partnering communal other things
to a lot of different people.
with your permission Mr chairman
well I I I don't think you want
to question the member I think I
think that's what I'm trying to
figure out how we do this
because that was an interesting
comment.
Sponsor of the amendment.
I know we can maybe check out.
The.
In the health center I just want
to put that on the table that
you know something happened to
her that the sponsor of the
amendment would be supportive of
putting this in H. B. two.
Senator would you have a comment
on.
The first Mr chair my microphone
seems to be staying on.
Which I know that sale on
important stuff.
So that the public that certain
be careful provided a sense.
But senator of.
Madam floor leader.
I have a problem with this too
at it's it's not the the the
issue of the crux of what you're
trying to do as far as staff for
trying to find a way to do a
study but I I I object to
putting it in the feed bill
because of for one thing as
you've noticed already it
created quite a bit of
discussion and.
It should be a proper bill
brought before the proper.
Means so that it can be a single
subject will that we can discuss
on the floor on committee not in
the feet bill as a extra brought
in
I'm not accusing the fact of
being any kind of logrolling
even though I have in the past
ask for opinions on that but I'm
not gonna say that word this
time but I I am supportive of
the verbal amendment but because
of that reason we need further
discussion on this not the
minimum amount of discussion
that a feed bill that is so
critical to fund the legislature
pass so thank you for bringing
this forward today thank you Mr
chair.
Senator thank you Mr chairman
and and I I I don't have a
problem with.
just for some clarification
though
The two point five million
figure was there some I assume
there was some preliminary work
done on this or there was a
a couple of work put together in
the presented to say bureau
somebody to give us an estimate
on how much this was going to
cost.
Mr chairman and senator Byrd I
think that's a good question and
and yet there was not found.
It.
This was not taken to like the
bureau for economic research it
was
because
a discussion and some research
by members of both sides of the
aisle just about four five
members trying to come up with a
figure in this Mr Burciaga I
believe answered earlier you can
correct me there was there were
some who thought that should be
born some without it should be
less and and was agreed upon to
to hit the this the center of
the range.
And thank you for the answer Mr
chairman I I just I think we've
done
various studies I think what one
that was a pointed out to me
earlier was up I think we
evaluated all staff or something
like that for fifty to five
hundred thousand dollars or
something like that so I'm just
trying to get a handle on the
amount of money and and make
sure that we have an idea that
we're going to spend the right
amount of money we don't
procreate out X. amount of money
find out number one maybe more
but I'm hoping that it may be
less and
it seems I don't put the cart
before the horse I it to me it
would seem more logical to have
a a a a scope of what we wanted
to do and accomplish and then
get some estimates
I just I guess I'm bringing a
point to the table just for
thought or discussion but that's
the only point I have Mr
chairman it seems like put the
cart before the horse thank you.
Thank you Senator sure we want
to close on the mend.
Yes Mr.
So.
The study we're doing.
Probably I don't I don't think I
have a problem with the study.
I have a problem with house bill
one.
To see to see the so we've
already had more discussion on
this house bill one normally we
get the the briefing on it
there's a question or two and it
passes unanimously but now we're
having a discussion about
something that's in here mostly
because I don't think it belongs
in here.
This is something that we ought
to talk about.
As as a as a body as opposed to
sticking the six lines in there.
So that's that's my big thing
but I do have a of just as this
on the amendment on the
amendment we have of other
organizations to do this NCSL
for example.
So with that I just don't think
that this is the place to do it
I don't think it's an emergency
we've been a hundred and ten
years doing it this way waiting
five more months for the regular
budget to get there if we go to
break us so with that Mr
president I Mr chair.
Whoever you are.
You can join.
I'm.
I move amendment number one to
house bill put.
Thank you click on call the
roll.
Yes.
Senator Campos so.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales will.
Senator Hemphill.
Better here than Senator share
yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Vice chair Senator Rodriguez
all.
Chairman senator Munoz No sorry.
No right sorry.
So we have of.
Seven no.
For yes.
We're back on the bill questions
on the bill I have another
minute.
Sure as a maintenance plan you
may.
So first of all Mr chair this
was actually written down.
what will get them a copy them
and.
So really what this does is just
make sure that
The to read for
well so Mister chair I I I move
of.
Committee for memorable one
house bill one for discussion
purposes.
The second.
Thank you.
So Mr chair this was really of
what I call the transparency of
amendment so we're going to do
this let's make sure that that
we're following the the
procurement cold and we're we're
consulting properly and we're
just making sure that the public
and and we know what's going on
with this so in that case if
we're going to fund it in in the
feet bills let's make sure that
everybody knows what we're
funding.
Comments on the main.
Mister chairman Senator share.
This is actually the procedure
that would be followed with any
expenditure of that authorized
by this body it's it would be in
compliance with the
With state procurement code it
must go through the Legislative
Council
because it is a legislative
expense some of them have been
funds to sorry.
Question.
Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman I I could
have said it better I guess I
don't really need I don't know
why this is actually needed I
don't think it it adds any value
in it would probably make it.
Click here along the way serve
with we would maybe set a
precedent we had to do this with
every single thing we did and.
We already have a procedure to
provide for this policy for this
process thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you for the
explanation I mean seems it's of
course a reasonable requests and
of course it's something we
already do so yeah I would be
opposed to putting the amendment
on just because the last another
step to than the house having to
concur and we know sometimes we
don't have enough time to begin
with over there in the house and
then the whole session so don't
waste anyone else's time and I
feel like doing this would add
unnecessary step so thank you
Mr.
Mr chair.
When is transparency a waste of
time.
I am in favor of this ammendment
thank you Mr chair.
Any other questions on them and.
Make those Senator close so Mr
chair on the same bill back in
in in section ten of this
category transfer transfer
amount set out in sections three
through eight that includes just
one of this act are provided for
informational purposes only and
maybe transfer among categories
so I do believe that there is a
potential.
Do not know what we're doing.
So I I don't think that this is
a waste of time I don't think in
I don't understand why all of a
sudden this study has to be
jammed through.
When we know.
Do we have time to do it we have
sixty days to do it.
I don't think transparency is a
problem Mr thank you also I know
I move the Senate the
Where we.
Finance finance committee
amendment number one to house
bill one.
But Representative second.
There was.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos no.
Yes No.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez now.
Senator then yes now.
Then it fails.
Seven four that kind of
question.
Another member Mr.
So I move a.
Of finance committee amendment
number one to house bill one for
the third time.
For discussion purposes.
Thank you.
I move the prescription purposes
second on the.
Some of those.
Questions on the amendment.
I just want to.
Mr chair of obviously we have to
do this right now obviously we
don't care if we know in public
but it but it what this does is
say we ought to have more than
one entity with the contract
I am concerned Mr chair that
this push instead of having it
house bill two.
just to the to me it reeks of of
lack of transparency in this
simply says that we ought to
have two people breaking up this
contract instead of one because.
If we're not going to discuss it
as a body we're not going to
discuss it as a as a committee.
What to make sure that this
isn't.
Something else out there it's
not a it's not a.
Nepotism were a gift or
something like that and I don't
know I'm not this process to
that's all it says.
To to contracts.
As opposed to what.
Questions.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
share because of the fact that
provided this will go to
Legislative Council.
I I we did not find the
amendment necessary there will
be public discussion at that
time.
Questions and then Senator
Steinborn.
Thank you Mr so leader Mr
Burciaga when you dial came up
with a number my guess is the
scheme that you all came up with
was to hire a firm to do this as
opposed to an amount that was
for hiring two firms.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn correct thank and they
normally Mr chairman Mr Burciaga
when you do these kinds of
reviews do you hire to contracts
with that really be kind of and
like not the norm Mister
chairman Senator I'd like to
Representative.
Representative.
For.
Pardon me rover see I could
answer that question Mr Chairman
Senator Steinborn members of the
committee
first I I would state that any
contract any agreement greater
than sixty thousand dollars for
professional services requires
compliance with procurement code
so regardless that that will
happen the idea of hiring more
than one firm I'm trying to
think I I think there have been.
Handful situations where that
has happened over the years R.
the request for this particular
two point five million dollars
for the study
the idea was to as I understand
it from those legislators who
requested this was that a firm
would be hired but again I don't
speak in favor of our opposition
that's a policy issue
but that was my understanding
was that and I one from the city
that would is what was expected
at thank you Mr.
In
center I'm sorry said that's
alright thank you very much Mr
chairman so the settlement is
already floor leader in terms of
this procedure if possibly Mr
Burciaga would be able to
elaborate a little bit more in
terms of the procedures for
contracts like this because I
believe that the process is
already in place but I believe
it's important for us to have a
better understanding of how this
process would proceed and in
particularly because are we
going to the Legislative Council
first or is this going to be
something that Legislative
Council itself and would
undertake and then the results
will be presented to the to the
Legislative Council.
Mr chairman and Senator Campos I
will defer to Mr Burciaga on
that and
I do want to point out though
that I could not imagine a study
be completed to our satisfaction
that doesn't have pros and cons
to various approaches and a
variety of
Ways to address our geographic
and policy diversity.
Mr Chairman Senator Campos
members of the committee
anything that is in section four
these are appropriations to the
legislature they are not
appropriations to the
Legislative Council Service per
se however one session ends the
activities covered in here are
delegated to the Legislative
Council Service
so in all of these cases we're
looking at mmhm.
Activities that either already
have an RFP based or will
require North P. to continue I
would expect that if this passes
our office would begin looking
at what would be required in a
scope of work on our feet for
the two point five million
dollar expenditure are we would
prepare when we would expect the
council might be sooner rather
than later they usually don't
meet until April or may.
In in light of the expectation
that this go through sooner
rather than later they may maybe
sooner than that at that point
they can review the language for
the RP a lot of his Porter
played but when everybody would
be looking at primarily is the
scope of work the time frame the
expectations of deliverables
etcetera and if that is to the
satisfaction of the council that
it would proceed when we issued
our peace in the past we've
issued them with usually a
thirty day turnaround for
response when they come back an
evaluation committee is
assigned the job.
Evaluating it determining who or
what entity is the best better
and then once one is selected
there notify negotiations start
for fight best and final offer
for example may be required and
once it's selected a contract is
entered into and then they
proceed with the work is
required that process could
take.
On average anywhere from forty
five to sixty days.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
so Madam Jordi floor leader in
terms of the conceptual
component it would be within
reason possibly to offer.
Multiple contracts for various
reasons whether be policy or
some of the financial costs that
would be associated with this so
it's not necessarily would just
be one contract that would be
issues that what I understand
thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Mr chairman and senator.
Yes our.
At least in terms of looking at
the language and the uniform
statute in rural construction
act.
When something is in the
singular or in the plural it
could mean either and that that
standard drafting language so
yes technically more than one
could be hired that is the wish
of the Legislative Council thank
you very much Mr chairman so I
have
to center branding so thank you
Mr chairman yes thank you just a
quick point Mr Chairman wrote
will it is conceivable that you
may not have to use the full two
point five million correct it
says it's for expenditure for
this purpose but it could be
less that you may use we don't
know correct I just want to make
sure that we're on the same page
Mr Chairman etcetera that's
correct thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you any other questions.
Share close so Mr chair all of
this debate has been over around
the study but this is house bill
one.
My point through the whole thing
is this doesn't belong house
bill one and if it's going to be
in there.
There ought to be some some.
Control from us as the finance
team.
Do the study just not house bill
one.
And I'm trying to just make sure
that the if.
If we're gonna do we have to do
it right.
Right means that there are to be
transparency rate means that we
have to make sure that this is
V. and ramp through for some
nefarious reason.
Right means that it's done in
the proper order so it all I'm
asking for with this amendment
is that we make sure that more
than one indicate is involved.
And we ought not be debating the
the the.
Value of this study right now
we're debating whether belongs
here and if it belongs here does
this little group of people have
any control over.
And I submit without these
amendments we don't we've
abdicated our position so with
that Mr chair I move that the
finance committee a minute for
house bill one
do now pass by a vote of forty
seven.
Number of of.
Israel is called.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos respectfully no.
Senator Padilla respectfully no.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales no.
Senator Hemphill.
Senator share yes.
Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez now Senator
yes.
Forty seven seven for a minute
fails are back on the bill
questions on the bill Senator
Woods.
Thank you Mr chair.
Notice.
I notice.
The F. I. R. page two.
And we're talking about a ten
percent increase over last year
could you are ten point nine.
Your lab right a little bit on
that increase.
Mister chairman Senator with I'm
going to let Mr Burciaga
address.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
are you talking about the ten
percent increase for LCS.
And the internship program those
are the ones that have ten
percent are those lines specific
or general what Mr chair and
madam Majority Leader and and
they'll I am actually referring
to the total the mid point of
the page on page two of the F.
R..
There were it says of the totals
and at the end it says ten point
nine percent increase over FY
twenty three.
And so I I realize you know
you've got increases across the
board there but instead of
trying to pick up each one of
them this kind of give me a
general idea of of.
You know is it inflationary
increases is that where did you
come up for these figures for
increases I guess Mr chair.
Mr.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
are the budgets I should say the
requests for appropriations for
the different agencies are
submitted by each agency
individually so service LFC L.
E. S. C. the house and Senate
chief clerks may independently
provide those requests are based
on their oversight body their
respective leaders and the like
and so we get different amounts
for that some of them have to do
forth with inflationary reasons
some to ensure that there is
money for retention recruitment
promotions and the like for
staff some are basically just
increased cost as an example of
IT hardware and software we
really tried to upgrade our
system with respect to security
we get hit pretty often it's
transparent to most everybody
because you don't see it go down
but there is a sizeable increase
there as well for intermix
Spence's which was one of the
larger ones that is because we
have a number of activities
going on right now
during the intro that we haven't
had in the past there are more
requests from the committees for
studies and consultants we've
had more ethics or harassment
investigations which require
outside and special counsel we
have lawsuits relating to
inspection public records act
confidentiality confidentiality
challenges and the redistricting
lawsuit is still ongoing all of
those are reflected in the
request our in house bill one
and that has come out to about a
ten point nine almost eleven
percent increase across the
board.
And Mr chair thank you for that
ensure of I would like you to
hone in on
Line one nineteen legislative
building services.
And tell me why that was
removed.
From.
The the request Mr chairman and
senator woods that is is listed
there for informational purposes
there is a five million dollar
request for billing services but
that always goes in the house
bill two Building services
always covered in house bill
two.
So it would not be listed in
house bill one.
So it was it Mr chair so it
wasn't listed last year that
house bill one no it was not it
is not it has always been house
bill two okay I was just a
little confused there as to why
that shows you know as zero
I'm sorry that I didn't look at
it close and that it was because
it if.
Didn't ring true to across so
thank you for that
Chair thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Of the the
My question is the interim
committee expenses going from
one million to four million.
What are we doing this.
Four times as much.
We're anticipate doing Mr
chairman and senator share that
is what Mr Burciaga was
referring to regarding the
It increasing the budget for
interim committee specific
studies in requests for outside
consultants the ethics or
harassment investigations and
lawsuits and so that was why
that was increased because those
are under way now so those are
expenses that are clearly
In the in our view finder.
So Mr chair of.
Four eight.
We're we're members of NCSL are
we not in CSG in these other
national groups that's true and
because somewhere in your system
we're we're paying for that.
Mr chairman.
Provide us this kind of stuff I
mean it's part of our membership
of the we just look it up on the
internet in column of the state
Hey how does this work it is
working to the state.
Mr chairman and senator that
they work for some of the
specific requests of interim
committees because that's fairly
common to have in CSL present
but whether we the committee
needs a study or someone to
actually work for the committee
at the direction of the
committee that's the only thing
all the rest of it would not be
provided by NCSL such as
attorney fees for our
investigations or
lawsuits.
So Mr chair is do we anticipate
this being an ongoing thing for
ever that we're going to be
studying and paying for
attorneys like that.
Mister chairman Senator we have
Revise the sexual harassment
policies so that there is an
internet as part of the
initial review and then if there
if that Committee decides that
there's probable cause to
proceed then us another attorney
must be hired so yes that is
something that we want to make
available and let me have Mr
Burciaga elaborated that Mr
chair.
Mr chairman and senator up we
use a national conference of
state legislatures NCSL
Expansively we we call them we
contact them all the time as do
I know a number of you as well I
think that the differences in
some cases the interim committee
request the committee itself the
chairs etcetera ask for very New
Mexico specific information NCSL
tends to provide a more national
perspective based on what other
state legislatures are going
also a lot of this would be
specific to.
What New Mexico's doing in any
number of policy areas.
So Mr chair.
It seems to me that the issue so
we're trying to address here.
We will address and they should
be in the non recurring
questions.
Do it I'm not opposed to doing
it.
I am questioning why four
million versus one million of
course but but even if we need
that much of a help.
Are we always going to need that
much help because it's in the
recurring section of this or we
ever going to figure it out and
not need that four million.
So we always gonna be lost.
Mr chairman and senator all one
of the big.
One of the larger expenditures
own said largest but with a
larger expenditures for example
has been the redistricting
lawsuit in fact some of the
expenses for the redistricting
lawsuit are coming out of the
Legislative Council Service
budget normally we're done with
redistricting and years that end
and to after redistricting after
lawsuits and like this one came
in late in twenty two
oxygen it came in late and
twenty one or twenty two it has
proceeded and the Supreme Court
has not ruled on it there's an
expectation that will be
remanded
and go back to the district
courts that may take a lot more
time and money.
With redistricting is a once a
decade issues so I would expect
at least that portion would not
remain from here forward and
there are some issues that I.
That may be taken care with some
statutory changes this year that
would avoid some of the April
and.
Challenges to confidentiality
statute in ethics but it
resolved would avoid those kinds
of of losses so I would expect
that that would reduce over time
not continue.
So Mister chair.
I think that's my point
redistricting is once in a
decade to even if we need some
money to continue on.
The ethics issue I hope isn't an
ongoing issue but they're
certainly be issues out there
but.
To me both of those are non
recurring pay for now.
But when we're done we're done
because once it's in this
recurring thing it'll always be
in this recurring call.
Because it's just difficult to
move difficult politically it's
not difficult to do it with a
pencil and paper but it's
difficult politically to move
something from for ever and ever
and ever to let's do it now.
Mr chairman and senator sure.
Expenses is an ongoing recurring
issue but most of the
appropriations in that section
for to the legislature are one
time appropriations not all of
them but I would say about half
of them the nine point five
million dollars is one time the
constituent service platform one
point not five hundred thousand
one time so it depends on on
each one of those.
I can tell you are real quickly
off hand is the
The nine point five for
processing system one time.
committee room A. B. upgrades
one point five one time
constituent services platform I
thousand one time.
The display boards house and
Senate chambers one point three
million one time two point five
for the study one time.
Those are not those would not be
recurring I don't expect that
those which show up again next
year in the future.
Mr chair we have those in
recurring and recurring column
to.
Mr chairman I don't know how
those are classified by others
here DFA I'd we just drafted the
bill.
Well Mister chair just I'm that
would just jumps out as a Hey
why why one to four one to one
and a half maybe one to one to
two maybe but one to four
million just really leaps out at
me and I don't think that I
understand why I understand why
we wanna spend money now I don't
stand what we want to spend that
much money for ever if we fix
our ethics committee process if
we fix our redistricting
process.
Those are fixed so that's my
only question Senator let me let
me help element when we went to
the redistricting Legislative
Council use their general
federal funds to offset the cost
of the lawsuits and pay for them
and send out part of that is
catch up right during the
interim because if I'm wrong at
any point role let me know.
At during the interim we have
Legislative Council staff
attorneys planning parties
right.
We need to fix that issue with
the interim committees because
attorney should be internees and
they should be planning our our
dinners and and and doing all
that a lot of it is when we
spend per per committee to get
a.
Webcasting in in electronics
issues over about fifty thousand
a piece or something.
And so in the modernization and
some of this is catch up but.
Twenty twenty shut the budget
down house bill in fifteen house
bill one and we went to
webcasting minimal staff minimal
minimal people in the in the
building and then we ramped up
in twenty one to twenty two and
now we're back at full force.
But.
You need to make sure that
council has the ability to do
what they need to do and and
give a little bit of flexibility
and we have to trust our own
people to to do that.
And so that's why some of those
numbers jump up really high as
we move forward is because.
COVID yes catch up
modernization catch up
technology catch up lawsuits
catch up
attorney's fees for who knows
what's gonna sit next right it
request whenever we need to make
sure they have the ability in
there within the flexibility in
their budget to do what they
need to do.
Correct me if I'm wrong well you
can not go ask for a a bar
adjustment because of a lawsuit.
Or you can ask for a more just
for from DFA for for any
operational services in the
council can you.
Mr Chairman we do have the
ability for category transfer
says was identified earlier we
would still be within this
legislative budget for robbing
Peter to pay Paul and if we have
to do that and so.
As we built this I mean those
are my comments to the council
and to and to everybody that
that's an in house bill one is.
Let's make sure you can have the
money to do it correctly right.
Let's make sure that we're not
neckline diamond ourselves and
that we're paying our staff
correctly Council services lost
how many how many
for the Attorney six or seven
bill drafters Mr chairman we
have lost I feel drafters are
staff attorneys over the last
sixteen months.
Over the last year and a half
we've had a valuation and they
went to other agencies for
higher pay.
And so how do we retain those
attorneys at a pay rate so they
don't leave I mean you can take
a Pam who does our tax stuff.
You anybody I can replace it
with.
It is not an attorney and I know
that you could call and say can
you draft tax policy state New
Mexico right.
And so we need to keep employees
like that in the right payments
for they won't leave us so we
have professionalism in the
capital and and this is just
adjustment that the legislature
moves to make.
I mean I know it's a lot of
money no looks like a lot of
money.
We nickel and dimed the
legislature for how many years
that I've been here right.
And I'm not gonna do that
anymore.
There's nothing wrong with
having a number one council
service a number one legislature
so we look very professional as
we move forward.
I do have some questions on the
study but that's that's kind of
my response to get over this Mr
chair I I appreciate that and in
in not I'm not saying what a
nickel and dime ourself.
A I'm asking why session in in
recurring is posted on our
current but also.
Mr Chairman Mr Burciaga what was
this line item in twenty
nineteen before COVID I mean I
know we we spend a lot less
money during comment because
will we were here but.
You Mr chairman and senator I
believe it was just a little
under one million dollars Martin
about nine hundred thousand give
or take it's it's always been in
that neighborhood and I will
tell you that between two
thousand eight and approx me two
thousand seventeen.
it was cut it used to be even
higher than one million dollars
for two expenses but we were the
the state did not have that kind
of money in during those years
and it's slowly been ramped up
and the number of intra
committees that we staff and is
ceremonials pointed out of we're
now we have to purchase
equipment and contractors to
actually go out and do that
webcasting hybrid video on the
road which is extensive and
expensive all right thank you Mr
CENTCOM thank you very much Mr
chairman and ask for point of
edification in regards to
feasibility studies as I've
heard the
ongoing remarks that you made
regarding feasibility studies
possibly being
submitted or financed in some of
our appropriations bills would
you help me please to better
understand the level of
consistency that we're going to
deal with when it comes to the
feasibility studies throughout
the session and the reason I
bring this up because taking
action on this feasibility study
does that leave it open if you
will two other feasibility
studies with other
appropriations that we may see
down the road and putting
together appropriations act
possibly junior bill if that was
to to consummate thank you.
Morning Mr chairman.
This study is done by the
council because this is a
provided.
Right.
Remove story just before the
legislature and we'll give you a
perfect example we did the Paris
studies to Council services and
so there's certain places that
we want the council our our body
contracting with agencies are
are companies that do these
feasibility studies that report
back to the legislature.
Reform those committees in the
legislature to memorials to in
terms and we provide those
because we want council.
to to do that because we're not
asking the executive to do this
study because executive may not
participate.
When it comes to this study
about and the legislature in the
legislative body man Council
services is one asked to run the
R. P. right the R. P. award the
contract into term the dollar
amounts of the budget and so I
think it's a completely
different nature than doing a
study for the department of
health
specified Medicaid planner or
whatever but some of the studies
that that we do have to come to
the council so we know exactly
what and so that when we move
forward in in given the prior
years under different
administrations whether the
cooperate and cooperate with the
legislature not.
We still need to have the
studies done in so that's why
some of the studies I act and to
Council services and not through
to House Bill it and Mr chairman
I really appreciate that so the
recommendation then would be if
there are feasibility studies if
they're gonna be specific let's
say to the legislature
Legislative Council that's O. K.
but when it comes to members of
the legislature if we're
recommending feasibility studies
to
to work with different
departments and that discernment
the indication is that something
that you would be discouraging
throughout the session.
And I mean and.
Senator Campos I I think that
depends on what the study does.
If it's if it's on the
legislature to dispense the
study efficiencies in the
legislature to stand
efficiencies and pay scales the
study efficiencies in technology
driven sure we send the council
and if their pay studies at
their studies that we want to
make sure that there's no
outside influence on that we
as a legislature controlled
what's what's in the study and
not for a while.
Study and and then not get the
result we once I believe they
have to go through council thank
you very much Mr chair I just
want to the point of
clarification because as we go
forward I know that there are
quite a few requests for
additional feasibility studies
by various agencies and this way
at least we have a a guidance if
you will as we move forward
throughout the session thank you
Mr.
Senator Gonzales Mr chairman I
move it to us on house bill one
of the bill second.
But I do have a few closing
comments.
As we move forward
and and Representative
you said there was an agreement
on both sides in the house on
this issue but there is a big
debate on the floor and if there
is an agreement I don't know
where went awry.
They not think they were gonna
get their participation I mean
we have agreements with.
Democrats in the house on on on
the female and and we don't have
that problem in the Senate but
we have an agreement in New our
issues are not being brought up
but this issue sticking out like
a sore thumb what happened to
the that that you guys have Mr
Chairman I I have to be on the
side I do think I characterize
it as an agreement between both
sides but that they're both
sides were represented on the
discussion of this and we did
have some votes from the other
side of the aisle for the bill
and actually debate in favor of
the study so it wasn't an
agreement with the other side.
And I think this is this brings
up a big issue Council services
how are we going to handle these
as we modernize a legislature
right.
I mean.
Are you pro rate is as one total
amount and and this ammendment
right what's separating San Juan
the Senate works differently
than the house.
So our study make completely
different because there's only
forty two of us there seventy
six of you right and and we
cover larger district with a lot
of representatives inside our
districts and so how do we
create that efficiency now we
gotta go to Council services and
say well well how is the Senate
gonna do their study and house
the house they're going to do
this study and how are you gonna
do it where you have a districts
where.
Senate Democrats may have house
Republicans inside their
district and how do you hire
those different staff and I
think that's an issue that that
causes a problem with lumping
one dollar amount with one study
instead of being very strategic
and specific in saying you know
appropriating have to the Senate
after the house leading
leadership determine how how
they're gonna divide that that
study and and how they're going
to work that in staffing because
you talk about large house
districts in the largest one in
the state well and doesn't
matter to us because they fit
inside our Senate districts you
know.
In our percent districts may be
in the largest in the world but
the house disk I think I have
about five house members inside
my district right I don't know
how Center couples has so many
but I mean he's got seventy six
or seven counties right Senator
Padilla district and city and I
right and so I think that's
where the where the issue
becomes right and I wish I would
have caught this earlier in
drafting so we could not avoid
this fight because.
I do not want this place.
To end up like we've seen in DC.
This is a simple bill this this
is something that should not
divide a body in the legislature
on what we're trying to
accomplish and what we're trying
to do if we're going to start on
the very first couple days on
end of life.
We know what's going to be a
long nasty.
Dirty laundry session and that's
not what I'm here for I think
this committee is here and I'm
gonna speak for everybody in the
committee is to do good for New
Mexico to do the right thing to
make sure that we as a body in
this committee.
Look to the future of New Mexico
and look to our constituents.
And and I just.
Don't want that I.
I think we had some debate on
amendments I don't think we're
gonna have those downstairs we
may have a may have a lot of
conversations but we we're gonna
try not to have those again
I think it's better that we've
we dooming Committee that we do
on the floor or not we're not
there for ever.
That's my only advice I do have
a due pass motion and I do have
the second we call.
Senator Burt.
I'm gonna vote yes won't explain
of a.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator Diamond yes text by
myself.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator share no.
Senator Steinborn yes.
Senator Woods.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
Yes yes I'm sorry again yes.
Exponential but so.
Thank ninety to ninety two
Senator Burt speaking about
thank you Mr chairman.
I I'm not opposed to bill at
all.
With the exception of that that
special appropriation for the
study.
I just think it is wrong to pile
things into a bill that normally
flows through this process we
can we can Fund the legislation
we can make sure people get paid
is also for the and maybe you
put into it a moan of contention
for some people and for me I
personally would like to see
those separate I just don't
think it's I think it's a
separate issue I think is a
separate debate
and so
I like the attitude of grades.
I don't have a problem with
anything really and and the
foundational H. B. one.
But I just think the study of
was was rushed it was put into
this bill and should be
separated not necessarily
concerned where to place to meet
if if it comes out of council I
that's fine but I still think
you should be several separate
bill separate appropriation and
separate debate thank you Mr
chairman.
Centered.
Thank you Mr chairman you know
the way I see the speaker bill
is just the cost of doing
business and this bill should
have been non controversial I
for once I support everything
that the bill was was brought
before and I actually support
the feasibility study I think
it's a stand alone bill I think
we've seen that today but what
took place here today in
committee and what really took
place in the house.
You it you have created division
and maybe this bill partisan
issue which was an unnecessary I
think it gives the appearance
that we've done something sneaky
here and that's exactly what the
public hates about politics on a
personal level I I break from
from many members of my party
and supporting the idea of the
rate legislator and I'm happy to
stand and explain those reasons
why when that comes forward when
we seek the issue into another
bill it really muddies the water
and what we're trying to do here
I feel like you have tainted the
process of the feed bill and you
really put a cloud over what
should be a very nonpartisan
discussion about
professionalizing New Mexico's
legislator I think that should
be a nonpartisan issue and
perhaps you've made it part of
sin which makes it difficult for
those that were so supportive of
the issue I just think that
there is a lack of transparency
it's disrespectful to the public
it's disrespectful to the other
side of the aisle it did not
there was no cooperation and I
certainly hope that this does
not set the tone on the first
vote that we take because it
again it will be a long sixty
days and so I'm disappointed in
seeing how this went down
although I could say I'm
supportive of the end of each
concept standing alone thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you
Correct most young Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
not on the bill at all I just
want to clarify to get a tax of
the video is being excuse me
there is a webcast at this point
it's audio only.
Video is being recorded so it'll
it'll be put together but right
now the public is at least
hearing what happened in this
committee thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you madam.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
chairman Mr the five million
second let me say true this is a
long arduous process to get all
this done in and I truly want to
thank you
Rev Representative Chasey for
your work on this it's never
easy to to get a consensus and
it's a hundred percent all the
time but you know that you've
done a great job and we
appreciate all the work and role
in the legislative staff thank
you I can't say enough and LFC
all our staff thank you thank
you so much.
We're gonna go to hire a real
quick in Adrian you want to
explain how we're gonna do this
like ten or fifteen minutes and
we may call you guys back.
Representative Chasey commission
for.
Please.
Thank you course is.
This is one.
Thank you
higher.
All right.
So.
Thank you.
Yes.
Okay thank you very much all
rights Adrienne forget it
explain how this process is
going to go only because of the
rebel only because of the state
of time because we have to get
back into the Senate chamber and
we want to give you an
opportunity even if it's a
shorter time to explain what's
already in here for the members
in the audience and everyone
here the synopsis and the
explanation is pretty borrowing
here so you have it before you
and if there are any questions
at that point we will go back
and ask them otherwise the
information is all in here but
Adrian let me give it to you and
you can explain the process
thank you madam chair members
the committee so before you you
have two different sheets one
has been prepared by DFA in
collaboration with LESC and the
other one was prepared by your
Senate finance staff so the
Senate finance staff one has
basically two different colors
it's boring and purple and it's
basically taken all the projects
that have been flagged in the
previous reports throughout the
interim and compiled them
together these are all the
products that are red and yellow
and we actually sent out and
requested justification from all
the institutions almost all of
them Mansukh provide us with an
answer by our deadline which was
yesterday at three o'clock and
the justification is available
on the second to last call so
you can kind of see where it's
institution is so the way this
will work for us today and the
sake of time is both the the
representative from LFC and the
representative from DFA will
each get about a minute.
Higher and sorry from higher at
least get about a minute to kind
of just brief you all and then
we'll open up to questions
members from different
institutions are available in
the audience if their specific
institutional questions that
they can probably answer okay
Adrian are we going to go to
both the SF's Senator finance
committee summary and the DFA
all together at once DFA in LFC.
Is that so we know for the
public.
Madam chairman and members of
the committee of this is based
off of that work that LFC and
DFA normally do throughout the
year this is their latest
quarterly reports to make sure
for clarity thank you very much.
Hey and the gentleman's name
here let me have your names like
General honing thank thank you
thank you.
You can proceed Madam chairman
members of the committee good
morning I mean it Chavez and
capital outlay analyst with the
legislative finance committee
I'm joined by Gerald hony
capital projects director at the
higher education department I
can answer any questions about I
love these process and how we
normally do our quarterly
reports on projects that was
thoroughly done yesterday as
well happy to answer questions
and I'll pass it along to
director County.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the Senate
finance committee my name is
Gerald pony I am the capital
projects director for the New
Mexico higher education
department as Adrian mentioned
earlier we did pass out some
information for you all is this
document here what we've done is
we've also provided the higher
education departments
understanding of the status of
each of the projects that were
coded as either red or yellow in
the.
Your report that you all have
seen we also provided on the
back of this document to other
processes that we wanted to make
you aware of and those are just
the processes that highlight the
higher education department's
vetting for funding
recommendations each year as
well as the process for the
higher education department when
we do wills of capital
expenditures prior to
construction of projects we of
course our happen here and
appreciate the committee's
consideration of all of the
request from higher at and at
this time I'll go ahead and just
stand for questions as well so
thank you all right.
Thank you Mr chairman I take
over you and you.
One quick center what you need
to have any chance we need to
introduce some sorry.
Mr chair we we're.
Mexico for.
Texas
James Johnson.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair if I may I I I neglected
to say
we also joining me today is is
our cabinet secretaries
secretary Stephanie Rodriguez
with the higher education
department so thank you.
Thank you.
Cancel.
What also.
Mr.
We also have another new
chancellor there is not a not a
new face here but a former
Attorney General Hector
Balderas.
Chance.
Thank you.
any questions.
We may circle back around I'm
sorry may circle back around.
Because we need to go to the
floor and house bill one to the
limited time I'm sorry we in can
be cheated come that we may
circle back around we may just
start calling you that members
have questions.
It's very important we pick
thanks capital.
Whether you're short.
Because of inflation.
I need to complete the projects
those are things we need to get
done for but if you have
projects are not moving that you
don't think are viable.
And we need to put money towards
that project completed.
That's what we're gonna look at
as we move forward before we
look at your new projects.
In those projects that you can't
complete.
Before giving new projects then
you can be successful with what
you got rather than just sitting
there and in you know thorn in
everyone's side and not
completing anything in in not
getting nothing anything
accomplished other than having
to pile capital that's never
emit completed so I'm sorry for
what happened and to go more
time than we thought that's the
legislature and in and so I
apologize for that but if we
have specific questions will
reach out to you staff will
reach out to you or will have
another hearing so thank you.
Where we're joined.
Senator.
