The amendments first and then
get to the bill or if you just
want me to run through the bill
and and then put the amendments
after that.
I think those are real short
amendments we can explain really
quickly so we you have to
amendments
The members have the amendments.
So we can remember the first
amendment
ninety nine point one in your
packet sent Rodriguez we move
that amendment force yes I will
and amendment that.
Point two two zero seven nine
nine point one.
For a discussion in the bill.
Okay.
Thank you members so the
amendment in front of you
on page thirty four line ten
would strike the phrase the
project manager and insert
instead operating expenses of up
to one million seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars and then
a page thirty four lines twelve
through twenty five and thirty
five lines one through six we
would strike sections eighteen
eighty one in their entirety
this was this particular re
authorization was made by the
executive and they realized
after the fact that they wanted
to sign up the the language a
little bit more for that
particular project
given that they were trying to
give the the project a little
bit more flexibility with the
money but they realized that the
way the language had been
originally crafted perhaps give
them a little bit too much
flexibility to this kind of
time's up more but more.
Any questions on the amendment.
No questions Mr chairman do you
wanted to stop move one at a
time yes.
No objections the minutes of
that.
It's been adopted and and
Senator Rodriguez and you'll go
to a.
Seven two four point two yes
well Mr chairman I move that
amendment point zero zero zero
seven two four seven two four
point two up for discussion.
Senator Steinborn did you have a
question on the prior amendment
just hand out well Mr Mr
chairman not necessarily I I
just it's gonna requests we can
but the amendment online.
Sure.
You should have those in your
email to yes.
The public's following along as
well so.
Thank you.
However you want to put the
prior then we can just be a real
quick and then I'll just make
sure we got that fixed.
So the prior amendment
Thank you language and putting
up to one point seven fifty.
Is.
Spaceport had been using the.
Bonding capacity to pay through
operational Attorney General
sent a letter this year saying
that they can't do that there
has been nor no court rolling
and it's my understanding as a.
Jenner July that the state is no
longer using bond money in is
now sending back to the city the
county of don and the and so
that is why we need to back up
with general fund you can see
can you to see this problem a
spaceport until they get Madam
operational person that that can
make their leases viable so they
can stand on their own to to
late next year you may come from
more dollars.
This is a continuing issue that
we have with us or and so.
Looking through the budget and
trying to determine
how we're gonna take care that
the spaceport there is the
balance of the other two fifteen
house bill two so they are
funded at two million so the
state continues to support that.
In this we are built in this
section that we're amendment
there is twenty million that has
been on spent at the spaceport.
Five years later we're still re
authorizing this money for them
Senator Steinborn you need to
make sure you check with your
local up.
Questions that that money is
coming back and we do have your
hand right thank you thank you
Mr chairman and and you know
I've been working hard this
session to our to try to stop
using Dona ana county funds
which clearly in the law are
only supposed to be used for
construction and so thank you
for your leadership to help to
resolve this and and everyone
else that was involved in the
administration this is a really
important shaft
so good to see this amendment to
I think it does clarify that
language that was in the.
In this reauthorization and so
are just very much appreciated.
Thank you and I will I am in
touch the county and we of
course will be following up
thank you Mr.
This
amendment to put the next
amendment in this.
Representative this is my
amendment Senator can you remove
this ammendment for discussion
purposes yes I already moved it
you may do it again I'm.
Okay I'll just second that
motion of this is something that
that you have the wrong one
currently.
Then the next amendment was for
chapter house in my district
that and actually got a Mexico
were greater in New Mexico and
we miss this we are when it came
to me and so this one is my
appropriate clinical language
of.
Any questions on the amendment
makes anyone at.
Mr chairman yes got it that's
going to give you the number
again make it easier thank you.
Question center once you have
your hands up.
Mr chairman the.
I was late on the first
amendment.
So I guess I can wait until you
finish with this amendment for I
discussed with first amendment.
So thank you Sir.
Any objections.
Docket we are back on the bill.
Representative Martinez so
explained a bill now that we've
got amended.
Yes you know thank you Mr chair
first of all of I apologize for
not introduce my experts miss
man to keep and Mr Steve you'll
send both of them with the LFC
and I also realize that actually
did explain the bill in my
opening it's such a short
straightforward bill so with
that and with those amendments
will stand for questions.
Senator Woods you have
questions.
Yes Mr chairman of actually on
the the first amendment this is
talking about operating expenses
on a.
A bill that we bond money for
ten years right
or am I mistaken the purpose of
the bill.
Mr Chairman.
Representative.
That money general fund money
that was put into the capital
bill so it is not bonded money
it's it's general fund money
that cash that had been sitting
there I believe since two
thousand nineteen prior to.
Okay thank you thank you.
Of
questions from committee members
Sir would you take your hand
them.
I need a motion.
Mr Chairman I think that that we
have to move here to I'm one of
those not to adopt two ninety
six but to now this is not one
of those Senator this is.
But it's just amended bill it's
not a substitute bill so we.
That so I'm and the rest of us
do an improper way but we don't
need to do with this is not a
substitute thank you so I move a
do pass Mr chairman or House
Bill to ninety six
as amended from house taxation
revenue committee
and amended in Santa Fe I'm
sorry Senate finance committee
with the emergency cost
estimate.
Twice.
Have a motion and a second that
we call the roll.
Yes Mr chair.
Senator Burt is.
Just.
Joining us senator Byrd are you
here yes I'm here.
We're voting on H. B. two ninety
six yes yes.
Senator Burt yes.
Senator Campos is not here
senator Candelaria yes Senator
Candelaria think yes Senator
Diamond.
Yes.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Gonzalez is also excuse Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share yes.
You're here yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator then yes yes nine test
and tune no.
Representative will probably see
this afternoon seems like your
daily racing Center plants.
That thank you senator I think
yeah you should give me honorary
membership Senate finance
please.
maybe we can that do some
capital for for you and
Representative McQueen or night
right next to us so we can do
some capital in case a.
Spread thank you thank you
Representative McQueen your next
the we're still waiting on some
members come back Casey Center
couples is back but we're
waiting on surveys all over your
house bill two.
Representative.
When you want to go and start.
Share.
Mr chair members of the
committee house bill fifty five
is the capital outlay
transparency bill and it simply
requires the council service to
publish our individual
allocations.
In the capital outlay bills I
will say Mr chair there was an
amendment put on in Senate rules
of the Senate rules amendment
was sort of incomplete and will
need to be fixed and we can
either fix that.
Your incident finance or on the
Senate floor.
Representative you have any
witnesses were.
The chairman I do not.
Public comment on this bill.
Chairman members of the
committee yes we do we receive
no indications of opposition
with this in support we have
Jason Espinoza.
I chairman members the committee
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists with the New Mexico
foundation for open government
and I'll keep it short we stand
and support thank you.
And next we have Fred Nathan
with bank New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Fred Nathan I'm executive
director of thing to Mexico
which is a bipartisan think tank
serving the people of New Mexico
we also support this bill and we
believe this reform bills on the
many steps the legislature has
recently taken to increase
transparency of state government
and make it more accessible to
members of the public and
taxpayers from creating the
sunshine portal webcasting
committee hearings and floor
sessions to opening up
conference committees making the
capital outlay funding process
more transparent is the logical
next step in this positive trend
I urge the members of this
committee to vote in favor of
house bill fifty five many
thanks.
Chairman members the committee
that includes public comment.
Question from committee members.
Senator you have your hand up.
Yes Mr chair so I do have a.
Question or comment but.
Mr chair why why is this
important to me would put out a
capital outlay bill it says
where all the money went I was
published money individually but
the bill says in San Juan County
of these this is where the money
went these things were funded
why does it matter whether I'm
the one that signed a particular
document or senator Neville is
the one that signed a particular
document.
Mr chair Senator share you know
like you I also publish my
information in the vast majority
of the members of the
legislature do I just think it's
to be automatic and it should
also be.
The bill proposes a searchable
database so are funding can be
analyzed
you know I represent four
different counties I assume
their voters in my district that
are interested in you know M. I.
favoring one county over another
or
you know.
I've been given the authority of
which apparently is unusual
among states to allocate dollars
to specific projects.
and since those.
Those projects are challenged I
think the public should know.
So Mr chair and representative
it's still published in a bill.
And so one of the things that we
do in San Juan County of.
Quite literally we sit around
the table of with all of the
requests that ever came in for
San Juan County and we're all
single county of folks up there
it get set for rob Senator Pinto
she's got two counties the rest
of us soldiers Representative
San Juan County.
So we sit at the table all of
those requests there we talk
about what we're going to do and
so for example of the of.
The county may need certain
things
someone college may need certain
things and so we we talk about
how we're going to do this and
so I might say listen I'm gonna
take care of this this project
for the county.
And senator bill is going to
take care this project for the
college.
So I didn't get credit for doing
anything for the college but but
we agreed as a team that we were
going to fund both projects the
other thing that we do it in San
Juan County as we look at things
and say.
We want a whole projects.
Now we know that sometimes the
projects are too big of
sometimes we coordinate with the
with whoever is the counties
cities whoever's there of how
much of this are you going to
put in how much we gonna try to
get from the state whether it's
from the tear the governor's
office whatever so we Fund whole
projects.
With the concern that I have
under this.
Is that all of a sudden will say
all you didn't take care of the
county you just took care of the
college is that because you have
some special relationship yet
the team took care both.
And while I still publish all of
us all five of us published what
we've done I don't want there to
be the impression that.
That.
All I ignored or senator Neville
ignored some important project.
Because we funded everything.
Buy everything we could.
in that comes out in the end
bills the end bill shows that we
funded all of that it doesn't
show that I ignored somebody or
the senator Neville ignored
somebody so that's just that
when we talk about the open
government things like that.
Sometimes that just gets blown
way out of proportion on what's
what's happening and what's
going on and certainly if we're
sitting because the next step is
of the open government folks are
gonna say oh well well you sat
around and talked about that we
need to be involved in that
meeting to.
Well that's where we get to talk
openly about things that's where
we get to throw out ideas and
brainstorming try to figure
housing in and we're not gonna
do that if it's all on camera
we're just not.
And I think that that's
counterproductive to good
government will be able to talk
to each other and throw out
ideas and not have the press say
Senator chair of the proposed
this with that's not the
ultimate thing that was a
brainstorm trying to get things
going.
So.
I'm gonna keep publishing money.
I'm sure all five San Juan
County people are going to
publish there's.
But the reality is there is a
bill out there this is where the
money went.
Whether I got credit for not.
It's in that bill.
So.
That's where I am Mr Mr Chairman
representative.
Thank you Senator Campos thank
you very much Mr chairman
members of the Senate finance
committee and to our
Representative McQueen I really
applaud the efforts that you've
made over the years when it
comes to transparency
we continue to be a very strong
advocate for that and I think
part of that.
Frankly speaking for about
thirty years I've tried to work
on capital outlay reform and
within that so the transparency
is the.
Important issue and of course
the transparency does occur
whenever if you will the capital
outlay bill does come out.
The dissertation was was on
capital outlay reform and.
I did track if you will exactly
what occurs when we do work with
that so this is an ongoing
effort
but by myself but it but many
others in other states and the
reason I bring this out it's
often leads to the question in
other states we do see where.
Budgets are efficiently of
funded fully funded.
The important needs of states
Madam.
We have about one point six
billion dollars payments.
And frankly again that's
because.
So in fact with resources.
Our channel to those particular
projects in other cases the
processes are very cumbersome
and then of course as we all
know.
A lot of times we have counties
municipalities school districts
other forms of government.
That don't request resources and
so as we continue to move
forward the intent is how do we
make this as inclusive as
possible with the data always be
part of the driver to ensure
that the health welfare and
well being virtual safety issues
are meant and so I'm moving
forward I believe that it's
incumbent on each and every one
of us to ensure that that
transparency does occur and
going back to what Senator share
is talking about and I think I
always when I listen to M. I
learned something
he he shares thoughts and ideas
and and really brings.
Is is on experiences to the
table as we do that and so that
helps us to improve if you will
not only amendments for
legislation as we.
Work to to bring about this
level of transparency.
I believe in what you're you're
doing and in how you're seeking
to accomplish this in my
question is from the standpoint
of transparency.
What does this give us when
every legislator.
When their name is published the
beside the appropriation that
they've been allotted.
What what does that get us as we
deal directly with our
constituents for the taxpayers
the general public with the
media what what is the the the
grassroots intent of this
legislation bringing about
transparency.
Thank you very much
Representative.
Mr chair Senator Campos you know
to me the intent you know
transparency is the into and how
people choose to use that that
that information or interpret
that information is sort of to
that I know you know Senator
sure describes seeing around the
table and figure out projects
I've had multiple meetings like
that with with different groups
of overlapping legislators I
have my district hundred miles
long it's four counties
you know I have areas that I
need with the legislators in
that area and it's all so
private that I within to speak
to continue to do so and and we
talked okay what are the
priorities in this area.
Ultimately it ultimately though
as a legislator yeah I'm given
authority as in the house of
this year over a million dollars
to allocate and I think the
public should know you know what
I chose as priorities I do a lot
of projects in for example the
Eldorado area Santa Fe County
the US share with senator Wirth.
and he and I yeah we say okay
you do this much you do that
will split that up.
I had projects the Moriarty
Edgewood school districts couple
years ago and we had
it was Representative mas cells
are.
In a Senator should a blanking
on his name
real Center Perella in that it
was interesting to have three
projects each about forty fifty
thousand dollars.
If we could have done you know a
third a third a third but we
just let the three and said okay
you do this you do this I do
that.
and the projects get funded so
there there's different ways to
do it
in the the public I think the
public has a right to know I'm
just trying to make sure that
their rate is limited by the
ability of one news outlet to
convince every legislator
individually to re release the
information.
Thank you very much for that and
Mister chair members of the
Senate finance committee
representative queen so talking
about.
Or or districts I represent
seven counties fourteen thousand
five hundred square miles within
that thirty six appropriated
incorporated communities.
Twenty all of parts of twenty
five school districts.
And I could I could just go on
so when I when I
put forth the list that I have
the issue then becomes as we
deal with this
Fund this Senator Campos she can
help us with that Senator Campos
and.
Here again allotted.
The same amount as as senators
so within that again I fully
understand and support the
transparency and and I do
indicate to people will do the
best we can to leverage of
resources forward but help me to
better understand and the
question of transparency
particularly those of us that
represent these large areas and
and and how do we balance this
if you will distribution of
resources for the most effective
and efficient use not resources
but particularly to meet the
needs of of our rural
communities as you as you will
understand and then that would
just be my last question the
fully support this legislation
so if you've just.
With that.
Next person questions.
Thank you.
Mr chair Senator Campos
you know I feel your pain to a
lesser extent my cat my district
isn't nearly as big as yours but
it's big and I would argue that
rural districts have more
capital needs than urban
districts you know I you know I
have more school districts I
have more senior centers I have
more fire stations because it's
so spread out and I know there
are times when some of the of
the urban legislators and you
know not nothing against them
but they have a hard time
finding figure out a way to
spend that much money in a
little tiny District.
So as you pursue capital outlay
for reform.
I would love for that to be
factored it I mean let's let's
have a formula that allocates
money where it's needed and you
know the.
I think the equal shares among
legislators was a step in the
right direction in terms of
fairness.
But I do think we should
consider needs in in like you
you know I can't I can't come
close to funding all the
projects in my district
and I'd love to have some help.
Thank you very much and thank
you again for your ongoing
Devers you definitely are
champing for transparency.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
is this an important.
Thank you senator.
Senator on the run center this
year I'm sorry let's go to
center was next and then Senator
Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Chairman mostly in the I do
appreciate you bringing this.
Hi to make my information is
available to anyone that wants
it.
I do have one.
Well because when we is there an
echo or you're in Mr Chairman.
There might the more and.
Senator okay thank you Mr
chairman and I'm meet with all
of my representatives and my
senators at my district and and
sometimes we can't be all
together at one time but we
think should be and talk about
the power nations district
sales.
We we try to get at least one
patron induced papers show that
we did maybe we didn't you know
this wasn't just the closed room
meeting that nobody got any
input or and.
It is deal this is one of the
toughest deal court freshman to
do in the legislature what
everybody's come in that you but
I truly believe in my heart it
is the way to do it that the
individual legislators knows the
needs of this district better
than anyone.
So the appreciate your your
bills are supported not a
problem thank you.
Senator Candelaria.
Thank you Mr chairman and now I
am.
I want to emphasize Mister
chairman Senator Woods said
you know for.
I've always we've always sitting
kidding but I think it's true if
individual members don't feel
comfortable appropriating their
allocation capital outlay they
should allocated to the rest of
us.
Who do you and I think that
there's a myth in the
legislature that individual
legislators don't engage in
planning.
And I think we've heard today
from every member who spoke in
the amount of work that goes
into coordinating your capital
outlay with local government and
if you're Legislature provided
done do that well that's your
fault and that's
responsibilities on you not on
the system.
You know getting ready for this
legislature.
Mr Mr chairman.
For example I contacted
Bernalillo county they submitted
a an ambiguous capital outlay
requests to the legislature
saying we want roads for county
commission district to.
County commission district to in
Albuquerque on the west side
doesn't really have its own
county commissioner we've been
traditionally left out of
representation and so the
progressive north valley and the
progressives southeast heights
which are predominately white
areas get their own
representatives they get to and
then we basically are at the run
over on the west side of the
river and so what does that mean
for us well all the road
projects in county commission
district to my County commission
which is my entire district one
project out of all of them was
west of the river and it was on
the boundary of my district.
So I think it's important as we
have these conversations about
capital outlay reform that we
not I thank the crowd the
process with a broad brush.
and I just want to to voice that
I will never vote for getting
rid of the individual legislator
capital outlay if we want to
completely abandon our
appropriating authority and let
the executive doll out that
money we can do that I think
that be a very sad day for New
Mexico and I think it be a very
sad day.
For my district and for my
constituents to again pay their
taxes to their local governments
but their local governments
don't submit capital outlay
report requests for them I
literally am the only person
with my colleagues in the
legislature who are trying to
achieve equity between the east
and west side of the river in
Albuquerque why because the
elite powers that be at local
government level in Albuquerque
tend to not pay as much
attention to the brown folks on
the west side as they do to
people on the other side of the
river and that's just the damn
truth.
Mr Chairman and it's really
upsetting and and I want to
bring that out because we as
legislators know our district
and let's be Frank sometimes we
are the only people who are
fighting for actual equity and
fairness my vote for the bill.
because I don't think it it it
harms anyone I think it's
already been clear that then at
the end of the day I think it's
because I'm the vast majority of
us are already yes.
But as we it does is is we
always have these capital outlay
discussions you know I just
encourage the legislature let's
stop beating up on ourselves and
making it seem like we have no
concept of how to spend this
money the reality is legislature
capital outlay in my view is
some of the wells most well
spent money in the capital
outlay world and if we want to
go and look at which projects
are what keep the balance is
really high he you know it's not
really legislative capital
outlay speaking as the New
Mexico finance authority
chairman one of the largest
pools of balances we have Mr
Chairman is an tribal
infrastructure.
the tribal infrastructure fund
which is a Barrett and needs
based program that's run by
experts and not run by the
legislature
you know they have tens of
millions of dollars going back
to the last report I saw was the
nearly two thousand six.
So we have a problem sure I
don't think the legislature's
the really big problem and that
I think that narrative is pushed
by the executive which just
wants to consolidate more power
over capital outlay micelles so
for my district sh again are
tired of paying taxes and not
being represented by the
political elites of the City of
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
we're gonna continue
appropriating our individual
legislator capital outlay and I
think as someone said once in
history you can pry that from my
cold dead hands but until then I
will gladly support this measure
thank you Representative McQueen
for is stick to just maybe we
can get him also an honorary
member.
That just session Mr chairman we
can maybe can submit the price
of those to DFA is about yours
well thank you appreciate all.
Senator Campos for the second
time in the morning Senator
Rodriguez and many we are going
to ask you when you ask for.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chairman of course and members
of the Senate finance committee
in the Representative Inc we
it's not a question I just I
want to reiterate I concur with
the.
With senator Candelaria as we
move forward and I really hope
that there is going to be more
of our collaboration and our
operation because as we do move
forward so we need to be capital
outlay reform that we're looking
at we're looking at higher
ed reform as well.
On the other areas of Mr
chairman I want to go back to
what you continue to indicate to
all of us this definitely is
about the people of Mexico and
so what I anticipated what I'm
looking forward to is more
involvement during this in from
to ensure that that we set the
direction for the great state of
New Mexico thank you very much
Mr chairman members of the
Senate finance committee
Campos Senator Rodriguez thank
you Mr chairman and you know
while I have not released the
list of my allocations for a few
years now you know this issue
has been going on and discussed
a factory member since that I
think it was senator rue in the
Senate who was talking about
this and introducing legislation
to get this changed and also we
have an amendment one time a few
years ago I remember to do this
and
it failed in the Senate floor if
I can recall correctly so this
continues to be a subject to
continued continued discussion
and very necessary for
transparency in that Mr Chairman
if there's no one else I'm gonna
move the path I think that
Senator Diamond just put our
hand up but will be passed for
discussion and then we'll move
on with that.
Thank you senator Senator
Diamond.
I just wanted to echo what
senator Candelaria said in my
very short time being here I
have I mean crazy hero back home
not for anything that I've done
but really on your part Mr
chairman for making this process
so transparent I seem to have
had an account an account county
one county this can been
completely neglected through the
years and so I appreciate the
transparency I want to thank you
Representative McQueen rating
adding more transparency in this
process I will absolutely be
supporting this and this is just
the right thing to do for our
constituents in our local
leadership back home so thank
you bye.
Senator Diamond I don't see
anybody else on on the list
Representative McQueen
you know in my area and the
probably run into is if you have
more to one person and you get
to another it comes an issue at
some points in all my capitals
basically for infrastructure I
don't find anything else water
lines power lines but you
representative you know as as
many chapters in center complex
has counties plus.
Three counties in and I'm glad
Senator does include me in San
Juan.
Then and have a a little less
the spread around but it's hard
when you live in in rural New
Mexico to treat people equally
for their needs when you try to
fund those projects as
completely as you can so they
can get them done and it it's
going to provide become an issue
for for some members of that
they're gonna start saying you
can get me in providing it in
the why did you do that.
It's a choice I wish we would we
do cap or maybe Center Campos
and and turn LFC we really need
to take that on.
Thanks cap well eight the way it
should be fixed I have a big
issue with with capital where
lobbyists are are higher to get
capital in a rate on the
percentage of what capital they
bring home that may be a floor
amendment I may look at.
And so those lobbyist are now.
Can't chase account going get
paid for.
It's really hard when you have
lobbyist calling on behalf of
this one more capital and we
have that one point capital and
and it becomes for me.
I really don't like it because
then we are hearing what the
real needs are.
From the communities and and the
chapter houses Representative
and it's hard to do it that way
and unfair advantage for the
chapter houses that represent
for someone to say don't do this
don't do that what happens in
the Navajo Nation is they sent
out a capitalist request.
And it doesn't match up with the
chapters who are the people on
the grounds needs are lot of
greater slaughter back because
we just amended one for back co.
Just basic needs in my area I do
that I do think there's another
amendment we should discuss.
And that is a leading the
legislature program all the
money for capital outlay not
giving the governor the third
that was never in statute
I think that.
That's always an issue and how
they trade offs for roads I did
see I did see the the the
amendment that this goes back to
the special session and it has
emergency clause on that am I
correct Representative McQueen.
Mr chair it does have an
emergency clause on it and
there's been a little confusion
about whether it applies to this
session or next session yeah
we're trying to clarify that it
would apply to this session.
But but that being said only be
perspective we're not gonna go
back twenty years and start
publishing information from
that.
Some of those guys are not here
so.
I will matter.
I do think the amendment form
and would be that the
legislature is appropriating
body we will deal with capital.
That we.
You need to give everybody a
third a third a third when they
are to get a half an and then
might take another thirty the
math in the Senate finance
doesn't work that well when we
do that and so may look for me
to just put it up for amendment
on saying that.
She gets half and the two bodies
get happen we're not going to
find a half but more.
I think that's really important
especially with the federal
money coming that we do
appropriated that we do get
these projects move that we are
not paying interest on stuff
that is not moving forward and
that we can call back and
change.
With Senator Rodriguez make a
motion to have a second on her
motion Mr Chairman.
Second by Senator Campos Senator
Steinborn if you just raise your
hand I'm.
Again Mr Chairman while you were
speaking I just wanted to make
one comment which is you you it
brought up the lobbyist being
hired to deliver on capital
outlay getting paid a commission
in essence I think our state law
actually bars lobbyist from
getting paid based upon their
work getting a return on their
work so as someone who's tried
to improve those disclosure laws
so that's in FY I but I just
want to think against the
Sanchez well and this is just a
no brainer really for all kinds
of reasons and public dollars
and therefore it should be
public what we do with our so I
try to support it thank you Mr.
We do have a motion and a
second.
We call the roll.
Yes Mr chair Senator Burt yes.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
Houston to explain my vote.
Senator Campos yes senator
Candelaria.
You still there.
Yes I am here and I will vote
yes.
Thank you senator Candelaria yes
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales
yes.
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator share.
Yes.
Senator sure yes Senator
Steinborn yes.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods yes.
Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes and
senator annual.
Yes.
Senate chairman yes yes you have
to eleven yes.
Thank you regulations of
Representative McQueen to look
for that floor amendment I do
think the legislature's
appropriating body and.
When you do a half an and then
divided by a third I think that
we.
We do need appropriate that
money so.
I'll see on the floor
Representative.
Thank you Mr.
Mr chair.
We are you.
It's just me to go.
Okay.
We are gonna start house bill
two.
Mr chair.
So couple yes it just explain my
vote and I want to really think
Senator Diamond for reaching out
to taking a look in terms of
what capital outlay has been
distributed within the district
she represents in to ensure that
there is a fairness issue and I
really appreciate that so that
was part of the reason for my
voting yes on this particular
piece of legislation as well
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator I'm just make
sure we don't have any comments
on house bill right.
Members of the committee now we
do not.
I just want to clarify that we
get to go to the audience on the
other line.
We're gonna do house bill two
we've already we cap of the
member has I think they're still
going so we really need to make
so people understand we can do a
one point five percent increase
for all employees across the
board we added about forty six
million in in the Senate in
reoccurring money we had about
twenty thirty two million for
the ERP for a there the
retirement of.
Financial aid and then we heard
the optimist caller suggests
they we did add some money we
did have some members bills that
everybody agree to our important
and those are very public of
where the money is and what
bills work
we did capture.
Let's uh some of the federal
stimulus money for Medicaid.
We did talk about.
Twenty money.
Tourism because that was a hot
issue coming into the session
and we discovered that that they
really want twenty five million
and we try to help tourism
lesson we could not getting into
a fight with the executive but
that was something that happened
we put the hundred seventy
billion on roads for small
business guys captured the six
hundred million fans are
bringing to us in the state.
For the one point six billion so
that we don't have that.
Hi increase in our U. I. fund
because I think it was amended
to the publisher.
And so that is really important
for small businesses and the
like one is we can.
If you look on page ten of your
packet.
These are scenarios that we
adopt.
The Senate finance changes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
As I first want to preface by
stating that this process of the
SFC work up on house bill two I
think has been the most so the
most public in the most
transparent that we've had at
nine years that I've been here
Mr chairman and so as as we've
continued this process with our
staff through committee work
there is I believe staff has a
final recommendation or an
updated spreadsheet for the
committee.
based upon all of the work that
we have done both the first
presentation Mr chairman for the
committee on house bill two.
The subsequent subcommittee
meeting on language and then the
follow up conversations that
subcommittee yesterday I'm I
don't know Mr chairman I can
yields to Mr Abbey here Mister
so we if they if the members
have that she just everyone
knows what I'm talking about.
Is everybody will turn to their
package on page ten.
These are.
Languages and little at adds
that we had talked about to the
governor's office and in
shortfalls that we seen an
agency or department.
Correct some of this is.
Sure that.
We do have the money in the U.
I. fund and putting some money
for early childhood thank you
right Fund.
So those are transfer.
Mr Chairman thank you for
pointing that out in the packet
so Mr Chairman at this point
what what what I would move Mr
chairman for purposes of
discussion action by the
committee is that the committee
adopt the staff framework as
presented on page ten as you've
referenced with one exception
and that is item number twenty
in your pockets.
either number twenty is some
language that I think is just or
or in consultation with staff
and various stakeholders in this
and this issue.
the amendment deals particularly
with the Navajo Nation sitting
up in managed care organization
while that may be a good idea
bad idea I'm not sure the
reality is I do not think based
on these conversations that
there is that's not the place
where this sort of language is
appropriate I think stakeholders
still need to inform what I
understand you to come together
including various stakeholders I
think we've always known Mr
chairman you've instructed us
that sometimes you have the
Navajo Nation that speaks to the
council speaks the speaker's
office or speak to the
president's office and we just
got to make sure that
everything's fair and equitable
so I would recommend Mr chairman
that the committee adopt the
staff framework at age ten
eleven with the exception of
item twenty which would not be
adopted and be struck.
Second the motion Mr chairman.
Thank you any objection to the
motion questions on the motion.
Saying.
thank you senator Candelaria
thank you Mr chairman I first
want to just kind of go through
and and.
I actually think chairman of
finance when we actually have
money and we're not cutting
money is very easy to make
people happy there's only a
limited amount of money that we
can stand.
Thanks to the oil and gas you
have a lot of one time money
a recurring money came up all
have happened during the COVID
because of G. R..
And people stayed on the job
so it's very easy but in the
future especially in the out
years we're going to see that
declined I I just seen where
they think that the economy's
going to grow at a rate of eight
percent next year I also New
Mexico's my mind with that.
Working on that we continue to
grow
and so we don't have to cut.
I think this will courts
throughout New Mexico on what we
just our budget we knew we know
we have one point six billion
coming state we tried to capture
much of that as we can as the
program body.
In the state.
So to protect New Mexico to
protect our small businesses to
protect our employees we passed
on the packages.
Throughout from about four to
five hundred million that we
passed whether it's.
The tax.
Credits G. R. T. for
restaurants.
Senator Candelaria bill for
loans some some other grant
programs through economic
development.
And so we've done our best is we
see that to help people during
this time we've done some
working families tax credits we
can have a tax package we're
gonna be looking at over the
next couple of days we don't
know what to look like it and so
what.
Four
We will come back tomorrow or
maybe this afternoon thank sure
that we're all going on house
bill two.
C..
Changes we may see some
amendments that that one topics
want to talk about on house bill
two when we come back to review
that.
Land is to get this on to the
floor maybe Thursday or Friday.
We just need to make sure we are
cleaned up we're not missing any
cases like some educational
bills came through.
I do want to say.
But does that for those members
who have been in Senate finance
before or on LFC that.
It is it is a big budget when
you talk about seven point four
billion dollars.
Programming that amount of
money.
If you have never sent a check
for for.
Hundred thousand or two hundred
thousand.
It is a big step in and the
people that work in New Mexico
work hard to help us get this
money dollars.
Well royalties it's a lot but
takes a lot for this amount of
money to come into government we
need to make sure that we do it
correctly spend it correctly.
We're trying to protect
everybody in New Mexico so.
Thanks senator we have adopted
house bill two amendments it's
eleven o'clock we will have
house bill two.
we did make it impassable shin
there was no objection to the
motion on the amendment correct
correct Mr chair Mister Mister
chair.
This is the Senate chair.
We are coming back to house bill
two in the next day or two we're
just adopting that the Senate
finance.
Scenarios on page ten right now.
All right here okay thank you.
So thank you guys I appreciate
it I appreciate the committee's
work the LFC staff is great they
have a hundred percent the time
furnished us with everything we
need.
Director Abbey director so so
late and entire staff over
there.
The ones that really make this
happen in New Mexico.
Appreciate the house
appropriation for working with
us this year we have a read into
that light as we didn't prior
years her staff has been very
diligently working with our
staff and our Senate finance
staff from.
To John to Adrian.
Peacock.
Secretary and everybody in
incent binance has been working
our system operator I appreciate
them in the state should.
We had a little bill on the
floor last night helped a lot of
those people that I think very
he.
Making sure that we're heading
in that direction.
So with that what we'll adjourn
we do have to head to the floor
we'll have an agenda this
afternoon depending on our time
frame on the floor and so all
try to come back to the
committee I know there's
something happening this evening
not will have other committee
meeting tomorrow morning.
Thank you guys appreciate it
we'll see on the floor.
