I mean District Court impact.
Off.
Mr chair.
And Micaela Fischer more from
evaluation manager I'm subbing
in for branding greater analyst
to is double booked today I'm
joined here with us my colleague
city Martinez his W. secretary
it DFA
so we'll just be brief since I
know you have a lot of courts to
get through actually Ellis
indicated off thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee and yet will be very
quick and just give you a quick
high level summaries and then
will let you know if you can let
us know how you know which
courts you like to hear from
first so in way of the budget
recommendations the LFC after
district courts and the
metropolitan courts increases
general fund by seven point
seven percent while the
executive increases general fund
by six percent.
The LFC recommendation includes
one point seven million for
judge compensation increases of
eight percent and two million
for judicial staff compensation
increases of about two percent.
these are recommended in
addition to the five percent
that's recommended by the LFC
and for statewide employees and
of course as you know four
percent by the executive.
excluding compensation the LFC
recommendation is one point two
million less than the executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommend recommendation does
not include increased general
fund revenue for training in
each district instead the LFC
recommendation funds train
provides training services
division through AOC and with
that I'll turn it over to
Micaela for the specials make
sure if they've been in the
house appropriations of that
house adopted that wrecked ended
up the rack so we know where
we're at sure Mr chair they were
in House Appropriations
yesterday and.
House Appropriations took the
LFC record off point.
just to know one thing for you
to dive in there are some
special appropriations for the
courts these are listed on page
twenty four of your packet the
LFC recommendation consolidated
most of the requests for the
district court's for security
and technology into one four
million dollars appropriation to
HSD there's also a two million
dollar recommendation from LFC
for a two year pilot for
judicial clerkships in rural
areas with the intention of
attracting public attorneys
rural New Mexico and with that
Mr chair we can hear from the
courts and in the order that you
would like.
you got the order I don't have a
list up here so well you call
him up as you see fit we're not
gonna be able to track involved
in on the backside of this yeah
we can just go in numerical
order if that's alright with you
Mr chair by distance of
leverage the furthest can get a
quick food that's a good
question so I see no New
Mexico's map.
To who is the farthest you
Madam.
They're on their way up.
They know.
Thank you Mr chair.
The.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee what is
more Sanchez sensitive loving to
New Mexico I presided Hobbs New
Mexico I'm the chief judge of
the fifty additional district
comprising the counties of
Chavis area in the.
Very large companies
today I'm going to ask you to
hear from my chief for executive
officer with respect to our
requested this committee thank
you Mr chairman Mr chair members
of the committee today we asks
for the committee to accept the
LFC recommendation as the house
to
We
Are requests boil down to a
hundred and forty eight thousand
dollars for magistrate court
judge salary unfunded gap for
thirty seven thousand two
hundred dollar and funded
judgeship for personnel salaries
we got a new judgeship but
didn't receive all the salary
money for that and then two
hundred and thirty three
thousand dollars for magistrate
court security for our five
magistrates courts in our
district.
And with that will stand for
questions.
Organize you Senator my number
so everybody's got that fifty
any questions for the fifty
Michelin.
Let's make clear I FTE right
then that then the LFC rack
about the F. T. the funding for
they have to.
If for.
Mr chair it's not a at if T.
it's just a gap in salaries of
funding that we had from last
year but we do have the FTEs in
our budget thank you I can just
clarify a little bit Mr chair so
the LFC recommendation includes
an eight percent increase for
judges but not magistrate judges
they were to be included in the
two percent increase at all
other part personal would get on
top of the five percent that's
in the larger state a
compensation recommendations so
seven percent for magistrates
thirteen percent for all other
judges.
we're not doing magistrates
judges this would be here so I
sorry this point magistrates
but.
So when you're shaking your head
like I'm the district manager
Mimi.
That's right yes that's correct
and they got the windfall last
year so.
I think that's it thank you guys
for your presentation have a
safe trip.
Position the next for this.
Okay so you need to get a map of
New Mexicos.
They are they can get home
earlier we've got the six Mr
chair.
We can afternoon Mr chair
members of the committee I am
chief judge Jennifer delete any
of the six judicial district
which encompasses Karia Dogo and
Luna counties I have with me
today Angelenos who is my C. E.
O. as well as in the Camacho who
is my CFO and we are also asking
for you all to adopt the LFC
recommendation which includes a
recommended compensation
increases for judges and staff
which again is one of the
judiciary's main priorities this
year.
In addition to what is in the
LFC recommendation I'm just
gonna go over a couple of us
that we are asking to go back
into our budget you do have a
hand out the deals with some
security issues that we've had
at our magistrates Baird over
the past six months we are
asking that in addition to the
money for contract Security Act
the magistrate courts that you
had back in our special request
in the amount of two ninety one
which is to upgrade security
systems including and installing
access control cards wireless
security systems for staff and
judges at are pared back courts
Silvercity District Court Deming
magistrate court and our lord
for District Court we are also
requesting we have a capital
request of sixty thousand to get
an assessment on the Grant
County courthouse it is ninety
three years old and it needs a
major updating and we would like
the funding put back into our
budget or put into our budget in
order to be able to get an
assessment to figure out exactly
what we then need to go to the
county and ask them for in terms
of updating that courthouse the
only other thing I wanted to ask
you to do is to fund LFC
recommended one FTE for a
paralegal to help us start a
self help clinic but did not
recommend any funding with
regard to FTP I'm actually
asking you for two FTE ease and
funding in the amount of one
thirty nine to allow us to have
a self help clinic for self
represented litigants throughout
the district with would serve
district and magistrate court
and with that I stand for
questions.
New York's.
Yes I'm just double checking
yes.
Any other comments.
We have some questions from
committee members.
The question I wrote my request
to you is given with your
legislators junior money is out
those are perfect fixes for you
junior money and from your area
in your here.
Representatives and senators
they have about eight hundred
thousand in the Senate about
four hundred thousand dollars I
think some of the problems that
as we move along thank you
exclusive table thank you.
Micaela you should have them out
by now.
Menacing.
Way way this is not a the price
is right.
Mr chairman of the north here
for Clovis.
Good afternoon Mister chair it
was done in our agency district
judges I do additional district
which encompasses curry and
Roosevelt counties with me I
have my where executive officer
Kevin spears and our core
financial officer Lucy
Valenzuela we're here asking you
to approve the LFC
recommendation we're good
stewards of our money we fill
our positions we don't revert
funds and we're very innovative
court you will stand for any
questions that you have any
questions from committee members
then.
Thank you have a safe trip home.
And the next yes yes I'm gonna
say probably the third.
The
price is right.
I got my mask is.
The yeah.
Good afternoon chairman yours
Committee members and judge of
the at the from the third
judicial District Court in Los
crucis
thank you very much for your
support in the past thank you
for the work that you're doing
at this time with me I have to
my left CEO David and in
somewhere to my right behind me
I have the mentality body who is
our CFO.
With respect to our requests
were requesting that the
recommendation from LFC LFC be
accepted it is a twelve point
six million dollar
recommendation this one is about
two hundred ninety eight
thousand over the executive
recommendation what LESC is
going to covers about four
hundred sixty four thousand
dollars is an unfunded matters
as well as security matters and
if you want more detail you all
have a about the looks like
this.
It will also cover five hundred
forty six thousand point eight
in expansions pre trial services
veterans court in a full time
Baylor will cover is the a
percent increase in judges sorry
to percent in the staff
salaries.
that is the whole there's some
special requests were asking for
funding systems four hundred
sixty thousand sixty dollars to
be installed in for in the court
of a hundred twenty thousand in
the last year so we've had two
vehicles try to drive through
the front windows of our
courthouse our district is
number one in safety incidents
so we need all of this money for
security and for other matters
with that I will stand for any
questions.
Question from committee members
seven dollars.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you you brought this up hello
during the LFC presentation
about your.
Security a windows so from that
time till now has anything been
done or.
Our latest incident with respect
to that was an individual coming
through and I think breaking
nine windows.
We have an individual come in
thank late last year right nine
windows about nine thousand
dollars in damages and he did it
with rocks as opposed to a car
that's the most recent matter
that's correct.
So Mr chairman of with forty two
percent to us that's included in
the budget.
Mr chair and senator there is
one four million dollars
appropriation recommended in the
LFC budget for security at all
district courts directed at the
AOC to distribute for more.
Thank you Mr chairman I hope
that we can help.
Thank you.
Thank you I don't see anybody
else in our state.
let me ask you a question don't
we have insurance the state
administration is and can
because we have just insurance
energy theme don't we have those
shared for vandalism replacement
yes we do chair many of us
Committee members the county
this is a county facility so the
count County is in charge of
replacing in dealing with their
own insurance
thankfully that's how it's
worked out so far.
Okay.
Thank you I don't see any other
questions.
Thank you.
Thank you.
About.
Thanks Mr chair the twelfth
District Court if I can twelfth
for those staff members LESC of
the listening skills gonna win
the game.
I know the LFC staff members in
Monterey before you get started
well over there you know what.
I appreciate you guys and LFC
right we probably don't say it
enough going through the courts
and filling in for somebody else
it's in another committee or we
appreciate the staff analysis
of.
All right and your presentation
for this.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Angie
Schneider chief judge of the
twelfth judicial district that's
in Otero counties and we are
also requesting that you adopt
the LESC recommendations in that
for the twelfth we've got
funding for magistrates salary
shortfalls pre trial services
our.
Alright programs we have the
veterans treatment court and
adult and adult drug court
program in those counties and
then supplemental funding
request for the shortfall for
the magistrate salaries for FY
twenty three and you should
hopefully have our our hands
with more information on it as
well and I am joined by a
hundred who carry our CEO and
will stand for questions or.
Thank you questions from
committee members.
Thank you okay.
I think you Senator.
Let me stand up for.
Cell phone books for.
Sorry about this this gentleman
I I I I don't have a question I
just know that I I government
thinks the committee and the
finance of the state because the
twelfth is had several years of
of trying to get back up to a
level that is comparable to the
other districts and in in the
last couple years we've been
able to add the judge which we
needed desperately we're still
not probably doing more jury
trials in the in the district in
the state and so we expanded the
courtroom and up in but does so
and so I just want to think the
the the the thoughts in that
support from the finance
committee as well as the
legislature to make this happen
and George Schneider is a great
job of keeping the twelve on
track and we're actually.
Winding down that backlog I
think that we've had maybe not
quite as fast as we like but
she's working on so it's just a
comment to say the twelfth is is
really doing a great job I want
to push it to support this
committee the finance has done
over the past few years so thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator Byrd I'm
looking at their pre trial
services in their treatment
costs.
Them in place.
And.
Thank you thank you.
All the time.
The tenth next Mr chair was the
tenth located Micaela that would
be to compare Mr chair.
The night.
The billboards would say.
Mr chair members of the
committee actually taken care
tonight is still or slow.
More modern community thank you
very much for your time for your
attention to this and Frank
thank you very much for letting
us do this the day after House
Appropriations I appreciate the
lack of five hours of driving I
really do
We made a mistake in our budget
submissions this year we forgot
to ask for supplemental money I
want to join the chair because
the staff and LFC and DFA have
got it all fixed so we worked on
some of the supplemental list
but we're on all of them that
you should see from this point
forward Mr cover the magistrate
money.
We all knew we needed to have it
we just didn't check the right
box when we submitted our
important so I think the staff
to that work they've been
working very hard with this
rescue for the LFC money.
Our staff you have to staff
members that are exploring
leaving us for the executive.
As the executive branch has been
getting more races.
They've been able to fund it
through their systems we're not
able to ninety percent of our
budget is our we can't give
raises unless you all give us
money.
And the extra two percent that's
an LFC is really nice.
Judiciary's asking for ten in
ten would be much better but the
the two percent we would
appreciate it very much for
staff without a stand for
questions.
Questions.
You know thank you for your
honesty right because we can't
fix problems if you don't tell
us what they are right and if
you go wrong to say that we're
gonna go directly to the rack
great the year coming eight
percent short of the dust to
fund them correctly I mean
that's very important because we
can make sure we're we're
tracking that in in finance but
I think honesty is very very
helpful especially since the
governor staffs in the back
about raises and how we're
handling races and and what do
you so I appreciate that will
try to help with house bill
comes to comes over if that
doesn't but we we understand
that you're not paying a lawyer
in Gallup for two can carry at
that for wage or that right can
expect efficiency in your agency
so thank you thank you and then
we'll be out to make a Billy the
kid and for some so please give
us a waiver.
We we like having his grave in
our county we do not want to
leave.
The oil moving we just want to
see him.
Have you visited it lately not
lately last time I mean my kids
went to rodeo shovels the I mean
in the of the fences around it
because people of stolen is
grave some some more than once I
think it's around his gravestone
actually.
Zero four.
In a smaller box.
Thank you.
Senator he has not that petition
for release recently
well a cell by cell the rate the
rate.
But is confined to a six by two.
Thank you thank you thank you.
Very Mr chair have both the
eight.
The.
no we were we were figuring the
furthest distance to get home
and since they were here last
night and at night so we're
we're doing this.
Now.
I was Micaela guessing prices
right.
Where the.
Senators we do appreciate your
time also through much
appreciate our our local
senators from update to
additional district house Colfax
and union counties we've given a
handout that details are
requests.
If you are or are not aware
there has been a really robust
change in the judiciary spending
process and our budget request
included streamline the really
does land support for our
request need to additional
district we have one of the most
robust treatment courts
treatment courts the goal is
better outcomes reducing crime
reducing crime also helping
getting people the tools so that
they can be productive citizens
changing up what we
it what we've done in the past
to try to have people be
productive citizens not come
back into the judiciary we're
the first gold gold certified
drug court in the state like
what is another thing that we do
in the community we were the pro
bono.
Two thousand twenty one much of
our requests relate relate to
those underlying issues I know
we've brought back and I brought
to you for years in a row we're
one of only two districts that
doesn't have an I. T. technician
that's a huge request securities
ago huge piece
in a perfect world we'd love the
entirety of our our requests but
would understand and and
respectfully ask that you
endorse the LFC recommendation
for the eighth with that being
said I am thank you for all of
your hard work and diligence and
consideration and stand for any
question.
Questions from committee
members.
Not seen and.
Thank you very much.
A safe trip home eleven.
Districts.
So there in Farmington.
I'm I'm eleven be at the hi
there Levin a anything for love
and be.
Thank you letters judge
currently is again this letters.
Fourteen if.
The.
With.
I don't know about that.
Afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee on Curtis
really on the chief judge
eleventh judicial district that
encompasses San Juan and Kinley
County
hopefully have a stand out that
we that we are that gives a
little more information I'm
joined by Jewish trouble our CEO
and John water on our deputy CEO
I just want to tell you a little
bit about where we are what we
are I guess is what I'd say
McKinley County has about
seventy three thousand people of
that seventy three percent
almost seventy four percent are
a native American and fifty two
percent households McKinley
County speak another language
besides English as a as a first
language in San Juan County.
We have about a hundred twenty
five thousand people
there were roughly of the third.
Anglo third non Hispanic eleven
percent native American and
twenty nine percent Hispanic
so.
I'm list ready stand for any
questions LFC recommendations
what we're asking for that's
what House Appropriations
approved yesterday.
that's what we're asking for so
I stand for any questions that
you might have.
Questions from there's time.
Thank you welcome to walk in
there about a quick question for
you just because of the district
that you serve with the native
population I'm just curious do
you have Navajo speaking
interpreters are Clark Sir yes
so that's it that's a statewide
services provided through AOC so
we have certified we we have
actually the state does a great
job we have Filipino and Navajo
we have when these.
Cantonese we so the they are
coordinated through our clerk's
offices with the state and
traffic thank you that that's
all I have.
Yes this point right Mr program
gal plaintiffs and.
The internet their previous
question and programs and.
So go ahead no good Mr chair I
think it's a very good question
and that is something that we
are currently working on right
now we have just in the last
year brought to McKinley County
of the it's not there if they do
W. I. the W. I. court
course the pre trial and I
realize that's not therapeutic
that it shows our push to start
bringing these therapeutic court
to McKinley County right now
we're in conversations our
newest magistrate judge wants to
bring a veterans court to
McKinley County and so that's
something that we're looking
forward to doing.
Let me ask you something I
thought we had veterans courts
in the system already.
There are veteran courts around
the state Mr chair of.
But just as district by district
so we we are the something we've
talked about in our district for
the for the last several years
and judge that so a in the
Gallup magistrate court the
newest one that was elected here
in this last election he has a
real passion for that and so
that's probably the impetus we
needed to get something to get
something going.
Can we have the funding for
that.
It is quite a mean we're the
most rate Gallup's most
patriotic town America right
this is heard and and.
We have a large I mean a large
contingency of veterans of the
Navajo Nation and ends in the
and throughout we were we were
just talking about that and
there is there is any specific
money yet
You've got to have that you've
got to have the passion and the
will power and energy behind
something that rather than the
money first I've discovered in
life so I think we have that now
will be back next year asking
you I'm sure for specific
dollars.
L. it's an opportunity for me to
put junior there and you develop
it
because I think there's great
news right I see the veterans in
Gallup by there and sometimes of
Mr chairman of the committee
reviewed with the cart before
the horse we would welcome that
like I said we have somebody
really wants to do it so.
Thank you thank you central
thank you.
Of the seven Mr chair.
This is old ways the district.
As you.
You know.
And on the.
Hello hello alright if only I
could fill his boots yet.
It could be my bill short films
as well as.
Go ahead good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee my name is recessed
Murphy I'm the chief judge for
the second judicial district
which includes it Sierra Sikora
capturing in Torrance counties
with me today I have Jason Jones
our CEO CFO we are asking for
Fifty point seven thousand
dollars for the of magistrate
judge salary shortfall fifty
thousand dollars for the
reoccurring security
For magistrates courts an
additional fifty thousand for
magister magistrate court
security and fifteen thousand
For training for judges staffs
for increase of a hundred sixty
five thousand dollars we ask
that you adopt the LFC
recommendation just as the House
Appropriations did yesterday and
I for that without it we stand
for questions want to clarify we
do not have a handout from right
correct.
Clarified that questions from
committee members.
And and this I think this issue
district goes from out in there
to reserve yes.
It's the largest additional
district in the continental US.
I am thank you for the trivia.
No no questions thank you have a
safe trip home thank you.
The C. thank.
Program the for.
No sorry if you meet their
tables to the fact that you know
my.
You should have time to Google.
Thank.
Requests.
I've never seen these people
before my.
We have no handout for you know
we don't determine when US and
members of the.
Read for I want to thank the
phone with the the you do
throughout the throughout the
session on this senator today hi
my name is judge like what I'm
the chief judge of the
thirteenth judicial district
with me is CEO for the the
little and I have our CFO of
preschool the thirties is
composed of three county Cibola
County your your next door
neighbor Valencia County all
through the neighborhood
Sandoval County all of them
borders.
Are you a number of of
communities within our district
will shop template part of the
Navajo Nation part of your
Apache nation as well ours is
the second largest district in
the state population wise we
have a population of over a
quarter of a million folks he
continues to grow like a.
like like a within the family
was out of five fifty in Santa
Fe County facility housing is
possible the same can be said
about this account.
Most of our requests were
addressed by LFC and we're
asking the this Committee to
adopt the recommendations at
this time.
We sample
questions from committee
members.
Question Senator I'm.
Again I digress is what is one
of artist over the air out
there.
No Sir no is not okay you have a
this is a new day.
Senator would you is not senator
Simon he did not run for
reelection we have barber will
just curious kind of in that
kind of a legend forgive sorry I
digress to.
Thank you let me ask you a
question.
Because I mean you're you're
such a large population from
Santa in Rio Rancho right you
think we have enough
efficiencies or do you think we
need to separate some ball and
and Valencia.
In that I mean I just that's
been a conversations have been
going on for for a number of
times this is for the seat
Cibola County with McKinley
County grant making a scent of
all the separate district.
There's a conversation there are
awarded for sports going but the
growth is also listed County the
budget but primarily of the
Santa.
I
think it's getting too big I
mean when you got a state and
district attorneys the I. forty
and everybody knows how that
works out.
Thanks to grants I mean it is
not an issue of getting those
district attorneys are getting a
district attorney in requests I
I have to see that as a nation
and I know the the.
The way working in in the
eleventh because that's what I
have my first legal job the gal
so I know that there's a
division one division two
district attorney.
Last you need to have a but it
seems to be working well with us
in one district attorney one
district for the three County
although we we border Bernalillo
county for this also and and and
the north and west towards the
work are but you should be
working okay.
Thank you thank you thank you.
For.
Which one the fourth please Mr
chair Vegas Santa Rosa.
So everybody kind of knows we're
waiting substitute for to come
down from the council of the
glove on Senate bill six I think
they were they were working last
night on is that I don't know
what the hold up is but the ones
that had a caucus know the back
up issues and.
Cancel good good afternoon
Mister chairman committee
members my name is Florida I
guess I'm the chief district
judge for the fourth of the
comps is what Lupe more and San
Miguel counties
with me is Brendan Murphy he's
our CEO you all should have
gotten a copy of our pamphlet
that outlines are requests we
are asking that that for
approval of the LFC
recommendations so that was
approved yesterday point house
finance committee.
In addition to what requesting
in our that we requested and was
approved yesterday we are asking
of that well for some special
requests one of those is for
funding to microphone Senator
for a years of all files that we
have in San Miguel county
courthouse during the calf can
interment peak fires we have to
pack up around eight hundred
boxes of old files
when about forty pounds each and
had to move them someplace safer
because we were in the
evacuation zone.
Also asking for funding to
convert one of our jury room to
convert one of our file rooms
into a jury room we currently
have three District Court judges
when we have to to those
courtrooms with jury rooms us we
are asking for additional
funding to make sure that we can
hold trials and all three of our
courtroom simultaneously if
that's necessary.
And with that I will stand for
questions.
Question Senator share.
Mr chair.
Choose convert to microphone
Mr chair and Representative sure
that's correct.
With the microphone it would be
the microfilm and microfiche
whichever whichever one is
available to us.
As opposed to put it on.
Some drive.
Chair Mister Murphy if we have
any other options Mr chair
Senator
As far as I know
the AOC is and the gestures in
the process of working with the
state records and archives to
have some other the public
trying affirmative acceptor
right now it's microphone.
I'm I'm just very confused
because I use my phone when I
was in college and I just
upgraded to mechanical and I
think that's all.
So all technology maybe I'm
missing something.
All right thank you Mr killer.
More questions can we get the
judicial branch awhile back a
whole bunch of money for
microfilming.
And may have been the Supreme
Court to microfilm of whole
bunch of stuff and and we did a
bunch of money.
How how many years ago I.
Mr chair Senator and I don't
know off hand but I can look
into it for you and maybe you
can check and see if they can
get.
That portion I don't let it
microfilms but at some point we
gave up a whole bunch of money
to the courts for microfilming
Mr chair of there was quite a
bit of files that were
microphone from our court but
the funding was not sufficient
to do all.
Any other questions from
committee members.
Thank you guys have a safe trip
home thank you.
Right.
Mr chair the second good
afternoon Mister chair committee
members I'm honored to be in
front of you today representing
the second judicial District
Court my name is Marie ward and
I'm the chief judge of that
court.
We are so I'm very proud where
we have thirty judges three
locations and approximately
three hundred ninety employees
we are here today requesting
that this committee adopt
recommendations I want to
personally express my
appreciation for the LFC
analysts
they have been incredibly
professional hard working and
very helpful.
We at the second of course
support all the statewide.
Compensation
moving that judicial education
center and to the AOC I did want
to take a brief moment to talk
to you about employee
compensation as I know that
you've heard from others
We have a challenging time in
terms of employee recruitment
employee retention we ask our
police to do more and more
because of the same and with
that we have the concerns
regarding burnout I have so many
amazing employees that are
working as
door dash drivers uber drivers
working in retail working in
restaurants just to try to make
ends meet and so I respectfully
request your consideration of
fully funding the employee
raises for the judiciary.
We are very grateful for LFC is
recommendation for the funding
for for closure settlement
program they've made the
recommendation that that should
be funded out of the market work
its regulatory fund of
foreclosure settlement program
is just an amazing program this
program is so strong that the
Supreme Court has work with us
on initiative to move this state
wide this foreclosure program
really makes a huge difference
in people's lives I have a
litany of examples of how this
program has really helped on
citizens of the state of New
Mexico I have one family and
that was
young family of three living
with grandfather grandfather
passed
they were facing foreclosure
because they were struggling
with how to work with the
mortgage company
in the middle of that process
then they lost in the in person
in their family
to it at the F. S. P. program
worked with this family and was
able to not only bring the
parties together to the table to
connect them to the appropriate
resources so they can get free
legal services so they can
address their probate so they
can get grant funding and they
were able to save the
generational family home.
The stories caused me to reflect
on my own personal story in
terms of when I was a teenager
my mom lost her house to
foreclosure.
What this program does really
makes a difference and lasting
impact in people's lives and I
appreciate if not this year in
future years to consider that
for general funding is I believe
that's a program here to stay.
Finally I would like to
address three capital outlay
request we do believe the
request for our renovations has
been part of the LFC
recommendations we're asking for
consideration of the one point
two four million four courtroom
technology upgrades we are
extremely busy port we have in
person hearings virtual hearings
and hybrid hearings we've
managed through COVID in a
piecemeal fashion we really need
to be able to upgrade our twenty
three courtrooms in order to
best serve the public had assist
with access to justice with many
attorneys all over the state
appearing virtually in order to
make sure that they're serving
their local communities and for
that they stand for any
questions Senator Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
judge chief judge excuse me.
Have a long day already all of
us so I I just want to call out
a couple of things one thank you
very much for meeting with us
ahead of time to to go through a
lot of this and one on one in a
severe with the central New
Mexico or the district to
legislators and that was very
helpful thank you
so I you know that there's a
discussion now I think of
additional backlog in the second
what is your budget due to
health should the The New A.
start moving things through a
lot faster.
Mr Chairman Senator Padilla
thank you for the question so
I can tell you one of the things
that really
was a great help with last of
last session and we were able to
gain a judge that we weren't
asking for the time and I
appreciate the legislature and
the governor for the new
judgeship I was able to assign
that to the criminal division
the Supreme Court has
reimplemented the CM all in the
second judicial district we
started that last fall we are in
the process of full jury trial
For the criminal system we
anticipate to get through the
the bulk of that actually by
August and so everybody's
working really hard and I think
we'll hear a very different
story the next session.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
chief judge so so we should
after August feel confident that
we caught up with what's in
backlog.
In terms of the the tracks the
Senator Mr chair I believe so
okay I will I'm looking for to
sing that and then the only
other question I had is all over
socialized courts Mr chairman in
your budget are all those going
to continue it we had a senior
court at the minute that the
youth court all those
specialized are they going to
continue with the budget that
you're coming forward with Mr
Chairman Senator Padilla yes the
those those programs are strong
they're they're continuing to
the.
And then Mr chair one last one
so other jurisdictions I think
want to start some of the very
creative and innovative things
that you all have done but I
think it's been fantastic are
you working with any other
districts to help them stand up
state of senior court or a yeah.
Mister chairman Senator where
we're always collaborating with
our our judicial partners just
is just our spoke earlier about
they're often a court that
people look to for innovative
programs we want to share our
knowledge we don't want to have
to reinvent the wheel so to
speak around the judiciary and
it is a unique opportunity for
the second judicial district to
operate a statewide program now
that's never been done before
and we're a proud to be able to
do that for this is a.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
I have I just want to thank you
I know that with that backlog
you all could be working
literally around the clock so
please let's catch up with that
because it's very important so
that the bad guys and gals out
there knowing that we're serious
about this stuff and we kind of
you know crime is not something
you get away with so thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
on the speech to text
recognition that the Supreme
Court asked for that and there.
In their consensus revenue.
Can you say that one more time
Mr for the speech to text.
The Supreme Court not ask for
that for all the agencies.
I don't know the answer to me
find out for you I think.
You know Mr chairman and my
name's contained Watson and CEO
I also serve on the budget
committee the unified budget
committee has report did not ask
for speech to text on a
statewide basis the court of
appeals asked for the speech to
text application in a limited
format simply speech to text
were also asking for the
additional transcript express
application.
And let me at asset but if the
court system gets it for one
agency one court right why would
they not be allowed to share
that throughout the entire court
system.
Because the way the vendor works
it's for the record Bender yes
you have to subscribe to it
district by district by just.
And so why would we be able to
buy just a statewide speech to
text system.
And say here's one for the
courts I don't know what else
needs one but.
I mean other than series so
Mister chairman I can tell you
we all have individual contracts
with F. T. R. for our four for
the record and will pay for
individually current.
To
get completely re worked.
Could you give me a total cost
for I think she called for the
record right.
Right for the record and if we
did the statewide.
costs for the courts and what
that looks like instead of two
hundred thirty eight Aaron two
hundred thirty eight over there
two hundred thirty eight over
there what are total cost was so
we could buy one copy right
package for for the peels for
that the dust.
I don't think that would be a
problem with any conflict in the
courts do you see that.
I believe all the judicial
districts use F. T. R..
Yes not speaking actor for the
record.
I'm not sure I think
metropolitan for me is a
different different recording
digital recording platform but I
believe I and I'm not I'm not a
hundred percent certain but I
believe all the district point
to use for the record.
And I can say Mr chair that that
four million dollar special
appropriation day AOC for the
district court's included both
security and technology so that
might be an appropriate use that
phone only and others.
Okay which is command so that
yep Senator and I love to create
efficiencies income and into the
Mr chair just so you know these
are recurring costs that for the
record tortoises it's not like
one time.
Thank you subscription and cop
correct thank you thank you.
Mr chair.
Of course next.
That's the last one right and
then we'll have to the first
after that.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is Nadia
to make guests and I keep judge
of the metropolitan court I also
have with me Rachel monarch our
CFO and then our newest dot
metropolitan court judge Estrada
and with that said I know that
we do have a hand out I just
want to quickly go over what we
need and all of the needs quite
frankly are desperately needed
included in the request of
course we've had robust
specialty our treatment courts
for years a metropolitan court
and some nationally recognized
last year the Senate for or your
before last center for court
innovation is actually did a
recording about our being
healing to wellness court which
is the only urban healing to
wellness court in the nation
in addition to that we have
numerous other specialty courts
including veterans court
on competency quarter on the
mental health court or
behavioral health court and of
course we have our healing to
wellness court recovery court as
well as our homeless court as
part of a right over the years
we've had up grant funding for
years and years and years
and at this point where to the
sustainability pays so much of
the money that is being
requested is due to lapsing
grant funding.
And.
That's a big concern of course
on the other items just to cover
briefly of course janitorial
services that's always a cost
not natural gas utility
increases and then as far as
special appropriations and back
to the audio equipment recording
cases metro we use a system
called courts marked verses for
the record on it's a simpler
system but we are completely
open to any changes or
efficiencies that are necessary
we are asking for new audio
equipment because we've had
quite a few problems with their
audio equipment and wiring so it
that conversion were to take
place we would welcome it with
that said I stand for any
questions.
Question from committee members.
Let me ask you go in the
category three and four hundred.
Want that building your base
budget and not.
Additional increase.
We go on to per that to our CFO
Mr chairman senator Munoz yes
that is our base budget and
these costs are recurring cost
in these are the increases that
are the negotiated through the
janitorial services contract and
the utilities because metro port
owns the building we do payer on
utilities and natural gas has
been increasing over the last
needs kind of an audit out wire
that you guys are requests that
when other smaller courts are
not requesting increases in
utility Mister chairman Senator
that is probably the case
because I believe most of the
District Court seven how to have
it before you today don't have
to pay their utility bills that
they're operating budget at the
expenses the counties expense.
Special.
Yes okay thank you thanks any
questions from any other
committee members thank you.
The rail runner home it's
cheaper.
Thank you right ridership.
Last but not least the first.
Thank you.
We don't have a script.
It's coming right now.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chair
Senators my name is Brian beach
it the chief judge of the first
judicial district this is
Kathleen B. hill our CEO and Sir
diligence and expertise that
really makes it all happened so
thank you for being here and
thank you for having us.
Okay so first initial district
is recovery both Los Alamos
Santa Fe counties goes from I.
forty the Colorado border and
Navajo dam to check my roughly
on it in addition to serving the
residents of those counties the
first judicial district here's
many cases that are only brought
by statute in our district
because of Santa Fe building in
the district so that have to be
brought in the capitol so it's a
unique district and in that
sense others to district courts
one in Santa Fe one interior
Maria and for my district courts
so those ten district judges
seven magistrate judges we
support the LFC proposal on it
end trying to keep it brief I
know it's been mentioned that it
was it's been a long day for you
already but on it I am
requesting a sort of LFC
proposal plus and that is please
consider raising our staff's
compensation so that is equal to
the executive in another area
where Santa Fe is it's not a
totally unique problem but it's
exacerbated here and that is our
employees are surrounded by jobs
in other branches and so with
the raising compensation you
again last year we have been
able to attract more staff but
we train them up and they can go
across the street literally and
make you know eight ten percent
more so it would be very helpful
to us so that we're not
constantly trying to fill a
leaky bucket so to speak
to be able to retain those
employees by having their
compensation be equal to that of
other branches they are great
staff they work very hard they
work through the pandemic coming
out the other side are helping
us innovate and figure out what
we can keep that sufficient
technologically and what we need
to go back to in terms of old
ways so.
They are they are crucial I want
to take a moment to also say I
see Senator Padilla is gone but
I do want to vouch for the
second judicial district in that
they have been extremely
generous with their time when we
is the first occasionally call
them because they have so many
resources and innovations they
have been very generous with us
in terms of helping us not
reinvent the wheel on things so
I wanna make it clear that they
really are very good about that
with that I.
I guess I would stand for
questions at this time if you
have any questions for.
Thank you.
Questions from committee members
Senator Rodriguez thank you Mr
chairman good afternoon to our
chief judging
Just say I do appreciate the
vast agency of your work and the
big geographical area when you
mention I forty on going I was I
guess I knew it was big but when
you said that it really made me
think you have a very large area
Rio Arriba Santa Fe New where
was the other one well so Los
Alamos yes and that would
include you have to get our
money and all that area that is
pretty huge and anyway so I can
see why your your caseload is so
big and so much to do thank you
so much and let me just mention
briefly that we did look at
targeted increases races for the
employees
specifically in certain areas
like the judges for example the
staff and the judiciary to have
targeted additional increases in
your salary that's in addition
to what everyone else would get
in so the firm member correctly
there was approximately we've
had recommended from the LFC
five percent across the board
and then we added an additional
three I think if I remember for
target I can't recall maybe
Micaela can correct me what was
the number two percent it was
seven percent total land that we
had recommended for the for the
judiciary and that the staff
again and so I just wanted to
let you know we are committed to
ensuring that you don't continue
to go through this terrible
situation that you experienced
not only during the pandemic but
even before that for a long time
you lose staff you serve as a
training ground then they can't
stay you don't blame them they
have a family to feed and and
other places they can go work we
always said they could work in
McDonalds probably get better
salary and wages than they do
with we pay that not as much
drama as we offer as
a home at a certain time and to
sleep and spend time with their
families do so I hope we can
finally catch up there and and
do something a.
About it and I'm I know we had
already discussed this whole
scenario of your requests and
everything in here was in the
budget or under specials in
section four as we said or
section I'm sorry section five
in some of the things so thank
you so much for that matter any
questions I don't know of anyone
else thank you.
Questions from committee
members.
I tell you have a safe right on
the schedule around what was the
floor back to the.
US prices thank you very much
thank you once.
The US to see me walk in the.
RT.
I'm sorry I wasn't here when the
second district percent of their
budget but they provided some
misinformation because I caught
him as are walking out the door
so I'd like to correct it for
the committee if I can.
They didn't want to budget
increase I wanted budget
decrease right that's okay with
me information but.
So on the question of the if
you're to text request for
appropriation they told you that
the court of appeals made
requests for eighty four
thousand dollars for the court
of appeals but actually HSD made
a request for our funding of
seventy four point nine million
dollars of which fourteen
million dollars was approach
market vendor that peer to text
statewide implementation
fourteen million dollars.
LFC recommended we get funded at
six million for that request
although the till the start of
funds don't exist anymore I
don't know exactly how that
works but in any event the
recommended six million dollars
as a special for all the things
that were in the seventy four
point nine million dollar
question obviously that's not
enough to do speech to text but
we did make a request because we
think it would be really helpful
and efficient if all the state
courts had the speech to text
it's just expensive.
The requested.
That's good that's good because
that's a question I want to
finance it can create efficiency
right we have speech to text me
last FTEs in the system.
We're trying to be as efficient
as possible we will be going to
best.
There's someone that's not.
Sitting at a.
Yes this type and type what
actions you have to listen in
real time so that there was a
three day trial tier three days
ago through the record for you
can hire someone to type it but
that's not so great.
That's currently the waste
that's exactly right so if we
get that the software does that
get read it yes hello Sir.
We can get rid FTEs that
currently sit there for three
days they're just typing court
transcripts.
Yes Mr chair we can spend less
money for sure.
I actually give FTEs as and that
he needed if we have if these
are doing transcription that's
correct I'm not sure we do
because they listen that they
listen to in real time.
Then if we get this to you need
proofreaders go back in the
center right right.
To go back and listen to the.
According to Mr chairman the the
read the transcripts come out of
it your speech attacks which we
have seen are pretty good if you
get part we you're confused or
if it's the most critical piece
you'd go listen to that the you
can it will tell you where that
piece of text came from on the
on the recording she go right
there and listen to it so you
can you still could listen to it
but.
It's it's it's a very good
approximation of a transcript we
ever.
Lost a decision because that
problem because a speech to text
in the recording did not record.
There was a gentleman I can tell
you when I was at the edges
office and we did a feels based
on.
Order cassette tapes.
Senator get ruined or lost the
remedy for that was to go back
to the court and say make up
what you think happened and
we'll see if we can get a
decision from the court of
appeals this report on that not
a really good solution the
electronic record can be
duplicated easily we never had a
I I I can't imagine that would
be a problem but we do have the
real the live.
Recording digital recording if
there were some dispute about
the defendant didn't say not for
you did say it that they can
actually go to the report.
There's never been and
there never been a court case
lost or nation where someone got
offer got charge because they
said the wrong thing in the
transcripts said something
different that they could go
back to that record and the
judge would accept we were told
by the digital audio recording.
Somebody had a question thank
you Mr chairman and and thank
you already we never I never
really met much but so if you're
gonna go down the road of this
this type of technology with the
you know I think maybe the chair
was talking about this earlier I
I hope that you know you you're
cooperating every part of the
judiciary in your effort here
and and that way it's you know
volume discounts are gigantic
and do a lot of this for a lot
of my clients and if you go down
the road just piece Mealing it
by you know them metro quarterly
and in the district courts and
then that whatever court in the
in you're just gonna pay through
the nose so I hope that you're
partnering with everybody when
you put in this this plan
together Mr chair Senator
Padilla I'm so glad you
mentioned that because you
mentioned it the other day two
with the court because I think
this is an enterprise solution
and we don't care will give it
to the public defender the
district attorney however what's
it right once we have.
Speech to text we don't we're
going to sell it to them so they
will they can get it we're just
now with the get us a copy of
the digital audio just like
everybody else and they have to
list so yeah we would just be
for efficiencies for us that
would make any system any case
which is an appeal.
Better or really wanted to
review the trial record you have
to do a re trial something will
make it available.
I think that's terrific I just
want to underscore that when you
buy these things please go down
the road of when you say
enterprise make sure that your
vendor understands your
enterprise is every bit of the
smallest court to the Supreme
Court to the whoever because it
just you know make so much more
sense to us from a budget
standpoint thank you.
And already maybe go back to the
Veterans.
The legislature's looking at
this how much of a discount will
yet for for buying bulk.
At Sam's club is in doing this
and try to go seeing as we move
forward because I see is a real
efficiency in the court system
in peace million it doesn't fix
our problem.
The chairman I'm sorry I know
for a fact that Cassandra Cain
who's R. C. T. R. chief
technology officer she's on a
made the request I know she's
listening to this hearing and
she's the one who will negotiate
with the vendors and I'm sure
she will take part in a few
games appropriations of X.
dollars.
How far can we get with that we
try to squeeze the vendor
negotiate with the vendor to
Mexico as far as possible but
that's a number we have fourteen
million currently just their
quote to do its statewide
network.
we don't want to other vendor
we're gonna have unlimited funds
but if we can get ten number
since they're probably listening
to and they're going to go back
and listen to our recording
right.
One is we want to squeeze a
vendor in.
Your words not mine squeeze a
vendor and see what we can get
reasonably negotiate with the
vendor price the
are everything's a negotiation
and and so the.
Seven C. T. okay do that force
and be very interesting is as we
move forward in the process and
and has house bill two comes
over and we create that
deficiency records and I'll be
talking with other issues
hearing this to discuss
communicating with them about
that seriously no I'm sorry say
we get pretty far may we do the
whole thing for cell number
that's not fourteen million I I
agree with it seems like we are
to be able to give it a try and
a for effort and if you don't
pass I'm gonna give discounts.
That's number one role in
business your money is made on
the buying side not on the sales
side so I'm of your credits will
take your advice to hearts and
you know what you're talking
about.
Thank you already thank you for
correcting that I thought I
heard that before and I brought
it up in and I yes.
When we got into in the morning
saying Seri can you answer this
question for.
Most of the time almost all the
time that would have gone
through a budget committee and
and gentleman Jervis would have
known about the second no this
row row so late in the process
the Supreme Court directly
approved the request nobody
would have disagreed with that
but we didn't you know we go
through the usual process that's
probably why there was some
confusion today so I'm really
glad I had the chance to clarify
thank you for being in the
building in the city.
They text you just you know I
was testifying in the house
Judiciary about all the stuff
are supposed to testify about
yesterday but we got canceled.
All have you back another day.
I have a lot of practice.
Thank you okay.
We're done right I think so
Mister John Cale.
I have a map LFC and I have that
right around questions it'll be
in my office for no six.
Thank you.
just so you know I mean it I
don't think we have any more
hearings like this right but if
we're gonna do what the house or
the next thing we know that the
pride invoke the rooms earlier
we can get him on the road to
better is for for everybody yep
thank you do.
We have the dust tomorrow some
may inform them right will.
Thank you.
I think we have the sense to
bill center Campos right I want
to talk to you for one second
for me go there who would please
our expert witnesses with you.
Tell you want to come up.
Is.
Yes okay.
I want to thank you for helping
us work through that last night
I know that you an element
working late trying to make sure
we're all up to have as much
efficiency as we can yes Sir we
want to make sure that this bill
rates very clearly so that way
everybody does understand.
In order for I'll need a motion
on.
Of the substitute Ford Mr
chairman I'll move it do not
pass on Senate bill six and they
do passport discussion purposes
on the Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
thank you.
Thank you have a second by
Senator Rodriguez and checked.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course members of the Senate
finance committee.
With me here today of course is
Representative Castellano who
As part of this district that
directly affects him and many of
his constituents and also with
this is alley righ who has
worked diligently since April
the six in fact even before that
on many of these related issues
when we start talking about fire
flood devastation.
Mr chairman members of the
Senate finance committee this
does become very emotional as we
deal with this because these are
the issues that all of us have
been doing throughout the state
of New Mexico so whenever we
talk about fires with there
being rude so with the the black
fire whether it be in the
northern part of the state we
deal directly with the wanna and
send me of fires the issue still
becomes of paramount how are we
going to address the needs of
the people that have been
adversely affected by this and
so with that Mr chairman in
terms of the substitute what I'd
like to do is before I even do
this is to defer to our
Representative Castellano to
make a brief statement and then
to go to miss rice so that we
can talk about the changes and
why we do have a committee
substitute before us and then
from there get into a little bit
more explanation in terms of of
what we're dealing with and the
piece of legislation is going to
be before so if I may Mister
chairman defer to Representative
Castellano please thank you
thanks for the Campos Mr chair
thank you committee as we all
know of the image peak fire
captain farmers peak fire the
largest in our state's history
destroyed many more than six
hundred homes and about three
hundred fifty acres this
devastating losses and
destruction from these fires
will take generations for rural
northern New Mexican communities
to fully recover and rebuild and
without the funds from SB six
sometimes a communities may
never fully recover so I think
that it's very important that we
really take a serious look our
community is been suffering a
suffered to this devastation and
I think being this bill forward
in having the funding to rebuild
it is something that is really
needed and I thank the committee
for considering Senate bill six
thank you Mr chairman thank you
I just want to make one point
you know.
We went on the subcommittee and
LFC and tour the fires and and
senator Campos you're going to
some health issues you still
when a menace even with those
health issues which I think is
very important for for people to
know in the newspaper that's
listening right that a
legislature that was going
through some health issues very
serious health issues was still
able to me this and you manage
that if any downside with
concrete senators on.
I'm sorry about that congressman
the but and really drove on the
issues and we met with the city
council met with the county we
two are the fire as we went to
their soul I think this is very
important to the number one
twenty drive home is in this is
to the federal government into
our US delegation is we're doing
this because you guys can't seem
to get your responsibility
together and get the money out
quick enough to rebuild and and
the number one issue in that
community is.
Children have already went back
to school.
Now if their homes were not
there there went somewhere else
right and that's the loss to the
community is and to the families
you lose your entire family home
and those children leave to go
to another school district
because they have no all.
And just as a state in the
governor and executive are
stepping up to the plate putting
the money on the table and
saying the federal government
you better do this because I am
I'm not afraid to go to court to
do the right thing for the
people in New Mexico
and believe me I will be the
first one to to sign on along
with you guys on the federal
money that if you don't do it
like you committed to do it then
and there to and that's the
reason we're here today is
because they are not doing their
job efficiently for those people
so
so what you want to go to thank
you thank you very much Mr
chairman if I may I would like
to defer to Sally ride so that
she would be able to present the
information that we've been
dealing with and I would like to
also add that through this whole
period of time with volunteers
with people that were part of
emergency groups we haven't
stopped to this day it's it's an
ongoing issue we realize we have
several situations throughout
New Mexico and is our intent
particularly through the water
crisis subcommittee to continue
to deal with some of the other
issues that adversely to have
affected our state so if I may
Mister chair do for us so that
we can continue with the
explanation and then of course
I'll go ahead and I'll wrap up
that and I will stand for
questions and now you want to
thank you because last night I
know you're working late with
our staff right to make sure
that we knew hello this federal
funding so I just want to say
that before we we walk out the
room I I appreciate you helping
us in the Senate finance staff
last night.
Mr chair thank you so much for
that this this project this bill
is very much there it near and
dear to my heart many of you
sitting up there have had the
opportunity a couple weeks ago
to come out and visit my
my agency and toward the New
Mexico EOC you guys also got the
opportunity to get a brief out
from us on all of our work that
we have done and continue to do
for New Mexico wildfires with
this bill this will allow us to
get funding on the table for
local communities who have been
impacted by this fire so that
way they can start you know
rebuilding their infrastructure
their public infrastructure so
we're talking about their roads
there bridges their culverts
that are completely you know
does minister are completely
impacted from all of the debris
that's flowing down down from
the mountains from all of the
fired impacts this bill is based
on a reimbursement program so I
do want to make sure that we
have that very clear this is
based on the public assistance
agency public assistance program
that is a reimbursement program
so like both the senator and the
representative had talked about
before our communities have been
out there and they've been
hitting at this hard since April
six they've exhausted all of
their funds in order to respond
to this in order to take care of
their community in order to take
care of their citizens that they
have living up there they have
no more funds left in their
coffers in order to start
addressing the work that needs
to be completed the public
assistance program is a
reimbursement fund so which
means that they have to go out
they have to do the work they
have to pay for up front and
then they get reimbursed by FEMA
on the back it with these funds
that we are talking about with
this bill it will add fun to
their Kaufer specifically for
the public assistance program to
therefore get the work completed
to turn the funds back ended
with the funds that you guys
have given through the bill get
reimbursed by the feds and the
for those federal dollars that
get reimbursed to them to be
turned back into general fund to
be took to go back into the
general fund
I I do know that after talking
with.
Hello last night a lot of the
confusion lied up and kind of a
cross mix between the public
assistance fund and the hermit's
peak half canyon Act so I do
want to address those can
completely separate the public
assistance fund is very much a
reimbursement program where they
have to spend the funds up front
the hermit's peak calf canyon
Act it's funny that it got
allocated by Congress due to the
fact that the fed started the
fire we are still waiting on
final guidance on those funds so
those funds have not been
approved but they have been
allocated but they have not
started hitting the streets yet
people still have to
apply for those funds get vetted
by the federal government and
then reimbursement occurs that
could take upwards of we're
hearing a hundred and eighty
days for people to be able to
review the application and then
additional hundred eighty days
before I start getting you know
put forth with this funding
right here this will help our
public governments be able to
start taking care of their
public infrastructure so we're
not talking about any funding to
go to private citizens and are
set fix fences or their private
roads or things like that this
is literally four counties in
our municipalities are saying he
is so ciation to be able to get
out there and start getting the
work completed.
So if I may madam chair as we
continue this in a sense it is a
bridge loan.
No interest but at the same time
it's to get the resources to our
local governments as quickly as
possible so that we can continue
with the improvements that are
going to be necessary for our
communities to continue to
hopefully get back to the level
of normalcy and at some point
hopefully to thrive so in
essence that's what it does and
madam chair if I may as we per
proceed
I know there are other questions
that are related not only to
this bill but to so much of the
devastation is a current
statewide and I'll be open to
comment on those as well and
again alley has the information
directly from the very onset of
this problem that occurred and
how she's been there on a
regular basis in order for us to
at least continue with
sustainability so that people
know that there's a ray of hope
in everything that we do when we
start to go ahead and deal with
an issue like this and others
that are related to it so that
madam chair for available for
questions thank you senator and
good to see you at least nice it
was nice to spend a little time
with you at the at the
department and of course
Representative thank you for
coming before us I have Senator
share then we have Senator
Hemphill in the diamond new one
also of madam chair I have an
amendment here somewhere on the
left side is another can I see
do something.
I apologize because Senator
Gonzalez and left his name in
the other last and so he was
first on the list and then is
that.
That's is that okay with you
only because he was yep let's go
ahead and let him go because he
was on senator Munoz is less and
then we follow the other thank
you senator for understanding go
ahead says.
You want him to go okay Senator
share.
So madam chair I I have an
amendment here that really
I think everybody has here so
what I'd like to do is move of.
Well Committee amendment number
one to Senate bill six at least
for discussion substitutes.
But when the substantive test
for the substitute of Senate
bill six thank you thank you
second that for the sake of
discussion.
So.
This is Mister chair again you
all can use me so much.
what this what this amendment
really does is is it strikes out
heard me speaking cap canyon and
substitute in caused by the
United States government.
In as I'm sitting here listening
to things of.
I I would submit
the all of the fires that start
on on federal land were caused
by the federal government
because of their gross
mismanagement of the forest.
At the fourth been properly
manage that would burn down.
We might have lost seventy trees
instead of three hundred fifty
thousand acres.
Of but it's the same
with the other two fires that we
had no all of which were
significant in the big damage
and so that's what this that's
what this is trying to get after
Mr chair is simply
taking away from this focus and
making it for the fires that
happened in New Mexico it is
least in twenty twenty the
federal government's been
burning down our state for
decades so of but in this
particular case I submit that
all of the fires or the
government's for cost wise for
the government.
So that's what this is really
about it also adds another fifty
million dollars to make up the
difference for all of those of
the fires it does not.
Here with with clearly a huge
issue of the it just expanded to
the other fires.
Questions on the amendment.
I don't see any other question
Senator Padilla.
I don't know that I have a well
just maybe it good to have a.
So is this an amendment to the
bill I you know I know that
Senator share I want to help as
much as I can here to you want
to rewrite this and even see a
signature on it and then also as
for the substitute is that
correct.
Thank thank you very much Mr
chair and a couple of things as
we continue to proceed whenever
there is an amendment that is
submitted it's usually submitted
first to the sponsor if you will
into the experts so that we
would have time to review that
the second issue is as you come
to me now to go ahead and it
express my concern whether it's
a friendly or unfriendly
amendment at this point I
consider this to go and be no
friendly amendment however Mr
chair Senator chair as we deal
directly with this you're
outlining some of the more
important issues as we deal with
the collective issues when it
comes to fire and the issues
that are caused by that and so
with that what I'm gonna do is
just quickly defer to our expert
so that she can also express to
you how these particular
amendments may not work for this
particular
substitute Bill if I may Mister
chair.
Mr chair Senator share the
reason
I I I hear you loud and clear I
I completely one hundred percent
agree especially whenever I talk
about the black fire the reason
that that the black fire cannot
be added to the specific bill is
because the bill is allocated
and and preparing the been
reimbursed by the public
assistance program which is ran
by the federal government the
black fire was not eligible to
be declared under Neath FEMA's
public assistance program so
there's no reimbursement.
Component if we include the
black fire into this actual bill
wise with the hermit's peak half
canyon we do have that
reimbursement component in order
to get funds put back into
general fund.
Mr Mr chair if I may just
continue of course with the
Senate finance committee
substitute in dealing directly
with this I believe what would
happen with this particular
piece of legislation and is it
would open itself up to some
issues than that I believe we're
not going to be able to address
very quickly and it could take
much longer if you will to get
the needed assistance in this
case to the Herman speaking tech
and fire issues that have been
cost thank you Mr.
That.
So I I think that that sponsor
of the bill so spot covered it
very well but again I just I'm
trying to figure out if this and
I think that you know our expert
here said that the what I
thought was gonna be my next
line of questioning if we do
this without.
Other legislation.
Is this a hold everything up for
who knows how long and and then
the does it potentially cut off
other like FEMA dollars in my
come in the state it is that
maybe what you were describing
Mr chairman an expert Mr
chairman for maybe defer to
alley to for the comment in
terms of what the the
description as.
Mr chair Senator
it doesn't it shouldn't cut off
any additional federal funds
coming in because we could be
able to potentially separated
but I'm afraid it's going to get
very convoluted if we're looking
at applying federal our our
dollars to the black fire and
the completely separate dollars
to the hermits PKF canyon fire
and then trying to figure out on
the back and how to reverse
expressions whenever we're
talking about the black where
there's no reimbursable
component for the black fire.
With that Mr chairman at the
better for us to simply apply
for a large amount on behalf of
a class of citizens.
It bring that in and then
properly put it in the buckets
that are for various items that
can be covered.
Mr chair please please proceed
okay I do not.
I can see how that could
potentially work in your favor I
do not I do not have an answer
to that I'm sorry so if I may Mr
chairman of course center for
the it's a point well taken
because we do have quite a few
issues that need to be addressed
across the state when we start
talking about wildfires floods
drought the issues so removal
and so forth with all of these
fires the issue becomes of
paramount to all of us as we
deal with the federal delegate
declaration for emergencies
that's one thing and then we
start to go out and deal with
the state emergency declarations
that would be another what we're
trying to do is to make this as
clean as possible to start to
address the results of these
fires floods and devastation so
this is this is one component
and I believe in the future as
we can tell.
Work through the water crisis
subcommittee they're going to be
some other issues with other
fires in those results that
we're going to have to address
but in order to go and do this
and the cleanest most
expeditious way we believe that
this is the way to go ahead and
handle that thank you Mr
chairman your but what you're
saying is without an amendment
because it seems like this is
going to complicate potentially
cut really I see all nodding and
there are other pieces
legislation is chairman that are
going to help with Senator
Campos described I have one of
them and I know several other
people do too so.
That's it thank you so Senator
Gonzales are you on the
amendment Mr so Mr chair Senator
I have a list.
So I I no I understand let me of
those women yeah Madam are you
on the main everyone's of the
bills on the publication shift.
So couple things Mr chair with
a.
This was just brought to my
attention which is why I didn't
want to Legislative Council and
I hand wrote it and all of that
in but the I do think that we
need to have a very serious.
Very public.
Conversation about why the
federal government is destroying
the state of New Mexico
destroying our forests
destroying our watersheds and I
believe because of the
destruction of our watersheds
that's what will have any water
in a river worried about the
Colorado contact River compact.
Stop burning down the forest.
That's the first step in their
burning them down and that's the
point I was trying to make but
because of.
The flaws of the way I wrote it
in the in I will withdraw the
amendment thank sure thank you
very much.
Question but Senator Gonzales
were back on the bill.
thank you Mr chairman I just
have a couple of of.
Thank you just call it questions
are just thoughts to.
So when your call when you're
talking about infrastructure.
And for example all.
Say that you're running a.
The water line or gas line.
And then the other part is not.
Confusa question.
The I have several of the
residents within the area.
The have the express that they
really don't even know where the
property line is now.
So will serve a fit into this or
that would be an individual
cost.
So Mister chairman Corso Center
Gonzalez if I can begin to
respond that would be a separate
cost that would be something
that would have to be addressed
independently primarily because
quite a few of the
points a question would be on
private land.
Mr chair I don't know if I.
I would like to also comment on
four Representative testing on
if we may please Mr chair
Senator I I will say that it
cannot be included underneath
this bill but it is something
that the citizens can apply for
underneath the hermits B.
caffeine Act.
Mr chairman and it also seems
like all.
Someone that's in Stalin are
doing infrastructure would
really want to make sure that
they're in the.
In the right place you know what
the.
Not encroach either way and
I'll.
So Mr chairman again I'm gonna
refer to a valley and so it's
it's a good good point Senator
Gonzales there are so many
complexities as we're dealing
with this and we want to keep
these are questions separate in
order to provide the the most
efficiency in the resources to
address each and every one of
these issues as we move forward
so again I'd like to defer to to
allocated to respond Mr chair
Senator so I want to make it
perfectly clear the
infrastructure that we're gonna
be working on is infrastructure
those been there for it forever
so we're not re laying new
infrastructure we're not we are
but it's not going on a on a new
piece of property there
literally putting back in what
is already been destroyed so
what we call bringing it back
after pre disaster damages this
is what we're doing.
Thank you thank you.
Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
so much Senator for bring this
forward Representative and Allie
for your responsiveness I can't
thank you enough for.
How much you did in your
assistance with not only the
fires up north but also and
senator diamonds in my area
you're really helpful when we
were trying to figure out the
black fire and I know Senator
Diamond and I are going to be
working on a bill that she's
going to help to draft to help
to address the black fire issues
but I do have just a question
about I want it for the record
about private landowners I know
that we have a lot of private
landowners who were impacted by
the black fires Wallace you guys
and alley can you please
explain just for the record if
there are any federal funds or
state funds that are available
to help with the recovery
efforts for private landowners.
Mr chair Senator.
at this time the state does not
have any fund underneath my
department there potentially
could be other avenues when we
start talking about USDA NRCS
you know programs like that that
are in by state of course it is
very specific and it's probably
very situational dependent upon
what is getting impact on these
private citizens lance
federally wise there are a few
federal programs in the same
boat we're talking about USDA
and and things like that but at
this point in time there was not
enough damage that had occurred
for it to be able to turn on
what we call the individual
assistance program underneath
FEMA's Stafford act programs
thank you Mr chair thank you
alley for that explanation and
alley can you talk about some of
the challenges that we have in
New Mexico to help support
private landowners and why we
don't have those funds available
Mr chair Senator Hemphill one of
the big reasons is the anti
donation clause is where where
we kind of start getting to the
point that our hands are tied
I will say that my staff works
very diligently in order to be
able to find the mass amount of
services that we possibly can
within the parameters that we
are given
We unfortunately typically a and
also this for everyone for the
most part we don't see disasters
especially the magnitude that we
saw this past year it was a
historic record I'm even in the
rainfall we we hadn't seen that
kind of rainfall since almost
nineteen ninety six and before
that was nineteen thirty four
we we just don't typically have
disasters like when we start
talking about Louisiana Texas in
areas like that they get
impacted you know on a yearly
sometimes even on a monthly
basis we just.
We just don't have the
infrastructure and are supported
at the time.
Your chairman and again thank
you Senator alley and
Representative because I think
that the silver lining in all
these disasters it's it gives us
an idea about some of the the
limitations that we have in New
Mexico and we can be thoughtful
and hopefully planning for
future events and we're gonna
have these funds available and
we're gonna figure out a process
so that we're not in a situation
like this in the future so I
look forward to supporting your
bill and helping to address all
of the recovery efforts across
the state including in our area
thank you Mr chairman.
Centered on the.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Senator Campos for the
conversation this morning and an
alley you to you for the
conversation all day since that
meeting has concluded I I feel
like we're going to in a good
place this morning I expressed
some of the frustrations that
are district experienced in the
aftermath of the black fire of
the frustrations and the delays
I'm sure that Senator Hemphill
can attest to this but the
frustrations of just knowing how
to go about getting your
counties declared an official
state of emergency for two
freshman senators was
challenging want to thank the
lieutenant governor for coming
in and really assisting us on
those efforts then we had the
impacts to private property
issue mention which is also
frustrating because we seem to
be met by this anti donation
clause at every turn and then it
was really the access in the
communication that want certain
parts of money were available
are counties are safety as of
those were unaware of how to
access the funds and so I too am
committed to making sure that
this doesn't happen again and
we're creating a process
together with that said when it
comes specific to this bill my
concern is that there are three
big fires that happened in New
Mexico and this bill is only
addressing the needs of one of
those that are permits P. calf
canyon fire I think that we've
had some good conversations as
to why that is it is true that
the black fire was not by
because the federal government
and so because of that we're
going to have to meet our
constituents and and hopefully
those efforts in those relief
will look a little bit different
I'm I'm supportive of this bill
especially because I think al
you explain it better this
afternoon to me is this is just
a of funding which they can
borrow again borrow against but
this is not a grants or gifts to
the burgeoning out these funds
are are to be returned back to
the state I appreciate that and
I think that all the help we can
offer them I am supportive of
but I just want to reiterate
that our job is not done after
we pass this we have the Lincoln
fire I run.
Eckley the senators from all
three fires that on Senate
finance we have the Lincoln fire
here within the pride fire we
have course need to address
years and we still need to make
sure that the those impacted by
the black fire made whole so as
long as we're all committed to
helping each other I stand
support of this thank you.
Yeah I don't have anybody else
some of this let me ask some
some questions on the structure
of the bill you know that and
and to say no I I do a lot of
federal contract it was I'm
sorry Senator I can see you you
to give me that give me that
phone books to sit on.
In order to do is ways.
So thank you Mr.
I will be brief and and I
apologize.
That's all right
and I will be brief but but the
make right fires is also in the
mix of it was originally
In the midst of for all of these
fires to get the reimbursement
and somehow it it got pulled out
and
The folks from Lincoln County
been working with the governor
and just came to an agreement
actually this afternoon to
understand that with with
additional information that was
presented
the member I I actually has a
presidential declaration number
attached to it which would open
the door for federal funds is my
understanding all those it was a
different start but I think it
goes to this bigger discussion
we're having is the force in New
Mexico continue to burn up the
for services not taking care of
the force and I don't know what
we can do to to address this
issue you know two hundred
structures if I remember
correctly numbers to our
structures lost those homes as
well as you know other
structures
And there's there's really no
excuse for people not have for
people not have to go through
this issue I know about three M.
fires through we have three
different bills on this thing
but I'm hoping that this
committee in this legislature
going to support the the the
these bills and really
A range of the funding to come
back to to make these
communities whole once again
because
I I don't think we can pick one
over the other and I know that
we have separate bills but all
three of these bills are gonna
have to be dealt with and they
get happy dealt with in a
positive fashion
but I think again the bigger
issue Mr Chairman is the state
somehow maybe the legislature's
gonna have to come up with some
mechanism.
For us to address with the the
for service on taking care of
our force and I will tell you
just as a side money you've
heard this a lot if you go to
Mescalero and you look at their
forced in New Mexico across the
highway to look at the Lincoln
forest the the the the
difference is dramatic the start
and you can see and that's why
that spotted owls moving out of
the Lincoln going over to the
Mescalero because not only do
you have two hundred trees on an
acre but you also have this
much.
Crap if you will on the deck and
they can't they can't do it I
was cannot.
It
In the people in Lincoln have
dealt with this I mean I can't
say that we go back to the need
to fire for example we're still
we still have been the laid back
online yet we are back online
either this year or first of
next year but this is the kind
of devastation this is ten years
old or younger.
So I don't know what the state
can do and I don't know what the
ministration into but I don't
the legislature can do but I'm
serious folks we're gonna have
some kind of plan to address the
issue as a whole because this
will continue to happen until
then for service cleans power
for us the right way.
Thank you Mr chairman number of
promise and mission thanks to.
Okay witnesses mostly
generalists over there but no
Senator Woods just a quick
question.
Now.
When FEMA repays.
Then the FEMA uses a a cost
estimate of damages so what
happens if we finance.
The actual cost.
And when repayment comes back
it's different because they
estimated different than the
actual cost of damages so.
Are we making sure that these
entities have resources
available to pay the difference
in the two Mr chair.
Mr chair Senator Woods we are so
I have a very small staff but I
have a very.
the staff actually go out and
help facilitate conversations
and and be there with applicants
we call them applicants those
are you're gonna be your local
municipalities and things like
that they sit with applicants
when these projects are being
created to make sure that they
are getting the most amount of
funding they possibly can when
it comes to getting reimbursed
so actually in your packet I did
include kind of a sample project
worksheet that was what we call
so outlines the scope of work
and how much a specific project
would cost my staff make sure
they get top dollar and in fact
I will tell you right now
justice from one of their
Representative from one other
example so more County.
Many of the roads are very much
impacted the rural regional cost
I came out to it was roughly
around six hundred fifty
thousand dollars with my staff
going out and actually
advocating for them and making
sure that they are getting their
most amount bringing the roads
not only back to pre disaster
condition but also updating with
new codes and standards we've
increase that funding to almost
three million dollars so we we
do not we are I do not like like
leaving money on the table so
we're out there advocating for
applicants as much as we can and
then the other question I'm
sorry.
Mr chair if I may Senator Woods
and what we've done with the New
Mexico department of
transportation in that area is
run assessment of the roads that
we have that are going to need
repair and with that with
coverts with the other aspects
of restoring we're at about
seventy eight million dollars
now in terms of those
assessments thank you Mr
chairman in the last question
for sure share this got to do
with more San Miguel Mexico
percent.
And are they going to be
qualified to use seasonal jobs.
Mr in center if I can Mr chair
just very quickly in fact that's
something that we're working on
right now they do qualify we're
working closely with them
they're hoping for that
reimbursement as soon as
possible but I'm gonna defer
again tally because I know she's
working very closely with them
so if I may Mister chair to help
answer that question Mr chair up
sorry Senator Mr chair Senator
was yes we're working very close
with them so I'll tell you right
now they've got a nineteen
million dollar project that's
currently been obligated some of
those are sitting at his
historic preservation Q. is what
we call it because I reviewing
some of some of the things that
they did Mississippi physically
looking for the endangered
species of this the that have
Senator Burt talked about a few
minutes ago so we are working
diligently the M. in order to
get that funding back out on the
table but like sent Senator
Campos said we are they are
included in the bill.
Thank you Mr so my question
thank you center this thank you
Mr chairman I'll short to
because I know it's late before
we go on to me just thank you
Ellie again and of course our
Senator Campos and
Representative custom.
just a Norma's feet to get where
we are today but and I think
it's a good idea that we do we
have to go past politics in
often think about the people and
what they've been through we
can't even imagine although we
think we do when we go see it
but when you live it it's
different the least we can do is
step up to the plate and do
whatever we need to do to think
out of the box and get some
funding out to to these
communities I do have a question
and that was all I had only on
the counties and this money will
go to counties municipalities
and someone to help do the
counties have a a plan already
to disburse some of these funds
I just want to make sure that we
can get him out as quickly as we
need to can you tell me that now
we have thirty three county how
many cities but let's talk Mr
chair Senator Rodriguez yes so
we've actually been
communicating with these these
local entities quite frequently
many of which we include like
going through procurement
standards with them to make sure
that whenever they do choose to
hire a contractor they're doing
it underneath the rules and
regulations that are set forth
by the federal government to
make sure that they do get
reimbursed we're having
conversations with them about
what is eligible what kind of
materials and what kind of cost
associated with things I do
think that my staff will be very
much a part of this bill and
making sure that reimbursement
as part appropriately
yeah and and so working very
closely with DFA to make sure
that what money is going out is
getting choose appropriate
channels and making sure that
those projects are getting
completed and completed on time
so that way those folks in this
constituents in those areas are
are getting a little bit more
sense of home back thank you
very much for that in good
answers and again good work to
all of you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank.
Go back to some process and I
guess you know legislators can
work on any piece of legislation
that they wanted and also to get
here and they provide this
legislation that they live and
fires in their districts of
nation they have that ability
start working and stuff's not
just wait I don't really like it
when they try to jump somebody
asked else's bill after they've
tried to work on a real hard I
don't I don't think that's the
right place we should be in
Senate finance
just because I do think federal
contracts right.
And and I know this if if the
county goes to the contractors
says how many etcetera but the
and says we want you to go do
this work but he doesn't have a
cage code or doesn't have the
the federal numbers right to do
that job is he going to be an
eligible contractor for that or
as fumigant disclosing because
he's not under the under the
Sam's in the index.
Mr chairman.
For to Mr chair so we have
actually run into that a little
bit over some of that the
private property debris removal
contractor we've been dealing
with we've just been working
very closely with those
contractors in order to get all
of that establishes that way
they can be eligible contractors
so Mister chairman for me also
along those same lines we've
been compiling a list of a lot
of the local contractors within
the area and the intent with
them also is to involve them in
that process because they're
still quite a bit of the debris
removal that is going to need to
occur so it's been one process
for the procurement process
there the platoon process will
continue but we're expanding the
list of those people that are
qualified in order to go ahead
and provide those services thank
you Mr thank you so as homeland
security in those local
contractors.
Case number and the exams and
all that I working from that
system get them approved.
Mr Chairman as soon as we're
notified that that is the case
we we are assisting those in
order for that to occur whether
we are or someone else from a
different entity we have a lot
quite a bit of voluntary
agencies that are very active in
those areas and those are
helping as well public is as
well I I just think it's
important for local contractors
that can.
At the start of business right
now maybe there could by about
going they start placing
culverts and we want to get them
qualified in that system because
they're gonna be working from
home that they have their crews
they hire people from the
community rather than calling
you know Senator Padilla for me
and in Gallup and we bring a
crew in an we stay in the hotels
and and we're gonna we're not
connected to that community I
think that's an opportunity we
have
into developing contractors and
getting the federal contracts as
they move forward through the
entire system I think it's very
important I think that happens
so let me ask you on a
limitation from the federal
government I I I can't imagine
that it's very quickly right I
want to get some scenarios
my house burned down.
Our lines are no good
I gotta put callers in I have
kids that were in grade school.
And now my kids can't go to
school because there's no rental
available Las Vegas right.
Traders in there are they
including the loss of.
Time for us.
I'm trying to figure out how to
play.
What the loss income that but
the additional cost to the
family for those issues that
they're having right.
The casting Act that the
reimbursement process so we
haven't seen the final guidance
come out but I will tell you
that I helped formulate
questions in and concerns in the
guidance for quite a few
entities across the board and
and many of those questions are
the ones that we included in our
final comments up to the federal
government to make sure that
were included on top of like
mental health that taking into
consideration of of a Christmas
tree how much is a Christmas
tree worth not not what how much
it was worth when it burned but
how much is it it's projected
value how much is a land worth
me how do you put how do pay a
dollar value on on soil and
water and things like that that
are going to be completely
impacted for the next ten years
so those are we are waiting to
see the final guidance and we're
prepared to be able to fight it
if it's not things that we
completely agree with.
In center Campos and.
How would we fight that if the
federal government came back and
said I had a hundred.
Here calf cal appropriations
right I have no grazing because
it's all gone the may take three
years to come back and now
either okay that is so my heart
rate.
Which certain areas and people
know this right cattle get
acclimated to certain.
Areas of your down south Keller
completely different than cattle
that are in the north for the
winter the acclimated how how
would we come back in and say.
We're gonna place that our our
hello house value going to work
and these are some basic issues
that I.
No.
Thank you Mr chair so one of the
things I will tell you that my
staff is also not solely
focusing on home it's Pete
kacang Act and the reason behind
that is because we expect that
there are things like that that
are going to occur so myself is
out looking for other grant
programs other federal
opportunities other allocations
that could be allocated to the
state in order to fulfill what
we consider what we call our
unmet needs one of those is
which and and I will do a
shameless plug in the event that
you guys had the opportunity to
talk to others who can help
influences but is what we call
the CDB G. R. it's the hides
community disaster relief block
grants specifically for disaster
allocations so we will be
actually formulating a request
to have money drop down off of
that to fulfill what we call our
unmet needs Mr chairman if I may
Center for the and I do have a
piece of legislation and we're
not sure but we're trying to go
and see if some of this can also
be recovering retroactively so
there's a lot of issues that
we're dealing with legally
within this process so this is
not only if you will the
resources but getting people
back to work but it's also
taking a look at the litigious
issues that that have come
because of this particular
another fires thank you Mr I
just wanna make sure that we we
get those people everything
there too right has lost is lost
I mean if my house burned down
and my wife still has pictures
right I mean that's the
devastation nobody nobody died
that's a great thing a good
thing right but the loss of
relics a loss of time to loss of
history right
I don't know how you value that
and how the government values at
but I think these people deserve
you know their their day and
they're tired and the correct
reimbursements in do that me ask
you on that and use that's a lot
of acronyms and I can't I can't
repeat it.
But what it do any good for this
committee.
To either write a letter
together or write a letter
individually and call who.
Mr chair I can get the answer to
you for that that person but I
do I can tell you that a letter
would go very far into have got
support and and having that
allocation request would be
would be fantastic I also do
real quick Senator Campos I do
kind of want to address the
comment that you made so I I
firmly feel like you know no
one's grief and no one's lost
can it's compare eyes you know
you can't can't put it on a
scale everyone feels differently
about their own personal loss to
Senator shares COVID and senator
Byrd's comic I will tell you
that one thing that my
organization and my office is
very much doing is making the
USDA which is kind of like the
the mother agency to the federal
forces we're making them show up
or making them be present we're
making them be accountable
they're sitting on on our our
meetings are sitting on our task
force so that we may they see
the impact that that you have
talked about what is causing we
we feel just as strongly about
is you do and so we're making
sure that they they are present
in their account for.
And then
time is always of the essence
right I mean you can only be
gone so long from somewhere and
you're not going back correct
right.
Thank and so I mean if you would
maybe what listed a bill first
and then stay there I want to
have a conversation about how we
help you additionally so hearing
the other in no other questions
we yeah but I what questions are
no.
I know the questions we have a.
Over the past second we have a
motion for a new passed by
Senator Padilla second by
Senator famous would call the
roll please that is determined
may please just a we were just
there was some other information
was just pointed out to us if we
can consider that to ensure that
this bill will make it out of
here with the the needed
information and I'd like to go
ahead and defer to injury real
quick to go ahead and described
what what he just discovered in
the talks real quick hello
Mister chairman Senator internet
page three in the committee
substantive online twenty one.
in the drafting of the point to
the point one had this but the
point to in the rush to get it
down here
fiscal year twenty twenty three
was this mistake so we just need
to put that back in so if it's
okay if you do a do pass four
point three version that has
fiscal years twenty twenty three
and twenty twenty four so that
way the money can actually be
spent this fiscal year so do we
need to amend the bill in
committee then the substitute
for a fact the correct version
so as we go to the floor it's
correct I think that's the
correct way to.
So we have a motion to amend.
Line twenty one right and strike
add fiscal year twenty three and
twenty four correct.
exit lane twenty one after the
word here V. years and then
twenty three and and that's the
only addition.
Fiscal years twenty three and
twenty four that's how it all
right so I guess amendment is on
line twenty one to that just two
years and at twenty three and
years twenty twenty three and
twenty twenty four to make it
clear that as a verbal amendment
and second on the second that
makes this any objection
commitment.
I see none can we have a amended
substitute I would move the bill
as amended Mr.
We have we have a motion on the
amended bill minutes substitute
as amended by for Senator
Padilla second action call us
and we call the roll.
Good catch Adrian.
Senator Burt.
Well yes.
Senator Campos yes.
Senator Diamond yes.
Senator Gonzales yes.
Senator Hemphill yes.
Senator Padilla yes.
Share yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez yes senator
Munoz yes
Campos.
Do passing bills in this time is
that thank you very much Mr.
The committee thank you wait
right there because I want to
ask you.
We're still here.
How do we help you the best rate
in the legislative process and
in may have the most power in
the legislature right now
lowering session so is it.
Riding to the ten Akron.
I never can repeat is the.
Riding letters to congressmen
with our request that they adopt
your language I mean now is our
opportunity when you have a
hundred and twelve us I'm sorry
hundred twelve this gather
together.
To to help people in New Mexico
and and and that I'd like to
hear what you're saying if you
want to we can bring you back in
that ring is framework for
language that we could we could
recommend to you to do that but
I would also like from languages
the federal government that.
We have our own state court
system in New Mexico we're not
afraid to sue the US government.
Okay okay.
Mr chair so I can definitely get
to the point of contact that we
need for this the CDB G. R.
it I will tell you I don't know
Supporting cursor which is our
our federal contact up in DC you
know she's one of our big
advocates out there for us so I
think running a couple of things
to her would be fantastic but
also reaching out to our
congressmen like you talked
about and getting kids his
opinions and his advocacy would
be fantastic the other thing I
will tell you and and this is
another should I on my end is my
staff and my agency is very
small so being understanding of
that and realizing that we are
doing the best that we have with
a little bit that way that we do
have and so when things do come
across your desk that have DHS
CM on and I I would like for you
to remember the situation that
we're currently in and being
able to be an advocate for us
whenever it comes to things like
that as a good time for you to
make that pitch.
And Services right we know we're
going to I don't know what
amount of money to spend their
right now is your time to make
your pitch when we heard a bill
that really matter so I mean
what are your needs to handle
this right up so one of our
biggest needs is is funding to
be able to and and senator
guesses has heard this to but
being able to
offset what we call so most of
my staff is a fifty fifty
matching federal dollars that do
come down from from the federal
ID call an emergency performance
grant it's a fifty fifty match
so the feds pay for fifty
percent we have a match for
fifty percent the problem that
we're seeing right now is the
match portion we just don't have
enough state dollars in order to
match so we leave the leave a
little bit funding on the table
how much do you need I do it I
can get you that answer I do not
have offered it and I deeply
apologize are on I'm W.
secretary over programs and not
finance so but my finance person
could be able to get you that
information I think that's very
important especially as you move
along with the other two fires
right the black fire in the
right I right requests that we
that we have that there because
that's just an additional load
right and and hopefully there's
not fires this year it is
devastating last year I mean
I've said this we don't fund an
agency you correctly and then we
expect you to.
Piecemeal and work on Sundays
and Mr chin confession because
the connection.
Mr chairman if I may and then it
Representative and and do that I
don't think that's unfair for us
to do is as legislators
templates because like I just
said.
We can buy time.
There's no.
No we have a clock set once were
born in in that time line is
that and then we can buy time
and you know in a family
situation in a work situation
those are very important to me
is provided that family
Representative do you have
anything else before we call
your bill back up.
Mr chair just I just want to
commend the staff we went out
there I think it was three weeks
ago if I'm not mistaken of some
of Representative centers of
their stuff is really down to
earth they they were they were
work really hard I know they
were on site at the fires and I
just want to commend their stuff
and and I hope that we can help
him as a lecture given more
funding to add more stuff thank
you thank you representative
will be looking for your junior
appropriations.
Security.
That was a commitment I don't
know what what.
Thank you guys appreciate it and
and let others some seriously
we're here we're here to help
and for the very same in the
government because sometimes I
don't think that we are actually
Senator Gonzales.
Come on.
Very ill.
A negative note the.
There was a big fire in Toms
that was in nineteen sixty nine
so for fifty years.
It's barely four should be now
the first.
You know that I know that
there's more technology now and
more and maybe.
Of the expand there wasn't the
support of the resources to
bring it back to what it is but.
The state a long time.
That's all thank you thank thank
you appreciate your time.
Committee report I will double
check that we got the amendment
correct double check that Adrian
and the staff so one of the
former not many things and and
looking like we didn't do our
work so yes there are four point
thank you Mr chairman you know
I'm so happy that you brought up
the situation with the funds
what do they need because we
were there are sales and I'm so
actually I did not mention it
before here so thanks to senator
Munoz and now I'm thinking about
the big shortage that we were so
shocked when we were there we
could believe you were operating
that department with such a big
deficit it wasn't only the
matching as we all know we were
there present and it is terrible
we need to fund your department
a lot better than what it is
that's for sure thank you
Senator Rodriguez for adding
additional junior funds.
Thank you there was where the
gentleman but go ahead well even
if we're judging your money a
quick question.
How do we submit.
Statewide projects to the
governor's office
have you got a process you guys
are good to go we're we're
talking about capital
Process yeah that conversation
we had a little bit today right
let us give them a premium on
