And the outdoor recreate How
much funding Mr chairman,
members of the community,
Senator Gonzalez, the house
included an additional $10
million for outdoor right, that
was above and beyond. What we've
what we've requested.
So the total is how much
That that that's in grant
funding, then we also have we We
also have based budget funding
to maintain the staff.
The flat rate.
Oh,
I guess I was so a little bit
disappointed with them.
Public Education department, and
they
Requested, apparently or that's
what it was on.
There. There are zero
And we didn't even get off the
ground. You know, that program
has been a
Just a couple of years, but
eventually, as you mentioned
The rule areas for economic
development.
I really think that the outdoor
is something that's expand.
You know, way before state.
And so I'll work with him, too,
but eventually
The thought there is that they
would merge.
You know, and in conversation
with the governor was too
Come up with a curriculum 12.
You know, on the scope and
sequence for the outdoor
educational
You know, it's so it's hard when
you see that, but
I'll work with that. And I think
that they're right. There is a
big big potential for New
Mexico.
Mr Chair is Senator Gonzalez,
members of the committee. I
would also like to for Karina or
Miho are
Uh, the one about
of outdoor recreation, which I'm
sure you know, you know well,
but please contact her. She's
stands ready to help with all
things outdoor recreation.
Okay?
Very well. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Chair, just kind of picking
up a secretary designate that
your tub
Acting secretary of the actual,
always get that wrong. First of
all, I'm glad they made you the
active you've been involved in
So many of these deals. Roll up
your sleeves. Make it happen
kind of a guy and you're doing
that all over the state and I
Just appreciate your
perseverance and
You know, details and trying to
help our states. So, um, with
that being said I wanted to to
pick up where my colleague left
off about the outdoor division
and, uh,
You, Mr Chair and everybody.
This is an area that really one
in HFC $10 million proposed a
new trail funding.
I think it's been hugely
successful lot of money going
out the door.
Communities like working with
Carl, Who's the program manager
for trails? Plus, but I'm a
little concerned that
Giving him another $10 million
that there may be a capacity
challenge on managing that. And
so what? I'm wondering for
For you and for Karina.
As if it would make sense for us
to put in some language
authoring some of that 10 to be
used for maybe some contract
assistance.
To manage.
That
Volume of new projects that
you're going to have.
Because I feel like Carl, maybe
add a little bit of capacity.
He's managing all of this by
himself, right? I mean, he is
the program manager for trails,
plus one person, which we just
gave 7 million were given
another 10 million. He's still
getting part of that 7 million
out the door this year funds.
So what are your thoughts on
that?
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee, one of the one of the
smartest things I know to do as
a leader of an organization is
have good people around you. So
I'd like to ask Karina to come
up and answer that question. You
Mr. Chair, Senator Stein.
Warren. Thank you for that
question. Um Carl has been doing
a fantastic job or whole team
has been great moving. Monies.
Um, we are very grateful for
seeing that 10 million. But,
yes, we would love to be able to
take some of that money for some
admin support. Um, it is a lot
of money to move.
Okay?
Current. Thank you. Um and Carla
is doing a great job. You need
to grow the capacity, so that
might be something in our
subcommittee we talked about.
Um, would necessarily involve
more money. If you're good,
Karina. Thank you.
You know, on the on the Media
Institute, This is going to be
Mr Chair. Such a
Catalytic.
Catalytic investment.
For all of southern New Mexico.
Um, I know it's going to fulfill
some long term goals in the
Albuquerque area as well, but
it's so important that we give
them funding to keep the team
that have been hired to do this
work on the field moving these
projects forward.
And we're HFC ended up is
basically
Taking away that support.
So, um, I think that is also a
So, um, I think that is also
huge party to my community and
to the state.
That we need to deal with.
And finally on creative
industries. They know they
funded eight. You all funded 18
projects. And so we need to keep
that going. I just wonder is one
person for a new division
enough.
I mean, I think that's kind of
hard, which is what HFC is
funded for Creative industries,
one full time employee Toronto
division.
So I think bumping up that grant
program anyway. We do have a
subcommittee tomorrow morning on
Thank you. Senator Stein, born
Um
Who else? Julissa.
Really kind of think we know
around, But thank you.
Thank you.
Are you happy with your budget
in the house?
Is this? Me? Um, Mr Chair. We
are happy we could be happier.
That mean you want to tell us
something?
Right, Mr Sidney, pretending to
be Cecilia.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Good afternoon. My
name is Rachel Mercer Garcia on
the LFC, analyst for the
Workforce Solutions Department
to speak a lot louder.
Otherwise my apologies. Can you
hear me now? Okay. Um, Mr
Chairman Name is Rachel Mercer
Garcia and the LFC, analyst for
the Workforce Solutions
Department. We're looking at
agency code 631.
I'll give you a very high level
bullets about the differences
between the two wrecks as well
as where HFC made some additions
and then turn it over to the
secretary. Um, so both the LFC
and executive recommendations
were a net decrease for this
agency. I call that out because
that's primarily because of
reduction in enhanced pandemic
era revenue.
Um, to the unemployment
insurance program, Um, with the
UFC adopted recommendation
today, Uh, the recommendation
would be a $1.16 million net
increase in General fund for
this agency and which would be a
10% increase. The LFC and
executive had identical
recommendations in three of the
programs and differences and
only two so I'll point out what
those were.
Um, within the labor relations
program, the executive
recommendation would have
increased General fund revenue
by 1.8 million and added 18 FTE.
Um, And that is in response to a
November 2023 court ruling
settlement that will require
workforce solutions to issue
wage and hour determinations
within 100 and 20 days and 85%
of cases. That court ruling came
after the LFC recommendation was
developed and HFC made. In
addition there, um, which would
bring the General fund
appropriation to labor relations
to 1.6 million
And would allow the department
to add 12 Ft and made make
progress towards that standard
established by the court.
The second big difference
between the LFC recommendation
and the executive recommendation
was in the employment services
program. This is one of the
programs where LFC recommended
multiyear, non recurring
funding. Um, while the executive
made appropriations into the
operating budget, so the
executive recommendation would
have provided 4.13 million in
general fund.
Find three programs that were
previously funded in non
recurring dollars. Those are the
B probie proud kind of career
interest truck, pre
apprenticeships as well as high
school career counselors. The
LFC recommendation would have
funded two of those initiatives.
Um, but did it in whatever we're
calling now, the expendable
trust but it multiyear, non
recurring appropriation of 2
million annually for the career
track as well as 600,000
annually for the pre
apprenticeship.
Program Now, three years, um,
within the HFC recommendation.
Um And then, finally, just a
call to your attention, HFC
added. 13 Sorry, 30 million in a
special appropriation for
apprenticeship programs that is
contingent upon the passage of
HB five that was not included in
either the LFC recommendation or
the executive. Those are the big
highlights. I will turn it over
to Secretary Seward in air as
well as Cecilia. Never. Mattis,
who my apologies I didn't
introduce when I got started.
Thank you, Rachel. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee Sicilia,
Mavrommatis. Rachel did a great
job. I have nothing to add. I'll
pass it to Secretary now. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. I want
to thank both of my analysts who
are fantastic for and thank you,
Rachel for that good summary.
I'm gonna jump right in to the
wage in our budget request,
because that is the one that we
submitted after the LFC had put
together their budget.
Because, as Rachel pointed out,
we didn't get this ruling until
after that date. So the wage and
hour division here's violations
of the Fair Labor Standards Act
minimum wage claims over time,
those kinds of issues
And the graph that you see here,
um, shows you what's been going
on in that division. So the
green line on the left or the
claims that we receive in each
of these quarters, the yellow
line on the right or the claims
that we closed in each of these
quarters? Uh, the red, um, sort
of line that goes across there
is the average caseload.
And the Blue is the funded
positions, which you can see has
been kind of a flat line. So
even before we had this adverse
here decision, we were hoping to
get more positions because of
the 72% increase in cases that
we've seen, however, in
November, 2023 is, Rachel
pointed out. The first judicial
district ruled that the wage now
were
Will have to issue decisions
within 120 days and 85% of the
cases to issue a written
explanation as to why the other
15% have not met that deadline
into issue all decisions within
270 days and with the current
staffing that metric is simply
not achievable for us.
We've also asked for some of
that money to go into the
contract line because we think
that hiring and that sort of
thing probably isn't going to be
enough for probably going to
have to contract for additional
investigative services. I'm
going to read to you from the
court transcript because it was
requested for us to do so. Um,
my hope, said the judge, My hope
is the department goes to the
Legislature and says this
unreasonable judge. Beachside
has entered disorder in this
matter, and we're stuck with it.
Please give us funding for
people so that we can do what
we're being judicially ordered
to do. And they say yes. So I
have read that to you, Um, next
slide. As for the rest of our
required, um, requests they all
pertain to this sort of pathway
that we're creating step One, of
course, is every student who is
in a school where the B probie
proud truck is coming.
Is enrolled. Who wants to
attend? This event is enrolled
in our career solutions online
Career binder program. Uh, step
two is the B probie Proud truck
comes to their school. Step
three is that they hopefully get
inspired. And if so, they have a
one on one meeting with a career
counselor kind of drew in
another road, merging into the
highway there because any
student can meet one on one.
With a career counselor. But
then step four is after that one
on one meeting, we hopefully get
them into a pre apprenticeship
program and step five is then
onto apprenticeships and, um,
schools or training. Um, so that
the ideas that all three pieces
of our additional request or
intended to work together I will
note that if you haven't had a
chance to play in the B probie
proud truck, it will be across
the street at Pere tomorrow from
12 to 5.
Moving to the next slide.
So those remaining budget
requests of the continuing high
school career consultants that
was we requested $1.28 million.
It was not funded. Um, we have
tried to to have more
conversations about this ped
supportive. We have letters of
support from the school
districts that host these
currently, If anyone is
interested, we'd be happy to
send those to you.
But that was not funded at all.
However, continuing be pro be
proud funding was granted
through the gates or whatever.
We're calling it now, and we're
grateful for that, And we're
also grateful for the continued
pre apprenticeship program
funding, Although the funding
currently in the gate would only
give about 100 pre apprentices,
and you can see the numbers on
the right of that we've already
done in the current fiscal year,
so 200 or in the in the past two
fiscal years, so
204 pre apprenticeships
completed 270 ongoing and 192
employers when great results
from those so just moving on to
the last slide. I just know you
always want to hear some updates
on labor force participation
rate and so forth, Um, happy to
announce that the labor force
participation rate for the state
did increase in 2023 by
More than a full percentage
point that represents about
30,000 more people entering the
labor force here in New Mexico,
which we know we all very badly
needed.
Couple of bright spots from the
2022 data, which is the most
recent we have available
disaggregated at this level the
population with a disability saw
an increase of 2.7% in their
labor force participation
population with less than a high
school diploma by 3.7% High
School graduates up by 2.4%.
Um, And so I just wanted to note
that that we are starting to see
the tide turn on labor for you
And the last slide is just the
one that I always show you. The
estimated employment gap and
with that shows you is, we still
have a big gap between on this
is what we all hear from
business owners and our
community every day, right?
There's still looking for
employees there. We still need
about 32,000 people.
That is down from about 38,000
people. When I spoke to you at
my finance hearing this time
last I just did. Is this the
semi truck that I drove off the
freeway?
Mr Chair Center party. I hope
not. You had a semi truck, so I
didn't mean to Madam Secretary
Dr your semi truck off, but it
was really a lot of fun. So if
you haven't had a chance to do
this yet highly recommend you do
they put you up there,
installing electrical wires and
driving semi trucks and I can
see where this would be
exciting. Roby proud is an
excellent program.
Congratulations to getting that
started.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator
Patty, we have about a 30%
interest rate, so I mean rate of
interest people being interested
in it. Um, so that's been
bring your money.
Um
It needs to go to Zuni.
Um on step three of your
Yeah.
Step three or your plan.
Do we not have career pathway to
Mr Chair in some schools we do,
and we tried not to duplicate.
So where there were innovations
owns or career pathway programs.
We tried not to play somebody as
opposed to schools that have
neither
In the house. Get the method.
Mr Chair. Yes, And they did add
800,000 of the requested, um
well, so that was in addition to
the to some short, Mr Chairman
short by 600,000.
Mr Chair. They ended about 600,
though, so we had asked for 1.2
million
Mr. Chair one. The existing
funding. We got funds about 100.
What we requested would have
been 200. We averaged about 6000
a kid.
Yes.
Mr Kids.
Mr Chair. That's correct because
we pay the wages. So it's
Mr Chair. Now, these numbers are
seasonally adjusted, so we would
not expect
Correct, And that was November
over November, so
Mr Chair, Senator. There is now
a total in the HD SDI budget of
1.062 as an increase to labor
relations, Specifically, the
total increase of her for the
department right now as it
stands at 1.16, but 1.62 to
labor relations.
Mr Chair. Yes, they add ft.
Mr Chair Senator. It's a it is
added into their operating
budget and 12 additional Mr
Chair. We do not believe it.
Kayla, keep track competent,
right? I really don't want to
18.
And they was he a magistrate,
judge or district Judge, Mr
Chair. He's a district. No, I
think if we're
Thank you, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary on that point, I want
to share with you a quick story
because I think, um, it's a
concern shared throughout New
Mexico, and that's unemployment
fraud. And while I think most of
us would agree, it's a good
system. If it works like you
know, a trampoline, right, but
not like a hammock where they
never get out of it. So we have
a standing gravel company there
in truth or consequences. New
Mexico and a driver tips over a
truck.
Because it's a huge mess. And on
the scene, the owner says, I
need you to go pass a drug and
alcohol tests and the driver
refuses to do so. It's a
required his employment contract
and finally just said, I'm not
going to pass it so it doesn't
take the take the test the
second time he directed truck
walks off
They get. They get noticed in
the mail that he's filed
unemployment on him and was
automatically approved the date
of the letter that they
received. They have to appeal by
the next day, sending it in my
riding, and they have copies of
the letter. It's not even
logistically possible for them
to get through the mail system
back to you their paperwork, and
nevertheless, they send it.
And regardless, it's decided
that instead of this appeal,
he's still remains. He still
remains and receiving
unemployment insurance benefits
even through the appeals
process in which the employee
fails to show up.
And they still say we're still
going to require additional
paperwork. You have to owners.
You have a
HR director who knows her stuff
left and right. Who's focusing
all of her time on this, and you
have a state senator who's
involved going back through with
letters and I'm asking. Why is
this so complicated? Pretty cut
and dry case right here.
That employee continues to
receive unemployment business
benefits until later it's
terminated. My question back to
you is
When it finally is is
Is received by your department
and canceled Disney employment
have to pay the money back. I
mean, it's taxpayers dollars. I
say this because there's so many
cases that, like, beg disrespect
from our taxpayers.
When there's another cases that
are are just and and and you
know, relevant and should be
approved.
Why does it seem like there is
an automatic default?
For employment termination, even
when companies are providing
very good evidence that these
are wrongful cases in many
cases, fraud. How do we How do
we default? Or at least keep
that center so that we're we're
certainly
You know, considering employer
side of the story.
And then my next thing is so
this gentleman is on
unemployment for months. Will he
pay his money back?
Excuse me, Mr. Chair, Senator
Brantley. I mean, first of all,
I'm I'm sorry to hear whenever I
hear one of these anecdotes. I'm
always um
Happy to talk directly to the
claimant if that becomes or the
employer if that becomes
appropriate.
Um, specifically with respect to
overpayments. If claimant is
paid, and then it's later
determined that they should not
have been paid or that they were
not entitled to the money. They
are assessed an overpayment.
They are required to pay that
money back. We do have the
ability to lean their property
to garnish their wages to offset
any tax return payments, and we
do pursue those remedies. Okay,
that's good to know. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary, And that story
is what I hear too, right?
It's got to be some clear.
Hmm.
I mean that employers. How much
have you guys looked at?
Or the entire workforces.
Mr Chair. No, that goes to
workers Comp administration. You
sent unemployment insurance.
Unemployment, can you can you
please repeat the question? What
do you think that cost is?
Because you have this difference
between state and bright.
Um, I Mr Chair. I'd be happy to
share that with you. It's in the
LFC fizzle my desk right here.
But they did calculate that,
Rachel, you know that number
Uh,
Senator Munoz. Um, Mr Chairman,
I can tell you the range that we
have for administrative costs
and then in terms of revenue and
benefits, it really goes for
that. So when it comes to the
administrative costs to
administer that program, our
range is up to 51 million on the
low end. It's around 25 million
a year with some some startup
costs, but it depends on
The benefit package, Mr Chair
just to clarify. Yes, I know
the, um I can tell you that
administrative costs. I thought
you were asking the cost to all
the state entities for paying in
the premium that they have
calculated ministrations costs
like, she said. It's about 25
million a year for the first two
years and then we're estimating
about 23 million
Mr Chair. I think ultimately
that fund is an estimated to be
about a half billion dollars,
right? 400,000 Padilla.
Once in a while, I do have to
try the dump trap bad Mr
Chairman of Enterprises are
willing to let me drive all
their semi trucks and more than
happy to go Take a test you and
be pro proud tomorrow At what
Time Secretary Mr. Chair 12 to
5.
Alright 12 to 5 across the
street, the freeway for quite a
while. It was that exit that got
me. So, Mr Chair, you both did
much better than the governor.
Thank you Tell her that
Rld.
The new, uh
Super treasure did text me said
she's not Mr Superintendent, Are
you wanna? Are you happy with it
I just I got confused because
you're over there and over there
Trading places, right? Good
afternoon, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee here we have with
US Superintendent Clay Bailey,
officially superintendent of the
Regulation, Licensing
department. Business code is
going to quickly review some of
the changes that was made that
were made with the house.
Appropriation. Um
So the the main changes that
were made, uh
That you'll see the differences
between the exact reckoned the
We're kind of right in the
middle. Now, the LFC
recommendation.
Um
Yes, sir. I know the ones that
concerned me. Thank you
Differences that concern you
Um, sorry. Uh, right before he
turns in, I'll let you guys know
it is that
18.4 now in general fund.
Um, that is 4.8% increase, uh,
to the gym agency General. Some
of the new additions were that
there's seven FTE now program.
Taking it from 113 Ft. Um
175,000. In General fund.
revenues were added to the
securities program.
And there was 125,000 in general
fund revenues and one FTE since
added to the Cannabis Control
program.
Um, and those were the the
summit over to Donna Rivera, the
D F a counterpart for the
agency, but just like to point
out some very important things
that the executive fills needs
to be, um, expressed as far as
it's concerned with House Bill
two sure currently has funding.
For regulation and licensing in
particular construction
industries division they were
given as a special 150,000.
Um, to fund the elevator
inspection program. Um, this, um
I'll let Superintendent Bailey
described why that is
insufficient.
Um, and the other thing I'd like
to point out is in program
support. Um, the executive, um,
the HFC recommended basically
the current operating amount,
and that is insignificant,
insufficient, particularly in
the two hundreds.
FY 23 their operating budget.
They exceeded that amount for
just, um, insurance workers'
compensation. They exceeded that
amount by 300. I'm sorry. Uh,
$182,000, and the other thing
that is not funded is I t
support which they need, since
they have a $2.2 million
Licensing software system that
they need to avoid further
cyberattacks. They need I T
support to bring those costs
down.
And I would just issue a word of
caution. I know that, um a lot
of
Both men, um manufactured
housing division as well as
financial institutions division
are funded with the Mortgage
Regulatory fund.
And I would point out that based
on all that the mortgage
regulatory fund is supposed to
fund right now from House Bill
two. It will have a balance. Um
next year, going in of only 1.2
Million and F I d alone.
Needs 3.5 million just support
itself next year. The
manufactured housing division
should not be funded.
With mortgage regulatory fund.
It has no connection to that
particular P code whatsoever.
Manufactured housing actually
needs General fund.
Finally, the other thing that I
would point out, which is really
important is, um, the substitute
Care Advisory Council.
Um, it is supposed to be fun.
There are currently I believe
it's seven positions, four of
which are filled.
Um House Bill two moves the
substitute Care Advisory council
funding for it to the
administrative office of the
Courts. Administrative Office of
the Courts does not even was not
even aware of this move.
And so this particular unless,
and they put on Superintendent
Bailey to find a sponsor to move
the stock to the administrative
office of the courts.
The way that that particular
council is funded. Right now
it's being supported by other
boards and commissions, which
have nothing to do with that
particular function.
And there are four permanent
positions that need General fund
to support those. And with that
alternative, Secretary
Superintendent Bailey think we
got that.
Mr Chairman. Yes, you did.
As quick as you can. If you want
to touch something, Okay, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee Thank you for having
us here today. Really? I'll just
send her on two things, mostly
on the construction industry
side as everybody knows,
elevators coming on board. We're
gonna need the funding to get it
on board. We pass That bill or
bill was passed last year with
no funding. This year, we asked.
We got to get that thing stood
up and get it ready.
By January 1st 2026. I have to
have it in operation and
everything inspected.
Huge timeline is going to be
difficult to meet at best, but I
am short funded there. The other
one's office superintendent. The
program support We asked for an
increase. Everybody knows
cybersecurity trying to add some
more programmers within that, so
we can take care of it without
going through contracts and also
the equipment. We need to buy to
keep us safe, so that's the two
biggest things that are
concerning to me, and that's one
of the back is waiting for you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, So I'll
be real quick so he doesn't come
to get me but chair and and
Superintendent I heard you
discuss about the cyber security
stuff and all that. You know, I
will let you know that the
attack that exploits the whole
reason the cybersecurity. We've
got to get you that money. So
did I hear you to say you need
money for cybersecurity or money
for I T Who's
I didn't quite get this real
story there. Mr Chairman and
Senator it surprised where a
year later and we're still
asking for this. Even though you
were a direct, you know, um, I
guess victim of this thing. So,
Mr Chairman, Senator, Yes, That
was the stuff I've done. That's
one of the hardest times. It's
to help boost up the cyber. We
got cybersecurity taken care of.
We need to get the employees
hire some new people to watch
over us to help take care of it,
and by
You know equipment to keep it
Maintaining updated
Okay. Thank you. Mr Chairman. I
just want to highlight that
because that cyberattack
affected
I would say a good two thirds of
the state and the and the
commerce and work that's going
on very big deal. And this is,
you know, ground zero where some
of these things
Mission. They will still need to
be No. That's
Well, Mr Chairman, it would be
nice to follow would do it
properly. There's a lot
And, uh, but it will still take
a
But the inspector happens if I
say I'm not going to do the
90,000.
My inspector. We need to do
that.
Well, Mr Chairman, we're still
working on the codes and what
we're gonna do with it in the
rules. However, I'm assuming as
long as it's safe, and it's
built under the prior I'm not
positive what all is going to be
The requirements yet.
And that's one reason I need to
get the funding so I can get
some experts in here all my
staff because we're trying to do
with the mechanical and she's
doing a great job.
We need the help.
Mr Chairman. I'm not there yet.
So I don't know.
All right, talking to you.
Thank you, chairman members.
What was your decision on these
subcommittees
That may be a I mean, we don't
need to have them picking on us.
I was just wanted to say okay.
You have my subcommittee. I
mean, I had we're gonna have a
deliberative conversation about
some topics, so I feel like we
have
Reduce
We reduce the amount of input
wanted about
So I'm not worried about
A little debate today, but
Notwithstanding, I've had a
Do a deeper dive on something
