Good morning and we'll go ahead
and will start.
There's a few things happen in
this morning our other members
will be coming shortly the we
don't want to get that behind on
our schedule.
The we're ready with our first
presentation and then maybe a
little bit later on will break
to have the members introduce
themselves for our audience so
we have a both present and on
the website so we will go ahead
and we'll start with our first
presentation and we have the the
child is from.
Hello seco and status.
Mr chair members of the
committee good morning I'm Nina
Chavez I am a capital outlay
analyst for the legislative
finance committee I'm joined
today by George such junior
local government liaison at the
department of transportation and
as all of you know a former
legislator today were reviewing
transportation projects
identified for this hearing
local transportation I'm gonna
now review some data points for
a big picture snapshot of active
local transportation projects
followed by Mr Dodge and other
guests that are in attendance
and SFC analysts that can answer
specific questions to any of the
projects from the analysis
report provided to you
so if you look at this very
brief memo from LFC.
As of December two thousand
twenty two there are
approximately three hundred
twenty for transportation
projects funded with capital
outlay under way with
outstanding balances totaling
one hundred and forty seven
point six million or sixty nine
percent of appropriations from
two thousand nineteen two
thousand twenty two you can see
that in table one broken down
further.
Transportation projects at that
time Representative roughly
eight percent of the forty one
hundred outstanding projects in
all categories and of those
outstanding projects that
includes fourteen re authorized
appropriations with balances
totaling two eleven point three
million dollars six have
original bond sales dating to
two thousand fifteen or earlier
including appropriations to pass
out invoke on and the east
affect arterial route.
DOT does provide resources and
support to project their project
oversight division offer support
guidance and resources to local
entities and in addition to
capital outlay DOT has various
funds that support local
projects including the
transportation project fund
that Mr Dodge and other guests
can further explain now pass
things over to Mr Dodge for his
insight on local transportation.
Thank you and thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee again George Dodge and
I'm the director of government
relations for a department of
transportation and
The number one thing near and
dear to my heart is the terms of
the transportation project fund
you know what the in in my years
in the legislature and in my
years with DOT this is one of
the best programs that is ever
come across for local
governments for smaller entities
that have no other way of
accessing funds and this is this
is one of the most popular
programs out there in the state
of New Mexico as far as
transportation is concerned so
it's it's it's a great thing so
I just a quick a quick
rehash of of what before this
came from of the first TPF was
in twenty nineteen okay to the
tune of fifty million dollars
okay in twenty twenty there were
no funds allocated to the
transportation project Fund in
the twenty twenty one.
If the it was funded two hundred
twenty million dollars and then
in the twenty twenty two is a
hundred and seven million
dollars.
Right and what it is is is part
of it is a recurring from from
excise taxes the rest comes from
a general fund in in the it's
usually probably close fifty
forty sixty.
Okay
The average of from the
recurring funds about fifty
million dollars between forty
five fifty and then we've got
the of the provided funds from
you folks and we really
appreciate it and from general
fund at the anywhere from eighty
million.
So sixty eight million dollars
so it's it's it's a great
program so you know what just
real quick if you would handle
all explain how we're tracking
these health department
transportation is tracking these
you've got a packet there and if
you brought this one from on.
District four has got the green
tab on top.
The second.
And I've got I've got all the
districts there.
And you can peruse those at your
at your discretion a lot of
information there I want to
focus on this district for its
got the green tab on top.
Second here to get our
paperwork.
Issues.
It's on this one it's like the
second one one as a request.
Right.
This this is something that we
work on on a daily basis we have
to person in each district a one
of them is one of them is the
when was the transportation
project fund person the only
local government real fun and
both of them work with our our
locals on this one right here
okay if you look at this page
are you have the energy on the
left hand side.
And then you've got the location
the scope of work.
You've got the ninety five five
ninety five percent state and
then the five percent any match
on a hardship waiver.
Okay the total amount and then
in this particular one district
for the design percentage in
this is for the twenty nineteen
legislative session which is a
fiscal year twenty twenty of the
construction is complete on
almost all of them.
And you've got to a couple not
standing but they are nearing
completion okay and and we're
we're worried about money that
we've allocated to some of these
locals and and and capital and
everything else and I think this
program right here and and these
pages right here
will tell us that these folks
are using their money very very
wisely and they're getting their
projects done.
So.
Good if you turn the second page
was still in district four with
the green.
This is fiscal year twenty
twenty two.
And this is the twenty one
legislative session and you'll
see also that on the on the
right hand column all the way
across these are the
construction percentages where
we are as of yesterday.
Okay some of the more complete
so when we're done March twenty
twenty three and then in April
of twenty twenty three.
Okay so in the end all online
design on all of these projects
is a hundred percent on its
complete so this is a this is
A testament to our locals in our
communities that other taken
this program very seriously job
done.
And then the final page so for
fiscal year twenty twenty three
which is a twenty two
legislative session.
Those contracts just went out
the window back in November and
went back in October returned in
November so this is
this is a work in progress and
they've got to twenty four
months to complete their work.
Mr Chairman yes Sir the I really
like the Lee you have the
percentage is yes is that really
helps us Mr you know like from
what you have here and there's
one that's twenty percent so the
basis of of.
Picture immediately and of
course the.
No we're doing some back filling
part you know with.
Budget request this really helps
thank you Mr chairman and and we
emphasize that with with our
locals when we're out there and
and our our full for me to
district take a take pride in
that and helping them and
assisting or locals to make sure
they have every tool they need
to to to complete these projects
and all of your districts are in
this packet here okay just so
you can you can look at all of
them and you can tell one thing
I would like to do is visit with
everyone individually okay and
and visited the districts and
then we can go over these
figures that make sure that that
everybody knows where we're at
at that point in time okay and
the other thing we're working on
Mr chairman and members of the
committee is you have.
You have six.
You have six different of so
that's what.
Spreadsheets so one thing we
like to do and one thing we will
be doing in the next couple of
months is is making these
uniforms and making sure that
everything is a go this is the
same and we can go ahead and.
Dispensing information on all
six districts so everybody knows
everybody else's at so and Mr
chairman members the committee I
I apologize I did not introduce
or secretary I apologize
research will also have to do
little or deputy secretary okay
and we have worked for the
office of the chief maintenance
engineer for the entire state
okay so you what Mr Secretary Mr
Chairman if it's okay with you
to see the up to this point are
there any questions you have
okay hello so this is just a
quick question good morning
morning Mr Dodge and former
representative good to see you
and of course need to staff
cabinet secretary and in I
didn't get to me.
Your name sorry I was morning
and PED I'm not a analyst for
the Senate finance thank you
thank you all right good morning
to the audience and everyone I
just have one quick question
wondering that call you George
absolutely yes ma'am on the re
authorizations for example that
you have I see the fourteen re
authorize appropriations have a
balance of eleven point three
million are you looking at re
appropriated to have a list of
those that you are going to be
requesting to what re authorizes
session just so that we know for
the future and if you don't have
it we can work on it and get it
to us.
Mr Chairman thank you for
allowing me to speak so I'm
gonna go ahead and
Mr chair members of the
committee I apologize for not
addressing that way so I'm gonna
go ahead and have you referred
to the Senate finance committee
capital outlay transportation
projects spreadsheet I'm going
to let you know how that was
organized so that you can go
through projects and then from
there ask questions so this
document is a compilation of
information shared by the LFC
and the agencies themselves the
information is organized by a
project size so the first two
pages are for projects that are
upwards of a million dollars and
that are either flagged red or
yellow then from there you have
those projects that are less
than a million also I rather
yellow within the tables
themselves we have the data
organized by here and funding
source and then I do want to
bring your attention to the last
column the re authorization
column some of the projects
already state whether they're re
authorized from there in there
funding source but others are
being flagged as re authorized
requesting read reauthorization
or pending and that is what we
obtained from the justification
information that we got from the
agencies themselves so in the
first column you see that I'm
sorry the last column of the
first row you see that that
first project was we authorize I
do apologize at the end of
subject to suppose they re
authorized instead if you would
like to make a note of that but
I also want to bring your
attention to page three because
there's very ation there in that
column and I just wanna make
sure you understand what it all
means there so again that last
column when it's saying requests
that means the agency has
already requested the re
authorization pending there are
a few that were a little
confusing based on what was
being reported and so in line I
on page three it says possibly
request and you'll see within
the justification that it's a
little unclear whether they have
or not.
and then the ones that state
requires me authorization the
HSD is saying that they will
need to do that and so if you
have any questions please let me
know that is perfect now we know
where they are and I just want
to make sure that we don't give
anything that needs to be re
authorizes our projects is very
important as we all know so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very well thank you for reading
secretary welcome
Mr chairman members of the
committee good morning thank you
for having us actually apologies
but the the report that we
prepare prepared is going to be
similar to the analyst report
about the capital appropriations
that are moving through the
department of transportation so
in this handout right over here
we've prepared a similar report
with the year the laws the year
of the laws The appropriation
amount and just to be clear the
percentage the column to the
right is percentage unexpended
so for example on the first page
if you look at the twenty twenty
one appropriation to the City of
Albuquerque that percentage.
Oh sure it'll be this right over
here.
Thank you your own okay.
Thank you Mr.
So on this report it'll if it's
broken down similarly to the
report provided by the LFC
analysts we broken down the
projects into four groups of
million plus that we're flying
as read
I million plus lighting is
yellow and then those projects
appropriation amounts less than
a million both red and yellow
and so I just wanted to be sure
that you were of the column to
the right near the status
justification is a percent
unexpended not a percent spent
so on the first page for example
the City of Albuquerque
appropriation of twenty twenty
one for just over two million
has not been we don't have any
space spending to report on that
project so again these are
capital appropriations made
through the department of
transportation will in turn then
execute those grant agreements
with the local governments of so
that they can essentially go to
work on those projects depending
on the district and the
communities of course our our
duty districts can support the
communities in these projects
especially for those communities
where they feel bandwidth is is
a concern or issue but then some
other districts where you know
it's been identified in our
partnership that they do have
the capacity to move forward
then obviously we we play a less
active role.
Thank you members.
I have a couple questions
So.
Women who are refer to this one
or two.
On the the one you just percent
at the one with Taos County.
And that one has so.
That loop one and loop to.
And the then there was an
additional nine hundred
thousand.
And where would that show
because that one is probably
getting very close so still
during the time of phone.
The late senator Cisneros.
Those two hundred thousand from
his part can I have two hundred
thousand in the governor had
five hundred thousand.
But it ties into this this to.
Mr chair on page eight of the
with the handout I just went
through.
You'll see just above the yellow
header The appropriation in two
thousand nineteen it is Taos
County New Mexico highway five
eighteen that's the gas pipeline
the nine hundred thousand
dollars appropriation.
Mr chair if I can just add Mr
chair members of the committee
this project these two
particular projects for the DOT
Dixon have been working
diligently with part of finance
to understand on the next steps
to continue with that progress
we also have the committee chair
here if there's any questions
that.
Need to be addressed but that
this needs to really it's a it's
a big number so to work with
them.
So.
Just one question Nina on the on
the nine hundred thousand when
would you have to re authorize
the.
Because that one was so couple
years ahead of the other one.
When I Mr chair I can go back
and confirm and get back to you
but it is showing that with you
that it was provided two
thousand nineteen so I believe
that that is meeting reversion
this year this year okay.
Right so at that point just tied
to this once.
Mr chair I can look back at the
information and get back to you
to confirm not.
Right very well.
Anything else members.
Mr chairman I think health Mr
chairman thank you I don't have
any questions but I agree with
you it's laid out very nicely
and I think we have plenty of
information to look through and
if we have any questions we
could always circle back with
you but thanks to a do you
Representative and former
representative John and dajin
cabinet secretary and our staff
you know what you have done an
enormous amount of work on this
and this is the most difficult
project I think is to keep track
of all of this so thank you for
laying it out the way you did we
appreciate that's all I have
Mister chairman.
Mr Chairman Madam chair to a to
a thank the committee and and I
think the the entire legislature
the governor's office on behalf
of all the small communities in
our state for the transportation
project fund because that's the
only stream that a lot of these
folks have other than provided a
capital outlay and and this goes
directly on the roads and and
it's it's very important to us
and the good thing about the
transportation project fund is
that there are there are no
reversions so everything just
everything just gets taken care
within twenty four months and
there's maybe a two or three
months extension and it's all
about the well we're here I have
a couple of announcements the
one is some.
There's always discussion.
You know Bob you know hello.
What goes on at the Rio Grande
gorge bridge in reference to
suicide.
And it was very it was reported
to me yesterday the for the
entire year because we of with.
Everyone working together on
this we have a twenty four seven
security.
There and it was reported that
there was zero.
Incidents for the year there was
no jobs at all so well it does
work you know one of the the
cameras phones everything that
is being installed there the
other announcements this is the
time of the year that in my part
I think that we have to be of.
Every thankful and very grateful
to the employees to the
Department for inclement weather
keeping our schools open keeping
our roads safe and the whether
someone we can't predict you
know it can be a of a very large
of snowfall or medium or.
But you know our our people are
there and they do a really
really good job.
Thank you Mr chairman will pass
that along thank you very much
even on Sundays if I may have
Mister chairman I saw a truck
state highway we still costing
every department instead of
transportation department I saw
it on Sunday because Sunday I
can't remember what it was a
weekend and there they are early
in the morning I was driving to
Albuquerque and there they are
this mean thank you during the
COVID this group never stopped
working exactly thank you.
Rebel very well thank you thank
you.
Okay now we have all.
Thanks committee Valerie Garcia.
We have money because they the
New Mexico.
The.
But.
Right.
I was coming.
Is
it
Good.
Let's uh.
Go ahead.
Hey.
Mr chair members of the
committee thanks for having us
again this morning I'm Kelly
cars will capital outlay analyst
with LFC I'm joined by Monica
Abeyta issues executive director
of the north central economic
development district secretary
Katrina look ho term Lopez of
aging and long term Services
Department and Valerie Garcia
also from aging and long term
services she's the
administrative services director
so what we're gonna start out by
making some brief comments and
then we can go to questions I'm
gonna start with just this brief
summary document that you should
have.
It looks like one of the ones
we've been giving you every day
up except it says status of
senior center projects at the
top.
so this table the table on this
she is showing you the total
number of appropriations between
twenty eighteen and twenty
twenty two to senior center
capital projects the total
amount of probation and the
outstanding balances on those
appropriations as of December
there are about two hundred
eighteen active senior center
projects under way across the
street without standing balances
of fifty three million dollars
or seventy secretary six percent
of appropriations to these
projects from twenty eighteen to
twenty twenty two.
I also want to wanted to point
out that these figures don't yet
include senior center projects
that were authorized for bonding
with general obligation bonds in
twenty twenty two those should
be going to sell this spring and
they'll be included and DFA and
LFC data tracking in the next
quarter we expect.
I also wanted to give you just
some brief background about the
process that these projects go
through for funding so there's
basically two options for senior
centers they can go for Director
Legislative capital outlay or
they can go through the agent
departments process for capital
outlay projects so they have a
process through which senior
centers submit requests
they work with the FAA and the
areas on aging to evaluate those
projects and then they come to
the executive capital outlay
hearings in the fall with a
recommendation that is
considered for inclusion in the
statewide framework.
I also wanted to point out the
LFC quarterly reports to do not
track senior centers on a
project by project basis so we
don't for individual projects
generally speaking have a red
yellow green blue color coding
system like you've been seeing
from to for some of their other
projects
but we do receive updates on
those projects directly from the
ageing Department and we report
on them in a roll up so in we
report on the status of the
total appropriations to these
projects each year so given that
we did produce a slightly
different spreadsheet for you on
the status of these projects.
So it looks like this and it's
organized into several different
buckets which are in these blue
headings so the first one is
projects with twenty twenty
three reversion dates that still
have outstanding balances.
The next one starting on page
four is projects that were
authorized in twenty twenty one
or earlier that have zero
expenditures and are reported as
still being in the grant
agreement states.
The next one is projects
authorized starting on page
seven projects authorized in
twenty twenty one earlier also
with zero that expenditures but
summer ported progression
forward on the project.
And then the last one starting
on page six is projects with
potential funding shortfalls
so and that would be that that
funding shortfall has been
clearly identified for that
projects through the reporting
race we received so the project
status column on the far right
those are for the most part the
updates that are provided
through quarterly reporting by
ale TST but in some cases where
individual projects did submit
an update through the reporting
form that SSC analysts have been
using to collect information on
the projects you're interested
in of those are included and
those are noted with a star
asterisk so for those projects
those updated updates were
provided as of yesterday
afternoon the ageing Department
updates we're current as of mid
December twenty twenty two I'm
gonna pass it to the secretary
now and then I think we'll go to
Monica and close with Mr Seah.
Start of the small question
Kelly is page six.
So this
will shortfall.
So these are projects where they
have specifically identified
that they have a funding
shortfall so it you know it
might not be all of them but
these are at least the ones
where the projects through the
reporting to the Department or
to SFC have specifically said
that they have some kind of
funding shortfall thirteen
million.
Mr chair Sarinana that question
is that thirteen million I'm
nose soon it if they have
identified a specific funding
shortfall it would be noted in
that projects status column some
of them didn't necessarily have
a specific number but just said
that they did have some kind of
funding shortfall so that the
totals that are showing
in each of these buckets are the
total appropriation amount so
far to those projects as well as
their outstanding balances.
Thank you.
Good morning and welcome to
morning Mr chair and members of
the committee it's an honor to
be here today and really talk
about some of the aging issues
that we know we've had for a
long time I'm proud to say that
we have been working with that
non metro triple A. as well as
the Indian triple way and metro
to get these results we know
that we have a lot of issues if
facing our buildings and facing
our vehicles to make sure that
we are serving our seniors in
the way that we need to be
serving them we do have an
uptick in seniors who are
needing home delivered meals and
so definitely and transportation
which some of the biggest needs
that are seniors are facing
today besides the food
insecurities so I I know that
we've got a little bit of work
to do but I think as we pull
this through and explain some of
the projects and we're we are I
think it'll give you a good
perspective of the status of
tribal and some of the non
tribal issues that we've been
facing and working on together
so with that I'll just pass this
on to to Monica bait thank you
Secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee can you hear me
OK.
Thank you for giving us this
morning I Monica bay to the
executive director of the north
central New Mexico economic
development district and I also
have with menial cicada whose
are not metric Tripoli director
in case you all have more
specific questions we as not as
north central we are the parent
organization for non metric
Tripoli which is many of you
know actually works with thirty
two counties in the state so
we're not just confined to our
seven county council government
areas but we work with aging
programs throughout the state
except in Bernalillo county and
on tribal lands we have fifty
six providers statewide and then
under those providers they have
a number of senior center so I
think it's upwards of a hundred
and thirty senior centers that
are in our program so on your
list you know anything that's
Bernalillo county or tribal does
not fall under us but the rest
of the projects do you in the
past I think in recent I don't
know how many years we actually
haven't done any work with
capital outlay formally with the
department the department is
handled really all of the
capital outlay work with this
with the programs this year it
is in our contract to to start
doing that work again and we
feel good about that because we
already do it with our local and
tribal government members for
north central we're we have a
good track record with capital
outlay that way or at least we
work with our members quite a
bit of so I wanted to just kind
of tell you what that is going
to look like we have an
assessment process with with
each of the providers and
typically they're receiving an
annual assessment by our staff
most of those are done unless
there's a reason not to do it
during the COVID a lot of them
were desk assessments but
they're done on site and we
really go through a very
detailed overview of the program
so as we do these assessments we
will be looking at their capital
outlay that they have already
received seeing where they are
with those projects and then
also asking them about needs
that they have coming up I think
you know Senator.
Gonzalez you you talked about
this a little bit yesterday with
the local government hearing you
know this really affects
operations you know when you
don't have vehicles or you have
equipment down especially when
you're running a kitchen so we
have to be really on top of
these things and make sure the
senior centers are able to
operate to the standards they
should be so just wanted to let
you know what we're doing in
partnership with the department
and to be here for any questions
that you have.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And now
Thank you Mr just ask you to
help a little bit more about
your organization and what the
federal.
Sure I know you from previous.
Your organization to try to
understand how it fits together.
Mister chairman Senator
Steinborn so we're a council of
governments you know there's
seven councils of government so
we're like we're like the south
central counts.
our region for the council of
governments is as Santa Fe Rio
Rio house Los Alamos Colfax more
and San Miguel counties and we
also do some work in rural
Sandoval County but one thing I
do want to say because I don't
know if people in New Mexico no
this council of governments and
economic development districts
throughout the nation often are
are the parent organization for
triple A.'s this isn't an
unusual situation but in our
state it is unusual because we
actually serve counties outside
of our Kaga region and I don't
know the full history of that
but I do know that over the
years you know are are are board
president was Representative
former representative next
Salazar and so he was very
passionate about seniors and so
when there was an area of the
state that you know things
weren't working right he would
say put it under north central
they will handle it and I think
that's how we ended up to just
be very large overview I think
that's how we ended up with the
whole state so one of the
challenges we've been trying to
address the last few years is
having some presence throughout
the state we do have an office
in Los crucis now and we do have
somebody now working out of
Clovis us starting this week I
believe so we're really trying
to make sure we have boots on
the ground and and we're working
also on northwest and southwest
New Mexico we have had our staff
really concentrated in Santa Fe
but we're trying to make sure
that we have more in person
presence around the state
because we know that's an issue
so you said you're with the
economic development corporation
or whatever but the Chicago as
well so are you a con.
The difference for cost for that
particular office that that's
correct Mr chairman and.
Members of the committee it's a
little confusing so when we were
formed back in nineteen sixty
seven we reform is an economic
development district some of the
council of government in New
Mexico are still called economic
development districts and summer
called cogs so we and.
And that's why I was thrown off
a little bit
This is forced on you have a
county since we do have a cog
why would your office have an
office in the in the county how
does that work.
Mr chairman members of the
committee so our offices
specific to this program to non
metro Tripoli because all of our
offices for the council
governments are in Santa Fe so
we are trying to have a presence
down there so that we can work
well with the providers in the
southern part of the state thank
you just want to understand the
context of that stuff thank you
thank you and and senator I'm
glad to meet with you off off
line if you want to talk more
about it.
Garcia.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee in this
presentation I'll be discussing
the red and yellow flags
projects that
listed in capital outlay
quarterly report the coming
because of the delay of these
projects in how the agencies
helping to address these delays
so starting on page three in.
On
this.
So starting on page three in
twenty in two thousand eighteen
we received ten million put ten
point seven million of in the
appropriation this appropriation
was the total funding for
seventy the projects although
one project was under million
dollars out of the seventy three
projects forty six projects have
been completed the state below
are some of the larger funded
completed projects turning to
page
forty nine percent were five
point two million of the ten
point seven million has been
obligated and is on track to be
fully expended by June thirtieth
however fifty one percent or
five point four million has not
yet been obligated.
State I illustrates the category
breakdown of the obligated
portion of the twenty eighteen
projects we split up the Navajo
Nation to show their portion of
the balance this is important to
issue because currently the
Navajo Nation is in the process
of new leadership in during this
time projects have come to a
halt to all physicians have been
appointed the HSD is working
with the Navajo Nation and
setting up meetings to go over
the request depending on the
direction of the new president
this may affect the completion
of the projects.
Page six shows in twenty twenty
we received thirty three million
dollars appropriation this
appropriation with the total
funding for ninety seven
projects all but seven projects
are under a million dollars out
of the ninety seven projects
sixteen have been completed thus
far this to be lowered to
sixteen completed projects
turning to page seven the twenty
nineteen appropriation of one
point three million for the Taos
pueblo senior day care facility
is behind schedule only nine
percent has been expended due to
the price escalation for
construction costs the project
is estimated to be under funded
by eight twenty two thousand the
grant he will ask for an
extension the twenty twenty
projects excluding the completed
mentioned earlier for also
behind schedule these projects
expiring twenty twenty four
the agency will continue to work
with grant is to help get the
projects back on track.
Eight eight illustrates the
category break out of the
obligated portion of the twenty
twenty projects leading out the
Navajo Nation once again.
On page nine it lists the common
causes of delays being reported
test for construction inflation
supply chain issues labor
shortages and the permit process
of the common causes of delay
for vehicles price increases and
longer the times are delaying
the purchase across the board
grantees are facing internal
hurdles within their own
organizations.
Page ten list some of the ways
we as an agency addressing
obstacles grantees are facing
for providing training to be on
to help fund for the new staff
and local and tribal entities we
updated our website to create a
reference for grantees to go
when they have questions or need
guidance in the capital outlay
process we have increased our
senior centers site visits
during these visits we're
helping to assess the more
critical needs of the senior
center we're leveraging
emergency funding we're
recommending faced funding over
several years and to help keep
the costs down have sort of the
times we have content contacted
several dealerships to stock
used vehicles for hot and cold
delivery and delivering
transportation and lastly we're
revising the scoring criteria
for the application process.
This concludes our presentation
we stand for questions.
Members.
The.
One of thank you Mr chairman
thank you for The presentation
can you go into a little more
detail about how the funding for
senior centers works because it
seems like and Sikora County
there seems to be a higher
percentage of funding that the
county is required to put toward
the senior center and they're
saying that it's no longer
sustainable and there seems to
be a little bit of confusion how
the senior centers are funded
across the state and
possibility that some centers
are funded higher from the state
than others is is that an
accurate.
Mr chair Senator Hemphill so
it's really based on a formula
and the population not only you
have in your county but who
you're serving and so I know
that that Monica can talk a
little bit more in depth about
the formula as well and I can
speak to you specifically about
Sapporo if you would like I'm
not sure if we want to be able
to do that there but we can
share the formula and I can
explain to you so how we're
working with them and trying to
resolve the issues there but you
know I I know that they have
concerns and we've been working
with them on their concerts at
frontier thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
of course thank you very much
for the presentation and the on
going to work as we deal with
the the legislative process a
couple of things and I really
applaud our governor for really
working to eradicate poverty in
as we see an aging population in
our state continue.
Then that the two keys that are
very important to us of course
are going to be nutrition and
overall health if you can give
me an idea in terms of not only
the severity of that issue but
secondly as we deal with
providing the services how far
behind are we or are we keeping
up to speed in terms of serving
our our elderly population those
that are home bound providing if
you will through transportation
through the nutrition and more
importantly as we deal with that
keeping up with their overall
health how does that work Mexico
throughout the state.
Mr chair Senator Campos so you
know we we are asking in our
budget for additional dollars
one of the some of those those
additional dollars really come
to the escalating costs that we
have now I am I've just talked
to Neil and and asked because we
found out recently that we have
a waiting list in a few areas of
the state that we didn't address
that may need to be amended
input in our budget in addition
to that we've had several
conversations we we we met with
many seniors virtually and in
person across the state had a
great turn out I think we had
over six seven hundred seniors
in all the different areas
participate in tell us what
their needs are and we've been
working on last year's needs and
this year's needs and it is true
we we need to do they they want
more to be done in grandparents
raising grandchildren they want
better and more robust
transportation which we are
asking for in our budget three
million dollar investment that
we would leverage with the the
veterans as well as department
of transportation so we'll be
working on programs in rural and
remote New Mexico to enhance
that we also have staffing
shortages across the state
especially in caregivers this is
not specific to seniors it is
everywhere hospitals nursing
homes everywhere and so we've
got to be able to start I
creative ways on making sure
that people are are physically
cared for and like housekeeping
and sort some of those to our
services come back and so we're
working very closely
on on applying for grants in
order to to have some of those
things happen
and we're trying but I think
this is a a state and national
problem and so we're really
focusing on food and food in
securities as well as
transportation so we've heard
from our seniors that they want
transfer.
In in more than you know just
there were there rural area they
want that into specially
appointments into Albuquerque
and in some cases such as in
Vegas might be a faster service
to go to Colorado and so how do
we make those sorts of things
happen it's easier on the
Medicaid end of things because
we can talk to or Medicaid
provider and say can you for
this population can we get
services in Colorado and can
this be paid for so we're
working on strategies such as
those things in order to make
sure that that happens Medicare
is a harder piece and the
advantage programs are are
harder on that to to make sure
that those things can happen
outside of the state that they
have an advantage plan on so we
we have a lot of work to do on
that but I I know that the we're
the fourth highest you know
fastest growing population of
seniors in the country in by
twenty thirty we will be there
we will be the fourth highest
per capita and so we need to
start these investments now
we're seeing more in securities
as we continue to reach out we
have partnered with the
department of transportation or
I'm sorry with motor vehicles
and we now have a list of any
every senior sixty five and
older just a driver's license so
that we can start reaching out
to see what those needs are
because I I don't know that we
all understand that scope and so
we're working on this issue but
we didn't realize until recently
that we had a few waiting lists
that we needed to address so
we'll be asking for additional
dollars to to support that as
well thank you very much and so
if I may Mr chairman as we move
forward in this is going to go
ahead and lead to the
collaboration and cooperation as
we deal with all of the services
and essence it's a it's an
inventory of everything that we
deal with and of course I
continue to applaud the works
that are that are going on when
we start to coordinate so if
maybe you can also tie in terms
of how we're coordinating Howard
let.
Bridging and how we're going to
be addressing that because it's
not only going to be the
resources the session it's going
to be in the years to come
particularly the out years how
we're definitely going to ensure
that we can take care of our our
aging population as you've
already stated this is going to
be one of the key issues for for
our state so it's important for
us to to tie that together.
Mr Chairman may make a come
thank you so I think you know
Senate finance I think is aware
that there was a request for a
seven point five million in
additional dollars for the aging
network and that goes directly
to services that that Senator
Campos is bringing up I believe
the LFC wreck for that is like
four point five million so I
just wanted to kind of let you
know how we came to that number
so non metric Tripoli makes up
about sixty percent of the total
allocations of aging network
many of the services dollars and
what we did is we went into the
budgets of every single provider
all fifty six providers we
looked at what would it take to
bring staff up to fifteen
dollars an hour because
certainly that's one of the
reasons we're having trouble
with staffing a lot of these
folks don't make fifteen dollars
an hour they make minimum wage
and then we looked at what would
it take to absorb the inflation
costs were seen with food and
and gas and tires and all of
those kind of things and then
finally we looked at two percent
increase in consumers for a year
it's a very small number and
that is our portion of the seven
point five million so I think
it's a very modest ask for a
really big issue that our state
is is facing and I just you know
I would be happy to meet with
any of you to talk to you more
about that and what it looks
like in your individual senior
centers but the staffing
challenges they're facing are
really.
Are creating a lot of
difficulties in get in terms of
getting services up and running
and we really we really want to
deal with at least the
compensation and get people
where they need to be so that's
a little better I think we're
doing a lot of leveraging and
trying to be creative the
department as I know we are
we're starting a Medicaid
billing pilot where we're taking
the programs that do adult day
care because that is a Medicaid
eligible services service and
we're trying to move as many
consumers an adult day care as
we can over to Medicaid billing
so that the remaining pie is a
little larger for these other
services and I will be looking
at what other services we can
move to that a regime as well
we're also applying for grants
what we're seeing is that the
providers are spending all the
money that they're allocated and
one thing I want to remind
everyone is that we've been
operating with extra money we've
been operating with cares funds
families first coronavirus Act
funds and our funds and the
first two meant that I mentioned
are already gone the the last
one our bill will be complete in
a September two thousand twenty
four so with in our triple a
that's about eleven million
dollars additional over the past
few years my concern is I don't
want the senior centers and
providers to fall off this
funding cliff because they've
been relying on those for
operations this hasn't been like
extra money that they're doing
extra things with they're
putting it into basic services
so thank you for the opportunity
to to to explain all that thank
you very much Mr chairman just a
final comment and I really hope
that the Senate finance
committee considers this to be
one of the top priorities and to
our elderly that are out there
that are listening I hope that
you continue to make contact
with your legislators this is a
priority and as we move forward
if we take care this we're
taking care of a lot of the
people that are very honorable
if you will to to all the things
that are going on in today's
society so again thank you very
much Mr chairman for the
opportunity to express that.
Hello I just have two questions
and no one is some.
Ms Garcia hello on page seven.
The New Mexico with Taos Pueblo
is that a separate building or
is it part of the senior.
Seven.
Mr chair I know that we got word
that the Baca
who is R. O. I. A. director
Rebecca do you know if this is a
separate building inTaos.
For the adult day.
Complexes.
Part of the same building.
Yes madam chair Senator and I
guess a little bit to report a.
Chairman Williams has been
saying this is a true example of
of.
You know trying to fund projects
to be complete.
Because I've been working with
us on for quite some time.
And if.
Come server here that it's still
not the.
So very well the the last part
that I have this so.
In reference to the ankles.
Have you looked at the option of
may be leasing.
Or maybe we could lease so many.
And instead of investing in and
they get old and then we're back
to square one again.
We keep them for two years three
years and.
And the budget you're talking
about.
Madam chair Senator Gonzalez I
think that's a great idea I
think that it could be a hybrid
because I know that we have hot
and cold trucks and those are
are harder to lease because
they're special order typically
but I think on routine vehicles
we can and will check into you
know.
Disability modifications
vehicles as well we can take a
look at that but I don't I don't
know that we've really explored
that but we we will take a look
at that thank you for that
recommendation.
Thank you would have more
reliable and better.
Operations you know of more
functional type of.
I know they do they do get all.
We will definitely take a look
thank you so much.
Kelly anything else one.
Mr chair now.
Members of.
Then the we want thank you thank
you thank you for being here and
thank you for the information
thank you.
