We can still do it going to do
it can I introduce my guess when
you can Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Back.
About some.
The cop because the.
Thank you Mr might be real quick
this is Andrew Shuman everybody
he is an outstanding young man
who has like seventeen master's
degrees already in Cali fifty
eight you know associates I met
him recently right before the
session started and invited him
to to join me during the session
and as it turns out several
other legislators already done
that and so we're just trying to
get in his dance cards we can
participate in all of our work
and I'm just really happy to
have him here with me thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator
for a lot of intelligence
introduce my guest.
Thank you.
You want to go ahead and.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning Britain Senate bill two
seven right I have Senate bill
two seventy it's an
appropriation bill for two
hundred thousand dollars to fund
the national history day program
to support any school that
wishes to participate in the
program and national history day
programs an annual competition
were students grades six through
twelve choose a topic and do a
deep dive in the past by
conducting extensive research in
libraries archives museums and
then they present their can
conclusions and evidence through
papers where their value waited
by professional historians and
educators and through this
process students develop skills
in communication project
management and historical
thinking and I have my expert
witness with me Mr chairman Eli
in may and with that I'm gonna
turn it over for my expert
witness to say a few words thank
you senator Mister chair members
of the committee thank you for
having me like in a state
librarian is Senator nicely said
this is two hundred thousand
dollars appropriation from
general fund to the department
of cultural affairs
at times in the past this
funding has come to the state
library this is essentially
passed through funding we is
sole source contract with the
communities council and there is
a representative of the the
communities council here today
of the communities council runs
the program on our behalf
through that contract I would
just add that it serves about
six thousand students on average
I would say this is for grades
six through twelve and it is not
only an annual program it's a
year long program so of the
workday and the title is a
little bit of a misnomer history
day is really a year long
program
minutes ago way for students to
really dive into researching a
subject of their topic with the
mentor
and a very in a very deep.
Ways so
with that I will I will only add
to that we do not currently have
any recurring funding in our
budget so this would be
the only funding that we would
have in our budget for FY twenty
four and without all will stand
for questions.
Zoom this is not.
Your.
Mr chairman and members of the
the committee my name is what's
that.
Okay.
Got it.
Right my name is Brandon Johnson
I I am with the New Mexico you
manage counseling here
as a a parent and as a judge I
took the day off to to be here
because I wanted to let you know
that act as a parent I've had
two kids go through this program
my old this is a junior my
youngest is a freshman in high
school and they both benefited
tremendously from this program
they learn research skills
they've learned how to speak in
front of groups which I think is
important they also learn
technical skills they did a of
short documentary on
Bill topic so I I can't say
enough good about the program
also there are people trying to
get into zoom but for whatever
reason it's not working so just
to let you know.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
this is an excellent idea one of
the things that I have talked
about a while back and for we
had for I think quite introduce
it but was interested in this.
You know.
Taking a little step further
creating sort of a New Mexico
room and each one of our public
libraries also have you
considered that at all is that
that that that ever come up in
this conversation.
Mr chair at thank you for the
question Senator I do remember
that conversation we do the
state lottery continues to
provide
about eleven thousand dollars
per year to every library with
additional funding for tribal
libraries and and special
requests as well so we do
support the concept but we
cannot move forward with the
idea of having the The New
Mexico room in every library we
our philosophy in general is to
get funding to the libraries and
provide support but let them
make the decisions with the
funding thank you Mr chairman
yeah the reason I bring it up is
so what was a traveling in
Tennessee one time and I just
kind of had some extra time and
I I know that all of my
colleagues do this whenever it's
time to go into public libraries
and hang out what just so
happened I was by this really
nice library when and I just was
so impressed and I ask the
librarian and she says no every
Tennessee library has a
dedicated Tennessee room in the
library and so I think we should
look at that at some point thank
you.
Any other questions it's a
pleasure to committee for the
past couple Senators second by
Senator nine.
Is Senator Gonzales happen
beyond.
I know I think it's a no I just
wanna make.
Okay.
in projection thank you pass
motion.
We have.
No objections.
Nine zero
thank you
Senator Gonzales is built.
It yeah.
We do have we do have an
incentive for them I just kind
of taking expert witness when
this phone can Mr chairman of
the Senate rules for the.
In the yes Representative horse
racing fees.
That's what the in the new
equipment with we actually have
our committee we have to train a
set of young people.
I'm into this roundhouse
legislative government deals and
they have to learn how to
present bills and and ask
questions we're going to do that
with us a little bit but if we
don't start training these older
people if you look.
Well not in our committee
because everybody and try to
bring in the younger so but if
you look at some of the other
committees the committee
secretaries are all the the
analyst with other committees I
said in other committees.
In order.
I said in other committees but
we got to bring up this other
group of people that want to do
government in in the only way we
can do that as we train them so
remind you and injure hundreds
Senate Bill to use to seventy
five and we do have a man for
that I talked to the sponsor of
the bill Senator Gonzales he's
fine with the amendments I do
agree to Mr chairman of the
stuff we did of the bill last
time I was sitting there with
that and we have a whole
amendment drafted also admit it
you want.
have a motion to move the
amendment for a disclosure
amendment to Senate bill two
seventy five for discussion
purposes.
Second by Senator Rodriguez
presenting abilities to.
Senator do you have a copy
amendment or do you.
We'll get you a copy explained
it this is this the one that we
spoke to Mr chairman that this
is the one that takes a twenty
five percent does twelve percent
now and spend as twelve percent
in it in a calendar year not a
fiscal calendar year that's the
confusion and then it adds in
electric vehicles right.
and sits at a rate of.
First of that.
Now I did brief the sponsor I
did too and I but I didn't hear
back from just rely on whatever
you spoke to him about that I
talked to him yesterday and
asked about adding electrical
vehicles in and at a at a rate I
need to figure that out they
don't see.
From a class.
So we in this ammendment
included in at the same rate as
regular guests.
Vehicles depending upon the way.
based on their way that because
that's the way the past present
and so included in them so if
the.
Senator somebody has a lexical
vehicle that set of two thousand
pounds they're going to be at
the rate of thirty four.
Full movie depends on the
amendment considering that the
sponsor was.
Have a motion for do pass I'll
second the motion we're Senator
Hemphill went.
Senator Rodriguez went to do a
bill.
Thank you have a comment on the
amendment.
Mr chair that.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you see you
there that's okay Ricky Serna
secretary department
transportation I haven't been
made but it it sounds as though
where
we're going to charge electric
vehicles the same rate based on
their weight and age as gas
vehicles center for the
educational math I are aware
that scale is correct classify
them in that same scale for
right now okay Mister chair out
after committee I confirmed it I
believe.
Currently.
Based on my conversation with
secretary Schardin Clarke
currently they are paying the
registration fee consistent with
gasoline vehicles based on age
and weight.
and so my thought was the intent
of the amendment was to avid
increment above that base
registration fee which would
essentially recoup the taxes
lost from the reduction in fuel
purchases okay let us get this
ammendment on and then we're
gonna then the the last cation
mixed verbally.
It'll be accounted for because
if it's higher look jumped into
the highway class so.
So
the initial exam the X. six
seven point.
So we have a motion and a second
to drop the amendment any
objection to that amendment.
Question I'm the man yeah yeah.
And senator and secretary so.
So seeing the amendment I see
that
We're continuing we have a kind
of a special not an exemption
but we charge important
vehicles.
Less tax than any other
commercial use and we're
extending that to the selective
vehicle my reading that right Mr
secretary.
Mr chair Senator Steinborn I I
haven't had a chance to read
through it but if that's your.
It's an extension of current law
that says all four vehicles
having a declared waited more
than both of our.
So this two story.
So be declared chubby charge
registration of two thirds of
the right of the respective fees
so we give a discounted rates in
law.
And we extend that in this
ammendment so Mr chair Senator
Woods it appears this happening
looking at the F. I. R. where
the table that Mr chair was
referring to where it says
trucks tractors and buses were
inserting in their electric
vehicles which would then make
them subject to registration
fees based on their weight and
whether or not there five years
or older
might in my discussions with
secretary Schardin Clarke my
belief is that they are already
included in this table meaning
that they are paying a base
registration fee based on their
way and whether or not there
five years or older.
And so in other bills for
example senator Tom Ince bill
he's establishing an incremental
above their base registration
fee so if I have an electric
vehicle that weighs four
thousand pounds or less that is
brand new I would be paying
forty dollars and an electric
vehicle increments would come
above that base registration way
and the increment would offset
some of the tax lost far from
them not purchasing fuel thank
you Mr chair Senator Steinborn
farm vehicles are taxed
completely different because
they're not on the on the roads
all the time so you may have a
truck that just calls on the
farming goes to the.
Silos to come slowly and in
comes back and so those are
important because they have a
special registrations and
they're not doing waiting
distance.
Mr chair.
These anyway that's what I was
asking about I was actually
asked about something different
a secretary to get that has a
special form right that's good
explanation Mr so that's all I
have.
Thank you so any objections to
adopting the amendment.
Seven amended bill
Mr secretary of.
I want to tell us where you
think this are to be in the
Senator Padilla can propose that
The incremental yeah the
implement for electrical
vehicles and and we're track
that we have another are you
saying we have another bill
going through the legislature
right now on the subject Mr
chair Senator Woods there there
is a a bill to provide rebates
for electric vehicles that does
that and adds an incremental
distribution P. sorted
essentially does is say any
vehicle that's registering and
paying a fee pursuant to that
table must also pay an extra and
I believe in Senator Commons
Bill it's an extra sixty dollars
if it is a hybrid both gas
electric and an additional one
hundred and twenty dollars if
it's just all electric so they
would pay that base be and then
there would be an additional
cost about the.
The sixty dollars above if there
hybrid.
In one twenty above the base
rate if there of all full
lexical vehicle correct Mr in
order explain this I'm just
going to go to the largest class
in this in this scale which is
greater than three thousand
pounds right and we're going to
increase the fee to seventy
dollars so on top of the seventy
there would be pain
one thirty.
For this the class of greater
than three thousand if there
hybrid that sounds correct
yesterday and then
I'm gonna pick than middle of
the road.
maybe a truck ten thousand to
twelve thousand pounds the fee
is one forty one will be half of
that.
But twelve percent after that so
one forty one plus one twenty
would permit three sixty.
And so then be paying three
sixty for all that trickle
vehicle knowing that they're not
two sixty.
One forty one twenty two sixty
sixty one sixty one okay.
so that's what they would be
paying in that weight class.
Correct well I mean you know the
but remember Senator one time
fee that they would yeah yeah I
think that completely offset
what we're gonna lose and gas
taxes for instance.
Remember we got some track
twenty Bucks and we divide that
by two so we're taking twelve
off now because we just got the
twenty five percent to twelve
percent and then so we take that
twelve dollars off that's the
right now range simply do you
have any issues with that I
don't I just don't know exactly
where to put it in the bill
because I see a couple of
sessions were could go you could
go to the end of one
section thank you could create a
part just I mean I was the only
section that's what you have to
do the thank.
So you want proposed amendments
to move it that we'll have to
probably have it drawn up so we
know exactly what's going to go
so.
So you could create a section
three and then move the
effective date this a new
section for.
Do you want us to get an
amendment drafted will.
It's it's by the unicenter
Gonzalez's bill that you've
already talked and so I talked
to yesterday several times told
what what it is all right with
it extending that New Mexico
vehicles in there and in it he
said he was fine with.
Told what rates we thought we're
going to.
Is like a new section
so we'll have to add a section.
Mr I absolutely spoke with
hundreds of because it's HSD
bill he supportive and I can
work I can get secretary
Schardin Clarke recall also to
make sure we can confer with her
on the amendment are we to meet
this afternoon Mister chairman
we are gonna meet this afternoon
so I guess we'll it was not one
amendment on this bill.
We'll come back in and point
third hearing for a start
hearing and get it out today.
This of course that line if we
can get Adrian or someone to do
that R. Clifford if someone's
tracking that amendment that
they just talked about if we can
get counsel to go do that real
quick we can we can hold our
budget we can even do it right
now before we finish this
Senator Burt.
Seven restaurants.
Chair and senator didn't we put.
A amendment on this bill.
To reduce it to.
Half of the increase Senator
amendment we just put on.
We propose that we split the
increased.
Yeah but we didn't come in with
a doctor.
We just talked about and then we
will go over the so.
Senator.
But on.
Split it right.
He put that amendment on Friday
verbally yeah that was approval
This Is Your.
Yes this is electrical vehicle
so but verbal amendment one
owners on Friday.
That's all at.
Number two you have no I will
make sure you I would stand up
but I wanted to
Is that.
Waving and it was a tiny little.
Separately I guess we'll there
somebody will better if we just
had it writing that waits on the
right yeah I agree so that we're
not lawyers so we don't know how
to track that we can do it into
this hearing or in the
afternoon.
We're gonna try should be pretty
quick.
Senator Stefanics other issues.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee.
I'm here with the some experts
on Senate bill seven as amended
and I believe the finance
committee has a committee
substitute bills.
You have a committee since.
Yes.
I'm not here okay be back.
Many service.
Seven million.
You don't have.
You have a copy Committee
substance
I have.
point two two five six nine
seven point one I believe Phelps
and Adrian worked had it worked
on over the weekend.
Fifteen.
Make sure you get center of
million make sure he gets his
own copy code.
We can have in our books.
Well that.
Senator at going to start on the
substitute okay so this are on
the way I'm sorry about that Mr
chair that's our fault members
apologize to the changes in the
committee substitute the Senate
finance committee substitute it
includes the Senate I called the
she packed the Senate health and
public affairs committee
amendments it includes now
requires Medicaid providers so
that the hospital for the health
care facilities would be
Medicaid providers and it
stripped the appropriation.
So that's what the of finance
committee substitute did on
Senate bill seven Senate bill
seven is the health care fund
that the governor is proposing.
Now a one second she passed out
the bill so don't we're waiting
the subset of that's what this
one just said seven the money
came the as the bill.
To make sure there's no seven on
what she passed out because mine
came with the seven which is.
Is not just.
So everybody's got the sub
right.
Yeah.
No seven on the top.
Six nine seven point two six
nine seven point two is what
we're working from home so I
don't have a point to I only
have a point one that I know
what it does.
That.
Too much paper in this bill.
Thank you.
All right okay so Mister chair
on the issue.
Mr chair members of the
committee this is a rural health
care funded that the governor is
proposing to assist of
communities that have facilities
outpatient and inpatient with
operating losses and this would
affect of health care in twenty
eight of our thirty three
counties and it is a loan fund
it would only be set of bailable
to the health care facilities
that are expanding services and
have an operating loss it might
be in communities that are
setting up kidney care physical
therapy OBGYN behavioral health
a variety of services it would
be based upon right now the
department of health and Human
Services department does
verified the IRS statements from
all of our hospitals in
institutions and facilities
around the state so it would be
based upon the IRS operating
losses that are shown on the
forms so would be alone after
the fact and the whole purpose
is to keep some of our rural
facilities from closing and to
keep them in operation so the
governor has tried this in the
past but we refined it well we
work with Medicaid with the
hospital association with other
comments that they should
probably primarily the for our
Medicaid facilities and
institutions with me today I
have the acting secretary of the
Human Services Department Kerry
are me ho and the executive
director of the New Mexico
hospital association Troy Clark.
So Kerry secretary Mr chair
members of the committee good
morning as Senator Stefanics
said that Senate bill seven
creates a rural health care
delivery fund the Human Services
department would administer the
funding created new grant
program for rural providers for
struggling with those operating
losses that are incurred in
providing inpatient outpatient
primary specialty behavioral
health or medical transportation
services to New Mexicans and
we're recognize revenue such as
reimbursement for Medicaid and
other peers is not sufficient
just Senator Stefanics the
mentioned the original bill had
an appropriation of two hundred
million of that amount has been
removed from the substitute but
we think that is the right
amount to really make a
difference that will spur change
innovation and economic
development to improve access to
care in our rural communities
here in New Mexico
the bill was amended as serve
Senator Stefanics mentioned to
click the ability for a provider
group not located in a rural
area to bring up a new service
so not just operating losses for
existing services but really
allowing for rural providers to
expand it and it would allow for
services such as like a mobile
unit that could be provided by a
larger hospital to serve a
specifically a rural community
and to ensure that grantees are
serving Medicaid patients
in New Mexico we are currently
experiencing critical shortages
of all health care providers in
rural areas eleven of New
Mexicos counties are considered
OB desert's meaning that there's
no obstetric care no midwives
and no alternative place to have
a baby our state currently
maintains only seventeen point
seven hospital beds per ten
thousand residents well below
the national average and ranking
New Mexico forty fifth in the
country seven New Mexico
counties do not have any access
to hospital services.
All.
Most of our rural providers are
operating at a loss and
struggling to keep their doors
open and can even consider
expanding to new services such
as behavioral health or
reinstating lost services such
as OB care the combination of
high fixed costs and lower
patient volume is exacerbated
during the initial years of
operation which is why the bill
focuses on the first five years
well providers work on expanding
patient volume and move toward
sustainability
nationally we've seen the rapid
closures of rural hospitals and
the departure of rural providers
from our rural communities due
to this problem and we think
that Senate bill seven offers a
creative solution federal rules
that govern the extent to which
Medicaid can pay providers for
uncompensated care have been
substantially altered and pull
backs and supplementation of the
affordable Care Act in two
thousand fourteen which is why
standard Medicaid revenue is
insufficient to solve the
problem we also recognize that
rural hospitals and other
providers can service economic
anchors in their communities
providing jobs and connecting
people to critical resources
emergency rooms often serve as
the first and often repeated
point of entry for individuals
with serious mental illness and
substance use disorders and
often there are few other
behavioral health providers in
those communities to provide
that outpatient mental health of
those individuals needs Senate
bill seven will allow us to
address the ongoing need for
providers throughout the state
by helping to support not only
new hospitals and facilities but
also new and expanded outpatient
physical and behavioral health
services where we have
significant shortages thank you
Mr.
Mr chair and committee members
thank you I will be brief and
short because miss secretary
acting secretary meal cover many
of the points two things I just
like to stress one this fund we
fully support because it is it
removes one of the barriers to
increasing access to health care
throughout our rural areas and
that is the start up or
financial costs in the early
years of a new program you still
have other issues that need to
be overcome but the other issue
is although I represent the
hospital association this is not
for just hospitals as a for all
of our communities what it and
would be applicable to any
health care facility provider
whether it be an FQHC a hospital
or physician clinic with that
I'll turn time back over to
search about.
Mr chair were open to.
Everything you tell me what it
F. two H. C..
If it's a federally qualified
health center okay.
Everybody talks mechanisms and
some of come up in the next
secretary for HSD.
then go to the audience first in
support we'll take maybe one or
two people come up and support
in how many we have ones of.
We'll do two year two on June
about one minute pieces quickly
and get through it.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is sherry
Dotson and I am a volunteer
advocate for a a RP New Mexico
it access to rural health care
is vital to our many seniors
that live in rural areas and
underserved areas and for this
reason a a RP New Mexico
supports this Bill SB seven and
thank you very much thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Kerry robin printer
with the New Mexico Medical
Society we worked really hard on
the committee substitute for the
Senate health and public affairs
committee for start up costs for
included for independent
providers as well we think
that's a really critical part of
the bill and we fully support
its passage today thank you so
much thank you can go to to from
the moment you to into because
we we got to go to the floor and
other bills that to economy pick
whoever.
More you got about one minute.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members out I am Mike
Morris near lowest since we can
we got on the computer but we
don't have another one.
Trying to get more.
Thank you good morning Mr.
Great good morning Mr chairman
and committee members on Mike
Morris more Clovis and I want to
think the bill's sponsors and
express my support for SB seven
in Clovis that you know we're
experiencing the at the
challenges to access to health
care just as as we described I
in particular we like that this
bill recognizes the need to
address the gaps of behavioral
health care now we've we've I
let it charge and I County
efforts in multiple missteps
municipality efforts to complete
a feasibility study that
proposes that facility be
constructed in Clovis and
provide service to the area for
for behavioral health to the
region inpatient outpatient
crisis care for capital we're
seeking outlay appropriations
but we that this bill is music
to our ears with for the
operational side and that and
securing the operational success
of this facility once it's
constructed I hope that
resolutions of support from
Clovis poor Tallas curry county
and Union County have made it to
you this morning will have other
staff our group I'm and I hope
that you'll get SB seven I do
past thank you for your time.
J..
In the there you got about one
minute.
Yes good morning Mister chair
members of the.
We lost.
It's you hear me now that we can
okay sorry about that
good morning again and thank you
for allowing me to comment this
morning and we at Mexico lists
for Children are in support of
SB seven and thank Senator
Stefanics for bringing it
forward SB seven supports
equitable access to health care
for rural New Mexicans by
supporting the success of rural
health care facilities and so
folks can access care without
having to leave their
communities and so we asked the
committee to join us in
supporting this bill today thank
you thank you I know that young
lady had her hand raised and say
something really quick if you
drive a long distance.
Support.
Mr chairman you have to come up
to the Mike in.
Sometimes I forget we drive a
long ways to come.
I mean it Mr chair members of
the committee I mean that I mean
as Ammerman and the new CEO of
the New Mexico primary care
cessation we are the people who
represent all of the federally
qualified health centers across
New Mexico we have three hundred
and seventy thousand people we
serve mostly in rural and
underserved areas and we stand
in full support we appreciate
the collaborative process that
has been put together.
Thanks very thankful for that
thank you thank you for anybody
in opposition.
Anybody on zoom in opposition.
The
questions from committee members
we adopt a substitute yes we
have not.
You have a motion to adopt the
substitute.
a motion by Senator Campos
second by Senator Steinborn any
of the projection for discussion
purposes Sen Clemente over that
you described the substitute
bill yes I did Mr chair it
The **** Amendment it it
included Medicaid providers and
it stripped the appropriation.
Any questions on the substitute
for.
Senator Steinborn question on
the bill which is itself it I we
can adopt and then we can go to
Sen Campos you have a question
no not not in the substitution.
The question so no motion adopt
the substitute Gen.
Have a motion Mason compost
seconded by Senator Rodriguez
any objection to adopting the
substitute so we're on the bill
Senator Steinborn here first on
my list incentive comp chair and
senator a quick quick question
of well couple questions number
one is this in house bill to the
the funding for this.
Mr chair.
Senator I do not believe it is I
believe that the house put in a
small portion and that the
Senate was going to discuss if
it was going to add to that
small portion and Mr chair I'm
not sure if it was like twenty
million that was put in on the
house side
Senator phonics there's
currently forty million and
house bill two and as it moves
over and we're looking at bills
coming through or we're going to
add additional money to it to
make sure it's I think this is
one of the things we're going to
fully fund.
There's a crisis throughout New
Mexico so just be reassured I
think we're gonna get to where
you need to be.
That let me ask more questions
Mr chairman
Senator you it said that these
would be loans but the bill
doesn't use the word loan it
repeatedly says grants you are
on the yes and I'm sorry about
that so Mr chair Senator I'm
gonna have of our secretary
acting secretary is to that
question.
Mr chair as Senator Steinborn it
actually is a grant program so
it would not require providers
to pay back loans there are
other loan programs that I've
had to limited success partially
because of the very reasons of
the high costs and the inability
for providers to pay those
dollars back so these are really
full out requests we would do
reconciliation on the back end
to make sure that operating
losses were incurred as
projected in that we were
covering the correct amount but
they would be requests Mr Mr
chair and Senator.
I know we have some existing
clinics that are really worried
about cost of insurance
increases and I'm wondering
could those kinds of clinics
that have been in business who
may need help.
Could they be qualified for only
qualify if their balance sheet
on the whole experienced a loss.
So on chairman Senator before I
turn it over to the secretary to
answer that I do know that there
is a
an effort under way right now to
address the insurance question
for the next few years and that
is another piece of legislation
that will be coming forward but
in terms of this bill I'll defer
to the secretary to answer them
Mr chair Senator agree with
Senator Stefanics that there are
other pieces of legislation
to focus on the insurance issue
I think this is really focused
on an operating losses as a
whole at a as a whole and this
would have to is we have to be
anchored on the balance sheet so
that we would well Mr Mr I think
this does apply to this bill
because if thing Kerr a loss
regardless where the loss comes
from I'm really asking with that
type of a clinic he's been in
business for a while.
Be eligible and I know we said
start up businesses but no no
existing and novel so this is
current iteration the bill
includes I guess an existing.
Winnick that's really the.
Show them on their form.
Second quarter the fifth.
Mr chair Senator on page two
line twenty four grants are
limited to covering operating
losses for which recognized
revenue is not sufficient.
So it is the revenue from that
service thank you Mr chair.
Available on the SEC's.
Whatever their losses are they
can get.
Thank you Mr chair I I guess I'm
looking at page two.
That online twelve this is a new
health care service that's
really gets to the crux of what
I'm asking is if you're an
existing business not providing
a new service let's say you're
struggling nonetheless would you
be eligible if you're suffering
losses.
I would think we would want them
to be I can appreciate helping
with start up costs to the but
what are your thoughts on a
chair Senator so Mr chair
Senator I'll defer to the
secretary on this.
Mr chair Senator
My read of the bill is that it's
for new or expanded services and
really sort of trying to create
a pathway for a provider that's
really constructing to just keep
their doors open to expand or
offer new services such as
behavioral health which has been
talked about a lot
you know that's that's my
understanding of yeah and the
way that the bill is right it's
really to support the expansion
of New Mexico new services and
for Communities.
Well the service at the center
personally I think we should
consider talking about taking up
the directing new and I'll tell
you why because I mean we have
key providers and communities
that are established that are
struggling and I don't think we
should say well.
They don't need the help wishes
focuses crucial source of
funding on a new clinic that
starts up why would we include
the one major they're
struggling.
The has employees it's no by the
community as.
What are your thoughts on that.
No Mr yes.
Mr chair yes.
Mr with all due respect that
other type track with the chair
was saying.
I see the word video.
And I take that to mean what
we're new main switch is a new
service being provided.
Something moving forward not an
existing service and so would it
be friendly to take out the word
new.
Mr chair this is an executive
bill and I think that they have
negotiated several things with
the providers all over the state
doctors outpatient clinics the
hospitals and before I would
make that change I would have to
take it back to the executive.
Yeah well Mr that could occur
respect that position Senator I.
I hope that we can I mean it's
another one of these bills as
soon as first committee and then
the executive so you're not
allowed to change a single this
is an important where to get it
but you know I've gotten calls
to session from find your is not
actually my commute and Sapporo
Tremendously concerned about
what's going on here about
shutting doors that will and
their existing businesses so.
I just think that's part of our
health care crisis in New
Mexico's keeping those clinics
viable and so I think this is a
really important change would
appreciate if you're.
Committed you in your experts
having a conversation adopt
telling back you know we don't
have to I don't because a here
but anyway so that's one issue
on it if I.
And then another if I want to
ask about Mr chair
Senator is school based health
centers I would assume that this
bill doesn't include school
based health centers but we're
hearing so much about the need
for funding for school based
health centers that are put.
In a really similar situation
have what are your what would be
your thoughts about possibly
even including them.
So Mister chair in our state we
have different types of school
based health centers some are
attached to our large health
care systems throughout the
state and some are independent
with the department of health
and so for those that are
included with Presbyterian let's
say they would be covered if
they can shop rating losses but
for those that are independent
set up by the state of New
Mexico there's a separate
funding stream for those school
based health clinics.
Mr chair I've got in doing in
the county I've got a
Connectivity Senator health
center they ran for school based
health centers part of COVID and
now they basically shattered
them all with the exception of
like one roaming staff person
and so I wonder if this bill
would be able to help them
sounds like they might.
If if there's operating losses.
Perhaps so Mr chair Senator I
think I secretary could answer
that Mr chair Senator Steinborn
actually don't see provision in
the bill that would preclude
school based health center so
there's there's two types of
providers that would be included
as eligible it would include
facility type providers and
serve other types of providers
that are not traditional
facilities in a school based
health center sort of would
qualify I think.
For requests as well so I I
actually don't think they're
excluded from the bill.
Well that that would be great Mr
chair in college because we
don't really provide a whole lot
of funding the school based
health centers and that's
serving a very vulnerable
populations I think we all agree
so madam secretary I really love
it if we could have a
conversation about that as well
I think those two changes now
they may be an existing school
provider once again the word new
could prohibit certain ones from
qualifying unintended
consequence for a shutting off
the budget so those are two
changes we can look at if needed
Really make this a superstar.
Plant the idea thank you Mr
chair particular couples thank
you Mr chairman of course
Centers defects thank you very
much for bringing this
particular piece of legislation
forward I I really appreciate
that and and as we we deal with
the rural health care issues I
know there's no one better not
only qualified but if that is in
the trenches dealing with this
is someone like yourself Mr
chair as we move forward
This does this mean that.
This would be an opportunity for
some of our rural health care
providers hospitals in
particular to change their
status in order to qualify under
new so that they're able if you
will to
To be able to qualify for these
grants that would be issued.
So Mr chair Senator thank you
for the question if it is a new
services being set up so for
example let's say the hospital
in Las Vegas did not find
currently OBGYN and wanted to
set up a week you land it would
be seen as a new service or
expanded service so if you had
behavioral health Mr chair
Senator in a tiny little part
and you wanted to set up some
outpatient services throughout
the community that would also
qualify so so Mister chairman
Senator in terms of this than
the reimbursement or if you will
the grant would just be for the
resources that would be needed
for that specific new services
that is that what I understand
so Mister chair yes but there is
an exclusion it does not cover
construction.
So secretary madam secretary do
want to say anything else about
this Mr chair Senator Campos it
I it's really for operating
losses that are projected to be
incurred so which would be sort
of reconciled on the back and
did not a Senator Stefanics
stated specifically excluding
capital costs so so Mr chairman
of course Senator as we move
forward then if let's say for
example there was a rural
hospital I wanted to go and set
up the new services but the
needed equipment is is that
covered under this or or it's
not it's just gonna be for the
operational shortcomings so Mr
chair Senator I'm going to defer
to the secretary.
Mr chair Senator I believe I
believe that it would be those
those high fixed costs that are
things that the hospital would
have to invest in while they're
building up that revenue stream
to sort of make that services of
all would be exactly the types
of things that we're trying
cover although I would defer to
Mister constitute.
And and Mr chair if if we're not
fully clear on that baby as it
goes forward if you just please
check into that because I know
that's going to be a significant
issue particularly for many of
our rural health care
organizations so so Mister chair
and Senator as we move forward
one of the big issues because
it's going to be general fund
and the issue then becomes how
are we going to deal with these
entities that are going to find
the new services in particularly
if they're going to be a not for
profit or that is already been
indicated if they're going to be
setting up a mobile unit and
they'll be traveling throughout
I will just say the state is is
this in any way a violation of
our anti donation clause in
terms of.
Providing a grant to.
Health care providers in rural
New Mexico that are not publicly
or government run.
Mr chair Senator on page five
number eleven line sixteen start
up costs is to provide and it
does have costs associated with
leasing equipment location or
property leasing location our
property and depreciation of
equipment costs so it is not
construction but the leasing of.
And and so so if I may Mister
Mister chair and of course our
Senator when we start talking
now about the anti donation
component does this have an
effect on that if let's say for
example there's a not for profit
starting up if you will a new
portion of one of the services
to be provided and we do have
some of that occurring within
within the district that I
represent so the question then
would be is there any violation
of anti donation clause using
general fund money to go ahead
and initiate if you will and and
stimulate if you will the health
care services that are needed in
rural New Mexico thank you Mr
chair so Mister chair and
senator on the anti donation
clause of the Medicaid provision
does take care of our serving
those people who are below the
poverty level and is allowable
by the anti donation plus and so
Mister chairman Senator that
leads to my follow up question
with the pass through so here
they qualify for Medicaid
reimbursement this goes to the
Department from the department
they disperse the resources is
that going to be directly by
those applications of those
providers in rural New Mexico or
is it going to be a separate
disbursement.
Ending on who applies for the
resources and then how their
provided the grant thank you Mr
chair so Mr chair Senator I'm
gonna have the secretary is for
that Mr chair Senator Campos it
would be a separate disbursement
to would not be included I think
you may be asking them bills be
clear if if I misunderstand your
question of whether it's paid
through like a Medicaid
reimbursement that is not the
way this bill would work it
would actually be a separate
payment that would not flow
through our managed care
capitation rates or any other
rate structure because this is
not reimbursement for services
that exist yet so it would be
separate and that's partly why
it's not Mashable with Medicaid
federal match and it's really
just state general fund to
support those that build up of
services so Mister Mr chair as
we move forward and senator
that's the concern that I have
because here we're talking about
Medicaid on this side what they
qualify for and what that
process is on the other side we
have general fund and what we're
indicating as these requests are
going to be dispersed according
to that but in reality we're not
taking into consideration the
Medicaid resources and so that
that creates the concern in
terms of the anti donation
component and and I'm I'm very
supportive of the bill and the
intent I just want to make sure
as we deal with this that again
we're conforming to what our
state constitution what our own
laws are indicating and then
from there how we can get the
billable services if you will
taking care of thank you Mr
chair Senator.
Thank you you make some good
points that we should have on
the Medicaid reimbursement if we
give it to them to Medicaid
right on their losses and they
get a higher rate of
reimbursement.
And so it's something we should
probably.
Look here I think our new
secretary of DFA has a law
degree and I think he should
probably consult with the
secretary the general counsel
for the governor and clear up
that question thank no have
center time and questions.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
thank you guys for presenting
this I to echo some of the
concerns that have been
expressed by my colleagues by
your own hands out here it says
our rural hospitals and I don't
disagree with this rural
hospitals are being forced to
close because reimbursement is
not enough to cover the cost of
delivering care to patients in
rural areas I don't disagree but
when I read the bill it doesn't
necessarily address that problem
rating on page two lines twelve
and then again down on twenty
two this is this bill is desist
and building new health care
services new or expansions down
down lower it says newly
constructed rural health care
facilities of the operation of
the newly expanded health care
service but it does little to
assist.
Existing providers with existing
services and those are the ones
that we see taking a loss in in
our rural communities we need
help with the current services
current providers in this bill
does nothing to do that in fact
I worry that it incentivizes
expansion beyond the demands of
our rural areas and and would
also incentivize that you know
well it removes incentives for
responsible financial management
if you can we just agree we're
gonna pay the losses no matter
what but but it seems to me that
the better conversation is how
do we invest in the services
that are already there at the
providers that are already about
to shut their door and saying
well you have to do more how to
how do we how do we assist them
to provide the services that
they are trying to offer now I
also I also think that there was
mentioned earlier about the
school based health center I
know that in truth or
consequences New Mexico that's
the only Pete pediatric care
there is and so I would like to
see in a little more than I
think it could help them because
as I read through the bill I
don't see any area in which
would guarantee that they too
would be eligible for that so I
just wanted to the exact same
concerns we've heard instead of
investing in new and where we go
from here I just want to make
sure that our current and
services we currently have is
where we making investments
today thank you thank you.
you know I I I also agree but
the city want to start a new
program and it never becomes
fully operational or fully
funded right they keep running
losses losses and in the program
probably should maybe never
should the start in the first
place because there was enough
people how do we control that.
That they don't start a new.
I'll pick something and then say
we wanted this but now there's
no revenue and now we need to
get rid of it and now they're
going to keep coming back for
more more more I mean is there
some cap controls in your so Mr
chair I'm gonna let you to my
experts into this
Mr chair Senator and Senator
Diamond I actually it there are
a couple things I want to
mention one is possible to
contain significant investments
in the provider network today so
we had substantial funding built
into the Human Services
department budget to take
providers existing providers up
much higher than they are in the
Medicaid reimbursement rates so
we're looking at going up two
hundred twenty percent of
Medicare that's that's in house
bill two today and it's part of
you know part but the
legislative and the executive
agree on that substantial
investments that that does get
part of the way there there are
things that Medicaid cannot
fully fund and it is more
expensive for providers in those
first few years when they're
trying to build up a service
when they're trying to address
their revenue stream and trying
to figure out how to get all of
those things stood up in the
require some technical
assistance which is also private
provided by the Human Services
Department in order to get that
sustainable revenue there I
think you're raising some very
valid points and and we would
definitely want to work with
grantees about you the needs in
their community and whether
whether those needs are going to
be met by the desired service or
an alternative service might
workforce an alternative model
might work to get them their
where they need to be so I I
just wanted to say thank
you know we would sort of take a
look at that and I mean there's
language in the bill also about
really serve prioritizing
requests based on the needs of
the community it may be that a
full obstetric unit isn't the
right solution and would want to
work with of those communities
sister think about alternative
models that would be more
appropriate.
for that community based on what
their projected volume would be
so Mister Clark would like to
come in as well.
Thank you Mr chairman senators
of the committee I would add to
this that I appreciate your
comments Senator Diamond it this
doesn't solve all the problems
of our existing hospitals but it
does address the one of the
components that is inhibiting
our facilities or hospitals and
other providers if you need
school based health centers from
expanding services and we keep
highlighting prenatal Services
obstetric services I would tell
you there are many communities
that don't have prenatal
services they could have that
through telehealth offered to
begin to be aboard they don't
have enough volume that they
could be offered for so this is
for an expansion of services
that will allow it increased
access and that could be
behavioral to could be prenatal
could be a number of different
things are out there.
And while it's not solving the
issue that you are talking about
existing facilities it is in
there to expand that access to
our rural communities and it
does provide protections Mr
chairman in that there's a
requirement that if you receive
these grant monies if you were
to apply for one year that you
were agreeing to at least remain
open for an additional year on
top of that so it matching the
date for two years additional
too so you don't have these
situations where somebody comes
in and applies loses the money
that for something that should
not start of the intent is to
provide sustainable services for
communities that do not have
them today for increased access.
Get ready because the state has
never collections on anything
they have ever said when we said
we give you money to do this and
and then they closed a year
later in the state I in a bad
back we've never done that but
it it it's interesting to me how
do we also protected not in use
my committee for example we have
doctors that have been there
extent motion everyone has in
here in their room rate and
those doctors may have three
thousand patients and their
family practitioners and yada
yada and and all of sudden
Presbyterian you and then
somebody sees us and says Hey we
know that there's a profitable
sector in Gallup New Mexico that
we can go pick up well the
family provider may still be
there and then they'll pick up
those patients how do we protect
those local providers in there's
one new one when our M. C. H. is
in shambles those doctors came
to me and in Atlanta of building
they moved into the building the
doctors are there currently
volunteering for my HSA all
remained in the community and
and then going to competition
with that doctor but how do we
keep those from from the big
boys coming in and saying we see
what they got and we're gonna
take it and we're gonna take it
with that this bill and use
their money against them that's
another key factor for me that
we may want to tighten up how do
we do that and.
This is this is critical yes to
tier C. and to Alamogordo and
because somebody will come in
in.
You know we don't have prenatal
services in Gallup so you came
in and they're doing so that
well what do we want to go back
to the hospital how do we get
that back to the hospital
because they've already took the
money and and how do we keep
those guys from killing our
other small doctors in.
And and.
In here.
You would have an answer.
Mr chair and centers on that
I'll tell you it's not the
intent and I I think it's no we
can address really we're looking
at this bills solving the
problem work there is no
interest in expanding access and
going into places because it's
not currently financially viable
because of the start up costs so
I would say I don't think the
hospitals are looking to not
have that prevention in their of
their in fact we have a
discussion with the broader
group to say we didn't want to
preclude some of our larger
health systems that are not in
rural areas because they may be
the source a special look at
prenatal care if you look at UNM
or Presbyterian level as they
could be the source to offer
that prenatal care that's a the
it telehealth out to some of the
small communities
so I think the perspective was
looking for how do we get more
access out there because today
the economics are not attracting
anyone to provide those
services.
That that's true but how do we
how do we have my current doctor
that's a family practitioner and
wants to hire prenatal doctor
and wants to use these.
Funds right there this is all
expand and I'll do this in the
community and then you get
Presbyterian that comes in and
tries to take their.
Can do it cheaper larger quicker
and and Senate building those
doctors in those communities
with this how do we how do we
keep them how expand our local
guys and and keep the the big
players out in certain areas.
Again Mister chair I would just
say I think from the and I'm not
saying that there's not other
additional language we could put
in there's a belt and suspenders
but the intent is to offer that
so the local guys would be able
to do it if it were profitable
they would qualify for these
grants so the larger providers
wouldn't have the ability to
come in and get for these
requests and it was profitable
today if without those requests
we believe the services what
I've already been drawn there
except for that one word with
new.
And that's that's what come into
play we're Senator Steinborn
said that if you come in and
offer new services then that
doesn't.
And so I really want to send
this bill out here really really
clean to the floor right center
and well Mister chair I've
already noticed some of
spellcheck problems with the
this version so we'll need to
I could come back after some of
this is discussed with the
executive I have down the school
based health clinics the
existing or current services
insurance losses and the fear of
competition from large providers
which I don't know can be
addressed by this but I did hear
your concerns
We could try to come back with a
point three version and see what
you think.
Senator Steinborn thank you
thank you very much Senator for
that I really appreciate your
willingness to look at all those
things because I think they make
a lot better I do have one
slight concern representing it's
a Representative Dona Ana County
better represents a very poor
areas in doing in a county
flexibility Dona Ana with very
rural providers that are kind of
disconnected and away from the
county including frankly a lot
clinic for that familiar that's
that that one of the biggest
providers and service someone
part again all part of going
into County this this threshold
in the bill about a hundred
thousand a county with a hundred
thousand really all providers
are very different.
I could see maybe if you were
limited to within a city you
were to do something like that
the county issue becomes
problematic because of how rural
those providers are they might
as well be treated similarly I
believe if that would be
something else you want to look
at is maybe make that threshold
by city rather than by counties
with something else.
Just a suggestion and I put that
in my district thank Senator
miss you so much Campos thank
you Mr chairman and I'd be more
than happy to work with the
senator on any of these issues I
have said about three seventy
seven the deals directly with
the school based health clinics
so there's this legislation out
there but whatever we can do to
make this the best bill possible
because that this definitely is
is much needed here in New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman
thank you.
I think I thought we had it
right but then you get other
questions right I'm gonna really
don't want to do is I don't want
expanded thousand because it's
really not rural right if those
communities wanted do something
we can do something another way
the Medicaid increases that that
could secretary talked about
would help that love from the in
in there because we had this
conversation yesterday about my
hospital and how we can increase
the Medicaid reimbursement
and spend that kind of triggered
everything so Senator what we
get those cleaned up I would get
those answers kind of this this
morning there almost as
afternoon will come back in in
the discussion but if not we're
gonna have this thing tomorrow
morning to get in in thank you
very much every morning coming
in and out everything right
thank you thank you.
Senator Rodriguez your next.
For.
Senator share.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I have a smile
Torres with me here he's the
chief economist LFC company only
works.
Indispensable Kelly yes thank
you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee as you
may recall we have discussed
Putting away a chunk of our
windfall revenues this year into
the into the severance tax
permanent fund for future use
and future needs this bill here
merrily ensures that the savings
from the debt service that we
would otherwise pay since we're
going to be using general fund
revenues we're not getting
current this debt service and so
it ensures that the debt service
that the state saves from that
will be put into the severance
tax permanent fund and it will
generate estimated ninety two
million per year and over a ten
year period and it is estimated
to to result in a hundred eighty
five point seven million by the
end of that term and in addition
to that it would generate
approximately forty one million
per year after that estimated
after the ten year period is
over so this is the vehicle by
which we can establish the the
framework to have this these
funds put in there thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee impediments from
expert witnesses Mr chair just
here for questions.
Anybody in support.
Anybody in opposition anybody on
zoom.
For.
Senator looks like you got a PT
bank questions from committee
members Senator Woods.
We're we're we're gonna passion
bill won't have yes so how will
that affect this at all no zero
six Mister chairman Senator was
we've looked into that and it
will not affect that it also
exempt it does not affect the
public schools or any of the
your marks that we have like
that the colonias the tribal
housing trust fund none of that
would be impacted it's all been
included thank you Mr.
Any other questions a motion for
you pass the second by Senator
Campos it was the other
question.
sorry but that's all right.
It was only written down so
Any objection to the do passed
motion.
Hi my nine zip Senator barely
got that thing out there thank
you thank you Mr chair members
of the committee.
Senator I guess around reducing
chair for me.
Thank you.
We now.
This money to lower Senator is
waiting for an amendment I'm
waiting for the.
She wanted to to.
With.
We can do Senate bill two of
two.
We are confident in the.
We have.
Two of two.
Everybody just.
Do you want to send him up here
with this and let's put him up
here with us for.
This bill.
Two men to Senate bill to to
send right Senator.
The state and you have a shot
nice to have.
Yeah.
We have an amendment.
You have an amendment.
C. will explain the.
Hey can you tell us about the
amendment thank you madam chair
members of the committee of the
amendment is simply increasing
the appropriation Senate bill
two oh two from one hundred
thousand to.
Two hundred thousand to conduct
a study on sustainable funding
models for post secondary
educational institutions.
Do we have a motion for the yes
motion far as a way to.
Have more on there's also this
language amendment sorry madam
chair members of the committee
there's also simple language
amendment on page one line
nineteen after models insert
including research and public
service projects just to
increase the scope of that study
that's the men that were working
for.
Okay I see because this one here
this only has the language and
not the not the funding change
their appropriation chain right
so are they to separate members
are both in one.
Madam chair will deal with the
dollars in the budget okay all
right so you don't have an
answer.
managers get the correct
information purpose need to move
the minute for yes the.
All second that for discussion
thank you and you've already
told us about this basically to
clarify because of the confusion
here on the on the appropriation
this here is merely a language
amendment at that we're dealing
with to insert including
research and public service
projects after the word models
were that with that thank you is
there any opposition to the
memory comments on the amendment
anybody if not okay you have an
amendment to to your bill so
let's talk about your bill thank
you madam chair.
You know we we we know that I.
Angie is everywhere we know
there's inequality inequity
throughout higher ed in order to
move forward you know what's
parity and and you know I. N. G.
and what's not parity we talk
about R. P. espys and how those
are should be in a in I. Angie
actually and not in any other
source and so what we want to do
is is look at the I. Angie
through a study in and see what
comes up and I'll yield to
ashtray before we go to the
audience.
thank you madam chair I don't
think I have anything further on
the bill at this thank you do we
have before you can do it anyone
in office anyone support this
bill in the audience.
Okay okay mark you want to come
up and briefly and so the nice
lady thank you.
Can you hear me yes I can't
public chair chair members of
the committee marks to read at
the next council university
presidents with some points
legislation we think it's
important I think this will be
I'm part process to really have
a better understanding of the I.
N. G. like Mr chair mentioned
the I. G. R. P. S. P.'s research
public service projects I would
also just caution on Friday it
was a suggestion on looking at
what projects we can move above
the line there's also another
piece of legislation that also
calls for decreasing funding
based on increased tuition what
we would like to see is to study
because again we really want to
commend the sponsor bring this
for long with us today is really
taking a close look we have
president New Mexico tax are you
done study we can build off that
site so what so we we can start
on that right away so we just
put this legislation and we
support services for a number of
reasons that help us get a
better picture of Judy and fund
private thank you madam chair
members the committee thank you
mark okay next person.
State your name for the record
please secretary of.
Well either way has to stay on
the for the record but I could
see you behind the mask thank
you.
Madam chair thank you I am
Stephanie Rodriguez and I am the
cabinet secretary of the higher
end department I'm gonna keep my
mask on because I'm recovering
from a cold that's why it's on
but although the agency is
committed to studying the
funding formula in the interim
this actually let's just look at
other things as well not only
that parity in the base that
many of you have brought up in
my committee hearings but also I
NG what is happening with that
R. P. S. P.'s how are we finding
those are should we roll them
into the Energy we can also look
at regional models and how we
compare to peer states and also
the nation to see how we are
supporting higher education for
their four our agency as part of
this bill and thank you.
Thank you Secretary all right
the one else's support anyone
opposed to the bill okay what
about on soon do we have.
Do.
Thank thank you very much
committee any members we have
Senator Steinborn on and then
Senator Campos and what else
thank you madam chair Mr
chairman in you know it's it's
it's.
Beneficial to study funding
models for university so a great
totally the word sustainable
it's a little bit of a tricky
words because you know you're
providing you know education is
providing a public service that
doesn't inherently necessarily
run a profit Amin you know let's
just like a lot of other public
services maybe it's a state park
or whatever it is so we use the
word sustainable economic.
At.
I don't know what that means and
I don't know what you mean by
that I guess the server Mr chair
maybe you could answer that what
what does that mean
madam chair Senator Steinborn I
think sustainable in this
context is referring to the
increase in fees intuitions that
we've seen across higher
education institutes in the past
few years
this bill coupled with the other
bill sponsored by a chairman
when you know Senator Senate
bill four ninety for both aimed
at addressing these tuition and
fee increases and see if I. N.
G. is the source of the lack of
funding for these institutions
are experiencing in certain
areas so sustainable I think it
is referring to countering those
increases that are being tackled
and four ninety four and then
also that we've seen.
Yeah.
Mr chair I just I don't know if
that was the right word honestly
but but looking have funding
models on the I agree with
totally I just the notion that
somehow they're supposed to pay
for themselves without bringing
in revenue from.
You know that that by definition
I think
I mean I guess that is the
sustainable model that they have
right now but nonetheless
looking at I'm a big fan of
research so.
This will be helpful thank you
Mr Nixon thank you senator
Senator Google thank you very
much madam chair and I really
appreciate the concept behind
this piece of legislation but a
couple of things I know that
early on as we are dealing with
the supplemental appropriations
act that the request was that we
not include resources there for
studies and now as we're taking
a look at the the general
appropriations act with
resources were talking about the
potential study and and so my my
concern is are are we going to
be doing studies or they're
going to be in specific areas
and then the second piece is
that I think there's several
already existing research
components I think it New Mexico
tech bureau has some I know it's
but with Policy skins we've in
the past through a to do taking
a look at
the I. N. G. R. P. S. P.'s and
so there's a lot of information
that's already out there and and
and and this madam chair and and
senator would probably be a
question for the for the
secretary of a to do
within.
The information that's already
been generated do we not have
enough information to deal
directly with I Angie's and R.
PSP's and if you will the
validity in terms of what we've
dealt with and the reason I'm
going to the secretary because I
know that as we've moved along
that question itself has
surfaced before and I know she
has the institutional knowledge
in order to help us to better
understand this particular
appropriation and of course the
validity of the request so if I
may madam chair
Mr chair if I can ask that
question please thank you
Secretary.
Madam chair Senator Campos thank
you for that question when it
comes to research and public
service projects often time
those amounts are so low that
they're not checked over and
over and over again through an
audit process let's say however
the higher education department
does have a committee that looks
over our PSBs have expanded
performance measures and
outcomes when it comes to I.
Angie that becomes a little bit
more murky murky murky here how
is that money spent how much
goes to student services how
much goes to salaries that is
not something that we have the
proper checks and balances of at
our department but we are
looking forward to talking about
a little bit more transparency
when it comes to those funding
mechanisms and higher education
so so madam chair and of course
Mr chair as we deal with this
madam secretary the indication
is that you want to find more
information out to go ahead and
deliver to the legislature but
you need to two hundred thousand
dollars in order to go ahead and
conduct the additional research
and studies that this would
would indicate.
Madam chair yes when it comes to
finding any sort of resources
money does definitely help so we
can contract with the right
folks and make sure that the
appropriate experts are coming
into the agency in conducting
these surveys research analyses
so we can provide you with the
best recommendations that are
data oriented during the
legislative session so madam
chair and and of course Mr chair
and madam secretary what you're
indicating is you need this
study in order for us to better
address the I. N. G. and the R.
P. S. P. questions that have
surfaced madam chair without the
study we are still committed to
doing the funding formula
component of this which is
looking at the base and parity
however with this funding we can
do more beyond that which would
include more of the I. Angie
also are PSP's and other factors
that counter in sustainability
metrics thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair just one
one point we in the legislature
always hear this claim eastern
who says they're they're in
in equity inequities between
eastern and there's a whole list
of people western New Mexico so
we see those inequities right
and we always give a more we
never say sure we fixing it
right should we give a million
more to western you give a
million more to to eastern and
we don't ever fix the I. N. G.
question and how do we fix the
I. Angie question moving forward
and then we did opportunity and
then we see tuition increases
what we need to figure out are
we really funny line G.
correctly to avoid tuition
increases and fee increases on
the students as we move forward
and and no a six percent
increase or seven percent
increase in you and then a
seventeen percent increase on on
fees
in in you are we really fixing
the problem correctly with
energy so that's that's.
Thank you Senator Padilla of
insurance chairman runs the
floor right now we're gonna
start here eleven that but can
you just ask your experts if
they
Go to the same barber that
Senator Campos goes to because I
would love to know the name
because I would love for more to
come in that way.
Education.
Should we all go to the bar
today I would love to go to the
three.
Thank you senator are anyone
else okay where the wishes of
the committee would you pass
madam chair motion for the house
and motion and a second on favor
signify by saying aye opposed
yes Senator you have an amended
bill thank you.
Senator yes witnesses here and
I'm just sit right there you
have five minutes to to them so
I did you have four ninety four
there are nine amendment for
Senate Bill.
Okay.
Passes before we have an
amendment for that too.
You know this is the first time
Senator that I see after budget
passes on the agenda
and it says higher education
funding after budget passes okay
well that's pretty explicit the.
All right we have an amendment
to for.
Hey that this one here is one
already what is to we're passing
to to so that way.
Okay.
Thank you yeah okay there we go
we have an amendment to Senate
bill four ninety four so Senator
do one explain the amendment
before we this is going to go to
the floor center.
We'll never seen gunshot.
Okay so what we're gonna do this
additional.
All right just so you want to
tell us what the amendment is it
seems pretty simple if I may
refer to it myself he wanted on
page two line one only for the
sake of time a strike become law
and inserting lose their off
passed to the legislature so it
makes sense because we usually
don't yeah and if we say become
law anyway but anyway so I'm yes
we have a motion is that it Asia
okay you have a motion to except
the amended for discussion Madam
chair most have a second off
second okay so let's talk where
he talked about that can you
tell us a little more explicit
on that what it does.
Madam chair for discussion time.
Were under discussion that's one
of the builders of the amendment
to.
We love to page if we just look
to page two line one it strikes
the word become law yeah well
imminent as a citizens and
become lots yeah yeah so I think
it is okay so do we have any
questions for the committee and
if not can we move it
you madam chair thank you very
much I really appreciate the
fact that we can have some
questions regarding this but
just just before I I pose a
statement on page two line eight
it just indicates higher
education department shall the
notify so I haven't had a chance
to fully review the piece of
legislation but there may be
some cleanup that we need to go
and work on as well so that's
that's that and then in terms of
the the statement itself I
really appreciate this because I
know in years past we've seen
where we go ahead and we take
action and then from there of
course tuition is raised later
on and so this after the fact is
is a very smart move in terms of
how we're gonna be doing if you
will with the future
efficiencies for institutions so
I have madam chair thank thank
you thank you very much to have
a motion to approve the
amendment moved some motions and
there's a concept that anyone
opposed Kate passed so you have
an amended bill now you wanna
tell us a little bit about your
bill Mr chairman.
Thank you madam chair members SJ
accommodation I don't know why
this is the beginning a never
corrects me so I keep on.
It yes so the purpose of this
bill is again in conjunction
with to to to sort of look at I
N. G. and higher education
institutions the bill would
proportionally reduce the
approved budget of a higher
education institution if that
institution increases their
tuition or fees after the
general appropriation act is
passed and so that reduction
would be proportional to the
amount of revenue that the
tuition fee increase would
generate and so that then goes
to DFA to reduce on a monthly
basis the allotments paid to
colleges and universities for
their operating budget.
Thank you very much anyone the
audience for this bill
supporting this bill anyway
there's month secretary.
Rodriguez hello there and
Stephanie Rodriguez the
secretary of higher education
here again as many of you have
heard tuition and fees at higher
education institutions and cross
the state of New Mexico did
increase this past year after
the passage of the lottery's
opportunity scholarship and
fully funding the opportunity
scholarship the average was
eleven point three percent
across all sectors.
Now this concern has come up
before the legislature before
back in twenty twelve there was
language added for every one
percent of a flight tuition
increases would be marked
against I. Angie by one percent
so this concept is not new this
bill tax does take into account
inflationary factors include
increases in operations at our
higher ed institutions and the
high agency coordination and
consultation with the department
of finance and administration
will review that diligently and
fairly before making any
decisions on bringing that
forward thank you for your time
and thank you Mr chair and thank
you madam chair thank you
Secretary I want else for the
support of the bill anyone
opposed.
Ends.
Right now we have to here we
know all.
A bit.
Tomorrow yeah dinner tonight.
Madam chairman members committee
marks that are the council
university presidents once again
I'm just stating that this way
this year we're we're probably
we're getting roughly about one
percent in New I need money
that's not prescribed meaning
that that's for general
operations but seven point two
million dollars for the entire
state of New Mexico okay in the
tuition is roughly about three
percent that in turn in terms of
tuition I'm gonna compensation
packages we greatly appreciate
that support on behalf of the
legislature on behalf of
governor long funding
opportunities caller ship and
another other important issues
for example compensation all
right here be that's a mandate
that we had employee and
increasing part condition.
Also what we do is we get
seventy percent of that
contribution we have to come up
with the other thirty percent
roughly so you know that's at
least what the composition
topics roughly closed over two
million dollars we have to come
get the I can for your schools
really the only two so we have
your revenue we have this I need
to state funding with the
general fund are PSP's and then
we have we have the tuition and
fees and so we tend to have to
balance our budget we have to
make up for those differentials
through tuition we find not to
and so we really appreciate the
Sanchez common and are we forty
nine G. enough or we not so I
think the study you I just to
the side should take place first
before this locations past why
ask me not to support house is
because of Senate bill two zero
two thank you madam chair
members.
Thank you mark how the one else
there we go more so you want to
come up.
Chair members of the committee
Martha shows registered
lobbyists for central New Mexico
community college and we stand
in in opposition from many of
the reasons that Mr survey to a
stated we do appreciate the
Sanchez working it's been
working diligently with our
president and our vice president
of finance just to make sure
that we have the flexibility
needed to deal with inflation
and the set our tuition in our
revenues accordingly thank you
thank you Rick NMSA want to come
up.
Good morning good morning madam
chair good morning Senators
thank you senator Munoz we're
having an active conversation
about higher education finance
and funding and for that we
really appreciate the Senator
bringing forward this bill it's
an interesting interplay between
legislative action inflation
tuition and fee setting and in
the spirit of Senate bill two oh
two let's have the study let's
look at let's see how higher ed
is funded what should the state
support which the tuition and
fee support and for that we are
in up opposition open SO Hawker
executive director of the
independent community colleges
my apologies in S. okay anyone
we're set for and against only
ones in here no okay so what are
the wishes of the committee then
yes okay that manager I have a
question but go ahead thank you
those a due pass will second all
seven for discussion and then
Senator Campos thank you very
much madam chair so in terms of
ATD and in two thousand twelve I
believe there was the
there was some some information
that we dealt with them
madam chair Senator do we have
a formula that's been used
whenever we deal with here's the
appropriation then from there
what we do is I will
subtract if you will resources
whenever tuition has been
increased at the end let's say
for example of of each one of
the the county school calendar
years.
Madam chair Senator what what I
envision is if we increase that
I NG right and they come back
just like the special later
sentences we're not including
this portion of the retirement
we're not including this portion
of the increases the secretary
will come to them and say okay
what is your number for those
increases I'm just commission a
number out of that's a two
percent increase in tuition
right and they said okay that's
a two percent increase in
tuition and the school last for
four percent what is the other
two percent right so what is it
other two percent of the four
percent do for tuition right and
where does it go and course is
doing this just say the other
two percent is to create a new
program and.
They're not but studies or
something we want to know and
then to justify the percentage
of increases that they need
right to offset those costs the
other two and in some thing goes
with fees rate if fees are
increased they were seventeen
percent at UNM right what was a
seventeen percent in total used
for was it cost reduction was it
to expand programming but the
student body can vote in
additional programming on their
own that they agree with it sort
of the student body vote with
them into the agreement with the
seventy percent fees for at the
number on it.
The whatever I I think that's
what we really need to say and
justify and say we're not just
increasing fees by of the
seventeen five percent for.
No purpose at all just to have
the money.
I think that's what we're really
trying to get it is.
We do what we can do this year
here when they get a lottery and
then also we see increases in
tuition we see that with
opportunity we see that however
lose for it in the state okay
justifies we're increases and
let us know so we know a little
because as you as I go home
right and I'll give the example
is we have free opportunity
college and I have two young
girls were to my office they're
both going to the nursing school
right all their tuition with was
free but their books were twelve
hundred dollars and so that's
part of the fees would increase
the cost of fees but the cost of
books went up so is that to
justify the nursing program
additional money for the nursing
program are white with the the
books so high maybe it was a
vendor we don't know those are
things that we need to know in
detail as we go forward in our
constituents say I appreciate
opportunity prior this too right
no I really help me I am the
kids are going to go to school
and welding certificates or
whatever in in but then the
state will my welding equipment
was eight hundred dollars right
and so was that including the
fees that we actually go.
So so madam chair Mister chair
the question then
Goes to does does the HEDT
Department have a formula that
they're already using since
we've already passed similar
legislation years back.
Is and if I may madam chair
Mister chair refer to the to the
secretary of what what formula
is in place to help us to adjust
that whenever an institution
raises their tuition after we've
increased if you will resources
so that we can try to find if
you will
tuition free slash an
opportunity for young people and
an adult learners to continue
their education.
madam chair I think you're
asking if we have a current
funding our current formula we
would use and the answer is no
however we have had discussions
in which we would take the total
number of tuition and fees look
at the increase and then
multiplied by an inflationary
factor which would consider
statewide inflation and also the
national trends in information
as well so we are prepared to
put something forward if this
were to pass.
And madam madam chair and and of
course Mister chair I think
whether this passes or not I I
believe a formula would really
be able to help each and
everyone of us better understand
where we're at because this is
definitely very valid issues we
deal with that thank you madam
chair thank you senator to your
concern Campos inflation is
different in Albuquerque than it
is in Las Vegas or in Gallup
right and so is is it rural
schools that could be it could
be a different inflationary
pressure that we've seen and so
that's why I think it's.
Want to look at.
Correct thank you all right
anyone else okay we have a
motion on the floor in this but
we have a second I seconded
earlier for discussion about
seconded for do pass all in
favor signify by saying aye
opposed past thank you as
amended Senator thank you yes J.
thank you Senator billable
quicker.
I yes he make the motion yes
thank you very much all right I
think we are we are we have we
have one.
Okay.
On the floor
This.
Thank they're not on the floor
yet so we're fine.
The move to pass Mr.
As amended.
Do we need to amend it Senator
here we have a.
For anyone to explain amendment
center shall make the motion
for.
The minutes for discussion
purposes seconded by Senator
Campos.
Senator twenty minutes thank you
thank you Mr chair so after of
Education Committee there were a
couple of issues there and so
the first one
If you look on the number two on
their the first forgivable
Justice goes in the title but it
it allows the student to leave
for two years and come back so
they can leave one institution
and come back to a second one
any time in two years with out
any repayment program without
any interest accumulating.
So something happens you go away
for two years in that you either
re enroll for that's when the
repayment process begins so that
first one clarifies that then
down number five it talks about
how to calculate the repayment.
So first of all there's zero
interest all the way through the
program.
So the the time value of money
we're just not going to we're
not going to collect any that
but the big there's two other
big part tier one is it doesn't
matter how much you owe you will
never pay more than five hundred
dollars a month so for example
if you owed well let me back up
the the other part is it's one
and a half percent.
Of the total would be the
monthly payment so if you owe
ten thousand dollars one and a
half percent would be a hundred
and fifty dollars a month for
for repayment okay
if it was twenty five thousand
dollars one and a half percent
would be three hundred and
seventy five dollars if it was
fifty thousand dollars one and a
half percent would be seven
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars but when I go seven
hundred and fifty dollars a
month.
Did I say that right.
Yes.
A hundred and fifty dollars for
ten thousand dollars a month.
Three hundred and seventy five
for twenty five thousand dollars
a month.
But if it was fifty thousand
dollars the monthly payment by
this would be seven hundred and
fifty dollars a month but what
we did is cap it at five hundred
so you could over the state tens
of millions of dollars and we
cap it at five hundred dollars a
month participate.
So that's what this does we try
to address the issues that came
up in in
Senate Education Committee it's
clear now.
You go to school you can leave
for up to two years re enroll no
penalty.
If you don't re enroll then we
cap how much it costs to come
back so that's what the
amendment US.
Chins on the amendment Senator
right Mr chairman of the
amendment on the bills always
thank you.
Thank amendment can have a
motion up.
Motion by Senator Diamond second
by Senator Burt any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Center back on the bill okay
thank you Mr chair so this this
bill really has three purposes
to it one is just protect the
fund that we're that we're
establishing here so that we
have it okay of right now it can
go away we funded it with non
recurring money last year of the
price of oil and gas goes down
this fund goes way so let's
we've got less we protected
we've got to do something but it
also and I think this is the.
Most important one it encourages
graduation right now I could
take the lottery scholarship
because there's no limit on it I
could go to the lottery
scholarship claim I wanted
associates degree in something
and then because I'm retired I
piddle around and I just spend
taxpayer money and I get nothing
because you know I have to be
clear that I'm going after an
associate's but I don't have to
actually get one well this will
encourage is graduation but it's
also graduation from any.
Trades of certificate so to
trade certificate an associate's
degree or bachelor's degree and
so the way it works is I go get
my welding certificate I
actually achieve it.
The loans forgiven.
If I say I'm going after an
associate's degree and I get one
the loans forgiven from going
after bachelor's degree can I
get one the loans forgiven so
would encourage encourages
graduation.
As opposed to encouraging just
to go to school for nothing.
But the last part in my mind is
a return on investment for the
taxpayers so the taxpayers are
footing this bill and so the
idea is the taxpayers ought to
know what's happening are we
actually graduating people were
not
because for graduating the
people that we are in fact
improving our workforce and
doing all those things all of
the good for the community and
and so forth before if there are
graduating it doesn't have the
same return on investment.
So.
That's what it cost.
we're gonna go the is anybody in
support.
Anybody in opposition.
The state to me to come up
anybody on.
And.
Over wants to come up first.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members the committee
unanimously Gosselin and I'm
here with dreams and action.
The and I'm here to oppose Bill
SB one SB forty one.
Descriptively concerns me
because this is a bill that is
gonna turn the scholarship into
alone a lot of our youth are
having to balance work school
and their home life a lot of
them you know me having to ask
them to come over here when
they're at work when they're
trying to go to school when
you're trying to better
themselves this is hard for me
to hear because is going to
punish a lot of poor people who
are trying to better themselves
is going to place them in that
and I highly and I don't want
this to be a thing that happens
a lot of them are trying to
there's to do their civic
engagement by coming with us to
support bills that could bring
them more future to come here to
try to talk to you know it's so
the legislators about the future
that they have and I think this
is really depressing to hear
that they're having to come to
oppose this bill having to spend
some other time away from school
and away from work to really
speak about how this is going to
affect them you know there some
members here who have
we had this opportunity for them
to better themselves and I
really hope that you guys listen
to us and you know see how we
are trying to make a better
future and I don't think placing
them in debt is going to do any
better if anything is going to
places more and you know for
situation is going to place a
some more harm and I really
would like for everyone to
oppose this bill thank you.
Hello miss hello Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Evan o'connell and I'm the
executive director of
governmental affairs for ace UNM
which is the UNM undergraduate
student government and I just
want to speak very briefly on
behalf of undergraduate students
at UNM our thoughts on the bill
we think that turning into a
forgivable loan goes against the
purpose of the bill which is to
promote New Mexican students
success it's adding barriers to
that success I think that
finances are already huge burden
on students and adding more
blocks in their path
is not the right thing to do at
this time and also since
opportunity scholarship has only
been effect for your we don't
really know at this moment if
this is the best path to go or
if continuing it the way it is
is a better way and I would also
just like to sing speaking with
my peers the threat of losing
opportunity is enough to keep
your grades up keep the
requirements up and I think that
it's a bit of overkill to ask if
you lose the scholarship you
also have to pay back depending
on you know if you're not able
to uphold those requirements so
I appreciate you letting us have
time to speak and thank you.
You may want to stay close you
may have some questions for you
from cyclic right.
Hi you turn on the might.
The training force on this the
chairman and senator on the
executive director of the Davis
New Mexico scholarship we're the
largest private scholarship in
New Mexico state history a ten
million dollar year investment
that we make in young people we
share a lot of the same concerns
that you do with the bill
Stewart tuition goes up or
scholarship dollars go as far
students don't complete what we
do with that money that we've
already paid out for them what I
will say and I know and I am
definitely speaking in
opposition but the part of the
bill that really resonates with
me is the part that requires
schools to report and graduation
I think that's that the the sort
of reporting parts are really
important.
What we found is that rather
than holding individual students
accountable for in this
graduation and for pushing
themselves to graduation we know
that New Mexican students were
out here working to better their
lives working to better their
communities they're going with
the intent to graduate I would
much rather see a bill like this
incentivize institutions to to
support students all the way
through to graduation that seems
to be a much better way to do
this actually punishing
individual students who need to
take time way to work with the
family time way to sort of
figure out their lives before
they come back and so that's how
I would deal with this challenge
that's how we deal with it at
the Davis New Mexico scholarship
as well.
Thank you.
to questions from committee
members Senator Steinborn.
You Mr chair Senator.
So.
Hi number one I wonder if you
know one of the promises of your
bill which is that.
You know we've we're going to
create a lever to encourage kids
to graduate.
I don't know as you say I mean
it's the first year the
scholarship we have data that
shows that number one I don't
know that if a person cannot
continue on in their education
that having to pay back a loan
for something they took under
financial hardship to begin
with.
Depending upon how much more
education I have to go.
Is that the that that is an
actual inducement for them to
continue on with their
education.
It may not it may just be a way
to have them encouraged that
when I think as some have said
they absolutely intended to
graduate that's you know they
got this and then they're going
out on a dream to try to try to
get a college degree or
certificate.
So I'm I'm I'm troubled by that
part of the bill
Because I think I don't know
that I agree with the premise of
the we even have enough data to
show that.
Beyond that Mr chair Senator I
mean I think with what we know
about college that.
I think.
This is the kind of back to the
other previous thing about you
know making investments for
Sloan for sustainability
whatever I think investing in
people going to college even
though some of the make graduate
soon may not is a good
investment for society
And I think the stigma of
college loans.
Probably has suppressed many
people from going to college
because of high debt and all
those things so I think turning
this into a loan program.
I could see having a negative
consequence and just basically
creating a bunch of debtors but
not necessarily creating anymore
graduates so for that reason I
will oppose the bill but thank
you Mr.
Thank you chairman I I was
looking for the cabinet
secretary for a TD I just had
some questions and I wanted to
to at least ask for that if if
if.
If you could please come for
just just real quick because
this is this is very concerning
whenever we start talking about
if you will the return on
investments for students which
this basically deals directly
with that so so in terms of the
Students themselves if.
They really have these hardships
and.
They're they're finding
themselves just really
struggling especially if they
don't have degrees if they find
themselves out there in the
world to work and they want to
come back but here's the
additional if you will.
Burden
it is issue at the house the
department dealing with those
situations right now if someone
wants to come back they have
they have a loan they resources
are you finding that there are
students out there that in
reality just aren't able to go
and come back because of the
additional financial burden.
Mr chair.
E. I'm sorry thank you Mr chair
members of the committee Senator
Campos thank you for that
question one of the things that
we do know it is a hint hint New
Mexico we historically have a
high student loan default rate
and so what we know is that when
students do take out those loans
they are not able to pay them
back in and we generally have a
very high percentage of people
in comparison to the rest of the
country this is also of concern
because institutions with high
default rates also could
potentially lose their federal
financial aid and so that is why
it's of great concern to us
thank you very much Mr chair
that's all I have right now.
I'm here Senator treatment is
yes thank you thank you very
much Senator and thank you for
your you know for working on
this so much I can't help but
think somebody like Emily that
we've talked about before the
person who has special needs
developmental disabilities my
daughter had a your your sister
and many others have family
members like that we know they
struggle in school they have to
go for a longer period of time
they may not be able to take a
six credit hours.
They may have to take three
because of special exigent
circumstances and I don't know
that we have anything in here I
haven't had a chance to see the
whole bill but I can tell you I
don't see anything in here that
actually protects people who
have accidents or come stances
the special needs and you know
unfortunately Senator I see this
all the time in legislation
where we approach legislation
for people that don't have the
special needs and and you know
we really have to be the voice
for those that have the the
special circumstances and I I
guess I just can't
see how a person with
disabilities like that is in in
living in a rural community is
going to be able to.
To do this and go back and pay
it if they just say somebody
needs two years and three months
in between you know because they
they got into a car accident and
they're they're now disabled and
they can't finish their their
school I don't see those
circumstances okay or or the
person being exempted from
having to pay back a loan in I'm
trying to visualize this whole
thing and and truly it's a
genuine concern that that I have
it's the has made do with
politics or anything but explain
something like this to me and
convince me because I'm right
now I'm not convinced but tell
me I'm I'm open truly so Mister
chairman Senator couple things.
Eight we should draw the line
somewhere whether it's two years
for twenty five years without a
draw the line somewhere
so that's that's that ended in
two people have things yes
that's what we put two years in
their two years with no interest
accumulates no there's no
punishment there's no burden
there's nothing in you just show
up at the school again any New
Mexico school that have to be
when you started at okay.
The.
Let me share some of this so
there's a couple of places now
where you can get forgivable
loans teachers can get
forgivable loans okay so this is
not a new concept this isn't
strange of service members can
get forgivable loans we have all
kinds of public service of
programs that are forgivable
loans and that's it does roll
focus that we want this we want
a teacher so we give them some
money of.
To get where they go in if they
get there so forgivable loan so
this isn't this isn't weird or
new we do this now.
Again we have to draw the line
somewhere how many credits so in
this case is six down from
twelve so we can still work of
but where we gonna draw the line
we gonna draw the line at six or
one.
Got to draw the line somewhere
and I thought this was
reasonable as I I mean I didn't
change it this was in the in the
original act.
So you know somewhere we just
have to say okay I don't see
this as a punishment at all if
you succeed.
It's forgivable but you can go
to school.
For one semester.
Tropical.
Come back.
The day before the two years is
up re enroll in go to school.
For four semesters and drop out.
In two years before a day before
two years.
You show back up in rural.
So you can stay if you want to
you can still do that.
But the whole idea here is if
you graduate.
And I and I see you so I want to
actually should be but I go for
two years and I get an
associate's degree the
associates loans forgiven and
now I go for two more to get the
bachelor's degree now the
bachelors questions for given so
it's not like I have to declare
I can go for welding
certificate.
And I went but welding
certificate doesn't take two
years.
It turns out that I'm good and
the bad Wilder.
Why can't will well enough I may
be able to weld well enough for
ranch fence but I can't build
things that require precision so
I now go and get a different
certificate in can't auto
mechanics or whatever.
We still got a certificate loans
forgiven.
So as far as punishment and
burdens I've tried to remove
those burdens with these
amendments.
If you get a very student loans.
range from four point four nine
four point five four point seven
nine these are the student loan.
Interest rates that accumulate
now under this bill zero.
Zero for the first two years
after you drop out.
And then it stays zero after you
start to pay.
Recreation could just quickly
quick point thank you senator
and and I can see your point
truly I can but I'm thinking
that how are these people like
people that are impaired and
truly cannot make the two years
and or haven't exited
circumstance heard the gonna pay
this back you know it they're
already in New Mexicans are come
stance and so I I just worry
what's going to happen to them
what are the enforcement actions
if they can't pay and all these
things that I guess I'm just
thinking about what thank you Mr
chair because I know we have to
get to the floor thank you I I
just have a few comics Center
robberies made good point we
never collected anything that
people assume people run this
right.
Go to court and.
Six hundred dollars but I I
think there has the capability.
This because what we're getting
is the students also apply a get
Pell grants so you know there's
tuitions free.
And they get to help I ran into
some of last night you said you
student money.
Calling.
And so.
That tells me you know we're
giving free tuition and and
books and everything and if they
have enough money to make money
well and cost.
Good to have.
Those for given.
There's an issue I I do believe
there needs to be accountability
right there's gonna be some
accountability so we're saying
you need to continue if we're
gonna do this for you we need to
just to have some
accountability.
Life happens
something happens and some girl
gets pregnant college you know
guys the machine shop in state
taxes fingers off right for some
incident happens.
But we got to figure out how we
have accountability in that the
other thing you did was lottery.
in that they reply for lottery
ticket lottery and then then
they don't succeed a lot of.
Right then on it just goes away.
In the news and.
They're using it in tandem right
now I know.
Both of them intend.
No to the floor session.
Closing comments.
Chair I just want to say that I
do not I've tried to do
everything I can to make sure
this is not a burden.
But still has a of a noticeable
return on investment to the
taxpayers of New Mexico and to
the students to get a degree.
What's pleasure committee hello
to table.
I would table a motion is not
debatable.
Second.
Second by.
Senator Burt.
Yes.
Senator Diamond knowing to
explain my vote.
Senator Padilla yes.
Senator share New.
Senator Steinborn.
There would.
Senator Rodriguez yes.
There are many of us were.
Federal.
Yes.
I desire to table.
Thank you thank you.
Senator Diamond had.
Yes I I just want to Mr chairman
I just want to thank Mr chair
Senator chair for bringing us I
think the intent of the
opportunity scholarship which is
the intent of what he wanted to
show is that.
We New Mexico is willing to
invest in our in our students
and to build a workforce which
we have a clear voided here but
taxpayers we have a
responsibility as lawmakers to
the taxpayers of New Mexico and
the opportunity scholarship is
not sustainable the students
that we have here speak today
are going to be successful
because they have the ambition
not just in Santa Fe today what
they're going to complete their
degree and for people like that
you'll have your loans forgiven
at in addition and other
investments you will succeed in
New Mexico the the part that
really wasn't wasn't really
highlighted here is that in
every part of this bill It said
they may have to pay it back so
universities could could make
some special exceptions for
anyone with special needs but
but this is not sustainable and
I don't think it it it is it
fair for the sixth seventh or
eighth graders out there who
also are going to want some sort
of assistance and won't have the
funding to complete their degree
because work wastefully
investing at all now so thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
If you were gentleman.
This.
