first with the uh amendment as
we've heard the bill, I think we
have the outlines and the
amendment goes through as we
always have to do in.
Fully insured.
If you can uh hold on, we're
gonna.
Can we get a motion to uh
Thank you,
Senator Woods. Can I have a 2nd,
seconded by Gonzalez.
out in a moment.
Go ahead, Senator, OK, thank
you. Uh, the amendment, uh,
addresses the issue that some of
the IBAC plans had that if
patients were to go out of
network that, of course, uh
would significantly increase
costs, but it holds this
amendment applies only to
in-network patients. So, uh, as
you'll see in the newest FRI,
um, their, uh,
Um, excuse me, comfortable with
that. The other thing is that
some of them do, some of them
don't include emergency visits
and urgent care and so just to
make it uniform, we took out the
no uh cost sharing for those two
entities, that is you've seen
the FIR some of them said, well,
we already don't charge it. So
that is in essence what the
amendment does in each of the
four.
any discussion on the amendment.
Uh, Senator Trujo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator. So
is this
the up to-date FIR.
The up to-date FIR should say
36 2025. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, it does. And so what,
what I hear you saying, cause I,
I don't have time to go through
the bill and try to insert all
of these words.
What I hear you saying is that
by doing this amendment, there
is no cost.
Madam, uh, senator and uh Mr.
Chair, uh, yes, if you look at
just to make this easy for you,
the 4th paragraph down on the
2nd page.
Um
The last sentence as a result of
the department that's state risk
management would have no
additional financial impact.
And the healthcare authority,
which manages the state risk.
Could you tell me where that was
again? Yes, the 4th paragraph on
the 2nd page, the very last
sentence as a result, the
department's uh Senate Bill 120
would have no additional
financial impact.
Health care.
All right, thank you, thank you,
Senator and the uh Reica.
Uh, in the
Two paragraphs down basically
concludes that getting rid of
the in-network gets rid of the
costs that they were projecting.
And on the final page, you'll
see.
Yeah
The
Um, and the very bottom here and
I have my
witness the er from the OSI who
oversees life.
And health and uh their.
Last sentence that the um.
Second to, yes, lesser all other
carriers, and this is where they
send out a very complex
template, you have any cost
increases here and there because
they have to help set the
actuarial rates. So this is a
thorough actuarial review
independently indicate the
behavioral health cost sharing
elimination had no impact on
rates except for one minor.
That's all I have.
Senator Woods.
Yes, sir.
They, uh, what I, I think if we
read that in addition, without
networks being clearly defined,
the group experience and
industry references regarding
the relative cost for out of
network compared to in-network,
uh, we're utilized to estimate
the impact of including out of
network providers.
Um, at 100% plan coverage levels
and as a result of that NEMC.
Uh
So, that'shea raises uh the
concerns, but they're saying
that they're, they have an
estimate of what this has cost
him over the last 3 years. They
don't really go in and justify
how they arrived at that cost
and uh the actuaries there uh
are.
Uh, is, is seagull.
Who, uh, I have worked with over
the years to try to on chronic
disease and also not using the
most worst case scenario, the
most believable.
Uh, analysis here is from the
state.
Uh
For the exchange where they go
through piece by piece and I can
have my uh expert talk about it
that each of the different
categories of costs.
In order to be able to justify
their rate increases for the
following year and in behavioral
health, they are not finding
that, and that is by an
independent actuary, um.
And uh actually, I think both
you, you have in-house and and
consulting actuaries looking at
this going through thoroughly. I
think this is the most reliable
source.
Of actuarial assessment.
I, I understand what you're
saying, Senator, and we've
talked offline about this quite
a bit, but two nights ago I
stayed up thinking about a bill
that we passed through here that
was going.
It's gonna cost the state.
40 to $50 million in healthcare
by just increasing the.
The cost share of the state.
On the insurance policies and
I see this one, even though
everything you say.
May very well be true. I just
can't vote with you today
because I just
We're
We've got too many variables
outside of her state.
And we don't know what's going
to happen, and I just have to be
more
Conservative on the votes that
Senator and Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
OK, I, if I don't have any
questions for the amendment, uh,
I have a motion to move motion
by Senator Gonzalez.
On the amendment.
2, yeah.
OK. Second by Senator Truhill on
the amendment.
Can you call the role on the
amendment?
Senator Brandt.
Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez, Senator
Gonzalez votes yes, Senator to
linear Senator Lanier votes yes,
Senator Padilla. Senator Padilla
Bosa, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes,
Senator twice and.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo votes yes,
Senator Woods.
Senator Woods votes, Senator
Schino,
uh, yes.
Uh, the amendment has been
adopted 8 to 0.
OK, we're back on the bill.
OK. Back on the bill, uh again,
uh, Mr. Chair, the bill.
Is the same bill that we saw a
few years ago, but it does
eliminate the sunset.
Uh, and that is for two reasons.
One, the overwhelming evidence
from the state and the OSI on
how this is not increasing costs
and finally the recognition how
it lowers costs, uh, and so, uh,
and I put in front of you, but
I'm not gonna go through it
unless anyone wants to, uh, the
elimination of cost sharing, uh,
this is a study, uh, done by
The
Um
The uh employment guide to
manage care, which was a
coalition of large employers and
uh state entities, and it
demonstrates that New Mexico
health connections at the time,
which was the only one doing
this was lowering, you know, if
you want to get into the
numbers, but substantially
lowering the ED visits if you
look across the bottom, the well
below the national and the other
competitors as well as inpatient
discharges. So as I had
previously said.
This became our business
strategy and allow to largely in
undersell our competitors and
these simple activities because
of the impact they had on
chronic exacerbate. So that um
Is the, is the bill and uh I
welcome any questions. Thank
you, Senator. So, uh, we're
gonna go out to the audience.
Anybody here in support of this
bill?
Zoom.
Anybody in opposition?
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for America's Health Insurance
plans. We stand in opposition to
the bill. We stand in opposition
to the bill because as uh the
sponsor has acknowledged there
are studies ongoing about the
impact of this bill. The sunset
does not come off for another 2
years. Those studies should be
completed. If you're going to do
anything with this particular
proposal, extending the sunset
seems a little bit more
appropriate. Let the studies
finish and see where the
information is. There is a cost.
impact related to waiving cost
sharing and what happens is it
gets built into the premium.
When you look to the, the
studies that were, the
information that was collected
by the OSI, uh, the OSI.
Acknowledge that the information
they had didn't cover the year
before implementation, and
that's when the premiums were
increased to account for the
cost sharing. So there is an
increase, uh, when you look to
cost sharing or premiums, both
of those account for dollars
coming from the policyholder.
Most of the cost was shifted
into premium prior to
implementation, we stand in
opposition to the bill. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla showed
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico,
and we um appreciate the
sponsors' efforts in this matter
and improving our behavioral
health access throughout the
state, but we also stand in
opposition for the reasons
stated by Mr. Moore and would
like to see that um provision go
out the additional years it was
initially intended to.
Go to committee, Senator
Steinborn.
Mr. Chair, so Senator Hickey,
good morning. Glad you're back.
um, Via. Alright, Mr. Chair, I'm
one of the primary co-sponsors
of this bill.
And I want to share a little
brief story. So
Years ago before the bill got
introduced.
I got a call from a um.
From a policeman.
Constituent of mine, and he
said, you know, you guys are
doing a lot of stuff to regulate
policemen and there's a lot of
pressure on police and how we do
what we do. Maybe you guys ought
to do something that actually
help us.
That recognized the trauma and
the stress that we go through.
And so I was working on a bill
um to maybe help with workers'
comp or do something to help
kind of offset.
Just support their behavioral
health.
And then I heard about this
legislation that not only dealt
with cost sharing of co-pays and
deductibles or copays for uh
doctor's visits, but also drugs.
Or first.
First responders, but everybody.
And of course I thought it was
uh just very um innovative and
forward-looking that we would do
that for all of society knowing
that all society is dealing with
this not just first responders.
So I decided not to do my bill
at all because I didn't want it
to compete with the senators and
I became a co-sponsor of his
bill.
And we became the first state in
the nation to do this.
And I've gotten many emails from
constituents saying how it's
changed their life, including
that first responder, um, who
now is a retired sheriff's
deputy, but um.
This has just been amazing. And
uh and I think as we've seen
also in the FIR.
Um, once it becomes part of the,
you know, just part of the uh.
Purchasing bulk purchasing, um,
particularly for bigger plans,
it's just kind of a negligible
expense, but it does a lot for
the people who benefit from it.
So we do need to make this
permanent and uh and not go
piecemeal a year or two at a
time, as some have said that
would not.
Be helpful. So um just very
excited to see Bill again and
hopefully we pass it.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, so I'm trying to like
wrap my head around.
Why would there be an increase
in premiums.
When the goal of this is is to
reduce healthcare costs because
people are taking advantage of
mental health care.
Before they get to the emergency
state. So, so I'm trying to
figure out why did the industry
feel like they needed to raise.
These
Premiums in order to cover the
cost of this.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and Senator
Trujillo, thank you.
Um
We in true Health New Mexico,
New Mexico Health Connections
initially did this new people
were.
not getting their behavioral
healthcare.
And then we discovered this
financial impact. It became our
business model. We worked with
Milliman, the leading actuary in
the country who I've shared the
papers with before I said, oh
yeah, that's huge. Keep going.
And so I, uh, I, I, I don't
understand why seagull with
Nysia is not able to do that,
uh, obviously those working with
uh
The uh state see this and
obviously the OSI who's
analyzing this every year in, in
the microwave, uh, I would note
that both Presbyterian and
United have never opposed this
bill because they understand I
know so why Blue Cross uh in
Chicago, uh, which is the home
company, uh, can't figure this
out. I, you know, I'm not sure.
um, but it, it, it does, it does
save so the um.
And thank you to bring that. The
other reason we're doing this
this year rather than waiting,
uh, the initial data cited in
the FIR was we, we, we're seeing
across the board as that impact,
but next year is a um governor's
call here and then we'd get to a
point where we could not renew
this, it would disrupt so many
lives, uh, autism family, this
is made just a huge difference
as we see autism and thank you
very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Um, so Senator, I, I, I.
You don't, you don't have to
answer this. I will just say
that.
My fear
In supporting this, and I'm
going to vote for it. My fear
though is that this is a green
light for them to increase
premiums again.
Without any justification.
And once the savings happens, I
don't think I've ever seen
premiums go down.
I'll just leave it with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Brown.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chairman.
Senator, um
When did this start?
With with the, you know, we're
getting rid of the sunset. How
long has it been in place?
Since, uh, uh, Mr. Senator.
Senator Brandt, excuse me, Mr.
Chair, uh, this went into effect
the summer of 22.
July 1st chairman, uh, thank
you, Senator. I appreciate that.
Um.
So we're trying to remove the
sunset.
And, and that's
All you're doing here.
For the most part.
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator, we
are removing the sunset.
Because of the evidence from the
state from uh our own experience
in the health plan.
And also the OSI, um, and again,
because next year be there.
Um
And they in particular this
year, I would say this
legislature will be hopefully
known as your behavioral health.
Uh, again, if you have these
financial barriers, even though
we're spending so much money on
creating programs, people won't
go and people who before this
will tell you they don't go to
intense about just stops them
from doing.
Um, there's also some language
on the
the top of page 3 that I've seen
repeated throughout the bill.
If I'm understanding this
correctly, it's it's exempting.
Um
These types of insurance plans
from having to do this. Is that
right?
Mm
Yes, please.
Mm
Mr. Church, uh, uh, Senator
Brand.
Uh, the language actually does
not exempt those plans from
complying with the bill. The
reason why we added this
language is to ensure compliance
with IRS guidelines, which
require high deductible health
plans to meet the minimum
deductible before benefits can
be paid out because the
deductible is part of the cost
sharing if this language is not
included, these plans would not
be able to offer to be offered
in the environments.
So OSI had issued a bulletin to
clarify and allow those plans
because a lot of people benefit
from plants with health savings
accounts, and this is just to
clean up the language and
clarify that.
These members need to meet their
deductible first and after that,
that they'll be subject to zero
copay.
You.
So, yeah, line 5 going into 6 it
says until the enrollees
deductible and these are what
you, you know, you got the
catastrophic plans, so those are
usually really high deductibles,
so it would take.
Most, most likely you're never
gonna
check in on just mental health
unless it's something where
they're getting.
You know
Maybe illicit and treatment or
something.
like that
OK, I appreciate that, um.
I, I, I think that I would
really like to see um a study, I
think that's why we put a sunset
on this in the first place.
That shows that it's actually.
Saved money
For some of the health plans,
um.
I don't know that we should be
removing this. I do understand
what you're saying about the 30
day, but, you know, with your
connections with the governor,
I'm sure you could get a
message.
You guys are tight, so I'm, I'm
sure that you would have no
problem getting a message on
this.
Uh, would you like to comment on
that? No, that is not necessary.
And if not, I could, I could
help you maybe get a message.
Thank you.
Thank you. I don't have anybody
else uh emotional.
Determined.
OK, send video. All right, thank
you, chair, you know, I uh don't
think I saw this one rolling
along, and now I've been, you
know, learning more about it.
Uh, I'm just curious, chair, why
weren't there more insurance
companies here to talk about
this. I'm, I'm, can you maybe
prognosticate, if you're
willing.
Just curious, unless somebody
was in the room that was
representing a consortium of
some kind, or I don't know, I
didn't get that from any of the
folks Mr. Chair and Senator.
Um
Actually, when we did this first
time around, uh, Presbyterian, I
did believe come uh currently
Presbyterian is undergoing a lot
of leadership change and uh
they're looking, they are
looking for a new head of the
health plan and so they, they
probably didn't become come
because of that, uh, united, I'm
assuming who is pretty
sophisticated in their actuarial
analysis just said, yeah, this
makes sense, we don't need to
go. Well, thank you, chair. um.
Can, can you, do you have any
outward sort of projections on
what this is actually going to
do, not, not, not a 10-minute,
you know, diatribe, but if you
can just give us some of the
highlights. I think that's
important for people to hear.
Yes, uh, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair and Senator, uh, the study
noted in JAMA here was just a
few months into the study, they
did notice and, and I'm
I, I don't know how they made
this inter they did notice some
increase in uptake. Uh, this was
published in
Um
The uh um health affairs, which
is the New England is the other
thing that substant that I
believe substantiates is that
the group who studied this from
Johns Hopkins, Minnesota, and so
forth, um, gave their
preliminary much more data than
what we have here to apply for
what's called an RO one, which
is a huge multi-million dollar
grant to study this and the
implications and the impact on
the chronic diseases and, you
know.
maybe 1 out of 100 grants
submitted gets funded, uh, this
grant got funded because the
government thought that there
was really something there and
wanted to uh popularized
throughout the country.
OK, thank you, chair. I just
assumed we were gonna get a
packed room on this. Anytime
I've done a bill similar to
this, you can't even stand in
the room.
The chair and I've been around
the same amount of time and it's
interesting. Uh, all right,
thank you, thanks for the
explanation.
Thank you. I just have one last
question, Senator, what happens
if we do not?
Uh, thank you, uh, Senator
Steinborn and Mr. Chair, um, I
hate to think of the
consequences of the lack of
uptake of all the behavioral
health services that we're
funding because the financial
barriers, particularly for, I
mean, there are a lot of poor
people on the exchange and the
eye back, and if they have to
pay this and, and as we know.
Addiction visits almost every
family. Um, this is going to
stop them from participating in
those programs and getting
sober. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator and everybody that's
getting behavioral health visits
right now is going to have new
fees that they're going to be
charged. Is that fair?
say who have insurance.
Who, who, whose co-pays have
been eliminated with this bill,
including for the medicine, will
now have to pay new copays and
new fees if we don't pass this
bill.
Mr. Chair and Senator, that
would be. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's all I have.
Hey, thank you. It's a pleasure.
Chairman, I move for a Du pass
as amended Gonzalez has amended,
seconded by Senator Padilla, uh
it's called the.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes no. Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez. Senator
Gonzalezia, Senator Linier
Senator Padilla. Senator
Padillas, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn votes yes
Senator Tobiasson. No. Senator
tobiasson votes no, Senator
toil.
Senator Trujillo Bosa, Senator
Woods.
Senator Woods boats no Senator
Shindo
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Munoz.
We have a Du pass 5 in the
affirmative, 4 in the negative.
Thank you, thank you, appreciate
it.
committee, we're adjourned.
