Chief investment officer Vicki
henges chief financial officer
Dominic don't you work and save
executive director called the
army ho and our transition
chairman for my treasured
Douglas Mitch brown
we put a big packet together but
really it's really fun tidbits
of information that you might
enjoy in the end of the packet.
Really I would just like to go
to page two I want to thank this
committee for allowing us the
opportunity to review our budget
and to determine what our needs
were for this year so if you're
on page two our request is six
hundred and three thousand four
hundred dollars for the fiscal
year and on page three for gives
you the breakdown in the two
hundred level it's fully funding
some vacancies that we have in
general counsel staff manager to
auditors accountants in nineteen
three hundred level is the able
program and the four hundred
level is basically software's
website software and.
I stand for questions.
Questions from committee
members.
Senator Woods.
So.
Tell me about this computer
software by.
Mister chairman Senator are we
referring to the cash flow
software yeah I'm talking about
on page two where you're talking
about the investment accounting
software.
Cash flow software safety and
with and what I'm asking this Mr
chair is simply.
What was used before.
Mr Chairman the senator thank
you for the question I really
appreciate it right now we're
actually doing everything
manually one individual or
Senator Daniel and so because
the increase if you look at the
very end the last page all of
those graphs were done by
Arsenio and it's manually done
if you look at the second to
last page just in the state
general fund investment pool if
you look at the increase from
fiscal year seventeen to fiscal
year twenty three were now at
almost ten billion and so it's a
little bit more challenging for
him to do the cash flow analysis
very quickly in order for Vicki
and her team to be able to
invest what needs to be invested
and then also working with DFA
to make sure that we have the
proper needs in place for
whenever they need funds so that
is like a better cohesive
relationship in the a software
that we can utilize other than
just a one man show.
Mr chair.
Percent.
This.
You're invested in.
Ten million dollars.
And did it on the back of an
envelope.
Mr Chairman no we're not doing
it on the back of an envelope re
using the same strategies and
policies we've used in prior
years but because we've had such
a huge influx of funds and a lot
more transitions both on the
transition tickets train tickets
that we have on the investment
side and the needs on the cash
management side we would like to
use advanced technology and get
this cash flow software so that
more people can utilize it for
needs.
But you just got to send a Mr
chair and madam secretary but
you is doing this by hand yes he
uses an excel spreadsheet and
then he develops the graphs.
They're beautiful and they have
a lot of great information but
it would be helpful for us to
have more than one individual
that has the accessibility to a
software that can help the
treasurer's office both on the
cash side and on the investment
side.
Thank you any other questions
from community members.
So you just won an update on the
system correct and looking at
cash flow guy right.
Thirty thousand is for an
upgrade to speed that up Mr
chairman it's for an actual new
software provided for cash flow
analysis compatible where is the
at UN answer the question force
is compatible with your current
system because I don't want
shared crashing crash share and
all systems goes down so I
understand you graph and chart
else's that's what the software
for correct yes
So the current the current
processes all of all the data
all the all the wrong date is
and share and that's it's in
chair we do is we extracted data
and we have to manually.
the work that we have to
manually kind of process it the
other thing is that there's a
lot of of of these draws that
are coming out we have to know
in advance when they're gonna be
coming out so that we can not
only do a cash position for that
day and pay the bills okay
whatever warrants command they
whatever like tronic payments
are sent out but we also have to
the project what's gonna happen
next week next month.
Six months from now a year from
now and what's happened recently
is that because of just the
large amounts that are coming in
to oil and gas and the large
amounts that are going out to
the early childhood tax
stabilization
we're having we're having to do
it.
There's other stakeholders that
use the data for example the LFC
uses the data to do their income
projections.
And we use the data internally
to make investment decisions and
so the system that we're using
is manually based a one person
that's doing it manually
two emails to pulling data from
share we need a automated system
to automatically pull in this
information to generate these
Pino beautiful graphs and to
have this information not only
available for the portfolio
managers before the LFC for the
you know that the governing
body's executive branch DFA we
need to modernize because we're
fifteen billion dollars that
we're we're managing and you
know there's billions and
billions coming in and out of
share
we need to modernize it
shouldn't be a manual process
you look at any fortune five
hundred company which were
probably fortune two hundred and
size they have automated systems
that do this that are tied into
the computers that eliminate
human error and it also can do
forecasting projecting balances
that kind of thing so that's
what this opportunity.
That.
Photos through.
So.
You're you're you're asking for.
By some software so.
Soon you sent out proposals to
do this.
Why did you you've got a price
here have you picked a software.
Mr Chairman no we haven't we've
researched to see what the round
the cost would be so that we can
bring it to you to present so so
with that.
I don't I don't want to.
I don't want and so you at all
that.
And no the you're very
knowledgeable you've already
proven that but.
Do you when you Research yes I
worry a lot because you're
talking about buying brand new
software.
Who do you get your
recommendations for this state.
This is what we will Mr chairman
we go through procurement
process with before we go
through that procurement process
and put a scope of work together
we make sure and work with all
of the people that are going to
need to that software so someone
from LFC someone from DFA
someone from other state
agencies someone from my team
both on cash site And
investments because they have
very different operations make
sure that that full scope of
work can can collaborate with R.
T. R. I. T. and making sure that
it doesn't cause any issues on
any side of any software that
are already utilizing.
The last question Mr chair do
you just pick up the phone talk
to treasure some of the state
yes Mr chairman in fact we'll
start meeting twenty of the
treasures on Saturday members
orders them and and they have a
pretty good solid relationship
of helping each other in
understanding how to get
different things done within
their office is and and I would
encourage you to listen to the
people that are already using
the systems to determine more or
less the least.
Controversial.
Uses and I don't I don't know
anything about this but I just
encourage you to be very
cautious.
Is what I'm saying Mr chair
thank you very much thank you
madam chair the LFC wrecked and
a hundred thousand for a
contractual services associated
with the cost of processing is
the day the report the number of
ports so in addition to the
contract services you're gonna
buy this where that the contract
will you work Mr Lindley's
from you if you would please
enlighten us with the funding.
One hundred thousand dollars of
already incorporated into the
regional started off with so the
six hundred three thousand is
the balance of things that we.
Okay.
Thank you appreciate your time
here today.
Public defenders.
Then we're gonna be short sweet
right Intel's which means our.
Yes Sir.
Remember you the public
defender's.
I just need to know on the
record.
Get started read into that.
The house adopt the LFC record
executive.
Mr chair the at HFC adopted the
LFC wreck which is six point
nine percent above FY twenty
three.
They want to go ahead.
I'll start just briefly
briefly briefly yes Mr Chairman
I was surprised to have the
option to be appear again one
week after we present a I know
that you received the estimate
of what we need to properly fund
our contract council certainly
we haven't asked for that but
that is the need it's been
consistent since I've been on
the commission in two thousand
fourteen we did a budget request
that was more than doubled the
budget the public defender's
office since then we've gotten
the data which we used in the
the the indication that we need
additional eighty eight million
dollars to properly fund
contract council we have a plan
and we had asked for four
million for contract council
this year
I I'm telling you the the need
is acute we will not have enough
contractors is my belief
come July first and will have to
start the client basis hopefully
that won't happen but certainly
we can bridge the gap with what
we need with what we're asking
for thank you Mr chairman I will
briefly go over.
When when last we saw each other
Mr chair members in the home.
That's right it would last we
officially signed.
the the LFC recommendations to
sixty seven point five million
dollars here's here's our
proposal and how we think we can
avoid and hope to avoid any kind
of litigation and and find our
needs in a way that makes sense
and that the state can do right
now an additional two point two
million for contract council
compensation which will allow us
to raise our our base rates
approximately thirty percent
one point forces seven million
dollars for six and a half
percent increase in across the
board for L. P. employees and
tell you why that's important
just over the last couple days
several of our attorneys in
Albuquerque got calls from the
district attorney's office
offering them substantially more
than they are making to leave
our office and go elsewhere
because we're statewide agency
we don't have the ability to you
we don't have the flexibility we
have to follow certain salary
schedules and so if we cannot be
competitive people will leave
and that turnover seriously
hurts our workloads and people
staying Elapidae work because
they're committed but there has
to be equal pay and manageable
workloads and finally
we are asking on top of the FTE
they were the the was approved
by LFC and DFA.
An additional sixteen FTE at one
point seven million dollars I
believe that our
our trend of decreasing or
vacancies and of reducing those
vacancy savings plowing it back
into our people we can justify
that and we have the people here
to answer any questions you all
have thank you Mr chair.
Thank you and that that's a
total amount for the that is
include the four million a
mention for a contract in place
correct it's about five and a
half million dollars to for
those three parts of our of our
requests in addition to LFC.
In addition to the LFC for the
the request.
With that NMSA four million on
LFC wreck.
I'm sorry our our original
budget request for was four
point one million for for
country council to.
And and and we're asking for two
point two.
To get to the for the threat how
much did you find out your
contract employees last year.
Mr chair I don't have a good
answer for you on contract
employees I think each of the
reversion amount in total.
I can give that to use about one
point two and if I could just
that the chiefs in sciences or
yes Mr chair Senator is an
outcome of the might cause
everybody on the World Wide Web
wants to.
Mr chair Senators exact amount
in front of us but the majority
of what we reverted was out of
the two hundred because of the
vacancy rate there was very
little left in our three hundred
but we're happy to provide that
number.
Okay and and Mr we'd we have
been cutting that vacancy rate
over the last several months and
we believe that when there were.
Appropriately funded that will
be able to do so.
Mr chair in FY twenty two the
HSD reverted one point three
million total that's not just
contract but that's across the
board.
Questions from committee
members.
Thank you Mr chairman just for
clarification.
And staff everyone chairman and
our own staff let me ask you a
question did you say that the
two point two million was to
raise rates but I didn't catch
how much are you raising the
rates
Mr chair in center Rodriguez
approximately thirty percent
that would give us the ability
to reason that about thirty
percent okay yeah you know I can
see it's that much long we've
been for ever so it's a good
idea thank you Mr chairman thank
you that thank you Mr if I may
that version is a just about two
percent of our general fund
budgets and generally were well
under two percent with reversion
rights.
Let me ask you one more question
on the L. O. P. easy employees
right that are everybody's
recruiting everybody from one
thing to the other is a one
point four going to be enough to
hold those employees.
You know Mr chair it's everybody
there smiling you're smiling.
Because it because Sir you know
it's it's it's hard to tell we
believe that on top of the money
that already you is going toward
salaries and are you know you're
trying to use our flexibility
around the state we're we're
doing as as you heard some of
we're reaching out to other law
schools around the country to
recruit
we are giving of geographic
differentials in rural areas to
recruit and retain attorneys and
so we would love to have more
money because we've got a
feeling you know that it's a
little bit of an arms race
sometimes we believe that if we
can pay the same as dust the
people who wanted to be public
defenders will stay public
defenders.
And so that's especially where
we want to be we if we can stay
even we will keep our folks.
It seems so you have currently
have fifty one FTEs are funded
phone whatever the state west
right they're currently funded
that are not higher correct.
Fifty one.
Rep Gregg if I'm not on that
page.
Mr chair and you have the right
number that was budgets mission
September twenty twenty two.
And how many have you fill
those.
our our current members they can
seize is less.
I'm sorry.
Is it approximately eighteen
percent with the new positions
which were added this last
fiscal year some of which were
still creating it because they
were the types of positions.
Mr Mr chair at that on the PS
County mmhm our numbers are not
quite the same we're talking
kind of apples and oranges here
I would say the number's gone
down the PS count from the LFC
calculation that's what's been
reported from agency.
I'm just trying to figure out
something can you you can take
your your funded FTEs right now
increase cells of those pay and
save those employees in your
agency right now without doing
anything by the legislature I
understand the.
Rob Peter to pay Paul.
Twenty four will come to June in
order to stop that bleeding I
think that's what you're gonna
have to do with your with your
funded FTEs is rate increase
that pay a what they call it the
price is the wrong thing and use
my information and.
If I may Mister chair we we
actually did that this last year
we increased three percent out
of what we saw was going to be
vacancy savings of course you
have to know that you're gonna
be able to keep that up the next
fiscal year and as a recurring
item by the I agree and we have
tried to maintain the
flexibility any other questions
from commissioner was
just a quick question
in this particular vote your
phone shows that it has you have
a fund balance of nine million
three hundred thirty thousand
dollars of its own paid for the
one fifty two.
So I was just wondering you know
we're talking about Hey in the
pool you can't use any of that
money to pay salaries.
And then as a book.
Trees
ministries Edwards are budget
director to answer the question
are you Robert are employed.
It's.
That center would you got I'm
all part of the limit is what's
called a question.
Mr chair I appreciate that Mr
chair I don't know I don't have
on any figures or data in front
of me for what this nine point
three million dollars is that
you're looking at but we can
look into that and come back to
you within for that work that
work I don't mean to trick you
and Mr chair Senator I can tell
you that it is not I am positive
it's a funded to which we do not
have access to pay salaries.
This is the it's the of
outstanding amount that so too
is by former clients when we
used to contract with people who
were above the intelligence
level.
and of those are outstanding
but.
Uncollectible ran.
Mr chair I think stands are you
Mr Bauer's answer it is good I
can check on that fund balance
and see what exactly is going on
there but that my intuition is
some of that is.
Let's check the fund out see if
we can make transfers not make
transfers of that fund balance
if it exists hello solar
problems me other questions.
Thank you man thank you guys.
DFA.
We want to start yes Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you all just got hits then LFC
analysts joined with by Nicholas
yes from the department of
finance administration and when
Propst the secretary of DFA
agency code three four one if
you guys are following along in
volume two those are on pages
seventy six through eighty six
your guises pace we will just
hit the high levels of money
guises bullets but overall the
agency recommendations differ it
by thirty six point one million
dollars in general fund revenues
of for a total net difference of
sixty one million dollars and
this is primarily due to
differences in the
recommendations for the agency's
food expansions which Nicole
talk a little bit about in just
a second they also differ in use
is a fund balance revenues Mr
chair the executive recommends
twenty two point two million
dollars above the LFC rack from
the tobacco settlement program
fund and I will hand it over to
Nicole to speak on the
expenditures thank you Jessica
Mr chair members of the
committee within the base budget
the executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC five five
hundred and forty seven point
four thousand and yes maybe to
decrease the agencies budgeted
vacancy rate for the contracts
category the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by four hundred
and forty four point six
thousand providing additional
funding for contractual audit
support and I. T. services.
within the others perhaps other
cost category the executive
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by a hundred and eighty nine
point one thousand accounting
for differences in
recommendations for grants to
local governments audit fees
information technology and
training across all the programs
within DFA all differences in
the recommendation for other
financing uses are accounted for
as previously mentioned by
misfits then as it relates to
the tobacco settlement program
fund balances of both analyst
came to consensus on performance
measures and I'll turn it back
over to Jessica thanks to call
Mr chair in terms of language I
just want to know on your high
level bullets on the second page
of the bullets there is a small
error so in terms of language
DFA includes authorizing ten
million dollars to transfer to
the board of finance emergency
fund LFC included two point five
million dollars that was
something the HFC asked us to
look at the difference again
them being ten us being two and
a half in terms of Medicaid and
County I'm sorry in terms of
Medicaid twenty four point five
million dollars is authorized
for tobacco settlement program
fund balances for Medicaid and
five point three million again
from tobacco settlement program
funds at fifty one point eight
million from county supported
Medicaid and then I'll hand it
over to Nicole to speak on the
agencies expansions which is the
bulk of the difference Mr chair
thank you for asking Mr chair
members of the committee as far
as the expansions there are
three expansion requests that
were submitted by the department
of finance and administration
the executive fully funds all
three requests I'll start with
the first one for the agencies
infrastructure task force the
executive recommended eight
hundred and fifty thousand four
four term I have T. E. the LFC
recommendation provides three
hundred thousand four three term
FTE as far as the of federal
grants management throughout the
executive includes two point
five million in federal revenues
for the for the federal.
Lance management bureau where
the LFC provides four hundred
thousand for this effort and
there was a difference in F. T.
E. the LFC recommended three in
the executive recommended.
And these are all term FTE for
that federal grants management
bureau the executive
recommendation also included
thirty four point seven and
recurring general fund for the
statewide food initiative the
LFC recommendation include seven
hundred thousand for
administration of the program
and that is already included
within the base that can be
found in P. five four one for
the department of finance and
administration I'll turn it over
back to Jessica for any
additional comments also Mr
chair just one last thing on the
expansion so Nicole mentioned
the difference in DFA is using
two and a half million in
federal revenues for the grants
bureau LFC on notice noted that
that is of funding that is an
appropriation contingency fund
and so we we instead recommended
just general fund so that the
small differences well I do want
to just quickly no before moving
on there is information on the
civil legal services program in
your packet on page sixteen a
couple differences there both
requests I'm sorry
recommendations supported one
point one million from from the
from the civil legal services I
don't the LFC is just a little
bit under the executive and uses
of general fund DFA provided
about three hundred fifty over
FY twenty three where as LFC
kept General Fund flip so just a
quick note on that and then
lastly Mister chair on the
agency also has not operating
expenditures these are kind of
the pass through programs that
DFA high level detail that is on
page fifteen for the committee's
reference and really the only
difference is there is LFC
provided ten thousand dollars
more for leasehold community
assistance so an increase of
sixty thousand instead of fifty
thousand at the executive and
then the executive provided a
little bit more about a hundred
and eleven thousand dollars more
for the land grant council will
LFC held flagrant Council
flipped so those are the
differences in the non operating
expenditures again you can have
more detail on that Mr chair
from head over to secretary
would you like me to speak on
agencies nonrecurring specials
we have a US.
It all right so I'm gonna go
ahead and go to page seventeen
and eighteen in your guises
packet I do have just some kind
of quick high level notes on
this but would be happy to go
into any in more detail but
basically there's high level
differences in recommendations
for the infrastructure office so
as you all may be aware there is
a legislative finance committee
sponsored bill that is
attempting to create an
infrastructure office
independent of DFA and so there
are some appropriations here for
instance lines to four seven ten
and sixteen all relate to that
office so we find some matching
funds local Grant assistance and
I believe it's eight million to
begin the start up of that
office where as the executive
has an appropriation for a
hundred million dollars for just
matching funds for that office
so there's a small difference
there I guess large differences
of the hundred million versus
the LFC provides about fifteen
million.
Mr chair the next items that
we'd like to talk about our
housing a list of a couple
numbers that are related but
this is for lines number one
number nine fifteen twenty and
twenty one just some differences
and emergency rental assistance
programs and funding that's
going to of New Mexico finance
authority so you can see some of
those differences there of
finally earn points are not
finally but next LFC online
eight includes forty million
dollars for the existing
recreation and quality of life
grant program we saw some good
success with administering the
funds those funds last year so
LFC added forty million dollars
for that initiative in terms of
the civil legal services fund
the DFA recommendation online
seventeen includes a one point
seven million dollar infusion to
the fund the agency is to help
because the the program is
experiencing reduced fund
balances so DFA give them one
point seven million dollars as a
one time infusion where's the
LFC of gives them six hundred
thousand and this was another
item Mr chair the HFC us to look
at was the differences in civil
legal services.
and then the last one I want to
just highlight the biggest
difference we believe is in the
food items so in addition to the
thirty four million that Nico
mentioned in the recurring
budget you can see on line
numbers three there's an
additional twenty one million in
non recurring funding that the
executive recommended and then
the LFC what we did is we
recommended all the
appropriations as non recurring
so we did seven point five
million for DFA to continue
their existing grant program for
several of various programs and
then not on that she Mr chair is
seven point five million to PED
for meal quality improvements
and food waste reduction and so
the total food rack for LFC is
fifteen million dollars again
have to DFA have to PED I'll see
if Nicole wants to add any other
items on the special she Mr
chair.
Thank you just Mr chair members
of the committee I just want to
have a couple of things within
the executive budget that would
be going through DFA and I
apologize I don't have them
memorized off of the LFC sheet
of but we do have a six million
dollars for comprehensive what
landmarks part program thirteen
million dollars for technical
assistance for incentives to
local governments for zoning
policies there's also seventy
five million for the land of
enchantment Fund that was also
included for DFA and then a
hundred million dollars for the
law enforcement recruitment and
then another hundred million
dollars for match funding for
federal infrastructure projects
through fiscal year twenty
twenty twenty six and that's on
page fifty five of the executive
recommendation document
Second with my comments I'll
turn it back.
Secretary.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my
excuse me my name is Andrew
Propst on a cabinet secretary
for the department of finance
and administration I will be
very very brief I think the
analyst covered our our budget
well and the difference as well
as you know Mr chairman we had
our house appropriation and
finance committee hearing
yesterday and I was just
concluded two we began to narrow
some of the differences in the
two recommendations largest one
of course remains the
approximately thirty million or
so difference for food
initiatives are candle travels
with the governor's offices is
here today to answer any
questions you have about that
the difference in particular or
those initiatives and other
numbers chairman of we're by
staff is also here to help me
answer any questions I can
answer which will probably most
of them thank you Mr.
I think it's called the
amendment this call Mr Chairman
I'm fine with that questions
from committee members.
Be nice.
There was.
The.
Little.
We'll go back.
I
just want.
The local data we are.
It.
Is.
Is that of the one fifty two
that shows and there's not that
much money into those funds to
yes so.
For.
Also in this that is a lag.
Mr chair Senator Woods I do just
want to know and I apologize for
not going to send presentation
so your volume to we
accidentally noted the civil
legal services fund as one point
six million dollars of the
reality is we budgeted at one
point one million dollars so if
you're seeing a five hundred
thousand dollar discrepancy that
would account for that
discrepancy and so hopefully
that that speaks to the
discrepancy you're you're
speaking to Senator.
What also stated
in the nine one one advance
phone which you should for.
Eleven dollars and with the.
Two was million.
Well.
And I'm assuming well but
at sale at a certain time.
And we're just not sure.
In this.
Four two.
I see what you're saying Mr
chair Senator Woods I would if
possible would like to get to a
nickel and are the secretary in
regards to when the timing of
that kind of happens.
Your question thank you
secretary.
Mr chair Senator.
in regards to the nine one one
these are projected that.
and it it takes on a previous
the calculation is based on that
thank you want to the previous
families coming in I can get you
further clarification for that
and then you know provided that
information as to where those
revenue sources are coming out
for the
for instance for one simple law
is for civil legal services and
that is mostly coming from
AOC firing phase so
Mr chair Senator those areas the
filing fees have been impacted
by the COVID
action and so there's no single
revenue generation that of
course you know we always try to
project to see how long on the
revenues are and if there is a
shortage thank you
we allocate funding for them you
know.
Well if you're.
This is.
To the.
So is that still the focus of
for.
Services.
That's what I was looking at.
Thanks references.
Mr chair Senator let that get
you that information I.
Thank you
for any other questions Mr
Chairman yes thank you just
quickly and I'd thank you hi we
good to see you secretary of
staff
tell me once again it went a
little fast in the beginning on
the housing part of what is that
that we're doing on health and I
look for here for the chart
you're referring to but I got
lost yes Mr chair madam vice
chair us so let's go back to
your special she which is that
page fort I think fifteen
sixteen if I can I can find.
All right so with housing I
could kind of walk you through a
couple of them so in the DFA
recommendation line one is
related to housing so landlords
support program this was
something that I believe was an
executive adds so oh sorry page
fifteen.
Mr chair madam vice chair.
Also on page fifteen if you see
item number one as mentioned is
this is a landlord support
program that was an executive
at.
Of the next item that is related
to housing Mr chair is number
nine on your list this is for
rental assistance and eviction
prevention the executive is
funding this with the remaining
balances of that arpa funding
the appropriation contingency
fund again this was a an
executive at but the LFC has
eighty capital find out late
package that is to accelerate
the capital outlay to M. NMFA by
one year and this would raise
thirty seven point five million
dollars for housing programs so
that's that's the attached LFC
kind of partner to that one it
for housing there's also number
fifteen which is going to be on
your other side to the other
page.
On page sixteen so number
fifteen this is a technical
assistance add on the executive
side for local us owning
policies so again executive add
on the LFC did not see the
request for and then the other
two items Mister chair related
to housing are going to be
numbers of twenty and twenty one
us so on this ship.
Number twenty is to the local
government division to provide
grants for supportive housing
structure so this is an LFC add
again to continue with an
existing grant program and the
number twenty one is for public
private partnership funds of
that New Mexico finance
authority and I believe that
this I believe that this is
related but those are those are
the items that are in the sheet
and you can see that a lot of
them on the executive side were
at.
Thank you very much for that
explanation that's all I have
Mister.
Thank you just one second I want
to go back to it's page eight to
nine twenty one right.
That's an executive record LFC
director of the state.
You said line twenty one Mister
chairman one of that is in LFC
rack.
What.
Let's talk about the program on
the same page.
Hi Mr chair yes I believe that
the food item is on page fifteen
this is for item number three on
the list on page fifteen and so
why are we pulling some of that
food items out of the early
childhood fund.
I mean that's the bucket that's
overflowing and that's intended
use.
Also Mr chair and so you know
the LFC recommendation provided
you know we looked at the option
of doing more nonrecurring as
you noted you know the school
universal school meals is
something that DFA pulled out of
non recurring and and
incorporated now into their
recurring budget and so that was
kind of the difference I don't
know much detail in terms of you
know why we didn't use the trust
fund for that I believe that
that those amounts have been
allocated in other areas and I
have agency click here if she
would like to got it all done up
here and the missing it could be
done if that was us but the
committee decides to do but let
me ask me just one more question
for answer that and then why are
we taking the infrastructure for
the twenty one million right and
I think the language was.
For food waste initiatives I
don't want to waste initiative
would be but but let me why are
we pulling that from PSoC if
those schools need the
infrastructure to to freezers or
whatever.
Good for questions so.
The bill that increases the
allowable amount from the early
childhood Trust Fund.
And there the house is working
hard on trying to accommodate a
pretty big difference in
executive LFC recommendations
related to child care and I
think also.
The department and LFC staff and
HSC working to raise that to
help bridge that it's certainly
food might be no an item that
could be added to it is just
need to be coordinated with the
increase in the limit coming
from the fund and on the second
one the public's use of public
school capital outlay funded
some of relates to the
negotiations on the capital
outlay bill which is a lot of
progress is being made and it
relates to the recommendation of
the public school capital outlay
task force to lower the match by
a third.
Which of the troops carrying a
bill that was passed unanimously
out of the task force and it's
it's coming to you and
there's LFC staff can make
available to the committee a
projection that that bill will
pull down balances to the low
teens from hundreds of millions
so that's an expensive bill the
expectation is that will boost
demand for that on by half a
billion or more which is a good
thing by making more funds
available to school districts so
I I again on the capital outlay
negotiations and discussions
they were looking at tribal.
library funding but it almost
that part is pretty well tapped
out given those initiatives.
But they're also looking at
capital outlay for of food
related initiatives like this so
the the real point is all these
things need to be coordinated at
the time you make decisions
these different funding pots.
Let me just the cash balances
listed about three point four
five billion in schools right
and I'm gonna use my schools.
Looking at this whole district
built into cash balances yes
they're not in if I use the
impact aid districts that are
the kids have to be spent on
them on the money just be spent
on the kids for impact a
districts why can't we somehow
require those school districts
to pick up a portion of the
infrastructure costs or all the
infrastructure costs if it's
funded RT Fund in I. N. G. with
food services and a.
Yes.
Capital improvements but I mean.
I think the strong school
district position on cash
balances.
allow them to move forward with
capital outlay funding request
that are also facilitated by
lowering the match will still
have many districts will have a
pretty hefty match like sixty
percent in Albuquerque even
after getting a one third
reduction so it is I think it is
a reasonable expectation that
school districts use their cash
balances to help come up with
the match but again it's still
pretty have.
Senator had some questions about
the instant that it was more
along the lines of since we're
on the topic can we have a
candle make a couple comments
just yet let this.
Yep.
So Mr chair members of the
committee Senator Padilla we
just want to clarify that the
seven point five seven point
five million excuse me that's
recommended PED's budget that
reads food waste initiatives we
believe came from the agency
requests for the universal
school meals that was originally
titled healthy meal incentives
and there was another title for
the for the next language I
don't member I apologize and so
we believe that that's where
that seven point five
recommendation came from and
that was never for capital
there's another twenty million
dollar recommendation for
capital which would be happy to
talk to later but that seven
point five for pead would not at
all address the issues of
reimbursements that are captured
in Senegal for.
we have missing the valuable
work talking about the twenty
one million for capital
improvements is six hundred and
you have the budgeted
respectfully the bill is here
it's alright here right now so
assuming someone's providing
some analysis to committee
members and so I just wanna let
you know Mr chairman the bill is
here in your committees.
We'll turn up tax money and I
brought a donut for you today
also known as a door stop.
It is snowing today I'll choose
my vehicle for more wary of.
Page out of the slot Mr
chairman.
So Kendall Center sitting there
why can't we in that piece of
legislation some school
districts will need someone.
An impact aid to my school
district I mean I mean look at
my cash balances my screen.
Gallup.
hundred twenty million dollars
and they get sixty seven million
impact aid I think gal gets
about the bulk of that and and
I've seen a lot of new cars and
new trailers but for going to
prior food initiative we need to
get the school districts
committed to it with part of
their money the all state money.
If we have to do a PO seems yes
you'll see match but impact the
money is designed to help those
kids and I live well I live in
Representative some of the
highest poverty in the state and
probably some of the most food
under initiatives that that we
need but those school districts
needing user impact they may
it's for those students that
they need to use four and we
look chart that bills yet we
require some time to do that
Senator thank you Mr chairman
and senator the only other
question I had that I don't know
if this is maybe Kelly or
someone can so I think I heard
earlier that you were mentioning
the trust fund flow money that
way into the thirty mill that
would be requested here this was
that we were going with that.
I.
Cynthia one look at every
resource we have available
because the exact has so many
**** that we can't build the
actually we think we're
overspent by maybe a billion
billion and a half requests when
we start talking about where
that comes from getting thirty
million of that trust fund is
going to hit a four billion this
year I think four five billion
at the end of twenty four is
like getting a couple water of
the ocean and if this is an
initiative that we need to drive
it's right up in the line as
early childhood and childhood
early childhood up to twelve or
thirteen it matches right in
line with the early childhood
and and the food initiative so
thank you Mr I think you know I
created the department and I'm
fully supportive of both swim
lanes and where the money comes
from I try to make sure that we
know how to flow it properly to
make sure that it's you know in
in if we were to go that route
Mr chairman if with your
permission can I ask this
question we have to get to that
every year that where can we
make a decision year to year
year per year your your two year
it's been a long day already
where the money will come from
to to do that the universal free
breakfast and lunch.
You could appropriate from the
fund sorry Mr you could
appropriate from the fund to the
early childhood department and
transfer it to pad for this and
with language thing was for
children's meals now you always
have the prerogative as
legislature the next year coming
into the operating budget state
okay we did one year about we
actually want to back fill it
with general fund or some
federal funding through into
every use you have the decision
to make those we call swaps.
The
I think that really education
coming up a little bit anyway so
thank you that's all I have
thank you I'm just trying to
figure out the best way to put
reoccurring money in the food
program and make sure that the
school districts participate but
they're committed to doing those
programs and they'll make you do
that is they put their own money
and and make sure those students
again let me ask you I can't
remember what
just cope we talked about the W.
I money and the and to other
funds can't member top.
Why are we not using just
general fund fund that.
Eight hundred fifty for task
forces.
UP Mr chair are you speaking to
the expansion yes well yes so Mr
chair
so for the expansion of we.
What's your question.
Sorry I remember that if we.
Us well we thanks on the
contingency fund for this the
LFC appropriate that exact try
to draw that out I see Mr chair
so the executive recommendation
again so that this is for the
not the eight fifty but this is
for the two point five million
so this is for the I believe
this is for the federal grants
bureau so again DFA appropriated
that from appropriation
contingency fund in the
operating budget but again LFC
up basically for appropriated
those balances elsewhere in the
budget and so we're using
general fund in this a
recommendation here two and a
half virgins the report of and
then you're talking to the
committee is there an LOC.
Iraq I think in our December
January.
There's a twenty million dollar
are I are cares fund transfer
that we need to make or
something I want to know where
that twenty million at there's a
balance in HSD wasn't any use
you may not know the number
again because I don't remember
the exact number either but
there was some more are both
funds that need to be
transferred because agency and
use of.
Mr Chairman.
There are a hundred and forty
million of corporate funds that
have not been appropriate and
often in the executive request
you hearing COVID it's from our
performance but in fact those
are general fund reserves and
sitting in the appropriation
contingency for so a hundred
forty unspent but that's the
same Fund.
The LFC staff reporting the
legislature as available for
Appropration whether it's our
profundity permission
contingency fund or other
general fund reserves with view
them as interchangeable
obviously need to spend that are
provided by I think twenty
twenty five you got those
restrictions but it's still we
count that as general fund
raisers and the only other issue
on our product.
The DFA general counsel for act
a couple appropriations like the
rural librarian Downman Fund
that last year the legislature
made a recommendation from our
put and I I think it was okay
but there are some reasonable
concerns flagged by DFA so the
session suggestion will be to
swap the funding of about that
the twenty.
Twelve or whatever million last
year from libraries from are put
to another use and swap or
something else.
Thank.
Thank you Mr Chairman just that
I guess information page fifteen
there at the statewide teen
court that has some
money coming from general fund
and then a larger amount coming
from non general fund what is
the source of the non general
fund where why is it split like
that.
On Mr chairman asked Nicole does
possibly speak to that.
Mr chair Senator.
I will get additional
clarification on that for you
okay
all just looking at the revenue
sources are I don't remember
after
having.
Okay all right it reason it's
split they're just an increase
needed for an increase in the at
the tap another fund or Mr chair
Senator for this program for
statewide team court as have the
blend of sources of job fund and
other revenue but overall the
programs used.
Okay and
Giselle Tapia if you know teen
court in how many communities to
they have the court set up and
you have a ballpark on.
Well health and thank their
team.
I believe that's correct and I
will follow up with you Mr chair
Senator for that thank you Mr
the only reason I ask is I've
seen do your work in of terror
county in Alamogordo and it has
become very effective very
effective and this will make
sure that as many communities as
possible if the funding is
correct and if the that we have
as many communities possible
participating in that program it
generates great results at least
my experiences tell me that
thank you Mr chairman thank you.
Secretary of anything to add or
rigorous gentleman I don't we
will follow up on the questions
that we were able to get to.
Thank thank you.
Senator Padilla that would not
be an allowable food at school
because.
Distracted from Santa Fe through
the visited he wanted to say hi
ownership that money introducing
yourself.
They love your food.
What the I will.
Thank you for having us.
We appreciated guys coming into
seeing.
I think it's actually going to a
school it was really cool thanks
for doing that Mr Chairman said
that it was fun to watch their
faces they're all just I think
over well seventy adults
cafeteria.
But it was I thank you coming in
could we place our order.
I think Senator a fifty eight
rigatoni and donuts at.
You will Mr chairman I don't
know if you caught that day but
the young man I sat with last
switch he he we traded for
carrot sticks for half an
orange.
It was a great trade.
Thank you thank you I was really
impressed with the early
childhood center I wish we could
have one of those around the
state everywhere that was the
most impressive thing I've seen
in every child.
Thank you.
That.
Kelly go ahead and start.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair I'm Kelly Klein with
the legislative finance
committee were on HSD code six
eleven the early childhood
education and care department
also known as ECECD with me
today and secretary again ski
and MaryBeth stands more from
the department of finance and
administration before we go
through the formal presentation
we did this yesterday but I
think it health for contacts
with the committee if I could
potentially have you open your
volume ones which is your skin
here non spiral bound book.
To page twenty four.
Yes teacher thanks.
Thank you bye miss Kelly.
thank you Mr chair so just for
reference on contacts in funding
you can see on page twenty four
on the left side chart history
of early childhood funding going
back from FY twelve to the
current fiscal year operating
budget and you can see that we
have grown tremendously over the
years many of those years we
were in some really financial
troubles and insolvency in yet
early childhood funding grew
through that entire history
because it was a real prior to
the legislature anticipated this
executive as well and so you can
see the early childhood before
it was an independent department
had significant revenues coming
to programs such as pre
kindergarten childcare
assistance home visiting the
family infant toddler program
really nutrition there's a
plethora of services within that
funding source.
If I could turn one more page to
page twenty six and twenty
seven.
This is some contacts in the
child care assistance program
and we're gonna be talking a lot
about child care assistance
because that's one of the key
differences between the two
recommendations following one
Senator.
So just for context on page
twenty six you're going to see
the federal poverty levels for
income families I will not
that's twenty two which is
slightly higher twenty three but
it gets you in the
If you're at four hundred
percent of the federal poverty
level for F. P. L. your eligible
we have to be going to work or
school of often activity or
eligible for child care
assistance so those are the
income levels by the household
members right below that chart
you can see how much we've been
paying on average per child for
child care assistance seeing
that we've been paying every
single year and increasing
amount per child child care
assistance to private providers
provide that care and then the
charts on the next page on the
right you can see the average
monthly enrollment of child care
assistance for those ten years
you can see that we were pretty
even at twenty thousand every
given month we saw did during
COVID and now we've shot up
given the expanded eligibility
which the department instituted
last summer and right below that
is the first chart showing the
declining birthrates in New
Mexico so the reason we talk
about this is to make sure that
we build the right size system
that we have enough pre K. looks
lots but not too many pre K.
slots and so and that's going to
be a continued trend so you
don't want to build twenty seven
thousand pre K. loss for four
year olds if you only have
twenty one thousand so it's
something we're gonna have to
deal with every year probably
for many years in the state is
constantly re balancing these
revenues because of those trends
so with that context we'll go to
where I'm just going to go over
our high level which is your
page one of your packet.
one of two of the whole packet
we're just gonna go over page
one.
So there is a lot of differences
between these two
recommendations all know that
yesterday in the hearing about
the committee accepted the LESC
recommendation but they did tell
us to go back and work on this
the very large differences
between the three the two
recommendations but as I
explained I think the best way
to think about this is there are
three main differences between
these two recommendations and
you can kind of tell in this
chart alone so the top chart
that you're gonna see on that
page one is your general fund
summary of how the differences
between the two recommendations
the secondary chart is the trust
funds and how those two
recommendations spend that and
then the third table is how the
land grant permanent fund is
recommended so the three major
differences I kind of pocket
them for storytelling purposes
between these two
recommendations are one that the
executive recommendation
included forty six million
coming out of the trust fund to
be spent in the next fiscal year
now that number was what the
consensus revenue estimating
group told us in the fall would
probably be the distribution
from the trust fund and so
that's why the executive
recommendation did forty six
million now that there's a copy
up to this that the trust fund
was built on a three year
average and that was supposed to
put out the distribution number
for the next year if the trust
fund has not existed for three
years the existed for two and so
we thought the distribution was
going to be based on average of
those two years however the
decision at the state investment
council was was to choose the as
the thirty year and put it is
zero so mathematically what that
does is bring down your average
if you bring have zero and so in
the fall before the budget
process happened we all thought
that was gonna be about a minute
hundred million distribution out
and so we found it was only
gonna be forty six that was a
bit of a shock to a lot of
people given that the trust
funds that.
Three point four billion dollars
putting up forty six million it
can handle much higher
distribution and not harm the
corpus so the LFC recommendation
does a higher distribution from
the trust fund of a hundred
million dollars so that's the
first main difference is how
much we spend from early
childhood trust but the
executive does forty six the LFC
does a hundred million and in
that middle chart you can see
those differences.
The second large difference
between the LESC and the
Executive recommendations on the
land grant permanent fund so the
LFC recommendation built land
grant permanent fund into the
general fund operating budget
that goes to ECECD in recurring
way.
And on the third chart at the
bottom you can see how the LFC
recommendations spends that
money and then every time you
see these little boxes on the
left hand side that says land
grant permanent fund see table
one those are the corresponding
numbers because land grant
permanent fund is general fund
and so you can see that those
numbers match the tables inside
the general fund summary well
the executive recommendation
bills the land grant permanent
fund into the non recurring back
of the bill so another key
difference how we built land
grant permanent fund into the
two budgets.
The third main difference
between the recommendations is
how we spend these monies okay
and so the executive
recommendation had a hundred
million in the back of the bill
for child care assistance twenty
million for pre K. and then a
smattering of other programs
which you can see on page two.
so big emphasis on child care
assistance
the LFC recommendation expands
prekindergarten and home
visiting with that money.
Well we the LFC organization not
only expands pre K. in general
as and like giving more slots
and availability of services but
we spend a large amount of money
on expanding the length of day
of service for pre K. so instead
of having a six hour dates a
full eight hour day of coverage
so that families have a full day
of care and then we add another
twenty five days on the care of
the pre K. here so we make it a
much longer program to allow it
to be a care option for families
that families opt in and receive
a full care the other thing the
LFC recommendation does is add
a rate increase for four year
olds of eleven percent it
expands prekindergarten slots
for four year olds for about
fourteen hundred and expands
three keep three year old
kindergarten by about thirteen
hundred so between those three
kind of big pockets I mean the
devil's in the detail there's a
lot of other small differences
but those are really kind of
that digestible large
differences between the two
recommendations
there's one couple more things
or talk about you'll see also
reduced handout transfers from
Human Services departments and
use trust fund money to cover
that whole the agency harmless
why did we do that it allows HSD
to keep that money to spend more
on income support programs and
also allowed some money from
tended to go to the children
families department to help
families in the child protective
services system.
And then the LFC also has a
language not included in the
executive recommendation that
asked the agency to focus some
of its childcare dollars on
expanding infants care because
it's the smallest portion of
child care that happens in our
state so childcare assistance
starts the first few weeks of
life and and when you're
thirteen only about thirteen to
fourteen percent every month the
children serving child care
assistance or two years and
below so that's about fifty
percent forty to fifty percent
are school age kids on a bus in
that program and so we know that
infant care some of the hardest
Care to provide for families
hits the optimal time that
families need to reactivate into
the economy and we just know
that those children are at the
greatest risk of maltreatment
black and so we want to have
this opportunity I'm fine care
and to start moving those
dollars into pre K. to to
childcare to the youngest years
especially given the expansion
but you all have funded K. five
plus after school care extended
learning so those older children
should be also opting into those
programs setting some of the
release on childcare assistance
allow those dollars we spent on
younger years I know that was a
lot
but thank you Mr chairman I'll
turn over to MaryBeth and the
secretary for any additional
comments thanks
committee members I'll come home
and I'm I'm sure that you would
all rather hear from secretary
on these large differences but I
did want to just bring up one
item it's it is not nearly as
large as the pre K. child care
discrepancies but it's three
million dollars for early
childhood coalitions it was
originally requested through the
trust fund it is in the
executive rockets not in the LFC
rack
and this is really important for
the agency because these
coalitions are seemingly rely on
tremendously to get feedback
from individual communities.
He's about what they need in
regards to pre K. child care all
of that and that way you know
the HSD is able to meet the
needs of the communities
specifically which I'm sure as
we all know can vary widely
widely throughout the state so I
just wanted to bring that to
your attention that that is a
critical need that is lacking at
this time and it's not a huge
amount of money but it's very
very very important to the
department's ability to carry
out their strategic plan so
thank you so much and without
I'll turn it over to the
secretary.
Mr Chairman nice to see you
thanks committee members it's
great to be here for the Senate
finance committee again and I
believe we did find a handout on
how the executive recommendation
a budget is a line to our
strategic plan and the dollar
amount associated with our first
call school readiness that is
thank you for that is very much
on the early childhood
universal high quality early
childhood and then I won't I
won't go through it but I just
want you to have that to see how
we were thinking about the
budget and how the as.
That said that the coalitions
are critical to our long term
success.
In implementing a responsive and
equitable and early childhood
system but I want to thank all
of you after the time that
you've given me I want to thank
Kelly and Charles and David and
the wonderful staff of the LFC
who really partnered with us
over the last three years as you
made this amazing monumental
decision to create a new
department and we work together
because we put this department
on solid footing not just for
this year FY twenty four but
really for the long term and so
I want to thank them and I
definitely want to appreciate
all the work that you have done
and that the communities and the
advocates of the families and
the pair and the educators who
helped New Mexico past the lake
grant permanent funds which is
said resoundingly seventy
percent of voters said let's
invest more in early childhood
and in this time of prosperity I
know these aren't easy decisions
that you all have to make in
terms of where we're putting
these investments but we know
from the research from the
neuroscience from the
developmental science that Lee
invest in our youngest residents
and we invest with high quality
programs a high quality early
childhood system Mr chairman
you've told me to focus on one
thing and I decided my one thing
is making sure that system that
is made up of childcare pre K.
and home visiting early
intervention is working
collaboratively in a concert
together because that's where
we're going to see the outcomes
for children we don't want to be
fiftieth one of the fifty first
in education and fiftieth and
hunger and fiftieth and all
these outcomes for child well
being and we're not going to be
because of the great work that
you all done the visionary
leadership and wisdom of setting
up not only the department but
then to follow on that with the
early childhood trust fund to
ensure that for generations this
is a generational issue here
that we are going to put these
investments in places that we
will take a generation possibly
to see some of the substantial
changes but we're going to see
some of them in the.
Short term things we're seeing
already is families are able to
go back to work because they
have access to childcare and
help paying for it we're already
seeing we're number one in our
early intervention program in
getting children into early
intervention and identifying
them and that's an exciting
thing to applaud in in our
special appropriation request we
said please fund our provider
rate increase we just completed
a cost study for early
intervention providers great
data that data is driving our
decision making around how to
increase those rates home
visiting I'll be the first to
acknowledge we're not doing the
job we need to DO and getting
Medicaid home visiting at the
level that it needs to be and it
will be and we are working our
director of family support early
intervention is working might at
the TNS working very closely
with the Lana at HSD the meeting
weekly with them CIOS so I know
we have that commitment to you
and we're not meeting it and we
will we want to do that and then
pre K. we all pre K. is such an
incredibly valuable and
important program that we have
to have this administration is
deeply committed to a mixed
delivery system that means
families may receive their
preschool in a family child care
home they may receive it in an
elementary school but it might
receive it in a community based
center and when you created this
department I think you did.
There wasn't enough coordination
you know we're we are pushing
out head start where we pushing
out tribal programs what we're
childcare programs being well
supported so to Kelly's point we
have to look at all these
investments we we base our for
your finance plan on the birth
rate data so we see over time
how we're moving up and down in
different programs and why we
need to do that for but honestly
we have budgeted in in our
budget the hundred twelve
million we want to be serving
eleven thousand one hundred and
thirty two infants that's only
fifty percent of those that are
eligible and have all parents in
the workforce right now we're
only serving one thousand
infants so we need to work on a
strategy and we're going to do
that because fifty percent of
the perks in this in our is
there funded through Medicaid
are at fifty percent FPL or
lower such a callous point
absolutely our most vulnerable
businesses and toddlers must be
in care finally on the pre K.
issue of even with eight hours a
day and twenty four for five
more days five hundred hours of
instruction pre K. there's still
another nine hundred and sixty
hours that a working family with
me so there still will be a
pressure on the child care.
And we have concerns about
ramping up from what we've asked
for for twenty million two
hundred nine million dollars
request to get that out the door
actively we want to work with
the LFC to come to more of a
compromise where it's fifty or
sixty and then we do a big play
next year or we look at it so
that we can prepare the
community and we can prepare the
workforce to be able to serve
children in pre K. they have to
have bachelor's degrees eight
degrees they have to do
curriculum parent teacher
conferences so we agree with the
LFC that we need to go further
in terms of how much for funding
pre K. but that amount of money
has it gives us great concern so
I will turn it to the committee
for your questions and
appreciate your time today.
Sen
William misconduct.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you
Mr chairman thank you madam
secretary thank you Kelly and
everyone that's presenting
hearing so tying it all together
makes a lot of sense thank you
for money that out Kelly and
and madam secretary to just at a
high level
So what we're sort of
educational specific educational
programs that you have you know
the birth to five that that are
solidly in your department only
half of those look in handy
administer where are they all
over the state.
Mr chairman Senator Padilla
thank you for that question and
we did I think putting your
mailboxes yesterday hopefully
their annual outcomes report so
we have providers all over the
state that are providing early
care and education some of those
are providing just childcare and
some of those are providing
childcare and pre K..
So all of our programs are in
early care and education and
that's in the bill that you
wrote the created the department
of that the work that we do
whether it's developmental
throughout early intervention
program but and I think we
talked about this last month
when I was here about how
educating young children before
the age of five it looks very
different than how we educate
children after the age of five
but the education that's
happening in our child care
centers teachers are.
They have their degreed
especially in our quality
programs they're doing this what
we call serve and return so when
a baby looks at you and because
you look back at them include
their parade is like synapses
are firing but when that doesn't
happen we see the children are
not learning in developing so we
work with our infant toddler
teachers and they get
professional development to know
about responsive caregiving
that's when the brain is
developing kids executive
function it's social emotional
learning how to regulate
themselves they're learning to
talk to sing so that's how
education looks before the age
of five and that's happening in
home visiting programs with home
visitors going out a working
family and teaching them how to
do these very important
strategies and this response of
this is how the brain develops
we talked about this last month
eighty percent of that brain is
wired by age three so wherever
these infants and toddlers are
in their families the support
they're getting it's critical
that that that knowledge bases
there and that's why we support
parent education for home
visiting and also throw
childcare and our pre K.
programs.
Mr chairman of the last thing I
had just I over there maybe
there other questions and I
think that presentation
everything was excellent how are
the the degree folk that you
were talking about how are they
compensated is there already a.
The pay structure plan put
together for these folks are
house that has a come together.
We were we we still have work to
do and it's in our of strategic
planning LCS noted there in the
document we provided right now
we we just implemented a
competitive rate for
professionals using the federal
relief money that's the other
reason that the child care ask
is so important because we want
to increase our childcare rates
I think we have a great meeting
inTaos where we were showing you
that we based our rate on a
twelve ten hourly wage for an
entry level person coming in to
do this highly relationship
based intensive work in people
is so we want to raise it to
fifteen and then the teacher
making twenty when we
implemented PPE the competitive
pay I got calls from providers
all the time saying I finally.
The decisions I was able to open
that classroom because now I can
pay staff wages the testimonials
from the people actually
receiving it have been
outpouring they can pay for
medication for their family
member they don't have to work a
second job so right now the pay
is about twelve to thirteen
dollars on average the people
are making even when they have
higher credentials and so that's
what this funding in the child
care budget will do maintain
expanded eligibility increase
the wages of childcare staff so
that we can have a high quality
system the quality begins with
that educator I think we know
that in K. twelve in the same
thing as an early childhood
almost even more because of that
infant who has to rely on that
educator to be there and be
responsive to their needs sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman of the but
the only thing I would add is
just keep doing everything you
do I think we're definitely
finally moving in the right
direction here but specifically
on the pay plan the.
Hey ladders and all that I'd
really like to see those
documented at some point
I know that you have a plan and
you're working with a lot of
people to put it together make
sure that works for everyone but
but it would be nice to see that
next time maybe you come to this
group thank you.
Question okay one thing we have
to do this.
I.
I.
Then the child because of
learn to run on your own and
operate funds not rely Gen.
Person at
yeah we get their phones.
So we need to
do that.
It is number is expanding all.
Members and.
Cost is.
It that the the faster
is.
Almost done.
In order to.
Is.
That will be sustainable oceans
and our children.
This.
Number
the cost of those.
That.
want to add more.
Total five thousand.
C. five thousand twenty four
thousand I'm sorry Mr chair
twenty fourth what made the
team.
The majority.
Mr.
After I.
Also.
Hello
dollars.
Child.
Is if you.
You guys are.
Let's talk.
dollars in resources need right
I.
The following are action thank.
Offset to that.
That billion.
Yes.
This.
The operator have some.
So if there's.
Senator flexibility is it has.
Hello costs.
if you have a.
The settlement.
The other agency has a case.
coercion.
The cost of million dollars.
The coalition's there's fifteen
and we want to expand to five
north counties.
So that's about two hundred I'm
sorry Mr chair.
That there between a hundred and
ten and a hundred fifty thousand
annually to have a coordinator
and have resources to go out
there to do committee
assessments that the district
teacher plans.
And communicate well over half
the.
For we do require that court
council collisions Mr chair to
have a quorum dedicated staff
person.
People to just get the money and
have it be volunteer base but
actually if someone that works
directly with the agency to.
They're not REC they're they
rants they get grants and then
they hire people in the
committee we have one in San
Juan I want to make in Lee
County.
Coalition.
Kids and system.
Mr chair the great question and
that what their job is to do is
to address that exactly is to
improve the coordination between
head start tribal childcare and
pre K. programs with school
districts and work together and
make sure families are at the
table helping design the system
one of my area.
Officials which I I.
For calling.
Calling from two thousand one
hundred.
More.
Some
of.
Okay Mister chair on I'll have a
reach out to you.
Talk about is
that's right.
The
current.
Your system is.
School.
The longer the longer that they
that's a.
Programs.
There.
Mr chair where we definitely
talking with them the LFC about
expanding it for early childhood
purposes but the executive does
not support and helping the
trust fund to expand beyond
things that are for that
prenatal to five early childhood
system with that is as much of
the investments of COVID I'm not
negating that we are still
woefully underfunding the
prenatal to five system so we
can't pay educators and
professionals what they need and
deserve the value of the work
they're bringing to our
communities so we don't want to
invest in something that we
don't invest in quality and then
we don't get the results that we
all want and then for the Dow
comes that would be my only I
understand that you're saying
we're increasing investments but
they're because that's what's
going to get us the outcome so
you're not gonna have
corrections and this you know
special N. as high and all the
other things that are costing
our state and both in numbers
but also in human capital so but
I I understand I hear what
you're saying and we agree that
we have to sustain this agency
like you have to sustain all of
the agencies in the state to do
the work serve the people and I
appreciate your support on that
as well
other agencies that I like that
so they are general fund dollars
that.
And so we're gonna have to work
or.
Similarities thank you Mr chair
thank you.
Thank you thank you very much
for that do we have anyone else
here we are at your.
The committee that some
questions maybe questions or
comments.
Yes Representative.
Thank you and madam secretary
good afternoon and welcome to
the annals of real real quick I
just want to thank you for the
great high level simplified this
what you need to pay attention
to that so helpful for us we
have so much information coming
at us so so good job I mean you
know top on it for us to all of
you thank you and to those
listening that's a really
helpful thing to do when you
come just to make sure paying
attention the right thing I want
to compliment you for that thank
you.
Thanks Mr chair.
Senator thank you madam chair
thank you Secretary in Calais
for the presentation I'm just
wondering about for child care
assistance exec is recommending
a hundred and twelve point five
million as a bridge before the
ECECD begins receiving
disbursements from the early
childhood trust fund and the
land grant permanent fund and
LFC is recommending forty two
million Kelly what's at the
position on how the ECECD fills
that gap.
So madam chair members of the
committee that's an increase
over the current fiscal year
forty two million now childcare
assistance is not an entitlement
program they can't everybody who
walks in the door they don't
enroll despite budget authority
and so this would still allow
growth for the program when LESC
was developing the budget we
were given we did have to have
discussions about what it would
cost for rate increases so this
is really about succeeding the
current rates and allowance for
growth of enrollment still as
well and so it wouldn't
necessarily cost as much as we
into the rate increase that the
secretary is now discussing
however we we understand agency
told us to go back and talk
about these things and so they
could still expand they would
have enough money to still
expand with the LFC
recommendation us really do read
increase or do a rate increase
and do less expansion we don't
have language saying like you
have to use it for this sort of
that so allows flexibility of it
the executive recommendation is
higher because it has those
things built into it.
Yes ma'am chair and senator
Hemphill our our she's correct
and what we have built in and I
would just say that eighty five
percent of the families that
were serving right now are at or
below two hundred fifty percent
of poverty there's very few that
are at the three hundred fifty
and above and so we do we have
to increase the rate both from
then on person inflationary
costs as well as what we have
seen the results of the
competitive rate for
professionals the what how that
has helped people hire and
retain staff who want to work in
early childhood I think we all
know in most industries out
there it's in your communities
people are starting at about
seventeen dollars an hour to
flip burgers do food coffee
great somebody so when we're
talking about some of the most
important work a person can do
this caring for an infant and a
toddler for ten hours a day
today
we need to make sure that that
entry they're coming in at
fifteen the teachers making
twenty so that we can have again
the results of high quality
professionals working with the
most important what we're
building our future.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that explanation Kelly and
secretary that that's all I have
thank you Senator and thank you
for your responses anyone else
any questions or comments no I
just need some quick
clarification before we end here
you mentioned earlier secretary
that you would want to serve in
in refresh my memory here you
would want to serve eleven
thousand one hundred and thirty
two infants but you currently
just serve four thousand we just
fifty percent of that amount to
do now
is that what category is that in
because later.
Childcare that's right okay got
wanted to make sure because
overall you Sir twenty four
thousand.
Two hundred eighty two currently
current thirty two percent or
school age I just because the
server our account think it's
percentages preschool age
children C. of their plan yeah
all right thank you Kelly did
you want to say something no all
right well thank you very much
for that clarification we
appreciate all your work and I
know this Department thanks to
Senator Padilla I think you have
to step out became reality
something we had to anticipate
it would eventually come and we
had we were happy to see it
become reality and and to see
the the work that not only
you're doing about that needs to
be done and collaborate we as a
team we can continue to help and
take care of our families and
our kiddos Madam does it
knowledge and think that my
credible staff here my team is
fifty CC every day.
Data service programs help
providers improve quality and
communicate and reach families
with the important services and
programs that we have yes thank
you we thank your staff to we
see that it's a huge
responsibility and one of the
biggest things we see is that it
grew so fast you know and and
but the need was great and so
immediately we found this
mechanism by which we can serve
a lot of kids and everything's
is growing to continue to grow
thanks to all of you for your
help alright that's all we have
so yes thank you.
Your we're gonna go on to
children youth and families
department agency six ninety and
we've got Eric with us again.
Someone else let's see.
Hi Eric.
I'm sure.
Thank.
All right good afternoon to.
Let's.
Conversations I don't like to
get this really hard like scary.
Okay all right there we go so
good afternoon to everyone here
today this is our last agenda
item for today and very
important much so thank you to
our justice former justice
cabinet secretary of the hill
and of course Eric in our staff
thank you for being here again.
Before we go on truly I want to
thank the staff before we hear
all that you're doing because we
do know how much work you do and
we think we do but we're not
there I'm sure you do a lot more
than what we hear about are no
but I I just want to thank
everyone thank you for all the
to do all right we can proceed
Eric you want to start with us
here and then we'll move on to
best.
All right madam chair members of
the committee again my name is
Eric Chenier I'm the LFC analyst
for the children youth and
families department sitting next
to me is secretary V. hill and
sitting next to her is our
executive analyst Mary Beth does
more.
I'm not gonna go through the the
bullets in a time to detail
because I think you guys can
read that on your own I did want
to kind of just discuss before
right I'm going to all dive in a
little bit into our high level
that's on that second page in
the packet that you all have.
Of the before I go into that
kind of just want to remind the
committee.
The CYFD over the interim was a
lead just at committee if you
members we're doing those
hearings for Legisla-.
And those are kind of set up so
that we do a deeper dive into a
different policy areas.
In the case of CYFD we dove in
to
And to childhood repeat
maltreatment.
and.
Two of the main take aways from
those hearings was kind of
looking at what what can we do
to improve how we are providing
the services and number one was
workforce and you know improving
on recruitment and retention the
other one was
Was implementing
Evidence based prevention
services.
So one thing I wanted to just
point out if we go over on page
two to the high level the
general fund high level you'll
notice that there's a lot of
things in that high level the
kind of address those two areas
so it's that recruitment
retention workforce development
developing that up and then
implementing those evidence
based prevention programs for
you know reducing that hi a
repeat maltreatment right.
and I also wanted to mention to
that if you want to look at the
Legisla- from back in December
that's also included in the back
of your packets there too so
anyway moving on on page two the
high level pates you'll see that
it's.
My number their online six I
wanted to point out.
The executive recommended about
two point seven million for
behavioral health services for
children in custody
and that would governor about
seven point three million in
federal funds
what what this funding is doing
is it's going into CYFD and then
CYFD would transfer that money
over to HSD for Eric me
interrupt you for your tell me
the line again because on line
six on your pandemic on yep
yeah.
Okay so that's Medicaid match
for behavioral health services
for three thousand children
three thousand thank you yeah so
that so the the funding the
funding would come into CYFD
CYFD would transfer that over to
HSD for.
the Medicaid match instead of on
the LESC side though instead of
sending it to sue FTE later be
transferred resenting it
straight to HSD and for very
similar purposes
but it's larger appropriation of
twelve million dollars and that
would governor about forty two
million in federal funds that's
that's one big point I wanted to
to make.
Moving down to line twenty one
LFC also included abouts about
seven point six million for
prevention programming for well
supported supported a promising
programming
and then also another million
dollars for.
Home visiting for the state fair
program that's that's there to.
Online thirty this is something
that we had a lot of discussions
about and this is.
So the executive brought in
you know increased general fund
revenue to the agency by about
eleven point seven percent.
LFC had a smaller general fund
increase of about three point
one percent but.
We also included this tent
tennis transfer into the agency
and and ten if you don't know is
the temporary assistance for
needy families block grants from
the federal government and a lot
of other states I use this town
if revenue in their child
welfare programs
it's and that's so that's in
there and so it makes it more
just so you can see at the
bottom there
At the very bottom you can see
the kind of totals there it's
more of an apples to apples
because we added that ten if so
the total general fund from them
from the executive is about
eleven point seven percent the
total increase with ten F. and
general fund from LFC was about
ten point seven so there's not a
huge difference there if you
look through the packet that you
all have you'll see on the on
the spending side there's not a
ton of differences in their it's
mostly on the revenue with that
madam chair go ahead and pass it
over to very best for for the
comment okay thank you Eric
madam chair members of the
committee hello again
I I wanted to just there are a
few differences as as Eric just
mentioned so I don't need to
rehash everything but one thing
that I would like to bring to
your attention is the workforce
needs the protective services
department
as Eric was just talking about
there's really you really
combines two things that are
critical at CYFD right now
looking at this issue first of
all is protective service we
were just talking about Legisla-
at a on child marriage repeat
child maltreatment and trying to
bring that down
that goes hand in hand with
having a robust protective
services workforce which the HSD
is really trying to get to a
point where they have sufficient
FTE to really make a difference
with things like repeat child
maltreatment so I just wanted to
bring your attention the funding
amounts in protective services
in both recommendations are
really very close so the intent
is absolutely there on both
sides to address this issue what
is what the discrepancy rather
is that the executive has put in
sixty FTP that the agency
requests to do this work I know
if you ask them I believe
they'll say they actually need
about three hundred in
protective services to bring
down the case loads and address
all of these issues but they
only ask for sixty
Mmhm and I just wanted to point
out that there they do have a
relatively high vacancy rate in
the program right now it's about
twenty four percent but they're
budgeted vacancy rate is only
about twenty one percent so
there budgeted pretty high they
they don't have all that much
wiggle room in there and so just
to put it in numbers for you
real quickly they have just over
a thousand authorized AT T. E.
in protective services but in in
FY twenty three they could only
hire up to a hundred about eight
hundred eighty eight of them and
currently they have please step
in anybody to have defining
correct currently they have
eight hundred and forty five
positions filled and not program
which eight forty three so the
they do have a need for these
positions and if you talk to you
know the secretary could
certainly lab right if needed
but a lot of these positions are
statewide they can't easily be
reclassified for a position in
another account with you other
County or for another level of
social workers it's really quite
complicated and they do have a
pretty high you know pretty
quick turnover rate so they're
trying to work on those things I
just want to put it out there
that the sixty F. T. E.
they really do need the
authority from the legislature
to create some new positions in
that program so again the
funding levels are very similar
to the intent is similar but the
executive would really really
supports adding some additional
positions for them so I just
wanted to put that out there for
you as one of the differences
still remaining in the budget
but with that I'll turn it over
to the secretary for on her
presentation.
Right thank you very much
MaryBeth secretario madam chair
and thank you everyone committee
members of the Senate.
my name is Barbara Vigil and I'm
secretary of state why FTE
having taken the position
probably about what a little
over a year ago October first of
twenty twenty one
it certainly has been an honor
to serve in this position and I
have
slowly but surely discovered
that our house needs a lot of
work.
I like to think of CYFD is a
home that's been built about
forty years ago thirty forty
years ago that need some
foundational repairs underneath
the ground and while we can look
up above the house and as we
live in this house and serve the
children and families in New
Mexico we see that sometimes a
windows don't close ride or
there's a leaky faucet and we
can fix those things very very
easily however the hard work in
this department means we've got
to go underneath the house and
checked the foundation and I
don't think that there's been
foundational realignment of the
agency for us since its creation
we've added rooms we've added
responsibilities such as cystic
violence we we've grown the
behavioral health services
division we created that into
the agency of course we've
always been responsible for
juvenile justice work as well as
our I choose neglect cases over
the years the agency grown and
grown and we haven't actually
gone below the foundation below
the earth and looked at the
foundation and so let me just
say since I've been in this in
this position I think that
that's where we have to invest
in we are we are investing in
that foundational work and you
may not see it you may not see
the changes that I hope will
will we slacked this work until
years forward
I also want to mention something
that's very very important.
The work that ECECD is doing
touches our system of care if
they are able to visit families
and children and toddlers and
newborns and create that healthy
wellbeing environment for them
the less likely they're going to
evolve in touch our system of
care anything that you can do by
way of education of supporting
our schools supporting our
teachers supporting or even
social workers who are in the
educational institutions that
serves us and so we work closely
with our sister agencies and
it's all connected
so with that I'd like to just
quickly go through what I
prepared just to give you a
little bit of highlight the
agency and I I think you should
have a.
The very basic power point in
front of you.
Our vision and our work really
rested how do we make a New
Mexico where all children youth
and families are healthy R. C.
are thriving and strengthened by
their culture and their
community and we do that provide
more treatment whether it's
ECECD for having home visiting
by either agency or in the
schools we do that by having
that supported
intervention for families we
partner with the children of
families in the communities
around New Mexico we build a
system of trust and transparency
and we serve these families by
listening by helping and
learning from their diversity
and to keep their children and
and use healthy and safe and
thriving on page three of of the
power point in front of you I
want you to I want to highlight
something and certainly up Dr
Scrase in his late.
It from.
In his power points if you were
present to the legislature but
it's related to our work as well
New Mexico has the highest
social vulnerability in the
United States so to the extent
that families come into our care
it's a direct of representation
of social social vulnerability
and you can see the map on page
three that highlights that New
Mexico has a long way to go in
addressing poverty and helpful
composition disability minority
status and language in housing
and transportation.
Moving on I'd like to describe
what we do at the agency in
general terms we provide an
array of services prevention
intervention and rehabilitative
and after care services to New
Mexico children and their
families and our purpose our
number one purposes to reduce as
Mr shin shin a mention is to
reduce repeat maltreatment of
art our children who touch our
sphere of care who touch our
system of care and we have to
guide you in our juvenile
justice system make sure we get
on the right track at the start
heading down the wrong the wrong
path towards a criminal
activity we also service
behavioral health needs of all
children in New Mexico not just
children in foster care who are
in our who are under our
jurisdiction but really all
behavioral health all behavioral
health services for all New
Mexico children and finally we
must partner with communities
with the other branches of
government with other agencies
CYFD cannot
be successful on its own we can
only be successful by partnering
with our communities with our
families and with our other
agencies to serve the committee
the families in New Mexico let
me start with prevention and
this is something I want to
thank the LESC for because they
really highlighted in their
analysis of our budget the need
for prevention work we
collaborate with ECECD and the
children's cabinet to produce a
families first prevention plan.
It is now under review by the U.
US administration for children
and families and CYFD has
received positive feedback from
the federal government with
respect to this plan I can't
emphasize enough the need for us
to invest more dollars on the
prevention side the four
children actually enter our
system of care and that the
investment the return on
investment will be a lot greater
if we invest more dollars on the
provision side we also have a
thriving families prevention
plan that includes childcare
assistance and home visiting
programs and that was described
in the ECECD presentation by
secretary Groginsky we've
increased spending on prevention
services to over ten million
dollars in FY twenty two and
we're now seeking an additional
six million to increasing
contractual services to expand
our what we call a multi level
response systems statewide
differential response.
We want to optimize our federal
funding to invest in
strengthening improving services
so we get the the federal match
to expand our our general fund
dollars
and we also expand prevention
services statewide including
community based services child
and youth specific services and
we want to compete continue to
build a continuum of care within
New Mexico to make sure that we
have the least restrictive in
the state community based
services for the children that
we serve.
In our budget we have as Mr shin
AT and missed and for mentioned
very little difference in the
bottom line of the two
recommendations and I think if
I'm not mistaken there's about a
of three hundred thousand dollar
difference between the two
recommendations.
Of the difference that we have
as missteps were highlighted is
the need to fund sixty
additional positions in C. Y.
FTE and I'll tell you why that
is important workforce
development is our number one
priority I was get the workers
in the frontline to do this work
across New Mexico we have a
total of eighteen hundred
employees statewide and we need
sixty additional workforce in
the social work frontline
investigative and placement
positions in protective services
and is miss dance more
mentioned.
And I did a little homework
today with those who can help me
Representative this we have
basically
we need
If you didn't have any vacancies
if no one left we would be only
able to hire if I'm not.
Miss in
sixty three more positions
that's it no one left the
department in because this is a
revolving process we need sixty
more positions to have the
latitude so if we have a vacancy
up in four in Farmington we want
to be able to fill it out there
but we also might have a vacancy
down in Los crucis that we need
to fill as well so the sixty
positions is not a lot of
funding
we have I think a hundred forty
six positions that are not
budgeted for and so by having
sixty additional positions that
were budgeted for that would
assistance in fulfilling what we
promise not only the Kevin that
settlement but to the people of
New Mexico that we are going to
focus on workforce
Workforce development.
If I may give you an example of
how this works.
If we look at communities across
New Mexico and I'm gonna I'm
gonna pick on some media more
and one of the counties.
If we have three investigators
these are people that go out and
investigate a family who's in
crisis.
And we have three investigators
each within those counties with
fourteen new cases that they are
assigned each month that is in
addition to the cases there are
ready for the now these cases
move through the system fairly
easy because investigations
should last only the maximum
amount of.
Five days we've expanded from
forty five to seventy five days
to
They are indeed engaging and
services so those workers in
more a lot of movement and some
we got counties have
approximately twenty eight cases
on their case to ensure the
safety and well being of those
families now they're closing out
cases as they come in and I
think we look at the average
rolling closure it's about
twelve cases a month but that's
growing if you get fourteen in
in your closing fourteen now
you're adding two cases each
month but I want you to think
about this New Mexico is a rural
state so those workers those
investigators have to go out and
visit families who are not on
the same block or if within a
few miles in the same
neighborhoods national standards
look at it slightly differently
because most states are not
uniquely rural New Mexico is an
investigator in San Miguel would
get assigned those fourteen new
cases every month to initiate
engage and assess safety for
those families and their cat
content contacting families in
Las Vegas thirty five million
miles away in the end we have a.
Of families in wagon mound in
additional seventy seven miles
from the of a after the miles
from town to town there are
often multiple children in the
family that we must assess the
home and their school that is
just the new cases coming in the
investigator in San Miguel still
has fourteen families for at
least twelve from the month
before fourteen from the month
before that they're working with
continuing to assess the state.
And have some of those children
in custody which takes a new
level of time and attention and
assessing for immediate medical
and behavioral health services
and beginning court proceedings
and a treatment plan.
The.
Members of the committee the
sixty positions provide us with
the additional staffing needs to
ensure that those new workers
that we hire are gradually
receiving not fourteen the first
state the start the job but
would receive three to nine new
cases a month over the first six
to twelve months of their ten
year but they're able to start
to deal with this case load
issue of that we have to address
so healthy workforce and staff
to children youth and families
is critical to our success it's
critical to this families we
serve in the sixty positions are
major support
you could call it a support team
for the house that we're
building up to server families
in New Mexico getting back to
the power point I just wanted to
highlight that that workforce is
key some of the things that
we're doing in addition to
asking for these new positions
are we've implemented pay
differentials for frontline
staff and agency we're
conducting an agency wide
appropriate placement and pay
equity
approaches now that it we
haven't yet started that we have
asked for the funding to do that
in our request reducing these
case loads we're we're upgrading
our training and mentoring for
workforce we're a strengthening
employee wellness and address
secondary trauma I'll give you
an example I sat on the bench
here in Santa Fe is a children's
court judge for a dozen years
and I was a children's court
judge for ten years and then I
was chief judge of the first to
additional district and two of
those twelve years and I have to
say is I heard these cases this
child abuse cases.
State after day
I started to feel secondary
trauma that he was having upon
me as a judge and I can't
imagine the families this case
workers that go with are going
into the home and seeing
firsthand the trauma and and the
abuse of babies and children and
what the impact of the COVID and
their ability to continue this
work so we are developing a
wellness program for workers to
really support them in address
secondary trauma.
We're developing a leadership at
all levels to provide stronger
supervision support and
mentorship and we're partnering
with universities in New Mexico
and community college as with
the social worker task force to
expand recruitment in to
Services.
so we have the three divisions
let me explain the three
divisions that serve CYFD
protective services division we
talked about that we also have
juvenile justice
Services Division they manage to
secure facilities The New Mexico
one Albuquerque one in Los
crucis and I would invite you
any time to go down to a tour of
these facilities and the work
that they're doing with young
men and women who are
incarcerated in our custody of.
Two years and and they're doing
what work they're doing their
learning the trades in their
education recently in
Albuquerque at our facility in
Albuquerque we created after
many years of planning and
athletic field and the boys were
so proud when that was dedicated
of how long you've worked on
making an athletic field on that
campus and it's really a
beautiful a wonderful investment
in are you and finally
behavioral health services
division has expanded over
several years and we Fund
access to behavioral health
services for children without
Medicaid and we support start up
and sustainability of children's
behavioral health services
across New Mexico so we also
license facilities of behavioral
health facilities through our
office or behavioral health
services division.
So I'm I'm rushing through this
because I know you probably have
a long day
but I just want to mention
another difference between the
two recommendations and that is
we would like R. that the the
ten if money is is valuable to
us.
The use of ten and funds for
some of the purposes for which
they've been recommended would
prohibit us from getting the
federal match because it's a
federal program we can't match
it I'm hoping we can agree on
language around ten minutes and
how we can use it
and use instead of general fund
appropriations for Spanish and
we ask for ten ten if we do
appreciate the tenant funding
but we're concerned about not
being able to match federal
funds with those dollars in New
and Services are finally of
program support which is all the
administrative support my office
and other offices around CYFD of
the work we do we do that
children's
Office of children's rights is
under the program support
element of CYFD is budget as
well as the office of tribal
affairs we didn't get anything
we ask for that and the work
we're doing around planning
building up our capacity to meet
our Kevin S. commitments it's
all within not all of it but the
there's major needs and program
support that for not get it
getting through the
recommendations so with that I'd
like to then just mention
we have Rick nonrecurring
funding requests to page
nineteen of the power point and
we've made progress on reversion
really worked on managing our
reversions I think last year
when I first joined the office I
think it was my first interim
committee there was a lot of
criticism about the larger
versions of CYFD and I've
directed my
division directors to manage
that and get this money out the
door so that we don't have
large.
Versions of our budget
so with that the bottom line R.
thirty four million dollar
request help close to bolster
our workforce lower now
treatment and rebuild our
behavioral health system of care
and finally I'm in and with the
quote from Robert F. Kennedy he
said the greatest true.
Must be the recognition that
every child is the potential for
greatness please get in line the
potential for greatness is in
every baby and child in New
Mexico so what that'll stand for
questions thank you for your
attention thank you Secretary
for kids do we have any
questions from the committee
First I had Senator Diamond and
then we've got Senator Hemphill
and now Senator share thank
thank you madam chair thank you
guys for The presentation in
regards to the sixty FTEs in
this can be for you madam chair
maybe even Eric.
It looks like you have about a
hundred and sixty vacant F. T.
E.'s now how many of those large
vacancies are actually funded.
when you get that for you.
According to
my numbers just before coming
over a hundred forty six
positions are not funded.
Of that eighty six so we would
say the balance of that.
Would be funded that we can fill
so how many how many vacancies
are funded.
Eric the difference between at
we have two hundred and sixty
six taking positions and a
hundred and forty six R. and
funded so I would say the
difference between it's what two
six funded so.
Madam chair and senator
and this is as of Augustinian
the LFC packet there the
difference she packet and they
have filled a few positions
since then I think about thirty
but the.
The number of vacancies is about
two hundred and ninety in the
protective services program just
to clarify that some protective
services
and.
Out close to about eighty of
those at that time were
refunded yes thank thank you
madam chair thank I think that
that is something worth noting
you already have eighty.
Funded they can't FTEs and
you're asking for us to provide
an additional sixty.
This if we're having
difficulties funding filling
those eighty FTEs what is the
strategy to then.
You know almost double the
number of funded vacant FTEs
thank you madam chair and
then Senator Diamond.
The the the it's a rolling
process so
it's not as though the.
The the amount of vacancies is
stagnant and so it moves it
rules let me tell you that since
January first we've had forty
two you they can see these and
we're currently hiring as we
speak thirty nine actions have
been taken to hire fill those
and eighteen offers have been
made so with that it's always a
rolling number in terms of what
we have available
they can get.
Mexico has increased
significantly on the list
statewide and we have as I said
thirty nine hiring actions
already in place six approvals
and waiting for candidates to
accept twelve that have accepted
and will be starting very soon
so
the plan is to fulfill our
workforce development plan that
we were developing under the
cabinet settlement and that
should be hopefully approved
within weeks.
So it's a revolving process and
so sixteen you positions would
enable us to address the work
the caseload challenges that we
have but also give us the depth
that we need to hire people and
not end up having positions that
are not funded but we can extend
an offer to so I hope that's
that's clear it's like a
revolving process and it moves
very very
very quickly through that
process so
Yeah anyway that I hope that's I
can have my staff explain it
better than mine so madam chair
what while I don't disagree that
it would be nice to provide a
hundred and forty new employees
right away I think what the
point is is that you have eighty
vacancies right now that are
available to do those work there
fully funded and waiting for
employment and so it doesn't
take sixty more funded vacancies
to get to work you're already
sitting on eighty funded
vacancies right now.
Well yes you can't or if you
madam chair and senator do you
can't argue with that general
concept but I think it's more
nuanced than what your
describing because it's impacted
on the region's aware that they
can see sicker the type of
positions that are vacant these
positions are not just frontline
workers there also staff support
their attorney positions within
protective services and so on so
it's it's much more nuance that
that the number sixty relatively
speaking when you have a
a workforce of a thousand eight
hundred people is really a drop
in the bucket they were asking
for just a little more funding
to get that depth that we need
to be nimble and be able to make
those offers and and fulfil the
needs around New Mexico.
Let's move on to
Protective services it looks
like for your your request is a
twenty percent increase this
year.
And off to the side it says that
from FY eighteen to twenty two
alone.
The budget for protective
services has increased tenfold
from one point one million to
eleven point one million and yet
repeat child maltreatment
remains above the national
average that would seem to
indicate that as much money as
we're throwing at the program
we're not seeing results if we
increase that additional twenty
percent.
What what are our goals and
objectives however we can
actually move the needle because
it doesn't seem like money is
making a difference thank you
madam chair and senator so yes
you excellent question and it's
my analogy about going deeper
into the house
the repeat maltreatment
data is showing that we need to
do a lot more work around
training our staff around really
providing better mechanisms of
following through with families
so for example if a family comes
into our when we become aware of
them and we do a risk and safety
assessment of and and we refer
them to services we've got to
come back and check on them and
make sure that they are engaging
in and we have
certainly
a develop mechanisms to do that
better to have that follow
through that's the only way and
money if you're not the only way
a key mechanism to reduce repeat
maltreatment but as I said
children youth and families
department the numbers the
impact that that gentleman
demonstrated in the state and so
on and so forth is a reflection
of a lot of socio vulnerability
factors and so yes you have
funded children youth and
families but it's not
solely as a result of the fact
that has gone down as much as we
but life is not solely
the result of the agency's
operations that said we are
looking the into how do we look
at that foundation and start to
invest see our smarter be a
smarter use of those dollars to
reduce that amount treat it
won't happen overnight I wish I
could one that wants to help
enforce.
We've that perhaps me and the
folks that work in this field
but
It's going to take time.
Thank you madam chair and I
would agree I like and your new
hair I I I realize that this is
not directed just to you and and
I appreciate you saying smarter
use of those dollars but we've
invested over ten million
dollars in the last four years
and it would indicate that there
are not using that was that
money wisely and that you're
requesting twenty percent
increase then we would we would
then.
By up and use that I mean you
still have a you still have are
well funded within that agency
that line item I'm sorry
protective services and we're
seeing no results.
But we follow through and Eric
this may be a little bit more
for you along the line of
protective services you
mentioned it and you were
correct in this the reversions
that you have have reduced looks
like from fourteen million by
the budget next year you reduced
it to eight eight point eight so
that's greater of the four
percent reduction but what
ironically in the protective
services line your reversions
went up quite a bit you reverted
two hundred eighty five thousand
and twenty one but by FY twenty
two am I correct that almost
nine hundred thousand was
reverted.
On the last flight of the.
Protective of him some.
Good.
Madam chair and senator at the
time and I think what according
to our calculation.
We only reverted in this year.
point nine two percent.
The budget sheet.
If I'm not mistaken so we
reverted
less than one percent.
Of the budget according to the
same draft madam chair in FY
twenty two the reverted almost
nine hundred thousand dollars in
protective services is that
correct yes okay and then we're
asking for an increase.
This year yes even with that
significant reversions in the
same line item last year I think
madam chair and senator Dino and
I think you need to look at in
terms of governor governmental
operations and managing
dollars I would I would assume
that if if we're only giving
back less than one percent will
probably doing a pretty good job
managing our for our phones.
That's that's my opinion but
maybe others for in the room
but.
The Senators.
Yeah.
I'm interested sure madam
chairman this.
I don't see built into this
budget any sort of funding that
is tied with legislation and I
know that this this legislative
session there's been a.
Been really a
addition to of was some
legislation brought forward to
address gaps in the system some
of those your agency has been
pretty reluctant to support I
know there was lots of
conversation over the interim to
identify during the steering
committee to identify ways to
address those gaps I don't see
it built into your budget but
what pieces of legislation has
your agency introduced this
session that would address those
concerns that were brought up in
the interim steering committee
thank you madam chair and
senator time and as I at the
exact same question was asked me
last meeting by Representative
Dixon and I I will say a little
bit more in response
during the inner I convened and
a steering committee enhancing
Services steering committee
because I wanted to hear from
various stakeholders their
perspective of how they believe
the agency should improve and
they issued a report and I've
studied that report and there's
so many things in that report
that we are doing internally and
I need to report back out to the
members about that not every
recommendation will require
legislation obviously
and we are working on a very
significant bill that we hope to
I am very very soon that would
address some of the concerns
that were raised in that state.
Okay so we can thank you madam
chair and madam chair and
senator and there's a an
appropriation treated to that as
well okay thank you madam chair
because I know there were a lot
of legislators that participated
that steering committee there
was a lot of gaps that were
identified and there is some
concern and frustration that the
agency didn't bring any
legislative requests that was
discussed over that period so we
look forward to seeing that
legislation and what that
that appropriation is I do want
to tell you that I think it's
very odd that you intend to
bring significant legislation
and yet you were not prepared
before house appropriations or
Senate finance appropriations to
discuss what that investment
would be and so that is
disappointing but we look
forward to having a conversation
as as the session progresses
thank you madam chair thank you
senator and thank you secretary
Senator Hemphill Senator share
thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary prove for the
information and for your your
work secretary because I know
it's not an easy job and if not
the most challenging job in the
state right now protecting
children is certainly incredibly
important as well as of school
psychologists they did a lot of
trauma informed trainings
throughout my career and I know
that one of the top stressors in
a child's life is changing
teachers if you can believe that
and that really gave me pause
because I thought if just
changing teachers and a school
or having a substitute can
create a lot of stress having
that child try to bond with a
new adult and a school what is
the impact of being removed from
the home being removed from the
primary care givers must be
incredibly difficult and really
alter that child's nervous
system for the rest of their
life having that
that the bomb.
Winds break and needing to bond
with new caregivers can be very
traumatic what are some of
The strategies that to your
department can focus on to
reduce the occurrences of
children being removed from the
home what what are some things
that we can be investing in that
our evidence base to make sure
that we're really limiting that
really traumatic event in a
child's life well thank you
madam chair and Senator Campos
you are correct that removal
from the phone remove from their
school their environment is
perhaps one of the highest
traumatic events that would
occur in a child's life and we
do everything we can and need to
do more around prevention from
that ever happening and as I
mentioned earlier all the work
around investing in prevention
of children and and and harm to
children is critical of but
perhaps more importantly is once
there's a call that a child is
being harmed that requires us to
go to the home and inquire about
it and assess the situation it's
about having that worker really
trained and knowledgeable about
how to assess the safety and the
risk to that child so that when
they leave they know whether to
make that decision to remove
that baby is a very very.
Challenging decision an
important decision to make and
so we want to make sure our
workers and that's why we're
asking for more employment more
positions to have those workers
have the ability to do that.
In a way that's healthy that
they're making a decision that
decision to take that child out
of the home and and because it's
justified based upon a tool a
safety risk tool that we use
that were trained on but more
importantly that that worker
knows that that supervisor and
others in that team would indeed
support that decision because
it's the right thing for the
child now there's always a
debate about how far we go in
removal versus keeping the child
within their home and that
debate is ongoing as we speak I
think we have to.
Wavy impact of removal and the
ability of the family to to to
get on the right track for
keeping the child there and
leading the family stand the
right track finally I have to
say that our office of
children's rights has grown in
those lawyers are child
advocates within the agency who
Who insure and we have an
educational unit of that team
and they are working with the
public schools for example with
APS to ensure that your children
are not moved from school to
school if they're placement is
is changed or that they can stay
in their home same
school year and it is really
doing outstanding job a job in
that area and love to share with
you more about that for thank
you madam chair thank you
Secretary for that response I
think you made a great point
that having train staff that can
respond and B. as present and be
in the right mind set to be able
to make those creek highly
critical decisions so I'm so
grateful to see your work force
plan and your recognition that
there is secondary trauma from
adults that are responding to
these very difficult situations
of your work in your workforce
plan here and I'll just add that
as a school psychologist I also
experience that and I see that
in our teachers and educators
across the state as well there's
only so much that we can be
exposed to before it really
affects our well being as well
and in your work force planned
what are some of the most
successful strategies that
you've implemented to help with
the recruitment and retention of
staff and when what's your plan
to
recruit additional social
workers so you really have a
robust staff of social workers
who are trained and not response
to these very emotionally
charged situations sure well the
first thing we've done is we've
given a rate differential to our
front line workers and it's tied
to their positions so that has
been huge in increasing morale
in.
And and and retention we are
also planning to look at the
appropriate placement
adjustments and make some
changes there and we've asked in
our budget to enable us to do
that the the rate appropriate
placement adjustments within the
pay bands we're also interested
in making sure the pay bands
make sense first for the front
line workers and we raising the
social worker pay band and we're
working on that with this state
personnel office
and we're we've been
collaborating with US
universities highlands New
Mexico state western and UNM and
eastern around how do we have a
more organized approach to
retention R. excuse me
recruitment of of social workers
students and we're working very
closely with them
out of the fifty million dollars
appropriation you all made to
those universities to this
higher education department to
create endowed chairs for social
work
education so we've got a plan
we're working on that as we
speak and and have been meeting
with them we've also been very
active in in attending and being
part of the social worker task
force
it's chaired by Senator TCP no
and Dr elements levy and we're
really working closely with them
and their expertise on how can
we be better about recruitment
of social workers and supporting
more workers once they are in
the HSD and I mentioned I think
we've we've been doing job fairs
we've had seven job fairs and
three rapid hires in the last
three months we've had not we
have planned nine job fairs into
rap of higher.
So planned through end of March
so we're really being proactive
on getting out there getting the
word out and really we're also
really looking and making sure
there's no delays in the the
hiring process both internally
and then was so as well I think
thank you so much for your
responses and New York thank you
madam chair thank you for all
right center share your next.
Thank you madam chair.
I very much appreciate the idea
that you're.
Start from the foundation.
because.
Obviously things are broken.
But I am looking at the just the
numbers here and in the
protective services of two
hundred twenty three million
dollars.
For eighteen hundred ninety
five.
Children that's like I don't
know a hundred and twelve
thousand dollars per kid.
We do with a hundred twelve
thousand dollars per ticket.
Well
we we treat families not just
child so the eighteen hundred is
that is the chart children so we
also treat families we are
Department to serve families so
that dollar amount yes can seem
hi but there's a lot of
infrastructure that goes into
serving families who are in
crisis
including you know having the
the work force to intervene to
support them having contractual
services to serve them.
A lot of our high and dollars
for child for children are when
children are placed in
congregate care settings I can
be extremely expensive and it's
something we are moving away
from to rather to hire and
retain foster fan.
Your children with the it is
complex the.
so when you look at the eighteen
hundreds.
Who are in our care there's
probably a clue to the hundreds.
A lot more than.
Well listen
Thousands of dollars per year
Let's see
we have adopted children as well
we have over three thousand
children more updated and and
there paid for as well in
custody we have the eighteen
hundreds children so there's a
lot of work done for these
children who are in crisis who
are in our care
to the extent I hope we're not
miss using these resources by
any means we certainly are very
careful about what we.
So madam chair madam secretary.
Just looking at that number it's
like well okay two hundred and
twelve thousand dollars three
twenty my kids well I'd be a
happy camper.
But
I understand that this crisis
and big deals going on out
there.
But I also want to make sure
that we're we're using our
resources.
Why sleep that there's a that
there's
a return on this investment if
that's the right.
Right term to use in this
situation but also of the
opportunity cost one of those
things that jump in my head if
you spend a dollar here that
means we can't spend here in
Seoul are we spending it in the
right place at the right time
and so I'm just big enough
number that came to my tent
Senator madam chair each it we
spent money on the front end.
The return on investment would
be huge on the back also in that
prevented those preventative
dollars are critical to.
Having a better return on
investment so it's not a hundred
twelve thousand per child maybe
it's the fact that we spend more
money on that front thank you.
Thank you madam.
Thank you senator and thank you
secretary Eric I didn't see you
did you want to respond are you
thank you madam chair and
senator sure I just want to
point out if you look at page
eighteen in that packet at the
very top there's a.
Kind of breaks out for you the
different spending categories
within protective services you
can see that foster care is
definitely a piece of it and is
it is a little hard to see a I'm
sorry about that because it is a
black and white but foster care
is a piece of that but then
adoption is also another big
piece of that and then there's
definitely with other other
pieces
within CYFD that kind would kind
of bring that number down that
you're talking about.
Thank thank you Eric okay I
think for the sake of time I
don't have any one else sick of
time we're gonna stop I just
wanted to make just a couple of
points more the questions can
correct me if I'm wrong
secretary Romero.
Three of you the team here
but it seems to me that the
rationale for us for the sixty
positions that on my own that
we're talking about have to do
more with for has to do with the
fact that in the eighty that
we're talking about there there
are not the right
classifications that you have
determined you need I'm trying
to open up hi I wanna put words
in your mouth and trying to end
to see if we're on the same page
to see if in fact I mean you've
been working at recruitment now
for a good while at the right
time recruitment the
classifications and
specifications asked audits all
these things that you need for
your staff to determine what is
it that you need more.
Quicker and will be more
meaningful and have a clear and
good and so here we are from
what I heard you say is that the
sixty FTE that you are
requesting have to do with more
social workers directly working
in that field.
While is that is that all the
sixty four or it's it's a social
work frontline is what I wrote
is that other positions may from
MaryBeth PM and this is tell me
because the the other eighty
positions are not social workers
there and other kinds I just
trying to figure out what are
them and I'm sure there's a
variety but K. good I'm trying
to thank you for she talks if I
madam chair if I could just have
a second just to kind of put
this into perspective over over
the years you know I've been
here eleven years and I think
maybe you as nine or ten years
ago we stopped including FTE
counts and house bill two and a
big a big part of that back then
was because we wanted to kind of
change Scotian away from having
all these FTE discussions
towards are we funding.
The department
adequately to do the job right
it's a lot of that this FTE
discussion it's a lot of it is
actually more in the executive
branch side of things than it is
on the legislative branch side
of things and so
you know doing re
classifications and and moving
things around like that that's
it's it's not mandated by the
the Legislature anymore what we
focus on more is is
is making sure the department is
funded adequately to do their
job and there's very little
difference between the executive
and the LESC on the actual
funding level.
Thank you for explaining that
telling Mary Beth yeah thanks
thank you madam chair and and
Eric Eric is right I mean the
FTE counts are no longer in the
bill so there isn't that strict
oversight as their there was you
know previously before that
change but I I do want to point
out that these are permanent
positions that they are
requesting and that's one thing
even though it is on the
executive side we help with
three classifications you know
we do all of that stuff but
but we we really don't like to
create permanent positions
outside of the legislative cycle
because it ends up costing
discrepancies in how many F. T.
E. the executive thanks the
agency has verses bill the LFC
it's not a terrible thing but it
does end up affecting things
like vacancy rates and you know
and things like that and so in
order to stay on the same page
try to make sure that those
permanent positions have
authorization from the
legislature so I think that's
really just kind of the
though at the I don't know the
dividing line I suppose is just
that without the authority from
the legislature is not really
recommended week we don't like
agencies to try to create
permanent positions out of cycle
so yeah thank you no thank you
thank you for that explanation
what help me understand because
I know you've been so under
funded in the.
Distant past but also because
you've been you've had such a
lack of the right numbers of
staff you just never have had
that staff specially the right
categories is what I'm trying to
get at and so the question that
I have is of the sixteen new
positions Senator Diamond was
discussing what classifications
are you going to have our I
thought they were more for
social workers and so on just
what I thought but are they.
Secretary I yes.
Can we have them only speak to
this and Martin just so we know
yeah and then as we are.
Members of the committee Emily
Martin R. director protective
services can okay be clear about
thank you I am hi madam chair
this sixty positions that we're
requesting our our mixers the
majority of those positions are
for our front lines
investigations an excuse me
particularly we're conducting
over twenty three thousand
investigations per year and
going back to what it secretary
Vigil described earlier this
isn't just about caseloads it's
about workloads that brings more
out if we have additional
positions available it helps
people stay and not want to
leave this very
the filling but it's difficult
work I think the the other the
other item with this is that
we've created a number of
different programs throughout
the last ten years are
differential response program at
the care of program.
Many many other prevention type
programs that did not come with
positions or funding and so we
are trying to fill that begin
filling that on the front end
with the sixty positions I see
got it thank you so the work is
been there of that you know
you've created it's there but
you don't have the bodies the
positions to continue so who's
doing the work you I would
imagine that others are having
to do to three times more than
I'm glad I asked because and
they're not getting paid two or
three times more madam chair we
we tend to put we tend to put
the workload on there are
existing staff and that
contributes to the turnover rate
yeah exactly thank you again
absolutely to that you mention
and set up much better than I
did but thank you for that my
room I recall quickly and I'm
gonna stop here with that during
the summer we had to that at
Legisla- at thank you Eric for
reminded me of that the latest
at hearings and it's true you it
the main discussions had to do
with workforce and training and
and the training I don't know if
anything has improved as much as
they needed to buy here to some
not so thank you for that and
then the and recruitment of
course which is what we're
working at I think one of the
best tools for recruitment is
really and retention is to give
people just the amount of
workload that they can do within
eight hours because that's
clearly what's happening I
wouldn't want to stay and work
twelve hours to get paid for
eight and then under that kind
of stress it's like working
twenty hours in so why would I
state right and and then they
hear others hear about it you're
not gonna be able to recruit who
wants to come back to work there
they've heard what happens right
so we're somewhat camp there
Senator thank you but let me
just say this and then I develop
and implement the evidence base
down information or programs and
so on and and I I see some very
good movie on on a lot of that
thank you for for all your work
and so your main goal here is to
reduce the and I wrote my notes
here is to reduce the.
Child maltreatment and the
reputation of these cases which
bothers all of us I think you
know that we are we have that
but anyway thank you for your
progress in the reversions I
took note of that too and let's
see and I did not realize until
I saw this that you do I knew
there were a lot of money but
twenty three thousand
investigations per year is that
an average it was this this last
year along.
Madam chair that is an
approximate number of how many
investigations that were
screened and in twenty calendar
year twenty twenty two.
That's a long distance my
goodness okay and then that
doesn't count those cases that
you don't know about that you
you haven't investigated so
that's a lot okay and then we'll
elected I really mean final
point this time on your
presentation thank you when you
first started secretary Thompson
thank you Emelie also for your
information you you mentioned
that one of the that is in
college goals here it's this to
nurtured the strength and
resilience of families and I I
thought that was very very
potent because.
Truly the it's not only about
nurturing but it's about
developing and you did mention
that another page I think this
page four of my notes developing
and maintaining that strength in
families
and so I'm happy that this is
one of your goals as part of
your mission to realize that.
That families you know this we
have a weakness you know in it
for various reasons different
ways and and so the whole family
has to be a strengthened and so
on in order that we can protect
our children and so on so thank
you for that on that you're
partnering with the families to
help them thrive I got several
of those that I wrote notes on
that I thought were pretty power
I think with that that thought
in mind you know we will
continue to improve and and see
a big change we all want to see
that together so I want to thank
you and we took your on request
very seriously in doubt the lack
of staff that you have in the
additional work that you have in
the discrepancies between the
two and so on so we appreciate
all that you you told us and
come here for us all I have and
I want to thank the staff also
on your chair I have our staff
stand absolutely.
Thank you thank you we have the
way the Mrs thank our leaders.
And the work yes yes my goodness
you are truly an amazing staff
you resilient to having to do so
much with such heartfelt
work.
Thank you thank you again all
right secretary thank you for
your work in Mary Beth you're so
good to thank you your thank you
madam chair what we do with that
area.
Right thanks to all our staff we
are halfway I have to announce
something for tomorrow I hope of
those here they may be out in
the hallway or somewhere I've
been told we will be we will not
have a finance committee in the
afternoon there were four
agencies that we were going to
hear aunt tomorrow and they were
on the agenda but my
understanding is that we won't
be doing in tomorrow there is a
meeting in the morning water for
any but the afternoon for
agencies know they will be
rescheduled for next week mid
