I appreciate it thank.
to.
This difference you can hear me.
Hello then.
The.
Yeah.
There sure I see a lot of smoke
coming out of the church and let
all the candles.
The service.
The.
If you have a card on.
The.
Way these lobbyists got nothing
but time.
The.
Hi.
We have and so on.
Thank you let me check on that
staff and I'll be right back.
Okay I think we're ready to go
so good morning to everyone this
is a yes continuing the sub
committee on the budget
appropriations so senator Munoz
and thank you staff again good
morning and thank you for all
your work overnight I don't
think you slept.
Thank you and senator thank you
can proceed madam chair without
good staff and without good
people and I just waiting on the
executive for their racks in
statutorily by Tuesday we were
supposed to have this done in
it's all based upon what the
exact kept checking on us and so
the stream there staff
well it's put us at the age of
of what we can accomplish and
and so this is gonna pretty much
wrap it up we will have to have
a technical cleanup committee
on then Senator and just to make
sure that there's any little
things the and or or language
that needs to be changed and and
move forward from there of madam
chair we're gonna go over the
rex if you look at the at the
far right hand it's under your
call.
You will see a changes that
restored.
In on the first page of the
restoration restoration to the
I. N. G. for western New Mexico
for eight hundred.
Senator Hemphill had requested
that Senator Hemphill do you
have any comments about the.
Madam.
We're on page one one line of.
Three twenty three.
Okay got it madam chair and
senator I just want to thank you
for your work putting that back
in the budget for western and
stabilizing their their revenue
I really appreciate it thank you
thank you we know the presence
on the plane to New York and
really cared about that I need
so much.
One page one.
If you'll look at page two
there's two that are there all
risks we we added some money for
sexual assault services
they were under funding because
a building pass we move some
stuff around to make that
culminated in an additional
money.
That's a subtotal for that ad
now if you look to sections
nineteen on page two you will
see an increase in
In the thirty million and that
as for the stipends for cops and
we know we had a.
Great news article about how the
legislature is not trying to do
crime package there is crime
packages that are being worked
on the legislature are there
very slow they're very detailed
we need to figure out what fixes
the problem in in in Albuquerque
and across the state because
current practice all in some.
Comments are made it's very hard
to try to maneuver stuff when
they don't know exactly what
they want thank you.
That's five years of funding in
there maybe we can review that
next year CEO successful they
are and see if we're just
parking money that's inefficient
if we turn the page three madam
chair.
You'll see the secretary of
state we're gonna hear Alexion
bill this afternoon we need to
increase that fund for the
upcoming election.
That if you'll look at the next
line item for that was a
reduction we had to make for the
exact and we're back filling
that to put that back into that
business develop the space.
Online thirty five we had to cut
the settlement because we're
going to pay off the and month
completely because an executive
director we had to reduce that
now we've added that back in.
If you look at line forty one
would reduce local some sorry
just for the okay.
Thirty seven I'm sorry that but
the language there and this will
needed technical Committee clean
that up we need we need to move
that into the swap to the
capital bill for the
thirty million for the for the
governor's rex for Indian
Affairs.
And that's what will the
language committee we had taken
ten million from local road
To help with maintenance for D.
O. T. we restored that.
We had an additional ten for
cost overruns and maintenance.
Of the then if we go to line
forty six.
This was a social worker
endowment fund in we restore
that fifteen there.
Go to the next page.
Line fourteen if you look online
for Tina that page of the
languages split up for soil
conservation districts in
Chile flavor in vineyards.
That will stand for questions
over pages one two four madam
chair.
Madam chair manic appointed
verification just on how to read
the sheets yes thank you thank
you so when you're looking at
these the first three columns
that you see reflect the
preliminary action that was
taken in subcommittee that is
what the subcommittee voted to
approve with the subcommittees
proposed changes so that was the
action that was taken yesterday.
Column to the far right is the
adjustments that are being made
to that action so it's important
to note that while there's not a
total column those those two are
added together these things are
additive so like for example.
If you look at page two line ten
you'll see that there was
nothing in that preliminary
action under that general fund
column and now there this the
SSE action is adding one million
to that line
if for example you look at item
twenty one the SFC action had
already added twelve million to
what was in house bill two is
that came out of the house and
this adds an additional thirty
million so these are additive
and I just wanted to make that
clear when you read these that
they should be taken together.
Forty two.
Thank you very much for the
total of the two together so
what it is thank you very much
John all right and thank you
senator Munoz for explore that
page for any quick questions
from so far Senator Gonzales has
a question.
Thank you madam chair and the.
Mr chairman and the and Donald.
They'll be a new reflection here
for the request to the
restaurants.
That they were looking at all.
Senator Diamond that was on the.
We're supposed to our bill one
ninety one.
Madam chair Senator Gonzales I
think I can answer this question
that bill reflects a change in
revenue which is not something
that would be done in house bill
to the house bill two as it came
over had funding set aside for
various tax changes that would
change revenues
so that amount is still
available for potential tax
packages that could come
together that particular one
that you're discussing would be
a good option for consideration
for that but those types of
funds would not be in house bill
two that's making appropriations
that would be a revenue change.
Thank you thank you don thank
you senator Senator share.
Who.
Madam chair and senator you've
got me confused by the image
Madam so we weren't settling it
yesterday but we are settling it
today can take madam chair.
Senator share.
In in the recommendation for in
the preliminary action that was
taken yesterday first I'll point
out that there is I believe ten
point six million in the capitol
bill for the and not settlement
which would have taken care of
our responsibility of what
absolutely needs to be done
there was in what came over from
the house and additional thirty
two million that would have just
completely taken care of the
people at not Madam together
just out pay that full Madam off
in the action that was taken
yesterday in order to
accommodate room it's that okay
that was nice to have that
wasn't absolutely necessary to
be done so to make room for
other things we said that that
thirty two million would come
out knowing that we would still
fell our obligation for what's
in the capitol bill now with the
recommended meditation for today
we are restoring that thirty two
million that would fully pay off
that settlement.
Right thank you ma'am.
Thank you very much for that all
rights I don't have any other
questions the motion take up
the.
Can we have a motion okay
there's a motion from Senator
Padilla to adapt this is
presented and second by Senator
Woods on favor signify by saying
aye.
Most K. to thank you madam chair
members we're going to Mexico to
the technical in languages just
minutes in.
Page I.
And so as you scroll through
their
This is language number four is
language for we heard about the
to the fifteen million that was
made and that and that was a
transfer completely this does
that.
Once you go through these
because you'll know better than
I would.
Thank you Charles
Madam chair these are the a
subcommittee adopted language
recommendations
Happy to answer any questions
the I think there are other
members that were not part of
that subcommittee that went
through this pretty extensively.
Okay all right thank you and
then the last page.
Hundred page seven.
These are further adjustments
Through the two packages that
you've seen before you.
the first one on the line seven.
This would authorize of the ten
million that's was available for
capital cost overruns two
million could be used by DFA for
grants management.
there was a some language that
folks wanted on the broadband
and cybersecurity appropriation
to include language the specify
that contain sufficient funding
for a digital equity plan.
For tourism for that particular
appropriation there would be
language that would also expand
the purpose for marketing to
also include local events
promotion.
Yesterday you had a discussion
about the role primary health
care centers this with your mark
one million of the twenty eight
million that set aside for
hospitals and and nursing home
staffing issues for those rural
primary health care centres to
also get some extra funding to
help with that.
There was a
discussion yesterday about the
need for set aside for golden
apple kind of a residency
program and so this would set
aside one million of the ten
million dollar a teacher
residencies appropriation for
that yesterday you discussed a
desire to
go ahead and take care of the
charter school revolving loan
fund that's other state funds
from public school capital
outlay so that would go into the
budget
this is a technical change
online thirteen that
we need to shift the lottery
funding to start in FY twenty
three we don't need it going out
the door this year so that was
started FY twenty three.
The office of medical
investigator there is an
interest in helping out a little
bit there says a half million
finally on trucks line fourteen.
And then just this morning there
were some cleanup and public
schools just providing more
flexibility between the K. five
plus an extended learning pods
clarifying that the early
literacy funding in the formulas
only for kindergarten through
second grade.
again flexibility between the
two extended learning programs
for transportation of funding
striking the provision for
charter schools to return
unspent transportation funding.
And then requiring the PED
secretary in collaboration with
the undersecretary for Indian
education to determine the
formula for distributing Indian
and funded the bill as it came
over left that responsibility
only to the undersecretary so
this would would ultimately the
PED secretary so there's some
additional other let technical
language of the staff are
recommending that you've heard
before and we're
going back and supporting the
the agency's request like
cultural affairs they do need
more language for this
particular fiscal year we did
verify that with them with some
a new projections there is an
appropriation from last year
that needs to be extended for
early childhood faculty
endowments at the early
childhood department we do
recommend after consulting with
Environment Department some more
about their language request we
are recommending those on
nineteen and twenty.
The department of education ask
for an extension of a IT
Appropriation that we recommend.
The technical change changing
subparagraph to subsection and
then also an extending another
I. T. program a project for the
public education department
you'll see the totals of five
hundred thousand in general fund
and ten million and other state
funds and with that I'd be happy
to answer any questions or
Revert back to the future.
Thank you thank you very much
Senator Steinborn thank you
madam chair and viciously did up
on the department of health.
The.
We include those two items did
you all come up the language for
the two items that I brought up.
I brought up a couple items on
some twenty two and twenty three
and some computer technology
stuff.
The number you're referring to
talking about.
I'm sorry Human Services
Department rate I.
Line.
Thirty.
Fourteen or fourteen for half
and then it says needs gosh of.
Yes you all did discuss that and
the language will reflect that
this money will be re
appropriated for the purpose
brought purposes of at and
strengthening the home community
based services including
eliminated the DD waiver waiting
list as well as those provider
and it has been payments at that
was part of the initial
subcommittee that was correct
yeah and then Mr chair madam
chair Charles but then there was
also a technology system thanks
for FY twenty three is that.
That I talked about.
Yes it yeah that's that's good
adjusted I just want to make
sure that that's what we're
talking about here the one with.
For the Human Services
department of the department of
health.
And one if.
Well unless you guys said yes at
the time all pull it back up and
and we can we can double that
okay okay next.
Questions all right.
From
motives with the.
Thank you very much I am on.
Both.
Thank you madam chair
will still need to set up the
technical committee so when we
put you madam chair Senator
Campos on the technical
committee and senator done.
And
madam chair members one
clarification on the technical
committee that it really is
technical adjustments if there
are typos if there was a you
know a clear intent that was
made by the the language that is
here but there is and some of
the needs to be done this is
only for fixing errors that may
have happened and things moving
so the last three days so knows.
That.
Changes that.
Yeah.
Happy that.
Your then.
The full.
Right now energy aware of that.
This will to.
After.
I can't imagine that all the
strategies thank you so much.
Madam chair technical committee
of prime meat on on Friday
evening or Saturday morning to
make sure as we bring house bill
two into the committee that
would bring the bill back to.
so to me Friday will bring the
bill back Saturday morning for
the committee's approval and and
begin that process of.
Thank you.
