Um
Today we'll be talking about um
some of the risks to, to New
Mexico coming from these
potential federal policy
changes. Um.
You know, and kind of as an
overview what I'd start off by
saying is there's, there's a lot
of uncertainty right now. Um,
this, uh, this new federal
proposal would
Uh, calls for potentially uh
about 2 trillion in cuts across
uh federal, federal government,
federal funding and some of
those cuts could hit states, um.
We're still learning about what
those cuts might look like. We
know and we'll we'll get into
the details on this. We know
generally speaking though that
um they're likely to hit um
Medicaid programs, they likely
to hit food support programs
such as SNAP, um, potentially
school meals and and other
education centers those would
probably be the the biggest
potential cost centers, but as I
said, the, the range of what
that impact would be, uh, will
depend on the decisions that are
are going to be made in in
Washington around that over the
next.
Few months, um, so with that is
kind of an overview, Mr.
Chairman, I pass it over to to
Izzy to, to take us into the
details.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, again, my
name is Ismael Torres. I'm the
chief economist for you all at
the Legislative Finance
Committee. And uh I'll be
speaking to the presentation
hopefully you have in front of
you, uh, forecast risks of
federal policy changes. And
before jumping in, I think I
really wanted to highlight
What this discussion represents
and what it doesn't represent.
And really this presentation is
a very high level discussion of
risks. It does not represent in
any way a detailed analysis or
expectation of outcomes. I
think, as you all know, uh, in
this business, things are
changing quickly. Everything is
very fluid, and as of, as of
today, um, or even as of this
weekend, putting together this
presentation, there wasn't a
whole lot of detail or
specificity with regard to to
the cuts that or the savings
that are being discussed at the
federal level. So this
presentation is meant to um help
you all wrap your arms around
what, what the size, what the
magnitude of these potential
cuts could be to the state, but
of course we know that uh the
devil's always in the details
and when those details come out,
we'll have much better analysis
for you all on the specific
dollars that could be at risk.
Um
I also want to highlight the
difference between what we call
revenue risks versus budget
risks. So if you'll turn to
slide 2, we'll start with
revenue risks, and this is
really the domain of the
consensus revenue estimating
group. We are constantly
considering, thinking about and
looking at economic indicators
that could influence the
revenues collected by the state.
This is much different than the
budget risks, which I'll get to
later in the presentation that
have to do specifically with
those federal dollars that could
stop flowing to the state for
specific programmatic purposes.
So the first half of the
presentation I'll be speaking to
the revenue risks of federal
policy changes and then the
second half we'll get into some
of that budget risks.
So if you turn to slide 3.
This is our current revenue
outlook, uh, as projected by the
consensus revenue estimating
group in December of 2024, and
it is still the revenue estimate
on which the budget is being
built during the session. And
you can see what those
expectations have been or are
since December, we've always
expected that revenues will slow
in the coming years. We've had
record revenue growth in 22 and
23. We expected that to slow
still to a very impressive 13%
revenue growth in 24, but then
really slowing down to that.
More trend, trend level growth
of 2 to 3% in those out years.
And it's important to keep in
mind what 2 to 3% revenue growth
looks like and feels like, and,
and really what that felt like
was the last 10 years during the
2010s, when budgets were built
on at most 2 to 3%. So,
If you all were around at that
time, you might remember what it
was like to build a budget on 2
or 3% and we expect that to be
coming in in the years ahead,
depending on the spending
outlook, and I'll I'll get into
that by the end of the
presentation as well. But here's
what we expected going into
December, and if you turn to
slide 4, here are some of the
indicators that were
Consistently watching.
To see if
There might necessitate a change
in that revenue outlook.
And from what we can tell, a lot
of these indicators continue to
show that the US economy is
performing the same, the same as
we expected on track with what
we expected. There are some
modest adjustments from the
February national forecast with
GDP growth essentially unchanged
and overall growth still
expected to slow and uh bottom
out maybe in 2026 before slowly
rebounding and returning to a
slightly above 3% growth rate,
and we see that showing up in
our revenues. We expect economic
activity.
to slow, and so therefore we
expect our revenues to slow.
Um, the jobless rate is still
expected to remain steady. We're
seeing unemployment claims
steady as well. Um, and all of
that is to say that the key
assumptions have not changed
significantly from what we
expected in December to what
we're seeing currently um in
terms of economic activity and
revenue collections. I would, I
would highlight that one of the
things that has changed our
expectations for interest rates.
Um, as tariffs are considered
and put into place.
Interest rates are expected to
stay higher for longer as uh as
tariffs are inflationary and
interest rates must stay high to
counteract that inflationary
pressure.
So if you turn to page 5, what
are some of the things that we
are seeing what are some of the
changes in federal policy that
could have an impact on New
Mexico's economic activity and
revenues, federal employment
changes, um, of course, as the
federal government seeks savings
in, in unwinding some of the
federal payroll. New Mexico has
a proportionally larger share of
federal employment relative to
our economy than most other
states. You can see on this map
here, um, how we play out what
we're about 6th highest of
concentration federal employment
in the country. It's important
to keep in mind that the share
of federal employment does not
include the labs. So when we say
30,000 federal employees we're
not counting the labs because
they are contractors to the
federal government and not
actual direct federal employees.
So maybe about 60,000 federal
employees, um, at least
represented here, not counting
the, the secondary and tertiary
dependent employees um related
to the federal dollars coming
into the state.
So, uh, many counties,
especially in rural areas that
have high concentrations of
federal employees are even more
at risk than the state at large,
but we haven't seen large spikes
in our unemployment unemployment
claims in the state. So we're,
we're continuing to watch this
but have yet to see some of the
knock-on effects there. But of
course, if there's a reduction
in employment, we could expect a
reduction in personal income
taxes, gross receipts taxes from
the consumption, the lost
consumption on those wages, and
then, as I mentioned, uh,
knock-on effects as well.
If you turn to slide 6.
This is another um area to watch
when it comes to economic and
and revenue impacts from federal
policy changes, tariffs affect
seats differently, of course,
primarily tariffs affect the
manufacturing industry or
sector, um, but not only can
The tariffs themselves impact
the real economy, but the
uncertainty about the trade
policy can have an impact on the
real economy.
In our underlying forecast from
S&P Global tariffs affect the
real economy through the
resulting impact in raising the
federal interest rate
expectations, as I mentioned
earlier, raising higher or, or
increasing the cost of
borrowing. It can increase the
value of the US dollar
internationally, which can, of
course, weaken uh consumption,
but also equity values relative
to a no tariff counterfactual.
And the uncertainty about that
trade policy has real impacts as
well. Businesses that may be
considering large investments in
projects that require imported
inputs of an uncertain cost may
delay those investments until
they have greater certainty.
And because of these effects in
trade policy uncertainty, um, we
expect to see New Mexico's
highly uh um highly affected
manufacturing industry, uh, to
see those impacts. That's
because, as you can see on this
slide here, our export import
industry has strong ties as
you'd expect with Mexico, which
is one of the uh
Uh, it tariff impacted
countries. So,
Our manufacturing sector is
uniquely exposed to this risk,
but if you turn to the next
slide,
On site 7, you can see that our
manufacturing sector as a
portion of our total economy is
quite low. So,
Or that sector
There are may be greater risks
than the national average, but
for our economy, that sector is
a smaller share and so our
greater economy has a, has a
smaller risk. Um, we do have
here estimated from the Tax
Policy Center, uh, tariff impact
estimate on our economy as
represented by gross domestic
product or GDP, and they're
estimating about 1.5% in lost
GDP. And so if you'll remember
to that first slide, if our
revenue growth is 2 to 3%, 1.5%
could be a big loss to our, our
potential.
revenue growth in the coming
years.
Um, just highlighting again,
another uh statistic, the
Brookings Institute projects
that a 25% tariff, which is what
is currently being discussed,
uh, could result in a 10%
decline in US employment, that's
almost 177,000 jobs nationally,
but retaliate retaliatory
tariffs, so tariffs that could
be imposed on the US by Canada
and Mexico in response to our
tariffs would have a much bigger
impact, potentially $400,000
400,000 jobs lost estimated by
the Brookings.
Institute there. So that could
represent a good amount of
employment, maybe 3% of
employment in New Mexico.
So we're watching that closely
as well.
If you turn to the next slide,
um, as we talk about forecast
risks, they're not all to the
downside. There are certainly
upside forecast risks as well.
And one,
You know, highlight upside risk
would be.
changes to federal policy with
respect to the energy sector.
Obviously New Mexico being an
energy state, we would expect
that increases in production
would benefit New Mexico
substantially. Um, we expect
those changes to take place
primarily through deregulation
or expedited permitting.
We don't expect that that um
expedited permitting or
deregulation will have a
substantial increase to
production as production is
currently much more responsive
to market dynamics, then, uh,
regulation.
Many of the producers in New
Mexico already have a
significant runway of permits
that are available to them. So
expediting permitting um is not
expected to directly result in
increased production. It is
important to note that tariffs,
especially on steel, could
increase the cost of of
extracting oil and gas across
the country, but also in New
Mexico, uh, increased cost could
result in declines in
production. So there are sort of
offsetting upside and downside
risks with respect to changing
federal policies.
energy in New Mexico.
Um, I also want to mention the
upside risk of inflation. It's
certainly a downside risk to
consumers, to all of us, but
From the state's perspective,
from the revenue perspective,
increased inflation results in
increased gross receipts tax
collections and personal income
tax collections. So, uh, that
could make it difficult for uh
folks to afford the necessities,
but unfortunately, that means it
might raise revenues for the
state. So downside risks,
unemployment, um, on economic
activity but maybe upside risks
on inflation and energy
production.
So what does this mean if you
turn to the next slide, of
course, as I mentioned to begin
with, the economic indicators.
are demonstrating
What we expected. We don't have
any updates and expectations. We
cannot say with any certainty
that, you know, we're headed
towards a recession because the
current indicators, the current
economic activity does not
demonstrate that. But we did in
anticipation of, of these types
of risks in the December
estimate produce what's called a
stress test. And this specific
stress test included a, a
moderate recession scenario,
which, according to Moody's,
could be the result of the
combination of tariffs.
rising inflation, deportations,
political tensions, and a
federal response raising the
federal interest rate, which
causes the economy to fall into
this kind of recession, starting
this year.
And that recession could
continue through the next couple
of years and, and really with
the economy not
Returning to full employment
until 2029. And that's the
scenario that we've plot plotted
out here for you and, and
modeled out to see its potential
impacts on the general fund. If
you look at the table on the
right, the 2nd row from the
bottom here is what the
potential losses could be to the
general fund if you're adding
that up, it's almost $1.4
billion. So if we're thinking
about what could the
recessionary impacts be to these
kinds of federal policies I just
laid out in the slides, um,
previous, maybe about $1.4
billion in losses to the budget.
All right.
Moving on.
to slide 10.
So that was revenue risks, you
know, the potential economic
effects from the changes to
federal policy that impact state
revenue collections.
And in some ways, uh, the
decreases to the federal
spending and transfers to state
spending presents an even more
immediate risk to the state
budget as a direct impact versus
a secondary impact to the state
economy.
And to the state budget. And I
want to stop and and reiterate
again, the big caveat I made at
the beginning of this
presentation, which is the
policies described on the
following slides, don't
represent, uh, uh, uh.
A final estimate there are
hopefully just to provide a
benchmark for you all to gauge
what kind of size and semblance
of the magnitude for the
potential impacts of these cuts,
as, as John mentioned. So
turning, turning to slide 11,
what are these?
Quick and dirty estimates built
on, and they're built on the
house concurrent budget
resolution that passed February
25th.
And so this analysis is based
off of that concurrent budget
resolution and largely it is
non-binding.
Uh, and sets the stage for new
tax and spending legislation
specifies which House
committees, US House committees
should increase or decrease
deficits in the coming
legislation and by how much?
And so if you turn to the next
page, slide 12.
Shows what the House concurrent
budget resolution priorities and
targets are by committee.
You can see the largest
Savings is, is.
Uh, planned to come from the
House Energy and Commerce
Committee, which has
jurisdiction over Medicaid and
other federal health programs.
So that's how we uh um
extrapolated the conclusions in
the next slides is from these
targets, 330 billion education
and workforce Committee, as John
mentioned, that's nutrition, uh,
nutrition in schools, child
nutrition, workforce
development, 230 billion from
the agriculture Committee, which
is SNAP 500 billion of
unspecified cuts, and then also
some
direction on net tax cuts in
addition to those savings and
then $300 billion in new
spending or committees with
jurisdiction over defense,
order, and law enforcement. And
uh I should mention that these
savings are represented over a
10 year period, so that's
another significant assumption
made in the in the coming slides
is
Uh, that these savings would
occur.
On average, the same year over
year. So rather than being front
loaded or back loaded that these
savings would be spread over 10
years equally. That's a, that's
a big assumption and, and
certainly likely to change as
the details come out.
If you turn to slide 13.
Uh, here's a table breakdown
that shows you the net increase
or decrease in the deficit at
the bottom, um, due to, despite
those savings from spending
reductions, the increases in in
in tax cuts is expected to
overall on net increase the
deficit over the next 10 years
by $2.8 trillion.
OK, moving on to how this
relates to the state budget on
slide 14.
Uh, hear this chart
demonstrates.
The House Bill 2 buckets by
category and by revenue source.
And you can see what immediately
jumps out is the HHS, the Health
and Human Services category in
the middle there.
Because the green bar makes up
the largest share of that budget
relative to all other state
budget categories. And you can
see the detail, um, dollar
amounts in the table at the
bottom, and you could see that
the Fed funds or or the exposure
in that category is at $11.8
billion.
The next two largest um uh pots
of federal funding at risk would
be transportation and public
schools at about $580 million in
the state budget.
Um, but you also have higher
education at $900 million. So,
you know, as a proportion, you
might see agriculture, energy
and natural resources, um,
significantly at risk and they
are, although on a dollar basis,
about $150 million for them.
So if you turn to the next page,
These next couple of slides are
our attempt to proportionalize
what those potential impacts
could be to New Mexico. As I
mentioned many times, devil's in
the details, it is very unlikely
that these cuts happen
proportionally, either on a
revenue or per capita basis, but
this is the best we can do to
help give you all a sense of
magnitude of, of the potential
impacts to the state budget. So
About $860 billion nationally on
Medicaid spending 600 billion or
maybe 3 quarters of that is from
the federal share. New Mexico
has the highest federal matching
rate and our Medicaid program is
projected to spend about $11.4
billion total, with a
significant amount coming from
federal revenues.
So, the uh budget savings that
were presented on the previous
slides could represent about 12
to 13% reduction in total
Medicaid spending, and you can
see, uh, on the right, the table
on the right, which demonstrates
the current federal and state
share of
Uh, Medicaid spending, but if
the same proportional 12 to 13%
spending reduction was applied
to New Mexico, that would amount
to almost $1.1 billion in
reduced federal revenues.
Moving on to the next slide.
Here's some more detail on
Medicaid spending, uh, by
program and where some of these
federal savings could occur in
each of these programs. So those
highlighted on the left are
described in a little more
detail on the right. I would
draw your attention to the
second row, which reflects the
Affordable Care Act expansion
population currently matched
with 90% of federal revenue if
that were to drop to 75% for
about 270,000 people in New
Mexico, of course, that's a
significant, that would be a
significant loss to New Mexic.
CO's federal revenues there.
Moving on to snap on slide 17.
The resolution directed the
agriculture Committee to reduce
spending by $230 billion. That's
about a 20% cut to the program,
proportionally to New Mexico,
you can see how much losses that
would represent in federal
funding on slide 17.
Moving on to the next slide on
school lunches.
Proposals to return the
community eligibility provisions
for school lunches to 25% rather
than 60%.
Um, could represent maybe $73
million annually in New Mexico.
That's about 515 schools that
would lose that federal funding
and as New Mexico currently has
a law on the books to provide
free lunches to all schools, um,
the state would pick up the tab
and that's represented on slide
18 there.
On slide 19.
potential reductions to TANFF.
Maybe not as significant as the
previous slides, but of course
significant to that program.
Um, and then on the next slide
we have social services block
grants.
Which could represent another,
uh, maybe a dozen, 2 dozen
million, millions of dollars in
reduced funding there.
And I, and I want to highlight
that, not estimated on any of
these slides or the potential
losses to education, which could
also be significant, um,
especially higher education
institutions who pull down
federal grant dollars for
research funds, student support
grants, workforce, but we've
already seen some of these
institutions putting together
their own analysis of exposure
and as uh Mr. Chair mentioned,
that's amazing. We hope that
each of these agencies owns
their potential risk exposure
and is following up with what
their potential losses could be
and helping us uh in
our understanding of of what
might be expected of the state
budget should those federal
dollars slow down.
So cumulatively, if you turn to
the next slide, what does this
mean for the state budget,
right? That's a long laundry
list of potential um federal
spending reductions that could
impact us.
And, and how does that play out
when it gets to the state?
On this slide, you can see what
we've called the Goldilocks
charts, which is what you all,
what the legislature, what LFC
has based their planning.
And and spending targets for
going forward.
The bars represent spending, the
line represents our revenue
projections, and if you were to
spend 3% gross spending by 3%
each year, you'd have surpluses
far into the future, as you can
see in the first chart.
The 6% scenario is the current
budget scenario. You can see
surpluses remain through FY 30.
But 10% would certainly put you
in a structural deficit quite
quickly within a year or two.
That's what we expected going
into this session. If you turn
to the next slide, you can see
what would happen if the sum of
those previous slides, $1.5
billion in general fund backfill
was put into place in the next
year, how quickly those
scenarios and that spending plan
can change.
All of a sudden, the 6% budget
scenario.
Has the entire surplus gone in
one year.
And accelerating the point at
which the state begins building
2 to 3% budgets each year based
on the revenue growth rather
than the 6% in in without the
1.5 billion in backfill. You can
see how the 10%
is completely unfeasible with
even the next year. So I, I, I
put this all.
Um, together for you all, just
to point out that
Uh, those risks remain, both on
the budget side. This does not
include potential revenue
reductions and on the revenue
side. So the combination of
those two things could be
significant. Um, luckily, the
state has strong reserves that
could help cover it in the short
term, but in the long term, this
kind of structural deficit would
need to be made up with more
significant strategic planning,
which of course reserves by you
the time to be able to do, but.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair.
I'd be happy to take questions.
I think what I'm gonna do is, is
let's see why the secretary said
she was gonna come right back
in. Let's transportation who's
here to talk to Melanie, I
thought I'd seen Mallory in the
audience. I don't see this.
Oh, you want to come up. I don't
see the secretary in the room.
You want to come up and I'm
sorry, I didn't see you, Ricky.
You want to come up and
Maybe slide over for one second,
Izzy let him.
They're in this, I wanna hear
what agencies are thinking, what
their thought process is, and
what scenarios they have built.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee.
Um
About
$540 million annually comes from
our federal apportionment funds.
Um, by way of Federal Highway
Administration.
Um,
to be quite honest, we don't
anticipate that our federal
apportionment funding is at risk
right now, what?
Is at risk to our understanding
are some programs that are
specific to goals set within the
previous administration, those
are essentially related to
climate change and carbon
reduction related goals,
including
Formula funding our CMA programs
and, and programs of the like.
Right now, given the transition,
our immediate concern rests with
the final execution of federal
grants that have already been
awarded to the Department of
Transportation and our
estimation is that they exceed
over $300 million and some of
those awards are specific to
some of those um reduction in
carbon emission related goals of
the previous administration.
And so we expect that once um
USDOT, Federal Highway
Administration is set with.
Permanent leadership, um, the
process by which federal grant
award agreements are executed
will be streamlined and and we
can feel more at ease with those
photogram programs, but we would
otherwise expect a shift in
specific program funding goals.
It's likely that other
secretaries across the country
in the reauthorization of BIL
will push for more federal
apportionment, which is assured
funding unless federal comp
competitive grant, um, funding
opportunities which make uh
funding a little less
predictable and unstable,
especially in planning for
federal match and so.
That's kind of a high level, Mr.
Chairman. Um, I'll answer any
questions you may have.
We may bring you right back up
because tell me what seeing.
See him something everybody
talks in acronyms
so our CMAC program would
essentially be our carbon
reduction programs, um, that new
program that was authorized
under BIO.
OK
Madam Secretary, you're next. I
see you, I see a present at the
higher end institution, Doctor
Richards, I'm gonna probably
grab you right afterwards.
What other agencies are in the
room.
I just want to stand up.
no other ones.
Um, good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, thank
you so much for the opportunity
to speak today. I came over
mostly to kind of listen to the
projections in here. The
department is concerned about
some of the cuts at the federal
level, um, specifically we're
looking at SSBG or 4E funding,
um, but most importantly, the
SSI and as you know, there's a
bill this year, um, to codify in
legislation the use of our
dollars instead of SSI and we do
have a concern that if we
continue and we're plugging
that hole with state dollars
that individuals could lose that
SSI benefit, um, where they
would have to reapply for that
if they leave foster care and so
that's something that we're
looking at. We're following
closely. We don't have a number
yet as to what that looks like.
We typically draw down about $75
million through our programs in
federal funds. Um, so even, um,
a decrease of 10% as they
alluded to, um, would put a
significant risk to some of our
programs we're budgeted at about
90.
5 million. So a 10% decrease to
what we bring down on top of the
95 million that's actually
budgeted would leave us in about
a $30 million hole in federal
benefits, so.
stand for,
we'll pull you back up
individually in questions. I
just want to get a, a big
picture. uh Doctor Richards and
then I think I see Gina, you
stood up, so.
OK. You, your nextgenisa.
Is the president in a mission
here? I thought I could see.
OK, I see his hand.
Good, Doctor Richard, good
morning, Mr. Chair and committee
members. I'm Michael Richards,
the senior vice president of the
Health Sciences Center at UNM
and CEO of our health system in
terms of potential risk for
federal cuts at both the
university and health Sciences
Center. I really think of these
as being in 6 big categories,
the first of which is our
research enterprise. We have
about $246 million per year in
federally funded research,
mostly through the NIH and NSF,
um, when we think about
potential.
risk we've already seen about
$1.9 billion of reduction um
through immediate stop work
orders. Those have occurred
largely through work that we've
done with USAID through Project
Echo.
However, you've probably seen in
the news that one of the
contemplated reductions is to
reduce the indirect rate or that
amount that we get above and
beyond, direct reimbursement for
NIH funding that could put us at
about a $36 million reduction.
There's also a concern that with
just differences in alignment
and priorities that we could see
a reduction of 10 to 15% of our
overall research portfolio or
about $25 million.
The second really big area of
concern is student support. We
receive about $45 million
through our students.
Um, to get Pell grants as
predominantly, but other kinds
of student support that
ultimately would reduce their
ability to participate in higher
education and ultimately impact
our enrollment, and we think
that that puts about $45 million
at risk.
We have significant workforce
issues that we have in place.
Many of these are directed
towards our work as a minority
serving institution,
particularly targeted at
bringing, you know,
underrepresented individuals
into the healthcare workforce in
particular. So we have a college
of nursing program that's a
Title 6 Title 9 program that
would be at risk of $1.1
million.
As a minority serving
institution, um, we receive
specific support um under um uh
uh that particular designation,
and that's about a $4 million
risk, and then we've talked
about SNAP, which is both an
important component for our
students and for many of the
staff that might work in the
hospital or at the university,
that could be a $9.3 million
dollar risk, but Mr. Chair, the
biggest risk for us is that we
run an integrated healthcare
delivery system.
And we received about $1.24
billion of patient revenue, um,
support to run our healthcare
delivery system.
It's a, it's a little over 50%,
um, the total actually about
more like 60%. Um, the total
healthcare delivery budget for
clinical revenues is about 1.8
billion. So when we think about
the Medicaid risk, or Medicaid
reimbursement right now is about
$864 million a year, and it
comes through in several
different programs and I'd like
to highlight those for a moment.
We do receive the standard kind
of Medicaid reimbursement that
all other hospitals.
and health systems receive both
for our hospital services and
our physician services, but a
very significant portion of what
we receive as an academic
medical center is done through
special Medicaid arrangements
and that you've heard me talk
about in the past is our much
valued partnership with the
state and the healthcare
authority and those include our
GME and IME, which is our
resident programs on enhanced
payment on our hospital
services, which is the DRG
payment mechan.
ism an upper payment limit
program that we receive both for
managed Medicaid and traditional
Medicaid and a supplemental
directed payment program. What
is important about those is that
they're not part, they are part
of the Medicaid program, but
they're not part of the base
Medicaid rate.
And those enhanced payments that
we receive the University of New
Mexico health system pays the
state portion of that federal
match, so we make about 165 to
$170 million payment to cover
the state's portion of those
enhanced Medicaid payments.
Those payment structures and
those kinds of programs have to
be renewed annually with um CMS
and so I believe that those are
at significant risk.
The implications of that for us
right now are that that we're
right now running within our
health system just under a
positive budget. I'm negative
about, about 0.4%, but at this
time of the year, I know that
through, through things such as
um uh managing the clinical
enterprise, we will get to a
breakeven budget. The point is
that there we are not running in
any way with any excess revenues
to absorb any cuts, that is
largely because
we are still running at very,
very high volumes, even after
the post-COVID periods,
typically running at about 125
to 130% of our traditional
licensed um hospital capacity
that comes with significant
increased medical expenses
significant increased labor
cost, so any of these reductions
will have a significant impact.
The consideration for me on this
is that there is no unessential
care being provided. So
If this reductions in Medicaid
or Medicare happen, we will
still have to provide the care
because these new Mexicans need
this care. We will ultimately be
providing him, but without any
reimbursement, and we kind of
demonstrated that we're right at
a break even so this would in
fact put us in a significant
negative margin even with small
cuts in the single digits of
both Medicaid and Medicare. So
thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'll
stand for questions.
We'll, we're gonna pull them up
and then we may pull you back
up. Gina, your next.
Uh, Mr. President and you mean
you next, and then Troy is
anxiously waiting, you got
something to add, Troy.
OK.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, Gina De Blasi,
secretary designate for the um
Department of Health.
Um, the Department of Health is
actually very dependent on a lot
of federal funding specifically
for the gra the grants in our
public health division.
Um, we support a lot of the
staff in public health.
Uh, through those federal grants
as well as the work that we do
in collaboration for uh with the
CDC and NIH.
Um, when you think about how
much money we receive in federal
grants for public health. I was
just looking at our budget
roughly uh the total budget for
public health within um the
Department of Health is roughly
$266 million of that 187 is
non-general fund most and that's
the work we're doing through our
public health offices, uh, the
outreach that we're providing
for our surveillance within our
epibureau as well. So, um,
I can tell you that now with the
measles outbreak that we had in
New Mexico, we have uh been in
uh contact with the CDC and
they've been extremely
supportive. We hadn't had
anything, uh, fall through the
cracks there, but, um,
definitely there's a large
federal grant funding at risk at
the Department of Health.
OK, thank you.
Mr. President.
Do I, is there any other
secretaries, Rebecca, you're
gonna speak for the governor?
Sure, yes.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
committee, um, I think, you
know, uh, with regards to higher
education, uh, and not that the
uh health health, which is
actually much bigger than ours,
but we do have a number of uh
programs that are sort of
targeted for diminution. One of
them is a graduate plus loan
plan, which actually would have
uh at least at our university
for about 700 students an impact
of about $10 million reduction,
which is significant. um, we
don't have the same amount of
NIH.
Uh, but obviously the 15% would
basically claim a 3 million
reduction just there, um, we
have uh USDA. There's some
programs in USDA if you uh look
at the targeted programs, uh,
HSIs could could project, uh $70
million reduction and that would
obviously impact us.
We have uh NASA and USA programs
that are also targeted for
reduction. Um, so overall, uh,
and we haven't even looked at
NSF and the targeted reduction
from 9 billion to do I think 3
billion in terms of overall
funding that could then trickle
down to us, especially if the.
Um, uh, the rates get reduced at
that point. So, and um the same
things that were being mentioned
earlier about uh HSI and MSI
Institution would affect us
significantly with regards to
the programming, uh, we have
seen a softening of some of the
language with regards to some of
our programming, but it still
would affect some of the things
that we do, so that's basically
an overview of what happens
here.
OK.
I don't see any other
secretaries in the room. That's
why you want to say something
now.
Make sure you're hand in the.
Hospitals.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Sorry for
the change of mind, but Troy
Clark, uh, present CEO of New
Rewe Hospital Association really
on the wrist, I think what I
thought everything had been
covered, but I think it's key
for this committee to understand
the risks that we have the
healthcare delivery and Aes Act
that we passed last year gets
renewed every single year. So I
think all the other risks that
we've talked about about
potential cuts that's the only
other thing that I would add is
an understanding that that $1.5
billion a year that came in to
support our hospitals for
sustainability.
especially our rural hospitals
that were at risk of closure has
to be renewed each year.
Currently that renewal still
sits, uh, with CMS for the 25
calendar year not approved, uh,
with no action being taken on,
so there is the risk if that's
not approved, uh, on top of all
the other potential cuts that
that could be cut in total.
OK, I see somebody from New
Mexico Tech, you want to add
something?
Mr. Chairman Karl Suma with the
Mexico Tech, um, we're tracking
changes in in DOD funding in
addition to all the others we've
received.
One program was cut of half a
million dollars a couple of
weeks ago. It's our um Starba
program was cut nationwide.
Uh, we also had a DUE grant that
was canceled last week. That was
a million dollars. We see about
$1.5 million of cuts so far.
We have about $150 million in
active contracts with the
Department of Defense and so
reductions in federal spending
on defense to about 70 FTEs uh
that are relying on that
funding.
In addition, the reduction of
any FEMA funding we receive
about $22 million a year in FEMA
funding for training. It has
significant impacts to.
To our budgets and so we're
tracking those and doing stress
testing as we discussed.
Anybody else want to add
anything before we start. So, we
just, Senator Gonzalez here
first and then uh Senator
Trujil. So if there's something
specific or you want to call
them back up, I just call him
right back up, but if they're
up.
We may rotate, so Gina comes
back up and you have a question
for Gina. It's just get those
questions answered for genius
we're not going back and forth,
back and forth.
So.
Gonzalez here first thank you
Mr. Chairman and uh.
I just first want to start off
by um.
My, uh, really, um.
Thanking you for, you know, for
this presentation and to our LFC
and to also to.
Our economist um Torres, um, uh,
this is really, I mean.
Um
timing and also um.
being so proactive to just see
what's happening, but I, I
really want to compliment you on
this on providing this
presentation.
No, um, the first part, uh, Mr.
Torres is, um.
What you presented to us.
This does not include like the
four services and other
agencies, right?
Mr. Chair and Senator Gonzalez,
thank you for the question. Um,
I believe it was slide.
5 does include forest service in
there. Um.
So, yes, sir, it would. OK.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh everyone
uh.
Think that this is really coming
faster than what we realize.
And, uh, for example, with uh
Carson National Forest just
Taos.
Not including Penasco questa
respieras, the other part.
There have already been 24
individuals that have been.
Terminated
And uh so it's real, you know,
for a small home.
Rural area, you know, to to be
hit like this.
And uh you know, how do we go
with this, but uh I think uh.
The other part that I'm seeing
is, yes, we do have this
individuals that have been
terminated.
No, we're at the highest part
of.
Possibility of forest fires.
And then on the other side,
where is the finding that come
from the state.
You know, if we have to go into
that part to where.
We have to
You know, assist with the.
the fighting of emergencies. So
uh uh I think there's a lot that
the other part that I will just
come in, Mr. Chairman, is um on,
on the medical part, anything
with our hospitals.
I uh we can predict this, I
mean, uh.
individuals are gonna need or
attention.
And so it's gonna go on, so by
having this information in front
of us and also with the.
Everything that's being
presented to us, so.
You know, just being the.
Taking the proactive role is so
a very high comment to to our
staff and to Mr. Chairman for
doing this. Thank you.
Center trail.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you for the presentation
in response, uh, kind of a
follow up on Senator Gonzalez's
question, um, I note on page 5,
you talk about the direct um uh
employees. Does that include
contractors?
Mr. Chan, Senator Trujillo, no,
these are direct federal
employees listed in the first
bullet. OK, and Mr. Chairman, do
we have any information about
the contractors because I
understand that that may be just
as much or more um lack of
funding.
Mr. Chair, um, senator, the
second bullet represents some,
you know, our largest contractor
sector, which are the labs.
Um
We have seen someone else. I, I
can do my best to dig up some
research. We've done some
analysis on that previously on
the secondary employment
impacts, um.
I, I, I would think it's less
than double.
Um
But certainly, you know, to my
earlier point,
Um, the devil's in the details,
we've seen or heard that, um,
you know, the labs, for example,
wouldn't have revenue reductions
or or Department of Defense, but
we just had, uh, you know,
someone from New Mexico Tech
speak to the other way. So, uh,
I would, I would hope that at
least half of these um
employment impacts would be
safe, but uh happy to provide
you more research on that. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I, I
will just give a shout out like
we've got a lot of vacancies in
our state employees in our state
agencies, I encourage anyone
who's
been laid off or fired from the
federal government to come and
work for us quickly, um, uh, the
next question I have is in
relation to a couple of things
that grants that I already know
have been closed down. Um, one
is with the, um, with DFA with
the crime victims reparation
commission, the RFP for um
funding for sexual assault and
domestic violence, those RFPs
have already been shut down for
this next year. And right now
that's
stands at like $9.6 million in
funding. So, you know, those are
critical services that we need
to have available in our state
and I, I, you know, we're gonna
have to figure out what do we do
in in that. We also have the
Secretary of State that has um
indicated um when she came here
to present that the HAV, which
is Help America Vote, funding
has been closed, as well as the
cybersecurity protection.
Um, funding has been closed, and
so I suspect that there's a lot
of funding out there that has
just been shut down that we
might not necessarily be aware
of. It's not spending cuts, but
it's definitely cuts for us. And
then I, I, um, Mr. Chairman, the
one last thing that I want to
ask about is I see on page 12,
um, that the SNAP benefits are,
are potentially slated, and I
recognize that we don't know
what those benefits are actually
gonna be cut.
Um, but it's not just
nutritional assistance program,
that's farm subsidies, and I'm
interested, um, you know, that I
don't see the Department of
Agriculture here, but I'm very
interested in what that might
look like for our farms um
throughout New Mexico and uh
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and, and, um, to our presenters,
thank you very much. This is a
great overall outline for us to
start thinking about and looking
at, um, I was carrying a
confirmation this morning.
That's why I was a little bit
late walking in, uh, over in
rules. So if you go to page 18,
I walked in probably right at
the right time for a question
that I or issues that I would
have on this. So on the school
meals, I just want to make sure
that everybody knows that's
just, that's not just lunches.
It's the school lunches there,
it is plus breakfast as well
because we did make a decision
as a legislature.
in a state to make sure that we
provide all of that, um, I, I
guess I'm, my questions are
around what, what are these
percentages in the first
paragraph and the 3rd paragraph
are, are, uh,
Our legislative decision there
was 100% universal free
breakfast and lunch. So I just
want to make sure that we're not
now going to some, what does
that mean?
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator. Um, as I understand it,
the federal government provides
free meals to schools who have
at least a 25%.
Population eligibility
currently.
They could revert to the
pre-pandemic level of requiring
60%.
Of the population to be eligible
to provide the entire school
meals and so that's what the
first bullet speaks to in the
the last bullet is how many
schools are captured in that
change, and we have that
estimated here 515 schools.
That the state would pick up the
tab for.
And so Kayla, you're dying to
say something.
Oh OK.
OK, Chairman, and, and then, uh,
um.
On the uh 72.9 million, is that
the total tab for for breakfast
and lunch in New Mexico, or is
that just a portion?
So, Mr. Chair, Senator Padilla.
This is a guesstimate. It's we,
it's a
Somewhat complicated formula to
figure out even if those
community eligibility schools,
as you know, how much the
federal government picks up and
without running that formula for
every school. I just did an
assumption of, you know, say on
average, we had to pick up
another $2 per kid per.
180 day school year and that
would cost the state around $73
million a year.
In addition to what we're
Yeah, it just represents the
federal share that we'd be
picking up. I think we're closer
to like, I want to say 250 of
all all funds total cost for
school meals right now.
OK, so this would be what we
would uh have in addition to
what we are, what we do. That's
correct. OK, and what percentage
do we do? I guess it's the
variance between what I'm seeing
here. I wanna say, uh, for FY
24, the feds paid about $180
million in school meal costs the
state picked up.
Closer to 30, and that's gone up
in 25 again, so this would be in
addition to that.
Uh, thank you, chair, and so I,
I guess, um, Izzy, how did you
come to the 1.5 billion. I, I, I
apologize. I was in another
committee this morning. I'm, I'm
sure you explained it very well,
but in a, in a nutshell, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator Padilla, it is
the sum of the proportional
losses reflected in the previous
slides, which means it does not
include some of the education
related ones or some of the
other uh um potential losses
discussed by some of these
agencies.
And so then the chairman, I
guess this might be directed to
you. I got I don't know if you
want to answer this or not, but
I mean, this is, this is pretty
damning, number one.
And number 2, what order are we
going to tap funds to backfill
this $1.5 billion dollar or
more. We have an order. Do, is
there like a way to pare that
down.
Your credit cards first.
Well.
That's just had to buy 400
computers, so I don't know that
I have much there right now, but
yeah, I, I don't think there's
an order, I mean, the reserves
would.
be tapped first, and then we
start looking into other
tranches of buckets that didn't
have caps. I mean, you're
worried about the early child
that that takes it 2/3 vote and
we have to come in to do that
and so that probably wouldn't be
on the table. I mean,
Scenarios could be a 5% standing
across the board right now to
make make capacity, uh, if we
have to. I mean, I sent out a
letter in early May or June,
right? Say does not go above 6%,
hold your budgets low
the economy is gonna change, uh,
so, I mean, that could be one
scenario of 5 to 7% sanding
automatically and see what
revenue number that generates,
so.
Yeah, thank you, Chairman. So I
guess the only other thing I
would, I would just add to this
one is, are we being extremely
proactive on the drawdowns. Um,
I, I, I, I wonder if maybe
there's some sort of an audit
that could happen or take place,
um.
To make, to, well, to make sure
that we get what the getting is
good. I guess there's no other
way really to say it. I mean,
so, so are we pulling everything
down that we could, that we need
to be pulling down. I mean, when
I first arrived here 13 years
ago, I sat through, I don't know
how many committee hearings that
first week, and, you know, we
just suddenly discovered that we
had missed out on $154 million
in funding for special
education, you might remember
that some of the people that
were here at the time, several
on this committee were
definitely here. I want to make
sure that we're, we're, we're
staying very vigilant and, and
proactive in pulling money down
that we need to be pulling down.
Is there a mechanism to, to, to
track or audit anything like
that?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I'd, I'd say,
you know, we, we have some
agencies that are proactively
doing a pretty good job of that.
We have other agencies that
probably need some help.
Right now in House Bill 2, for
example, there's a half million
dollar appropriation to CYFD for
that exact purpose to, to help
them identify additional um
opportunities to, to pull down
federal funds. My understanding
is, um, they've been working
with uh um uh consultant from
Casey Family Programs, for
example, and discovered that um
they should be able to be
reimbursing for overtime. Most
states do. We haven't been doing
it as much and there could be
some cost savings there, um,
even retroactively.
Um, so we can look for other
opportunities to potentially
supplement that where uh where
we think more help is needed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
I'll go ahead and stop and you
have others that have questions,
but I, I hope that we make that
a real effort to look across
state government and make sure
that we're drawing down
everything that needs to be
drawn down, um, and it's
proactively as possible and, and
maybe even outside of the
federal government, you know,
things that other grants and
dollars and whatever that we
bring in here from other places
too.
So, all right, thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Senator Padilla, good
example is that in an
environment department instead
of them drawing down the federal
funds, we backfilled those with
state funds for those state
employees, and instead of them
balancing half and half.
Right, we went ahead and did
that and that may have to get
reversed at some point, we hope
not, but we don't know.
of her Lanier here next. Good
haircut today. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
I get them all cut.
Good morning, gentlemen. Um,
Izzy, thanks for doing all this
work and I know your group does
a good job. I just, I just have
one.
One comment. So you, we know
that this, we know there's gonna
be some federal cuts. There's
already been some.
And you're doing a great job
guessing cause I know that's
what it has to be.
But I guess my question is for
us as legislators.
Why are we trying to grow the
government.
When we have all this unknown.
You know, we've we've done all
kinds of programs, almost every
single department is came to us
with a growth of some sort. Why
aren't we as legislators maybe
Um, maybe this is the time we,
we start cutting some of that. I
mean, if you look at HB 2.
In here, I, I don't remember
seeing a.
agency that was cutting.
Cutting their growth
Anybody want to come in? That
goes to anyone, no, the answer
is no. I mean, we build a budget
based on growth, right? And if
we don't have the, the number
growth and we based it upon
slide number.
5, right?
Was it 5? Yeah.
slide in under 2% growth of the.
And
To deal with you showed me that
page.
On page 21.
That's what we, that's what we
based our budget on going
forward is how do we sustain
growth over the next couple of
years. Inflation.
Is outpacing the growth in
budgets no matter what, and so
when we start building the LLC
budget, we saw, OK, what's,
what's inflationary cost and
then what is each agency need?
We saw a lot of unspent money
for the last couple years, and
we started pulling back and
started reducing those numbers,
but we have money, you have to
budget it somewhere, right? You
can't just go rat hole and put
it in the bank, um, cause the
issues are not getting dealt
with. I mean, perfect one is the
food banks, who said to us
they're gonna.
And hunger in New Mexico for $30
million.
And so
That's a good thing. That's a
good thing to try to attempt and
so you, you move those things
forward, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, and,
and kind of staying with the
The hairs thing.
Maybe this was a good time to go
through with a fine tooth comb.
This, this might be the, the
opportunity we have, and that's
it.
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Izzy for the presentation.
It is uh pretty draconian what
we're hearing and
I noted that the president and I
read over the weekend said that
uh
Didn't want to cut entitlements.
And
And then he went through a whole
thing about read my lips, well,
I'm not gonna say read my lips
again cause that was said by
another president, just accepted
as fact. I'm not gonna cut
entitlements.
But of course, the House
framework of what they voted for
said it and then the Speaker of
the House parsed his words,
saying, you know,
Who he wanted to cut and who he
didn't, so it's uh evolving
picture, but sometimes when they
do these kind of
You know, um,
Budget guidelines that say we're
going to cut X amount, I mean,
lots of cuts get made, and
that's just
The reality, so it's very
serious. I just want to ask you
the question was asked of our
chair, but I want to ask you the
question. Is he from Europe just
experience, where would you
suggest like?
Generally speaking, if we had to
make
Those kinds of backfills where
you would start, how you would
approach it.
from your perspective.
Mr. Chair and Senator Steinborn,
uh, you know, there's uh a lot
of national best practices on on
these fiscal playbooks and LFC
has one as well, and I think the
chair hit it on the nail on the
head with, you start with
reserves, you, you know, you
want to give yourselves as a
body enough time to think
strategically about how to
achieve those savings, um, and
so the reserves buy you that
time. They might get you a year
or two backfilling this kind of
um reductions in spending while
you all can debate and, and
Your staff can help you identify
where savings could be achieved.
With hopefully the smallest
impact services. There you go.
And that would be my goal too,
uh.
But um we don't really know,
right? Would these cuts be long
term? Will they be?
You know, one time, um.
Recurring since the governor has
said in the press that she might
call a special session later
this year if these cuts
materialize, are you all
starting those scenarios now.
Preparing for that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Senator
Steinbor, I, I'd say absolutely
and the, and the more we know
and the more certainty that
comes in as as decisions are
made, the more information we
can, we can get you all, you
know, you can be prescriptive
about.
Um, priority making on that.
Thank you. I think it's a smart
thing to do.
So it's all I have. I will just
say I'm proud to be a New
Mexican, you know, I'm proud
that we're trying to take care
of people in this state. We are
living within our means. We have
historic reserves over 30%. I
mean, you look back at the
history of the state. It was
when it was 10%, it was a banner
year for over 30% now.
Um, we're saving money for
tomorrow. I mean, we we're doing
things fiscally responsibly, but
we're taking care of our state,
which we need to do to move
forward economically.
So I think retrenchment.
Unnecessarily would be damaging,
um, frankly to our state, but
Anyway, um, appreciate the work
y'all do. Thank you.
Thanks Mr. Senator Woods.
Uh, the question I have, Mr.
Chair.
is simply after hearing all this
information that we want to set
goals.
To keep present programs going.
Or do we wanna
Knowingly,
Add to a budget.
That uh we hear today that's
probably gonna be less federal
money coming in.
If, uh, uh, the question that
Senator Steinborn stated that
You know, uh, we've had
exceptionally high reserves.
Uh
You know, so do you want to
spend to that same reserve level
again, or do we want to take
part in what coming the for us
today.
But there's programs out here.
That evidently we thought were
beneficial in the past, and I'm
preaching a little and I
apologize to you, Miss Chairman,
but
We need to set a goal today.
Do we need to set, and we need
to set a goal.
As to what's important if, if,
if the present program is
important.
Maybe we better start thinking
about that.
And, and
We've got some pretty good ideas
of where cuts are coming. Do we
need to leave?
Money and reserves for that
backfield.
You know, to me it's, it's a
pretty black and white deal
here. We don't know the exact
amount.
But we know for a fact.
That we can't just keep
increasing new programs.
Coming forward.
Uh,
We, we've got, we've got to do
something, and if we're smart,
we'll do something sooner than
later.
Figure out how to have a good
Idea of how much money we're
going to lose out of here in
federal money.
Which I think we can get a
pretty fair guess, and, and make
sure our reserves are adequate
if we want to keep the same
program score, then maybe we
have a, a discussion on what,
what programs don't need to be
going.
But evidently we thought these
were all great programs or we
wouldn't started them.
Again
We're going to rely on
The finance staff.
The LFC staff to come to us and
show us what's effective and
what's not.
And if it's not effective, we
need, that's where we need to
cut.
We and, and we can direct them
again to determine which one of
these programs are haven't been
looked at in a while, but it all
gonna come in a crashing heap.
What would you say, Mister
Chair, and, and, and gentlemen,
at what point in time will we
see these
cuts coming to us. We're already
see for service cuts, but when
will we start seeing state
funds?
Restricting because of federal
restrictions. Is there a good
timetable on that, Mr. Chair
and.
Mr. Chair, um, and Senator
Woods, so the, the
reconciliation, you know,
projects out budgets for the
next 10 years so that the, the
first federal money that it
would hit to my understanding
would be uh federal fiscal year
26, which starts in October.
October 1st.
And
And that would be through the
federal budget, we would see
that, right?
Mr.
Mr. Chair, Senator, yes, so as,
as Congress works to, to hit
those targets of um reducing the
deficit through those committees
and, and becomes more
prescriptive with which cuts
they, they're um they're deeming
to roll out, that's, that's when
we'll see that and uh as as I
mentioned before, there's a bit
of uncertainty now, you know,
there's
It's, it's kind of like day by
day we're seeing, well, you
know, what's on the table,
what's off the table, um, but I
don't think anything's
necessarily guaranteed at this
point.
But we could have a spreadsheet
mission chair, and, and right
now we know how much
That target is on each one of
those committees and we know
what New Mexico's percent is of
that amount.
Uh,
We could start right there and
that would give us a a fair
indication if, if they cut
everything just like that they
were saying we would have
knowledge as to how much money
we need to backfill in New
Mexico.
Mr. Chair Senator Woods, I, I
think that's correct. You know,
I think as he did a good job
with, with saying if we just
went on a percentage basis,
we're looking at, I think 1 1.1
billion was your number?
1.5 total. Um,
You know, depending on, on which
programs are are hit.
Um, it, it could either be
higher than that or or lower
than that.
Um, you know what, what I think
one of the concerns that that we
have a staff is that as Izzy
mentioned, New Mexico is a state
that's highly dependent on the
federal government, um, not only
for, for jobs, both direct jobs
and contracting, um, but also
for that federal support for
programs such as, such as
Medicaid, school meals and
snaps, snap.
But I realized that, but I'm
just, all we can do anything
about we can't, we can't do
anything about a a contractor
that works for.
New Mexico State or, or the
highway department or, you know,
uh, the, the way those contracts
developed, all we can do is know
what budget dollars come into
New Mexico and say we're gonna
try to backfill those dollars
are not backfill those dollars.
But
Right now we're talking about
$1.5 billion is a is a
possibility of cuts.
Directly affecting New Mexico in
the indirect.
Uh, uh, grants and stuff that
comes out to other agencies or,
or, I mean not.
Maybe not other agencies but
other entities in the Mexico
that might restrict our economy.
There's not much we can do about
that.
All we can do is a state budget.
Mr. Chair, that's, that's a good
point, Senator Woods, and, and
as we learned for more
information, we'll sharpen our
pencils and try to
You know, try to get that, uh,
that number, uh, a bit more
specific.
And uh and you know keep y'all
in the loop as as we learn more
information on that, you know,
the, the other consideration is
um with with this uncertainty,
one of the things that I would
hope would become certain is how
the federal government would
plan to to roll these out over a
10-year period. Um, and I think
as he mentioned, you know, it,
it may be they decide to do some
sort of some sort of average. It
may be to give some states some
flexibility. They decide to to
scale those up over time, um,
and that's a, that's another
option.
that, you know, the probably
the.
The legislative branch and the
executive branch could take is
just, you know, advocacy to the
federal government to uh
To uh help us out on on uh on
implementing these things, uh,
over the next 10 years, the
areas of the greatest concern,
as I heard in a bill not too
long ago.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Padilla real quick
I just real super quick on, on,
on the uh October 1 sort of line
in the sand that you put there,
which I thought was good, is
that notification to us or would
we have, do you believe we would
have some visibility ahead of
time, because I don't think we
should show up here after the
barn is burnt down, we should
show up here ahead of time and
maybe a special work on what we
expect those things to be, you
have any visibility to that, Mr.
Chairman, uh.
Senator Padilla, it's a good
question and see if you wanted
to add, you know what, my, my
thinking of how, you know, this
could potentially work over the,
over the interim.
I, you know, um.
You all will be a part of LFC
during the interim. We can
certainly put this on the on the
work plan. I don't see how we
wouldn't.
Keep studying this and and
really dig deep and and maybe
even give you all monthly
updates as far as what we're
learning and and what potential
cuts would be that way, you
know, every single month, you,
you see kind of where we're
heading and um I'm assuming that
as we head through, through the
summer and the fall, we, we can
zero in and, and really see um
what, what the needs might be
for uh for the for backfilling
and and uh and what might be uh
need to be acted on over the
over the next fiscal year.
Uh, thank you. I just hope that
again we're going to be as
proactive as possible, much like
I said earlier, I hope that
we're
Drawing down everything we
should be drawing down and we're
being proactive about planning,
and again, I don't think we
should be organizing ourselves
on October 1, I think we should
be backing up the bus.
You know, probably 2 or 3 months
before that day even shows up.
Thank you.
Senator Brent
was chairman trying to be quick,
um, just looking at the
The
House concurrent budget
resolution scenario.
Um
It looks like our our biggest
area of exposure is Medicaid,
obviously. Um, do you know on
that?
The 880 billion that's being
proposed and cuts, um, what is
that as far as percentage of
what they normally fund.
Uh, Mr. Chan and Senator Brant,
that's the 12 to 13% to 13% and
we get about 14 billion.
Mr. Chair, in the health sector
in total, it's 11 billion. I
think it's about $8 billion for
Medicaid.
That's a little over 1 point.
To Mr. Chairman Eric, that's
about right.
And then, um
So all we've looked at is kind
of what's being proposed from
the house at this point.
Really any of the other issues,
um.
That will probably see really
soon.
Oh
The Trump administration's can
handle some of those when it
comes to Maine.
Right
Um
So, you know, our state has
taken some actions that
Go against what this
administration, the federal
government.
Just happy about.
Um
And
warning is that.
Those the federal funds could be
completely cut off.
We haven't looked at any of that
though, right?
Mr. Chair, uh, you know, all of
these figures are, are really
proportionalized based on the
cuts in the House version, but,
you know, to, to your point,
the, the total exposure is the
all the federal funds we, we
receive are an exposure to risk.
And so to the extent that the
entire pot rather than 12 to 13%
pot is, is here for you, um, and
As those details come clear, we
will as uh deputy director
mentioned, be providing you all
with updates on that.
Um, what might be
I mean, I, I know that our total
federal funds is 1314 billion.
recurring
what's recurring, um, we might
look at some scenarios just to
kind of give us some ideas as to
areas
Like I said, I think we'll see
what happens with that whole
main blow up.
Um, I would expect to see
something by the end of session
on that, but maybe, maybe it'll
take a little longer.
My guess is the lawyers are all
talking about what could be done
constitutionally and legally.
Mhm
kind of stuff. And who knows
they may put language into.
To this CR that allows the
president to cut all the
funding.
So I think we have things that
that we should be concerned
about, I think, uh, had some.
The comments about, you know,
are we really needing to add.
A bunch of money
I think uh what uh.
Adrian and I were
we're looking at the other day
that we'd have about 3 months'
worth of reserves if the federal
government cut all their
funding.
That's uh that's not gonna go
very far.
Is that about right?
Mr. Chair, your math is right.
Thank you.
I think maybe we ought to be
A little bit more careful.
sit on the floor of federal
moneys always come with strings
attached.
We, we
Have seatbelt laws in New Mexico
because we were threatened if we
didn't, we'd lose our
transportation dollars.
Um
Education, all those had tons of
strings attached.
We were the last state to
actually join.
the Department of Education come
under the Department of
Education.
Um, because we didn't want those
strings.
Like the money so much we went
ahead and put those strings on
us.
But all that money comes with
strings attached.
Um
We want to cut those strings, we
shouldn't be surprised when the
money goes away.
Thank you.
Indo
They can be turbing, uh, just a
quick question, uh, as well on
the uh.
Well, thank you for the
presentation on page 5, where
you have federal employment
impacts in New Mexico. Did that
include also, you know, some of
the funding that goes to like
Bureau affairs and in-house
services, um, BIE.
Mr. Chariot would include those
folks, OK, I appreciate that,
and then, but it doesn't include
funds that go to tribes from
federal programs.
That's right, Mr. Cherry does
not that could be a significant
as well too because there's a
lot of federal funding that goes
directly to tribes. Uh, so, but
that's not accounted for in this
year, OK.
Just clarification. Thank you.
I mean, I mean.
I don't remember how many years
ago the European market
completely crashed and they had
to redevelop it, right? Cause
it's a scenario of worry in
right now in the United States
is where we're paying more.
An interest than we are on the
deficit.
So there has to be some
reconciliation, otherwise the
world more.
We're gonna collapse at some
point we're gonna collapse.
And so
Not like it or not.
You want a full collapse or do
you want to reconcile some of
this stuff right now.
That's, that's the US dollar
market it's telling you, you
better fix some stuff or it's
not gonna happen.
Um
I think this is a good hearing,
um, Izzy.
If we ran this scenario in to
send some members points. I
mean, we're already working on a
scenario what it's gonna look
like, right? When is this, when
does the budget have to be out
of out of the US March
something, right?
Yeah they're working.
So, Mr. Chairman, my
understanding is, um, they're
looking at May.
McKellen,
she's probably she's got this.
Are they gonna extend the
deadline or they've already
extended the deadline. When is
it extended to the budget of the
government open by the 14th is
the day that I have in my mind,
um, of March, and that's just
for regular funding. But what I
read and I, you know, this
changes day to day, so caveats
onon caveats, but the, the house
wanted to get through their
committees by May. They have to
get the Senate then to concur
with, you know, their
proposed plans going forward and
there's already rumblings that
has other ideas about how the
tax cuts should go, so it may
stretch out longer than the
summer. It's, it's hard to say.
OK.
So I mean,
We're, we're talking about
what's gonna happen, but we're
gonna be reactive when it
happens, right?
The problem is we have to plan
ahead to, so we're reactive
ahead of what's
In unison with what's gonna
happen.
I, I really don't think that
Medicaid can get hit, and I'll
tell you why.
I went to fiscal leaders
legislator, meaning and it's all
the chairs of the finance
committees from the United
States, Republican or Democrat?
The number one issue was
Medicaid.
And I think that he may be
talking about it. It's a great
talking point. It's a large
number.
But I don't, I think at the end
of the day, I don't think
they're gonna get there because
the states will have way too
much pushback. Uh, it's a number
one issue in every single state.
You know, it affects our state
in big dollars. And so I think
that may just be.
pushback. I think he's gonna
talk tomorrow, but we'll see if
he continues that talk about
pushing back.
The other thing is, you know, as
we move forward with this
budget.
It's about how this capacity
look.
If we do have to come back,
right? And what that number
looks like. We have to stay
within that 30% range, you just
turned senator ran say.
You know
Got 3 months' worth of reserves
if we pull it all out of cash.
And in other spending deficits
when they came and senators will
remember this.
Senator Gonzalez.
I don't know if Senator Woods
was here in '09.
In '09 and 10.
Where everything was, everything
was on the table. I don't think
we're gonna get there.
God, I hope not. I didn't get
that now. I don't want to be the
chair.
That is torture.
Um
And, and so how do we start
figuring out how to balance it.
So maybe you guys ought to go
back and, and run some
scenarios, and this is
scenarios, don't start spreading
the damn gossip around the
building.
I, I want to see what numbers
look like.
With 5% cuts, 7% cuts.
Just to get it in advance of, of
a picture of what it looks like.
We can't spend our reserves.
That quickly. There's no way we
can do that.
So it's gonna be a mix of
backfilling.
And tightening.
It has to be in the first round
and see what that looks like.
Um
This exact, I mean, we, we build
everything up to the brim.
And and some of them are
overflowing and now it's time
for a balancing act.
Um, as we move forward.
The one thing I, the indicators
and I usually watch CNBC in the
morning, see what the market's
doing, you know, job growth is
down, labor for participation is
down, uh, job openings and hires
and quits and layoffs are up,
ratio of job vacancies and on to
unemployment, is that?
Those federal employees are not
going to come to work for the
state tomorrow.
They got 6 months' worth of
benefits. They're gonna burn
those benefits and then they're
gonna start looking for a job,
uh, they're entitled to them,
and so that's it. But new single
family houses are down, right?
Housing starts are down,
homeownership is down,
construction spending is down,
wholesale inventories are down,
um.
These are all the sectors in the
market, they're signaling to
something, right? That's why
they're keeping inflation or
inflation, interest rates at a
higher rate, trying to stabilize
the economy. So if we lower the
rates and we'll have a whole
bunch of investment in in it
could throw everything can flow
inflation higher than it even
was, the whole deal of temporary
interest rates was to slow
inflation.
In some sectors it did in some
sectors, it didn't. And so as,
as everyday spending continues,
uh,
Inflationary rates will be the
biggest cost to the consumers
across the board, whatever
they're buying, I mean.
Um, we don't tax water, and we
don't tax food in New Mexico, so
food is, is completely different
for us than other states, uh,
other states are not going to be
in that scenario.
They'll be cutting budgets
immediately.
Cause we have reserves at a
certain level.
How many reserve funds do we
have or money?
That we can grab and not touch
our reserves before.
Mr. Chair, uh, you know,
As you know,
Funs exist across the state
agencies, so I, I don't, I mean,
the list is very long in terms
of number of funds. Uh, we'd
have to
Do some research on the amount
of funds
within reserves.
About 3 billion, as you know.
Yeah, and, and but as Moody's
gives us this upgrade.
If you start drawing from your
reserves immediately and don't
start tapping other places,
they're gonna say, well, they
really weren't really
In that grade of financial shape
because they were just relying
on their reserves. And so if you
start tapping other places and
and not completely deplete your
reserves or draw from your
reserves and it signals to them
they had money in other places
that the reserves were were were
true reserves and not just not
sitting there.
So, any other questions? Izzy,
thank you for this. Thanks for
your hard work this weekend,
will give you just one thing,
OK.
You know, I look at that
Medicaid a little different. I
look at the ones that we
actually have waivers.
If we discuss
I mean, they could just say,
yeah, we're not gonna do
anything with Medicaid. We're
just gonna, you know, we're
gonna pay exactly what the law
says we pay. We're just not
gonna pay the wages.
So, and, and he'll be true to
his word. I mean, I'm not trying
to take up for a president or
anything else. But if he says,
you know, I'm gonna do just what
the law says. I'm just not gonna
do any work.
And that adds up to
A bunch of money too.
So just.
Just put that thought in your
head that
The spin that goes on is huge,
as each one of you know.
We can talk in any way we want
to.
So we better be thinking
strongly about
Federal money not coming in here
from some source and how we're
gonna keep programs going if we
want these programs going.
So this year I'm sorry. Thank
you.
Right, we'll give you another
homework assignment this
weekend.
Mr. Chair, if I could just say
thank you to the staff who put
together this presentation over
the weekend that this is all
their hard work thank you guys
for working over the weekend. I,
I know it's, we're during
session is crunch time, then he
slows down for you guys quite a
bit, but you
I'm not gonna slow down that
much as we move forward until we
get some type of surety of
what's gonna happen.
Um, I know some have families,
appreciate that.
So he has a new family.
Um
So we appreciate that. So we do
appreciate you guys and all the
hard work you do.
You may be over there in a hole,
we don't see it, but we do
appreciate it. Senator Shchina
will send you over lunch. What
would you like for lunch?
No, no, I'm serious. Would you
want pizza, uh, you might as
well buy, do something good for
our staff.
Izzy you decide pizza or Chinese
food, which one? They're all on
diet.
Pizza, right.
Mhm
Senator Hickey, we're gonna do
your bill.
Meet him on Zoom.
We don't have anybody on Zoom.
The
Britney, do you smoke?
you snuff.
Any of the syntaxes that we're
going to discuss today.
No.
You don't look old enough to,
good thing.
The Hickey, we're gonna start
you off.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, um, for those
of you who haven't heard this
presentation before I've been
working on this for 3 years,
just a few.
Summary uh context points, um.
This is about nicotine and
addiction to nicotine,
particularly in youth,
particularly before the pathways
are developed between the
frontal lobe and the rest of the
brain when there's the potential
for uh development of pathways
that actually lead to further
addictions later in life, and so
going to the core of some of the
addiction issues, uh, if we
could get school aged
individuals to not take up
nicotine.
As it now comes in incredible
forms and there is some vaping,
uh, cartridges on the table
there, you can see them, they
come in colors in their games
and the more puffs you make, the
more stars and whistles you get
and uh unfortunately is uh we've
learned that, uh,
In 2019, about 35% of our middle
school were using vaping and
about 12 15% in uh in middle
school, the first one was in
high school. The um since then
we have learned that the pouches
have come in in many ways to
take the place of nicotine, uh,
the pouches are things that you
can slip into your mouth like
zen is a uh.
Relatively popular one, the
vaping, uh there are smoke
alarms in the bathrooms in the
schools, and so this is a way uh
to go ahead and get the nicotine
and remember nicotine is one of
the most addictive drugs that
there is, and uh we know that uh
if children uh don't take it up,
they're much less likely to take
it up in adulthood, uh, adults,
uh, have a very difficult time.
uh,
stopping nicotine and in any
form, it's uh easier to do in a
younger age. So what this bill
does is it's not really a
revenue bill, although it is a
revenue bill. It really is a
bill to in uh hopefully
influence uh and help children
stop taking up nicotine in their
school years, and we know from
Several states who have raised
the taxes on vaping and pouches,
uh, and we, of course, we know
from cigarettes, um, the more
they cost, the less people take
them up and particularly for the
nicotine. Um, so we're proposing
in this bill to raise a uh
wholesale tax or place a
wholesale tax on uh nicotine as
it comes through tobacco
products defined as
e-cigarettes.
And nicotine pouches, it does
not touch cigarettes, it does
not touch, um, chewing tobacco,
it does not touch, um.
Uh, cigars, uh, originally they
were in the bill, but we took
them out because having him the
bill with the complex way that
we do the funding, having in the
bill would have caused some hit
to the general fund. The good
news about this is that it will
raise 5 to $10 million it will
not have any impact on the
general fund, that money will go
into a new nicotine prevention
control fund in the treasury and
it will be administered by the
Department of Health for.
prevention programs currently we
spend uh outside of Medicaid,
only about $5.5 million on
nicotine prevention, the CDC
estimates that we should be
spending 28 million. So this
doesn't get us to the 28
million, but this does get us to
be able to do more, and again, I
want to finish with the key
point, if we can really, it is
kind of like a nuclear chain
reaction if we
can get to stop, stop the first
reaction, then we can help uh
people who, after they developed
the addiction pathways, not move
on to alcohol or other substance
abuse to deal with the stresses
in life. Thank you very much and
with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you. Uh, we'll go out to
the audience first, uh, all
those in the support of this
bill.
Go ahead, come on up with
anybody on Zoom? OK.
The ears pull down the button, I
believe.
Can you hear me?
Mr. Chair, this is Mahesita with
the American Heart Association,
so we thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill, uh, we have
an e-cigarette epidemic in our
schools and you can ask your
local principals, teachers, and,
you know, kids are wiping in
bathrooms and, you know, it's,
it's a big, big issue and what
this bill does it also.
You know, amends the tobacco
Control Act to include, you
know, new products, especially
synthetic nicotine products, the
tobacco industry claims it's not
derived from tobacco, so this
encompasses, uh, new products
and future products they'll be
taxed and you know, we urge you
to support this bill. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, Linda Siegel for the
American Cancer Society Cancer
Action Network.
And
It's the policy of ACS to
support the combined increase of
cigarette taxes and e-cigarettes
and other, other products, but
we really like the part of this
bill that, that does increase
these, these other tobacco
products and is clearly
clarifying the, the definitions
for synthetic nicotine, which is
really important to address all
these new products.
That are coming out. Thank you.
You, I will go to uh Zoom.
Oh, no
Uh net.
You're on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Nat
Dean. I just got a new name,
Zennette. Um, thank you very
much. I stand in support of this
bill.
It is
It's extremely important aspect
of implementing strategies that
will improve the health outcomes
of individuals when I'm working
with people who are on SSI or
SSDI or other disability
benefits, it becomes shocking to
them that they may be spending
uh 3000 to $4000 a month on
cigarettes.
And how that could be redirected
into uh
Resources that will improve
their health can be a drastic
fulcrum to improve their health
outcomes. We need to start young
and have that last have a
lifelong impact. My apologies
for my disorganization this
morning. It's Monday. Thank you.
Thank you. Anybody else?
OK.
in opposition.
It can have maybe 4 of you come
up.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Art Hall on
behalf of Native Trading
Associates.
Uh, a very responsible retailer
in Albuquerque.
For over 25 years, we employ 62
New Mexicans.
Um
Tobacco taxes are the most
regressive of any tax that we
can impose on our they affect
the most financially vulnerable
the most.
New Mexico is currently awash in
cash. We've got revenues higher
than we've ever had.
We just think there's no need
for this tax.
The programs in place are
working and they're working
well.
As is evidenced by the most
recent CDC youth use of nicotine
pouches remains low.
Youth vaping and nicotine
pouches is at a 10-year low.
The programs we have are
working.
Uh, by increasing this tax,
you're gonna negatively impact
our most financially vulnerable,
drive business to the black
market.
Um
And I must just throw in there,
uh, in all transparency.
Using these pouches, which I do
personally help me quit smoking
10 years ago where I wasn't able
to prior to that, so we would
ask that you oppose this tax.
Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chairman, ladies and
gentlemen of the committee
ceased to debate the
Tri-strategies New Mexico
representing Philip Morris
International. While we do
appreciate, uh, the sponsor's
intent here, um, we are the
producers of Zen, um, Zen has
recently been recognized by the
FDA of meeting the standards of
the uh 2009 family smoking
prevention and tobacco Control
Act and has said that Zen
specifically has um helped with
the harm redu.
uh efforts that.
Senators trying to get at.
These products, even though
Um
As was stated before.
Or seeing a reduction in use by
youth. We also understand that
these products can also provide
helping the larger population of
smokers reduce their use. So in
that we would ask that the
committee vote against this
legislation. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Leland
Gould, and I represent the New
Mexico Petroleum marketers. We
are hundreds of small business
owners in every city in New
Mexico. Our customers typically
are lower income and we feel
that this bill unfairly targets
and penalizes the low income,
uh, New Mexicans which again are
our customers so we posed in the
bill 20. Thanks.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Good
morning. John Thompson, a
registered lobbyist for Altria.
I wanna bring a little different
perspective uh to the argument
here and, and first of all, I
want to say respect what the
senator is trying to do.
I would encourage all of you to
be cautious in raising this tax
too much. And the reason that
being is I would ask you to take
out your handy dandy mobile
device and Google.
I vape online, buy these pouches
online.
And you can have them shipped to
your home.
Without taxation. More
importantly, without
jurisdiction of the state of New
Mexico over those retailers.
There is price sensitivity to
this, but also I would say
younger generation, and I'll
include myself, I buy my suits
online, I buy my furniture
online.
If it doesn't work, I send it
back, right? But there, that
will be a shift that will occur
to this and we will not grasp or
have jurisdiction over those
transactions, so I would caution
from, from raising too high, and
I appreciate the time, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Yeah
Anybody on Zoom opposition, OK,
all right. We don't have anybody
on Zoom. We'll go to the
committee.
Senator Trujil.
Yeah, um, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Senator, uh, can you
address that issue about the
online.
We don't, I mean, we're taxing
other things. I pay tax when I
buy from Amazon. I.
A tax when I buy from Dillard's.
I pay. I'm not gonna give a list
of where I buy online, but I buy
most of my stuff online too, and
I do pay taxes. Why, why is, can
you address that?
Uh, thank you, uh.
Senator Trujillo and uh
Mr. Chair, the, uh, I am not an
expert in tax per se, but I
would think these taxes should
be applied online, not just the
regular sales tax, so I don't
think that's a a valid argument
and the kid laying on the
computer and seeing all of a
sudden it's gone up by 40%, you
know, they've got a certain
amount of discretionary income,
they'd probably rather have
other cool things online and so
I, I don't believe that that's a
a valid argument nor.
Mr. Chair, Senator, is the, the
CDC information, um, yes, we are
seeing a reduction in uh some of
the vaping but for the reasons I
stayed in the pouches are taking
the place and the issue is
nicotine itself, how reform it
comes in is addicting and sets
him up for greater potential for
addiction to other substances in
life. That's what we're dealing
with here are our children.
Thank you. Thank you, thank you,
um, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Senator.
Not ache.
You.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, thank you
for the opportunity this
morning, um.
I've got a question.
On, uh, elasticity.
That is stated in the, the, uh
If my heart
And
First, uh, maybe we're talk
about what, what the definition
of elasticity is, Mr. Chair, and
if, if you would please comment
on that just a minute.
On what, what does elasticity
measure.
Thank you, Senator Woods and
chair, um, I have uh Brendan
Gray here with me, and I'm going
to, uh, he's an economist and
that's in uh a word that comes
out of that lexicon, so I'm
gonna have him answer that
question. Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, my name is Brendan Gray. I'm
an economist at LFC. Just want
to preface that I'm not here
testifying in support or
opposition to the bill, but just
to provide technical um
Answer technical questions, uh,
to your question, elasticity
very simply, uh, when the price
of something goes up, uh,
relative to the prices of
everything else and the price of
something goes up.
On average, consumers consume
less of that.
Um, and what price elasticity
measures is the magnitude of
that relationship.
So for some goods
Uh, the elasticity is more.
as the price goes up,
consumption decreases more.
Uh, for some goods, it's uh
lower.
Um, and, uh
So, so the question is, Mr.
Chair.
And, and my friend.
Tell me what happens,
we have here in this analysis
the last is the a minus 0.05. So
what happens when the price goes
up $1 how much should we reduce
sales.
Mr. Chair, sender, um, great
question. So price elasticity of
0.05 5%, 10% increase, um.
0.05%, excuse me, 10% increase
in the price will reduce
consumption by less than 1%. And
so that to your question, what's
the dollar gonna do? Um, if it
was, um, if the price before was
$10 it increases by $1 10% price
increase. Uh, it's gonna be 5.
The consumption decrease would
be uh by 0.5%. Yeah, about.
405.
percent decrease. In other
words,
It's this represents what Doctor
Hickey is saying.
That nicotine is so addictive
that the price don't make a hell
of a lot of difference because
it is so addictive, you're gonna
pay whatever it takes to get the
product only, only a very small
percent.
Will this affect as far as the
people that go out and buy it.
So
The concept of, of sin taxes.
is to try to change behavior.
But the elasticity of the
product makes it such that price
is not what's going to affect
the
The
Affected as much as you would
think so.
If the goal of the legislation
is to reduce consumption.
We're probably gonna go to more
of a black market situation that
we are.
I mean
Sure, you're gonna get some
people that can't afford to go,
don't have the means, they're
gonna scrape up another few
pennies and buy whatever the
product is.
So I, I just wanted to bring
that out, Mr. Chair, uh.
For all the great attentions
that you got, sir, but I, I
can't support the bill for, for
that reason that
It's really a punishment of the
very lowest of the low, which,
yeah, we should.
You know, ideally we would
outlaw the product.
We would just say no more
nicotine for sale in New Mexico.
Ideally, if we wanted to
To curb the use, we would do it
that way.
But trying to curb the use of
price.
Who, you know, we, as all of you
know,
You can go to the reservation.
And buy cigarettes now.
And not pay any tax on it.
So
There's too many, there's too
many other options for this to
work.
So I've got, oh, I'm sorry, sir,
Mr.
uh, I yield to Senator Hickey
for sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, uh, Senator Woods, um, to
start with the reservation, they
do put taxes on them. I mean,
they basically keep them below
what they'd have to pay on a
retail, but there's still not
just selling them for the
wholesale price, um, they are
also getting significant revenue
on that, uh, again, this is and
what we know from multiple other
states who have low sale price
ranges in this that the uptake,
the uptake before they really
get addicted.
is much lower, so we're, we're
trying to prevent the uptake and
the generation of this addiction
pathway in the brain. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and senator.
I understand now more of what
you're saying you're trying to
keep people from ever starting.
But it's more of a in my eyes,
it's more of a, a psychological
deal of that I've got to be
cool.
You know, if the cool guys are
doing it, I've got to be cool
and it's hard for me to even
accept that. I understand where
you're coming from. If, if
people actually voted.
Or, you know, with their, with
their dollars.
They would say, you know,
logically this is bad for your
health, and I vote not to do
that.
But they don't they especially
the very young, they're they're
invincible. They're gonna live
forever, they're, you know,
that's how we get them to join
the armed service, you know.
We tell them they're invincible
and
So anyway, I, I thank you for
bringing the bill forward. Thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr. Chair, if I could,
I misspoke earlier, um.
Your question, a 10% increase in
the price will reduce
consumption by 0.5%, so 0.5%. I
said 0.5%, just one.
I was right.
Senator Steinborn.
You
Mr. Chair and Senator, thank you
for bringing the bill forward.
I, I have a question on this
question ofasticity, is it, does
the statistic?
Deal population-wide or does it
break it down by age.
Mr. Chair, Senator, great
question here at the heart of
the issue. Uh, this is a
population-wide on average there
are estimates for age group or
um the length of use, uh, but
this is just population OK. Mr.
Chairman, you know, I was a
smoker when I was in my
twenties. And absolutely, I quit
because of price, because young
people have less disposable
income.
I think I, I would just wager to
guess the elasticity number
looks different when you're
talking about someone in their
early twenties then.
Somebody in their 30s or 40s. So
I mean, I, I experienced that
personally, um.
And yeah, I mean, I, I think uh.
So I support the bill because I,
I view this as a public health
measure. I view this as one of
the most effective tools we have
to keep people from using these
products and
You know, having a totally
horrible life with pulmonary
problems, and then, you know,
ironically, it's, it's, in some
cases, it's a big unfunded
mandate to the state because,
you know, half the states on
Medicaid and you end up with
those kinds of serious health
issues. Um,
Actually everybody else who can
end up paying for that.
But, um,
Yeah, I, I support it for those
reasons, and I want to keep
people from smoking in the first
place or using these products,
and I would also add Mr. Carre
doing a little research, I was
googling, you know, the decrease
over the last few years, which
is a good thing. I think it's
been driven by a lot of public
health campaigns seemingly, but
it's
It can be short-lived. I mean,
these, these products are very
addictive. It's where the profit
is for tobacco companies.
They're moving there. Now we're
just talking about all the other
budget cuts, all the other
layoffs. I don't know why we
wouldn't expect to maybe see
reductions in our federal
efforts to do.
You know, these kinds of public
information campaigns. So it's a
fight that we continue and even
though those numbers are falling
down, which is great. Is it long
lasting? We don't know. We still
need other tools to bring it
down further.
And so I think this is an
important one and
So. Appreciate the bell. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
gentlemen for coming in and
In defending this, if we
If you go to page 5 of the bill.
Online 10 through 14.
It, it's talking about the
nicotine, whether it's natural
or synthetic.
Um, human consumption is likely
to be
Anything that is likely to be
consumed, whether it's smoked,
heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, or inhaled.
Who was the one gentleman had
kind of brought up.
You know, we have patches,
nicotine patches, we have, uh,
nicotine gum and things like
that, trying to help these folks
get off of this drug, how
How would that play into that?
It sounds like that would then
become illegal.
Mr. Chair and Senator Lannier,
thank you for that, uh,
important question. The um
Uh
The, the quitting through the
use of of the pouches and and
the patches, uh, as you brought
up, uh, they are uh people who
seriously want to quit can go to
the new PAC program within the
Department of Health and get
those pouches and patches for a
quitting. Um also in Medicaid,
they have a similar program
where they can get those for
acquitting, but they're also
engaged in a uh
Interactive engage they're
engaged in interactive program,
which uh is any of us change our
habits, we also need to uh
Us in order to make the uh the
use of the pouches and the slow
degradation, um, my, my children
have gone through those programs
and they've been very effective,
but they're very effective, not
just kind of when bought by
themselves, but when people
engage in a program and there's
interaction and connection.
Mr. Chair, thank you, Senator
Hickey, and
But she didn't answer my
question. Would that still fall
under the tax.
So with those, those
organizations, the healthcare,
whoever it would be, are they
gonna fall underneath that tax.
No, those, uh, those pouches,
uh, and, uh.
And patches are supplied to
those individuals to help them
to quit in a very specified
program of degradation or I'm
sorry, decreasing over time, but
Mr. Chair, isn't that
It still considered nicotine.
But that is not a free product.
Correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
Mm
Uh, excuse me, um, senator and
and Mr. Chair, my expert tells
me that, uh, these products that
are FDA approved, like the Zen,
they are exempt from these
taxes.
To
To be used in programs like the
quitting programs that I
described.
OK, Mr. Chair, so I'll, I'll
direct you back to page 5.
Lind 10 through 15 or 10 through
13.
Product other than cigarettes.
Made for or containing tobacco,
nicotine whether natural or
synthetic.
That is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be
consumed, whether it's smoked.
Heated chewed, absorbed.
Dissolved or inhaled.
Wouldn't that all fall under
this?
They do, but if you read
Uh, section 2, just below that.
Mr. uh, Mr. Chair and senator.
Does not mean a product
regulated as a drug or device by
the United States Food and Drug
Administration pursuant to the
FDA cosmetic that.
So those would not be cut, they
would not be taxed, correct.
Mm
OK.
I think I think that's gonna be
a loophole in, in the law.
Uh, Mr. Chair, so let's shift
now, that was kind of the adult
part of it.
Um, let's shift to the, the
youth, um, because as you know,
I, I taught in school and I
chased many kids out of the
bathroom with tobacco and
cigarettes and fire alarms going
off and all kinds of good stuff.
And before I left, we did have
the, the vaping that was, that
was coming and I, you know, I
think that the kids are gonna
find a way.
To do some of these things if
they want.
But this
This, um, tax hike.
Who, when these kids are
purchasing this.
Who, who's going to pay?
For that tax.
In other words, we already have
it illegal for underage to
purchase this stuff.
Yeah, we don't, we don't really
stop it anyway. So how, how is
this going to affect that.
Mr. Chair and senator, uh,
Even though it is illegal. There
are a lot of
Smoke shops, what have you, who
still sell to underage.
And do not check their licenses
and they probably know among
themselves who that who who
those are, uh, one of the things
I'll bring next year will be
funding to be able to support
the
What are called undercover kind
of sting operations where uh the
police have a, a you go in
underage where they know there's
a particular place and uh that's
how they get caught and with
that they there are progressive,
uh,
Penalties that that align with
that. Um, the other is that they
have there are people who are
over 21 who go and buy it for
them, and they collect the full
amount of what they're buying
and probably I'm assuming some
sort of tip to go on top of it.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so
would you agree that maybe,
maybe we ought to be increasing
the penalties, not only the
penalties for those that sell,
but uh maybe even the parents,
the parents that are letting
these youths.
Do this. Maybe we ought to,
maybe we ought to put some.
Penalties on them. What do you
think?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Lanier, um, first I forgot to
thank you for chasing all those
people out of the bathrooms with
cigarettes. It worked, um,
because cigarette use went down
dramatically. So thank you for
your service in that, um,
secondly, uh, in order not to
complicate this bill. I did have
in previous bills, money that
would go for enforcement. I will
bring enforcement propositions
next year to uh the legislature.
Or the year after, um, because I
agree, we, we just very sparsely
enforce this, and we need to do
much more, and I thank you for
that suggestion.
So, Mr. Chair, you would, you
would agree with me that
Parents might have a role in
this.
Just like the person at at
Allsps that's selling it across
the counter.
Uh, Mr. Chair and senator, um,
parents are involved, uh,
hopefully a lot in their
children's lives and um my mom
used to uh smell my breath when
I came home cause I smoked as a
teenager and, and, you know, I
get what for, um, I would hope
that uh uh the nicotine that
that comes in pouches doesn't
probably smell, uh, unless it
and flavors, but anyway, I, yes,
I think parents should be
involved, you know, to, to what
degree, um, I'm, I'm not gonna
be in local parentis for the
parents. Thank you, sir.
All right, thank you and Mr.
Chair. So you had mentioned that
this was, you consider this a
pathway tobacco to be a pathway
drug to what?
Mr. Chair and senator, um.
The previous uh CEO of UNM
Health Sciences Center, Doctor
Zadonis, um,
It was a psychiatrist in an
addictionologist, and he, uh,
taught at UCLA, um, Yale, uh,
uh, UC San Diego, uh, was well
known for his expertise in this
area, and he once testified
before our committee a few years
ago, the tax oversight committee
and went through how nicotine
helps it when, when
Someone is young and stressed. I
mean, we all try to avoid
stress. We all have different
strategies, but having nicotine,
which is an addicting substance
that actually makes you feel
better for a little while, but
in aggregate over time is
actually known as a depressant,
um, when chronically used, but
anyway, that helps build the
neurochemical pathway in the
mind called the craving pathway
and some of us have more of it
and some of us have.
of it, but it plays a huge role
in all addictions and when
you're training that pathway,
uh, and if you have more of it
than than others do, then you're
really beginning to build it as
a way that to use external
substances that give you a
certain better feeling for the
moment, and then that progresses
into alcohol and that progresses
into other drugs.
So, Mr. Chair, alcohol and what
other drug?
In any um of the uh
Benzodiazepines, opioids, etc. I
mean, it's, it's, it's dealer's
choice after you get going and
um I often have said as most of
the people know, I have 2
children whose dealer's choice
was uh uh alcohol and then
cocaine.
OK.
So would, would it be fair to
say that you're kind of talking
about marijuana.
Mr. Chair
Would that be
Would tobacco be a gateway into
marijuana.
Mr. Chair and and Senator
Lanier, I, uh I would have to
speculate at this point, but I
believe that there is some
literature evolving that some
small percentage of marijuana
users are getting quote addicted
to it.
OK.
And Mr. Chair, so I, I looked
through the bill and uh
And I don't see marijuana
attacks on here.
Why wouldn't we be uh
Cause it still smoke.
It's still gonna have secondhand
issues.
I mean, you can't walk through
Santa Fe without smelling it.
So, you know, why, why isn't,
why isn't marijuana included in
this tax, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator, um, and perhaps I defer
to Senator Trujillo, but uh this
bill is not about marijuana.
This is about nicotine and to
the best of my knowledge, there
is essentially no nicotine in
marijuana.
OK.
But if it's a gateway drug,
tobacco is a gateway drug.
To
Marijuana, why, why wouldn't we
go ahead and include it in here.
And, and go ahead and let's
raise the taxes on marijuana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator, uh, this bill is about
nicotine and its newest forms in
particular. OK.
Mr. Chair, I, in just a few more
questions. If, if we talk about
the economic part of this.
You know, I, we are a border
state.
We have Arizona, Texas,
Oklahoma, I mean.
Colorado
if, if we increase our taxes so
much, they're just gonna go
across the border and buy this.
Um, I would say in some cases,
that's already going on.
If
Even the tribes, like in my
area, you, you could, you're
gonna go and buy tobacco just
like you do gasoline, you're
gonna go wherever it's the
cheapest to buy it, so aren't
economically we driving.
Out.
that moneys
Mr. Chair and and senator,
there's always that potential
for the really border areas, but
driving costs money, so that's
another tax on this tax, and so
the kids are spending their
money on driving, they probably
uh would not want to do that,
but other any other uh answer
here would be purely speculation
on my part, but, but, but again,
they're going to spend money to
to drive long distances to get
the stuff. Well, and Mr. Chair,
um.
Senator Hickey, I can, I can
tell you in color in, in my neck
of the woods.
Um
They get a, a group of them, and
they get one part and they go up
there and buy as much as they
can get.
And then they come right back to
that high school.
And they start their own black
market.
They start selling it.
Cheaper, even though they drive,
they can sell it cheaper in that
school, then they can.
By going down
to also.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, and senator,
uh, that, that could very well
be. I can't remember off the top
of my head of Arizona, Colorado,
Utah, uh, have similar taxes,
uh.
Again, I in Texas, I'm just
assuming is, is lower, but, um,
again, that's a
All, all that is a possibility,
but the, but this is applying uh
To
The entire population of the
state, um,
And uh it as we know from
cigarettes, it, it will
definitely have an impact, so
even though they, they may do
what you're saying, um, this is
still going to have a
significant impact and that's
why I keep bringing it back
every year. I, you know, the,
we're doing this great behavior
health bill, but at the same
time, if we don't do this tax,
we're not changing some
behaviors that come out to be um
deteriorating behaviors for
their wellbeing.
and the rest of their life. So
this is really starting right at
the beginning, as by calls the
chain reaction.
Thank you. All right, and just
in closing, Mr. Chair, you know,
I just, I don't think that
raising taxes is, is gonna have
the effect that, that you think
it's going to have. I mean, you
know, we can.
We can go around the United
States and look at different
things, you know, where they've
I think it was New York wouldn't
even let you buy a big gulp.
Uh, carbonated drink, you know,
and, and people are just gonna
find a way around.
And you know, if, if you're that
passionate about this, I really,
I really think maybe we ought to
look at just making tobacco
illegal completely.
And
And just uh make our economic
Folks in are addicted, make them
cross that border and and go buy
that somewhere else.
So, but I appreciate you guys
coming in today and for all the
answers, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I will tell you what, you
know what the reason number one
reason kids have it big IDs
coming from China and nobody can
tell the difference, very simple
to duplicate, they can go in any
bar in any store, scan it and
buy whatever they want in trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward. I just want to
clarify that the cannabis you
called on me, so I feel like I
have to respond, um, the
cannabis excise tax is currently
at 12% plus the GRT. So when you
buy cannabis, you pay the GRT
plus you pay an additional 12%
for the cannabis excise tax, and
that's slated to go up to 18% by
July 1st of 2030 in 1%
increments every year starting
July.
1st of this year. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Not high enough, Senator
Tobiasson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, so my
understanding is that alcohol
consumption nationwide in both
adults and teens is down and
continues to decline as well as
um certain drugs and with
vaping, we've dropped, I think
just over 2% in the last year or
two with team use. So if you
increase the tax, I think what
we look at one, someone
mentioned that our poorest
people in the state.
Maybe have a propensity to use
more of these products than
others, so we're hurting low
income people, um, and I
personally know several people,
teenagers and adults who have
used some of these nicotine
alternative nicotine products to
quit smoking and to continue to
decline their use or dependency
upon nicotine products. Um, so I
think that these alternative
products in some ways with some
people, um.
Can really help in their
situation. Um, I wasn't aware of
some of the programs available
to people, but I know people who
haven't used those programs who
have um stopped using nicotine
over the course of a reasonable
amount of time because of these
alternative products, um, and
what we've seen in, in cannabis
is we have taxes on cannabis,
but all it did was create a
larger black market, um, where
they went and dropped rates.
Significantly to attract
customers and I don't see where
this would do anything other
than
Potentially the same. I mean I
think we do have questions with
the tribal lands with our border
states, um,
And I just don't think that this
is a solution. I think if you
really wanted to, I'm not saying
you don't want to. I appreciate
what you're trying to do. I just
don't agree with the methodology
to get there, which would be
more education both with teams,
more education, um, with adults
and
You know, looking at the family
unit and seeing how do we help
them all understand what these
products mean in their lives,
um, no matter what their ages
are. So for that reason, I, I
don't support the way this bill
is written. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. You, you know,
if we're
like.
Those are the pouches, right?
Where you
There's the snuff, right? I
learned this in military school
and became a habit, right? And
then it became addictive, and
that's the problem, it becomes
addictive for me, right? I don't
know how many times and they can
call the cops now or do whatever
they want. I beat my kids when
they caught them baby, right?
Cause it changes their mental.
It changes them mentally, I
could see it.
And I don't like it. I hate it.
It's
For kids, it's very bad. Adults
can make their own decision,
right?
But we're not gonna be able to
tax our way into
In changing people's behavior.
I mean, you have to have
penalties in there, like, if you
get caught with this stuff when
you're under 18, you lose your
driver's license, period.
They can make their mind an
adult if they want to do
something.
And that's the way it was with
marijuana. I used to go to jail
for it, right?
He had 2 or 3 joints and I
didn't smoke marijuana, but my
friends did, and a couple of
them went to jail over it,
right?
That's how you're gonna change
behavior in youth, right? And
that's how you change.
The more the amount of marketing
they do to you and how they
market youth, right?
You go to European country, I
think there's a skull and
crossbones on each and every one
of these, right? And any tobacco
product is a skull and
crossbones, it says it's gonna
kill you.
And
And so I don't know when the US,
I thought they had changed some
of that, but it's interesting
reading the back of the bait.
Vape labeling, right?
This product can expose you to
nicotine. Well, it does, not
can.
Uh, which is known in the state
of California to cause birth
detects and other preventive
harm. For more information, go
to P65.gov. Keep away from
children and pets.
So don't want your pet to die.
Don't let him get into your
bait.
Very interesting. Keep away from
children and pets, right? This
is their labeling, not mine.
This product may cause
reproductive harm. It's not
intended for pregnant women.
This product is intended for use
or sale to individuals.
Under, under the legal age
limit.
In their respective states.
Should it be over the legal age
limit?
I mean that you, you gave this
to everybody in the committee
says under the legal age limit.
I don't know who sells this
product.
don't even know where to look
for the, that's and you read a
label it's very interesting
under the legal, it's intended
for under the legal age limit.
That's their intention, right?
But taxines is not gonna get out
of it. I mean,
I don't know how many times we
caught my kids with fake IDs,
right?
And what were they doing fake
IDs?
They could get beer from Daddy's
fridge, but they, they had to
get vaped somewhere else.
And that's what they were doing,
I mean.
the market for fake IDs is so
it's uncanny to me, right?
And my son and my godson both
got fake IDs and uh the, the my
My uh friend, his mom, the
godson's mom called me and said,
you better be on the lookout
because my son just got a fake
ID in the mail and I caught it.
So landing with my other son was
probably getting one too at the
same time, but it wasn't alcohol
they were trying to buy. It's,
it's interesting to me that
teens now don't really drink a
lot of alcohol.
They, they've lost their
interest in that and they've
moved off to other things and I
don't really know if a lot of
smoke weed or not anymore, I
don't know because this you can
get this in the vape shop with
weed in it.
And, uh, but every time I see
one of these in my kids's
vehicles, I just throw them
away.
And they're gonna go spend the
money to replace them, that's
their problem, not mine.
I don't think Taxi Miss is gonna
get out of there. I mean, if, if
you raise the, the tax on this
to 200%, I'd still vote for it.
I really don't care.
Right
You kill my pet.
A pet goat.
Uh,
and, and so I, I really don't
care about the vaping. I, I'm
addicted to nicotine because I
learned it at an early age,
right, and never could really
give it up. It was
in the groups I ran with, I
don't buy any of these products.
Within the boundaries of the
state of New Mexico.
I stopped at Dancing Eagle, it's
costing me a quarter of what it
costs anywhere else, right?
And I buy it a lot cheaper, put
it in the freezer, it lasts
forever.
Don't really have problems my
addiction, it's my choice,
right? For youth, it's a little
different for me, right? Don't
get him started cause that's
where you're gonna get hooked,
that's where I go to military
school, and it was on day's
work, which is an old plug that
was pretty much tar.
And pretty strong.
And that's where I got hooked
and then these came along, every
kid is hooked on these, they're
not hooked on Copenhagen to
school and stuff anymore.
They're they're hooked on every
MSU lobbyist is hooked on these
two. And and so.
They're hooked on these.
Because
That's the cliche thing to do
right now if you want to do it.
So you can raise the tax, you
can double this tax, I still
vote for it.
But it's not going to change
their behavior.
To change their behavior with
penalties.
Lose your license, right?
You get cited in court, you have
to do.
Community service work, I mean.
You'd probably kill kids today
if they had to go pick up trash
and cut weeds across the state
as part of community service,
they'd probably call it a
violation of human rights or
something.
But
That's the way you're gonna
change your behavior out.
You're not gonna stop me because
whatever attacks you raise, the
reservation is gonna raise it
just a little bit.
To be still be lower, and I'll
still stop in Dancing Eagle and
get a Dairy Queen in Copenhagen.
And a cup of coffee.
So you're not gonna change that.
Um, so,
Senator, that was just my
comments. Don't make any
comments back unless you want us
to roll this bill over Senator
Steinborn, you have a.
And motion for a due pass. Do we
have a second?
Senator 2.
Cara.
2
OK.
Senator Brent, Senator Brandt
votes no. Senator Campos.
Senator Campos votes no. Senator
Gonzalez.
Senator Gonzalez votes yes.
Senator Lanier. Senator Lanier
votes no. Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla votes yes,
Senator Steinborn. Senator
Steinborn votes yes, Senator
Tobiasson. No.
Senator Tobiasson votes no
Senator Trujillo. Senator
Trujilloolsia, Senator Woods.
Senator Wood's boatsow, Senator
Sendo, Senator Shendo votes yes,
Senator Munoz.
Yes, Senator votes yes, we have
a due past 6 in the affirmative,
5 in the negative.
We're gonna, we're not gonna do
that next bill mine that water
bill. It's quick, it can be done
pretty quickly. So we set up
some subcommittees and as we
move forward and start hearing
these.
We set up a language
subcommittee center compost and
Senator Steinborn, you may want
to hear this.
Um
Language subcommittee and that's
to review language and styling,
uh, constitutionality
provisions, concerns and
adjustments and, uh, bars, uh,
Senator Campos, you're gonna to
chair that committee, Senator
Tobias and Senator Hillier on
that committee. Non-reoccurring
subcommittees um inos, Brant,
and Padilla.
Review special supplementals and
deficiencies, C2, which is all
the technology section 9, which
is multiple years of pilots and
review fund transfers, um, and
the goal.
purpose solutions to members.
So to flag those.
The Capitol Subcommittee Senator
Shindo, Senator Gonzalez,
Senator Lanier, Senator
Steinborn, Senator Wood, uh,
finalized statewide cap outlay
perimeters, complete funding for
regional projects, prioritize
gaps to complete lending in
smaller projects and prioritize
projects and advanced public
safety and health, uh, ensure
tribal considerations are made
when the funding regional
projects are done, um, so that's
a capital subcommittee, Adrian
will start pulling you into.
the office and start reviewing
this and before we come out and
do it, show you the exact
recommendations they came down
with just so people know.
The exec came down with another
80 million in reoccurring, still
didn't fix the, fix the SCG
problem, uh, and 440 million in
non-reoccurring specials, and so
that'll take a lot of time for
us to go through and then the
Rios, I'll I'll take a while for
us to go through too, so.
Any questions everybody not like
their committee, anybody want on
another committee.
needs the chairs.
The chair.
Yeah, let me, let me help you
today. Maybe I'll put you in a
better mood.
You want to kill your dog.
Ser name, boy.
want to go to another and sit on
it to do so.
They can go, yeah, but we're
gonna, we're gonna a lot to move
in in special supplementals and
language. There's a lot of
movement in there and so we need
to really start tightening some
of that down as we move forward.
There's language that came over
that they proposed in the house
and got on in the house and now
they have new language and so
they're gonna try to play us on
both sides of the fence, and I
don't think that's fair to us if
they got what they wanted
somewhere else, they should not
be asking for it over here.
And so that's the same thing is
gonna happen in all those
committees, so capital and the
non-reoccurring or just are
gonna be crazy, so.
OK.
We're not adding language, we're
reducing language.
Yep.
Where
Uh, Adrian's gonna pull you in
sometime in maybe tomorrow I
start pulling you out of
committee tomorrow and start
going over the stuff that he
that we have racked up and so
that would give you a good
starting point, OK?
They compost you.
