Anybody in opposition.
They are here in support.
Voted for.
Supporters in our students into
the into the.
Those questions and questions
from committee members we do
pass.
The not so we don't have our we
have our secretary.
Hello a motion for do pass by
Senator this second by Senator
sure.
Well.
Secretary sheriff.
Where do not a do pass motion.
Get thrown in the wrong location
okay anybody in.
Senator is accused.
Senator Campos excuse.
Senator Diamond yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Gonzales yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Hemphill yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator Padilla.
Senator Padilla yes Senator
share yes employment both.
Senator sure yes and Senator
Steinborn is excused.
Sure would.
Senator Woods yes.
Senator Rodriguez is excused.
Senator Williams yes Senator
then yes yes that is seven yes
and for excuse thank you madam
pro tem Senator sure you an
explain your vote I just I I
think I need an education bill
on the floor soon because I have
a point that I have to use with
you Madam pro tem you're gonna
love it.
I'll be ready.
You can read that during your
Sunday lunch.
It
would.
Now.
Senator Kernan you want to just
have Senator Stewart state and.
Okay Justin thank you madam
chair members of committee there
is a an amendment that was
proposed by the committee I
believe so dust passing that
out.
It's a technical fix and removes
the appropriation and all we're
good with that.
So Mister chair I move a of
thank you madam once the bill
first of all I'm sorry Mr chair
members of the committee so I'm
here today to
present Senate tax business and
transportation committee section
for Senate bill one thirty
seven.
Can I have an expert witness
thank you for W..
Going to substitute thank you.
With that Mr chairman members of
the committee the substate
basically removes the
appropriation it also
The talks about the manner in
which the local government
division of the department of
finance and administration will
administer this and changes the
effective date means to talk
Tober first twenty twenty two to
give TRD an opportunity to kind
of set everything up.
Is the amendment yes that's what
we wanted the amendment I'm
sorry did you say one the bill
in the mail.
Okay here we go so
I'm gonna cut a little bit short
of the last few months we've
determined that house bill
six in twenty nineteen has
created a bit of a problem
related to destination based
sourcing for some communities
and municipalities that we
didn't catch that during that
debate a couple years ago and so
we have determined that
it creates of this particular
bill creates they destination by
sourcing safety net fund that
provides two years of support
for cities that lost revenue due
to the impacts of destination
based sourcing and are unable to
make that those losses to other
growth in in the G. R. T. tax
base Susan had your tea revenue
losses that at least ten percent
during the first half of FY
twenty two as compared to the
first half of twenty the bank
sure would receive payment
cities could receive payments
for six months for six month
period beginning in FY twenty
two payments from the I hop
temporary would help affected
cities avoid unnecessary and
damaging cuts to budgets in
critical services in this does
include an appropriation
that can be used.
So I'm of that age I just
briefly kind of wrap it up and
tell you kind of why we need to
do this.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee aged forty of the
municipally.
It'll close to the Mike this
this bill originally started
with Senator Kernan months ago
learning the unintended
consequences of house bill six
destination sources.
One of the pieces that we did
not think of at the time with
the consolidation of service
companies in a few of our cities
mainly Carlsbad and Hobbs having
that consolidation of service
companies because they get no
revenue.
Based on destination sources
close the house all of those
companies but those companies do
the work in the counties so the
five point one two five is
charged.
That goes entirely now to the
state no local distribution
stays at the point of sale the
business location when the work
is done in the counties the
counties keep their local
increments but nothing to the
local governments so what we see
with Colvin Hobbs in the first
six months Carlsbad is down
eight point eight million
dollars.
There G. R. T. budget for the
year is fifty million.
So this is this is real now for
Carlsbad and Hobbs we will have
to make dramatic decreases to
their spending to their
services.
What this bill does is it
creates a safety net act so the
any minister palatini local
government harmed by destination
sourcing.
Will at least give them a
lifeline the bridge until we can
come back with the permanent
solution one of the most
important parts of this bill is
data.
None of our municipalities.
Know where the money's coming
from when we did this we just
have G. R. T. that's the bucket
gets dropped into we don't know
if it's internet G. R. T. G. R.
T. what did we make from
destination sourcing or lose
from destination sourcing and if
we can't see it members you all
can't see it so this gives an
appropriation to tax and
Representative it gives them
time in the amendment to get
those codes implement.
Thank you senator and one of the
many many on the minutes.
Nobody.
Opposition.
Anybody in the audience and
support.
Many against.
We have an amendment on your
bills.
Mr chair I move of committee
amendment number one to Senate
bill one thirty seventh for
discussions.
Question.
On the amendment to include.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Kernan Sir Senator share
also so on the striking of the
appropriation how is the fifty
million dollars or where's the
money going to come from then to
make this work for this one
community thank you Mr chair and
senator and it's my
understanding that there is
smaller amount that has been
placed in house bill two.
And I would do we know what that
is madam that Mr chair Senator
there's ten million placing
House Bill to for this.
So then is this the only
community where this is going to
or or weeds this is something
that is available to all
communities that might have had
the same thing happened to them
yes Mr chair Senator this is
available to any local
government that ultimately loses
money due to destination
sourcing and Mr chair Senator
it's not a hundred percent
replacement either so if a
community loses ten million but
makes up to from other sources
from compensating tax or
internet sales we only back fill
that net net loss not the gross
and so that's what I'm asking I
mean that's ten million dollars
doesn't seem to what what's the
total amount that this is
costing municipalities and.
Fifty million from the one to to
fund.
So Mr chair Senator when we
originally the original
iteration of the bill was
focused around the local
distribution so we have the five
point twenty five percent but
you have one two two five local
distribution that now goes to
the general fund so in in the in
the FY twenty session right
there was language in the FIR
the said local governments will
lose money but there was never
dollar amount put on on the
original iteration of the bill
is up to fifty two million
dollars a year that comes from
local governments but now goes
to the general fund so that's
why we we put the fifty million
dollar number in there.
What do you do you to your
question Senator.
We don't know how much
ultimately will be lost we know
we have limited data right this
for six months being eight point
eight million.
For Carlsbad about eight million
for Hobbs so it's significant so
Mr Chairman just add on to that
the reason that we are.
Certain that the losses due to
the the destination is because
the local government the the CFO
or the financial person in
Carlsbad and Hobbs have both
participated in the
confidentiality it from program
where they can look very deeply
at tax revenues they know that
these businesses that are we're
reporting to the city are now
being forced report to the
county because that's where the
services are so they're very
knowledgeable about the amount
of losses that is occurring due
to this but you're right this is
not enough money but it is open
to any municipality that that
does have this issue.
That Mr chairman I want to help
you I want to help you solve
this I think this is a huge gap
for a community like yours but
I'm just worried that Michael
what we really gonna do here I
mean we're not going to help.
The other problem with that the
forty four million dollar hole
all over the state I mean what
so why would we strike to fifty
million do we not have anywhere
else what's what's the deal as
they say in the south.
So Mister chairman Senator are
you but I think I hear you
saying is that ten million won't
cover the the problem that won't
based on what Mr Stewart said
and based on what you said and
want one community's going to
eat up almost all of this ten
million dollars overnight.
Prone etcetera etcetera Kernan
center project when they did the
one point two two that's the
total of the fifty million
dollars we're just figuring out
offset for that's correct really
to communities that that really
lost that and so what really
should happen.
You destination are you Sir do
services those companies should
always Roadrunner reported that
money whatever the services
provided they just did it in one
place because it's probably
easier for the company and so
when we change destination
sourcing them that abide by the
law which was probably current
law and now that's what affected
that but the one point two two
that we captured in twenty
twenty is really the root cause
of that needs to be fixed and so
what may end up in another
lawsuit over this just settled
one for fifty million dollars
when we held the point five from
the unix and that was what forty
five million that we have so
for.
Mr chair fifty million and so
we're in the same situation
again and I guess for really
into tax reform next year this
is the one we have to fix things
everywhere when they poke holes.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and I I you know with
respectfully we say since I've
been here you know for ten years
we're gonna do the tax the
reason spent four hundred
thousand dollars when you we
know that will start.
Now I'm concerned are we only
doing this for one year or with
the ten million the how are we
going to solve this fifty two
million dollars issue until we
go through the quote on quote
tax reform exercise because I'm
very concerned that we're gonna
be right back here again in this
community is going to have some
other issues once oil and gas
whatever starts happening there.
I don't know what we're really
doing here for ten million
dollars I mean.
You get forty four million
dollar gap.
The remains even after that ten
million Mr Chairman center we
agree we see that in the data in
in.
I
think that every local
government is eligible for this
but when we did house bill six
it was a rebalancing of our tax
code in their winners and losers
in everything we do there always
is we know that.
In in the idea was by giving us
compensating tax by giving us
internet that it would offset
the losses that was the concept
that was the idea what we never
asked was what will happen with
communities that have a
consolidation of service
companies and that's why you see
Carlsbad and Hobbs being so
dramatically affected by this
and yes fifty million will not
be enough to solve their
problems like I said Carlsbad
fifty million dollar G. R. T.
for the year in their down eight
point eight.
That's what we we did feel
strongly that fifty million was
the right number ten that's just
based off of what the state is
making by taking are deluding
are one two two five because
these communities did not have
enough offset to back fill with
Mr Chairman so who's going to
determine who gets the ten
million I've I'm concerned that
you're gonna have some
communities very unhappy with
each other and we're all New
Mexicans here and I really want
to help you solve this by one do
it the right way.
Do we have any capacity anyway I
don't know you know to Senator
Padilla I guess let's get that
amendment and and then we can go
back to the mail on that and
then stretch the at the
appropriation Mr chairman that's
what I'm asking the questions.
And so.
How how we resolve the right now
I mean.
Can I can sure Mr chairman
canopy top five under contract
with municipally
the bill.
Find of these allocations you
have to apply to the local
government division of the FAA
on a six monthly basis and it
does have language that says if
the money is in the fund is
insufficient to meet.
that the allocation amount that
they verified that that will be
pro rated based on total
amounts.
So you might get twenty cents on
the dollar or thirty cents on
the dollar you might show.
Local government division KFA
the nature of the appropriation
allocation gift from included
some it's not the.
I think it's just pollution is
just one more this is more for
you Mr chairman I think why are
I mean I don't know how you feel
I'm assuming you are supportive
of this amount I don't know but.
Why would we not give you a C.
at ten there can you have fifty
then suddenly you have enough
for one year to keep this.
Hello in these all of these
communities.
You know Senator will stop now
if you want to explain to my
feel bad for these towns and
cities I signed on this bill is
in our current and our goal was
we started to fix the one point
two to two and and then it went
into court for corporations in
tax and there was a push back to
resolve that and so that's where
the fifty thousand number came
out of an FIR was what the total
was and so when they admitted
that they said.
This came out of corporations
and transportation they said
well we need to book some money
we kind of books money and at
and the budget to see what was
gonna happen and so this is what
I came over with this will be
five ten million
and so that's kind of where
we're at the but as it went in
we were trying to fix the one
point two two that was pushed
back to corporations and so.
and so just one last thing Mr
who came up with the fifty two
total for for here I'm just
curious who did that analysis
where was that our people are
did you all do that are Mr chair
Senator originally we we had
estimated.
Fifty million dollars would at
least get our communities to the
next sixty day session that was
where the original fifty came
from which just happened to
coincide with the FIR on the on
the local distribution shift.
To the general fund is fifty two
million.
And that's a year.
The the twenty two I shifts to
the general fund.
All right thank you Mr chairman
thank you let me just one quick
question so we understand so
what are the cash balances in
these two cities.
Mr Chairman I cannot tell you
that.
Senator I'm one of the many.
So not on the amendment.
Then have a motion to adopt them
in person I'm sorry Senator
Gonzales and then we'll.
Have a motion to adopt the
hello.
Motion by Senator Gonzales to
stop the amendment Senator
shares second.
Any objection to the amendment.
C. ma'am sure everybody voting
yes one of your voting no on the
amendment I would like to see
this money stay there so they
can at least fix one year of
this problem coming active no
I'm sorry.
So Senator Padilla is voting no
on the amendment anybody else
wanting though when they met me.
Back on the bill Senator
Gonzales had his handout I'm
sorry understanding for you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So Senator this doesn't go down
to like the individual business
now it's just the count in the
municipality Mr chairman and
senator no this this does not
this is this is to help the
municipalities and the question
was asked about cash value or
cash reserves and I will tell
you Carlsbad is already
preparing to lay people off
Hobbs cannot fill positions that
were originally budgeted and we
do if you look at hops reserve
I'm sure it will be very high
because just like the state of
New Mexico we do this and we
learned many years ago if you
don't keep a reserve at one
level then you're in trouble and
we know that in about a year you
can eat at that reserve or even
sooner so we may have high cash
values today but they're not
going to be there after
destination thank sourcing eats
that cash balances Mr chairman
of.
Brief but let me walk you
through certain Ariel and the
and I guess what I'm looking at
we would have to do something
different.
So like in the within my
district there's a concrete
batching plant.
And they lost their tax because
it's where they delivered
correct so in order to assist
this.
Do something else right.
Mr Chairman and Senator it's my
understanding that if they need
a threshold that would be
eligible for this funding but
there's a certain threshold in
age I can probably speak speak
to that Mr chair Senator and
that's why when I talk house
bill six in the rebalancing most
of our communities came out as a
net positive because of internet
distribution and contacts right
through this re balancing the
majority.
Did make money but with New
Mexico one hundred six
municipalities on average does
not work every community is
different and now it's our
southeast corner of the state
that's different we have not
seen in the data the this is
widespread we've seen roughly
about a dozen local governments
that have been adversely
affected by destination
sourcing.
Very well thank you thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator and AJ good to see all
so you just answer the first
question I have which is how
many communities took a hit from
this using about a dozen so
thank so first off Mr chair
We're talking about you know the
struggles of crop and how's that
in reality all those doesn't
could apply that will dilute the
impact Carlsbad Hobbs so how
much of a solution we find in
those communities want to get
split up.
but I have other questions M. AJ
would you explain or you center
Mr chair about that fifty
million dollar lawsuit what that
was about the fires you right
the state we can understand that
Mr chair I would not be away I
would not be able to explain
that I'll leave that up to HM I
don't think it has anything to
do with this bill the Mr chair
Senator very very different
issues but just for for
background this ultimately
started with the seven one six
fifteen right take backs that's
the statutory site for the take
back if you back.
Gosh probably more than a decade
ago now the City of Eunice had a
major take back.
In a devastated community.
I'm sorry take back so when you
have a tax payer the demands of
return.
And they can amended return six
months two years down the road
and when they do that taxed
Representative can go in clawed
back money from the local
government so we have a city
like unis it's a very small city
state they get a million dollars
a month as far as their G. R. T.
if a large taxpayer commence
return for two million because
of negative distribution and so
throughout this process there
was an incorrect take backs
being done seven one six fifteen
was applied incorrectly by tax
and Rev for all cities it's
ultimately you had forty four
local governments file a lawsuit
spearheaded by the City of
Albuquerque the state you
applied seven one six fifteen in
correctly you need to fix that
in in in applied correctly
through the through the formula
give us our money back the
appropriate number so instead of
going back through the data on a
to the R. P. five hundred
monthly to figure out the exact
amount that local governments
should have been paid taxed
resultantly settled with only
the forty four municipalities
that filed the lawsuit so right
taxed Representative alternately
set the precedent that they'll
make it right.
The only file a lawsuit so it
was only the forty for the world
we made whole from the take back
issue not the remains.
Okay thank you Mr chair and
Janet you'd mentioned it's good
to see you again it you had
mentioned that there was a pro
rated clause in here and I just
look through the bill and I
don't really see it and I was
wondering if you would point
that out where that is in the
building number.
This is the provision and said
that communities would split up
the money.
I'm waiting for my question
another question Mr.
That.
Chairman.
On page.
The money in the fund is
insufficient.
All of that thank you all the
pro rated offline
municipalities.
Thank and so with that Mr chair
would that mean that the FAA
would.
Or taxed Representative they
would look at the total request
from the state and then they
split it up so that the.
Do it a request from the
municipality chair from the
administrative.
Get an allocation okay.
Yeah and they would split it up
twenty cents on the dollar and
thirty cents on the got it.
and so that's really good that
that money which is there and
then Mr chair for I guess I'm
just wondering if this is kind
of kind of a hold harmless in a
way.
That be fair to say this is a
hold harmless for this tax me
tax policy Mr chair Senator the.
The concept here it's it's.
Really what we're asking for.
Is that if the state.
Does something big like house
bill six in re balances the tax
code that we set the precedent
that when that is done we create
a safety net act and put that in
place for the no the unintended
consequences that we always talk
about let's at least put a
safety net in place to her the
folks that we didn't think about
so it gives us time to come back
and fix it it's not permanent
Michael harmless this is
something that gets gives us a
bridge to come back and come up
with a permanent solution based
on data.
Thank you AJ and I'm glad you
said that last thing because
that's the my next question is
which is is there a sunset in
here.
Which Mr chair Senator it's two
two years it's just a two year
safety net fund and it expires
at the end of two years
hopefully by that time that the
goal is we talk about data and
how important it is to know for
sure how this is impacting in in
this bill we direct TRD to
actually do
a coating change with Jen tax to
figure out exactly who is being
hard I don't think it'll just be
Hopson Carlsbad at the end of
the day and I think that that
opportunity in two years we're
going to know for sure and then
we can come back and try and
figure out if there is a fix to
this.
And.
Mr chair Senator it's.
The data pieces just that we all
get to see the data in
ultimately the policy makers get
to make data driven decisions
right now we don't know we can
go there very difficult process
through a pre tax and rent of
having our finance officers go
that confidentiality training to
see the confidential data.
Look for smaller city that's
doable for the larger cities
with thousands of businesses
it's impossible and when I say
if they can't see it you can't
see it you can't and we work.
With our technical staff with
your technical staff we all want
data we we would love to have
more data because and we can
give better recommendations we
just don't have it today you Mr
chair and senator I yes I see
where we spell out the
allocation for a few years but I
don't actually see a son that.
Per se is there a sense that in
here Mr Chairman alleged Janet
answer that question.
There is not a funds that the
state but it has specified that
there are only for payments for.
Here is out of the funds that
and
Thank you presumably the bill
would still stay in the law it
would it would and but Mister
chair I guess my concern is is
that we're sending an
expectation of a program that
will never and you know this
will be a new hold harmless.
And
And that's my concern you know
that we we make changes in tax
policy and.
The hold harmless and that was.
You know those are things that I
know that the state regretted
getting in the hold harmless
agreements on other issues and
so I wonder is this really going
to sunset in two years what will
they inevitably come back and
say okay now we need
replenishment and go on forever
so I know that there are other
concerns Mr chair I'll just say
on the record for about lawsuits
and the state being sued and
does this make it harder for
businesses to then do their tax
returns and a lot of concern out
there so I I do have concerns
and I can and yet I can
sympathize with the request the
same time so I I guess so this
this is a debate for more thanks
Mr.
Any other questions from
committee members.
I just you know we booked four
hundred million in the tax
package that's why the fifty was
was done in here I mean we've
got to fix the problems of
unintended consequences that we
have throughout New Mexico.
Gallup and the whole harmless
right they're getting.
Pretty hard and so Santa Fe with
the old harmless to and I don't
know when the legislature can
decide that they really need to
do tax reform if they want to do
G. R. T. this year.
It really doesn't make a lot of
sense when we're gonna try to do
major tax reform next year we
should save that money for on
intensive corn consequences in
the safety net and plan ahead of
the there's too much money out
there people have too many
ideas.
These are the two communities in
that area that really.
You The New Mexico.
The revenue comes from that we
spend each and every day and
capital or whatever we're doing
education throughout the budget
so it's gonna have to get fixed
and and.
We're just gonna have to put our
foot down and say we're not
gonna spending more money into
we fixed the tax policy in New
Mexico and create a safety net
so we do and we all make
mistakes.
All make mistakes our tax
returns will make mistakes and
come back in and fixes on
unintended consequences for
have a motion on the bills
to pass a motion for a new
passed by Senator shares the
commission's all of us and then
the as amended.
Thank you for yes thank you very
yes Senator Campos yes Campos
yes Senator Diamond yes Senator
Diamond yes those yes
yes Senator Hemphill.
Senator Hemphill test for
Padilla yes thank you for the
test center here yeah Senator
sure yes Senator Steinborn.
yes.
Senator Steinborn yes thank you
yes Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
you're sensitive to renew yes
yes yes it is eleven yeah yes
thank you very much chairman and
thank you committee person for
all German I think those
language people I think they're
working on we need to go through
that real quickly on the
technical issues
and
Was presented by Domingo is that
she was on the language in that.
Thanks for the question so on
the discussion you and I have on
the floor today are you willing
to talk to all of us about that
we're going to do that tomorrow
given all the structure laid it
and everything else will cost
you more okay I do know there is
phone calls made about eight
that doesn't work that way but
it actually does it doesn't
change anything the way anything
operates a government services
clarify that the survey should
believe the money that we talked
about is protected so.
There's more bills they're
trying to hijack so we're just
kind of watching that with bill
to.
Thank tomorrow at ten.
Yeah can you send and I said
line on the floor but yes it is
better because we don't start
till one o'clock over there it
is better okay.
