reflective of an improved
position for our office at this
point, but not.
Senator, not a great position,
uh, so I just want to hit on
some highlights, Mr. Chair, um,
that we're asking for the help
of the Senate Finance Committee
with, um,
First and foremost, FY 26 is the
first fiscal year where all
direct election costs have been
removed from our base operating
budget and um
That being said, our base
operating budget request is
still woefully short, even in
light of some improvements, uh,
that you will see in HB 2,
We've conducted an extensive
internal review of operational
costs versus direct election
costs. We've absorbed additional
costs of ownership to the base
budget owing to several new IT
systems implementations, uh, and
we've incorporated necessary
enhancement work to the
operational budget for existing
public facing systems.
To reduce our need for future
one-time requests, which, as you
know, Mr. Chair and members, um,
What's often happening is that
we're coming before you for
one-time requests when they're
really annual, um, costs. Uh,
so, uh, our total base budget
request from the general fund
was 12.9 million. Um, we did
request one expansion, uh, the
challenge with that position,
Mr. Chair and members, is that
we have a position that's
currently being funded on a term
basis by HAVA funds. Um, we are
not anticipating having any
future federal funding.
Uh, for the election program.
Um, so we would like to keep
that person in her position. Um,
If, if we can go to the
recommendation comparisons that
you have in the slides, um,
basically what you will see is
that there are multiple
deficiencies, um, in,
in the realm of, you know, 45%,
43% for our contractual program
and our other, uh, 400 program,
um, you'll also see even with
the improvement in HB1 or HB 2,
we're still short about half a
million dollars in our personnel
fund.
Um, so we're asking for your
help with that. Um, lastly, Mr.
Chair, and then I'll stand for
any questions you may have, and,
and I do wanna sorry, I should
acknowledge a lot of my senior
staff are here today, um, so
subject matter experts to answer
any questions, but um we, we
were, we were told that we were
given $100,000.
removing expenses.
We were never consulted.
About moving, we were never, uh,
You know, we've, we've gone
through, there's a been a study
about building the executive
office, um, building, uh, we, we
went through that with uh the
folks from building services,
um,
$100,000 isn't gonna move us
anywhere, Mr. Chair and members.
And we have statutory
requirements.
That necessitate us being in
close proximity to you all.
And to the governor. When bills
get chaptered, they come over to
our office physically.
Physically. We literally hand
stamp in every page and sign
them off and scan them in. And
when governor's proclamations or
any other actions come in, they
come into us physically. The
governor is at our office. The
governor's staff is at our
office daily.
Um, so basically what we're
requesting is to either stay in
our current location as long as
we can until we can find a
suitable space, or we, we'd be
moved to somewhere in close
proximity and some other agency.
Uh, can be relocated because
there's a necessity for the
Secretary of State to be
proximate to this building, um,
or to where you all and the
governor work.
Um, and so with that, Mr. Chair,
I won't, I won't belabor it, um,
but we need your help. I'm
asking for your help.
Um
And I will stand for any
questions you may have.
I read in the paper the budget
sailed through that committee
and
To be like they missed a few
things.
Mr. Chair, we did ask for help.
We got a little help. We, we
didn't get where we needed to
go. And that's why we're here
before you today, Mr. Chair
we're busting at the seams
because we have council staff
working in committee doing
payroll, right? And then LLC is
busting into the sea LESC is
busting at the seams and so the
Capitol building, they went to
committee the other day, they
kind of got approval and they
sent some people up in like the
windows, so they're gonna start
demo this summer.
And so then that project will
kind of get rolling, but didn't
we discuss there's plenty of
room at the Attorney General's
office because he moved a
majority of the staff to
Albuquerque.
And is that something you may be
looking at, and Mr. Chair,
that's the first I've heard of
that proposal. Um, I'm not
against it, but we have
You know, we've gone through a
requirements review and, you
know, if that particular
building suits the requirements
for our needs, um.
I wouldn't object to that. But
again, Mr. Chair, there's been
no partnership with my office.
There's been literally no
discussion with us other than to
tell us you're moving.
And, and that's just, frankly,
completely disrespectful to me
and to my staff. So counsel did
not go over there because I had
that conversation.
I don't know, months ago.
And we talked about if we're
going to do the, the Capitol
building or not, and they said,
well, we'll go talk to her and
then the attorney general said
he moved a bunch of his staff to
Albuquerque and there was
vacancy over there.
I assume those conversations
were happening, so maybe.
John ought to really reach out
to you and figure out what we're
going to do because
Mr. Chair, all I've been told is
you have to move. And you, and
you want your space.
OK.
Questions,
I'm not directing that at you.
No, no, no, I know. No, I had
the conversation, so I assume
they had the conversation with
you, but they never did.
Yeah
In trio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Secretary of State. It's
really nice to see you this
morning, um, for the purpose of,
um, those of us that are new,
um, I know there's at least 2 of
us here at the table, so I'm,
I'm thinking about it at least
us two. Would you, um, just
reiterate what um Ava means, uh,
Mr. Chair, Senator Hava Help
America Vote Act funding. We've
received about a million a year
for the last several years from
the federal government,
particularly to shore up.
our cyber systems and our
physical security, and uh we
understand that not only a lot
of our other federal support is
going away, for example, the
tools that we get from the cyber
and infrastructure security
agency, which is currently being
dismantled. Um, so penetration
testing, um, sensors to detect.
Uh, weird, you know, internet
activity, those kinds of things
that we need, but also that
additional million dollars a
year funding.
Thank you, um, uh, Madam
Secretary, and um in regards to
the um cybersecurity. I just
want to point out something
that's a little alarming to me,
and that is on line 5 of the
budget that we have this
morning. It does show that the
executive request, which is your
request, Madam Secretary, I'm
assuming, is for $890,000 and
none of
that has been carried over to
either the LFC, the HAFC, um,
budgets and Mr. Chairman, I
would think that
That's just the base of what you
needed, not including what's now
frozen and potentially, as you
said, being dismantled, um, so
how much
If if that 890, that's almost
$900,000 almost a million
dollars. Let's just round it up
to a million dollars. You need a
million dollars in regular IT.
Um, maintenance and increases.
Does that include these other
funds and so what's the
Total amount that you estimate,
and, and I recognize uh Mr.
Chairman, Madam Secretary, that
all of this has happened within
the course of like the last
couple of weeks and so I'm sorry
to put you on the spot for that.
But what is the amount that
you're gonna need to ensure that
Our elections are safe.
are available.
And are fair.
Uh, so, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chair and senator, Madam
Senator, um.
No, the, the funding that you're
talking about, um, is not
inclusive of the funds that
we're now going to not have from
the federal government and the
services we're not going to
have. We were talking this week
about trying to quantify that
and if, if you don't mind, I'm
gonna ask my CFO Justin O'Shea
to comment on that briefly.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, yes,
um, so we are still in the
process of evaluating um what
the additional costs would be um
if we were to lose as the
secretary mentioned the uh
cybersecurity and infrastructure
uh agency in the federal
government. So, um, you know, we
are estimating it could cost,
you know, several 100 thousands
of dollars, um, as opposed to
$10,000 that we pay annually. So
we're still in that process. It
literally is happening in the
several weeks leading up to
this, uh, hearing, so, um,
that's still something we're
evaluating. We can definitely
follow up with that information.
OK, I think that's gonna be
important if we can get that
information ASAP so that we can
potentially consider including
that in our budget, Mr.
Chairman, um, in regards to the,
I heard you say that um what
some of this, I think you call
it scissa money um does is, um,
penetration again, could you
kind of just explain to those
who may not, I had a
cybersecurity incident, and I
know what that means, um, but
If you could just explain why
that is important and then the
last question in regards to that
that I'd like to know is, is the
information that the Secretary
of State's office.
holds, right, the voter
information, is that in FedRAM
or is, OK, I'd like to know
that. So, Mr. Chair and Senator,
I'll start with that. So there
is personal, private information
in the state in the state's
voter registration database, and
that includes your full Social
Security number and or your
driver's license number. So, of
course, it is incredibly
important to keep that
information protected and we do
know, uh, that nation states in
the past have attempted to
access that information, not
here in
Our state, we have had them
poking around, uh, so to speak,
on our websites and such, but
we, we are not aware of any
actual, uh, breach in our
systems. This is a cyber and
infrastructure security agency
under the Department of Homeland
Security, as we understand it,
um, all of the election-related
staff have been laid off.
Um, all of the funding for
election-related costs has been
frozen.
And what they have been
providing us is uh penetration
or and or vulnerability testing
of our systems first and
foremost to make sure if there
are any holes in the system that
we can patch those. Secondly,
um, they have been providing
what what are called Albert
sensors, uh, for not just the
state, but for counties because
of course, your information is
also at the county level, uh,
accessible to your county
clerks. And so what the Albert
sensors do is if there's
Any pattern of unusual activity,
an attempt to hack, an attempt
to, um, denial of service
attack, uh, a website, etc.
Those sensors will kind of pick
up those vibes and let the uh
the IT folks know so that they
can be uh on guard to protect
the information and to protect
those systems. So those are, uh,
the probably the top two
services
that provides, uh, or has
provided and now
We're trying to figure out where
we get those uh, those were some
really great free services we
got from the federal government.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman. So
Madam Secretary, um, while that
informa while that service is
frozen. What are you gonna rely
on? Because that's not something
that you can just let not be
done. It has to be done on what,
a monthly basis? That, that's
correct, um, madam or Mr. Chair,
and Madam Senator, um, we're
gonna be looking at having to
take on the cost of the Albert
sensors directly, and we're
gonna be looking at, um,
You know, conducting our own,
uh, vulnerability testing, um,
and again, these were free
services and we're gonna have to
reprioritize other things in our
budget, Madam Chair, or Mr.
Chair, Madam Senator.
OK,
I'm so sorry, Mr. Chair. It
doesn't matter what the day it
is, I mean, let me get you, I
think you need to go to the eye
doctor.
That that is the truth, Mr.
Chair, I do.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary, I
just have one more question that
I'm, I'm curious on it. I'm
trying to, you know, quickly
look through all of this, um, is
there, uh, uh, do you have
enough for your operations right
now. In this new budget, will
you have enough to just do your
basic operations. I see you
shaking your head no. Can you
help us understand what the gap
is. Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, Madam,
Senator, um, if you look on the
uh 3rd 4th page of our.
you'll see the deltas there, um,
and right now, just within our,
our personnel budget.
Even with the improvement in HB
2, we're looking at half a
million dollars in our
operations budget that we're
still meeting. And then if you
look on the 300 and 400
categories contractual and other
costs were still down about 45%
and 43%. And really what that
means is we'll just be coming
before you next year and asking
for those, uh, supplementals and
or deficiency funds and, and as
you know, Mr. Chair, you've
helped us so much over the years
as much as you have been able
to, but we're, we're
We're, you know, every year we
tell you what we need. Every
year, we don't get what we need
and every year we come back,
bless you, uh, Madam Senator.
Every year we come back before
you and have to ask to fill
those gaps, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. One
last question, I think I said
the last one was, so I
apologize. Um, Madam Secretary,
I understand that.
Um
You get reimbursed for each
election, like you, you incur
the expenses and then you get
reimbursed through DFA I
believe.
And I have heard that for some
reason, I mean, you have 2
elections in
Primary years, right? Not one.
So one election during local
elections because those are not
partisan and then two elections
during general election. Have
you gotten reimbursed for both
of those elections?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, Senator,
um, so we are uh in the process
of we, we did receive the
reimbursement uh through an OPR
it's a DFA. I know this might be
a little bit of a controversial
topic, but we are planning to
submit a bar, uh, to get those
funds into our budget so that we
can reimburse the counties right
away because um 5 counties did
not receive funds uh to fund
their election. They had to
front it out of their own
budgets, um, so we want to
rectify that immediately, so we
are planning to submit a bar.
Uh, we just received the funds
on 2.
Tuesday of, of this past week.
Um, so we're working on that
process to get those counties
paid immediately.
Right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you wrap this up real
quick.
When we created the, the
I get the fund
election fund. Why, why are we
not tapping that enough to to
cover the operating costs of
elections.
Because Mr. Chairman, those are
direct election costs. They are
the costs that go to the
counties. Um, so poll workers,
uh, ballot on demand systems,
um, temporary workers, supplies.
That is the purpose of the fund,
um, is to go directly to those
direct election costs, not to
supplement our operating budget,
Mr. Chair. OK.
I think that's it we'll kind of
wrap it up.
Real quick cause we got 3 bills.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I just
wanted to ask on page 3, there's
this
graph in the middle and a bar
graph in it.
The
That's, oh.
Oh, can I, I can ask, OK, so
what, what's the difference
between 25 and 26, it just looks
like a significant
Jumped
Here's the LLC.
Tell us your I'll say the wrong
name, so I don't want to say
Emily Hella,
the LFC analyst for the
Secretary of State. What you
were looking at FY 26, this is
gonna be the first fiscal year
with the distribution from the
election fund was passed last
year. Senate Bill 108. It's up
to $150 million per election, so
you're seeing that huge jump
from FY 25 to FY 26 because
currently in FY 25, the
Secretary of State has $9.3
million built into their
operating budget for the cost of
the general election.
We're taking that out in FY 26
to do the distribution of the
election fund and so on top of
the operating budget, the
Secretary of State will have up
to $15 million twice to cover
the regular local election and
the primary election. So that's
what that jump is. OK. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
to get house built too over
we'll get all spread out and
bring you back.
OK, but really tune up those
numbers. I hope Shaw or somebody
in council was listening so they
can have a conversation with you
about.
Your eviction notice.
We, we appreciate the time and
the intention to our needs, Mr.
Chair, very much. Thank you.
We'll have you back before we
get.
Wrapped up. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I appreciate that. Thank
you all.
Senator Bregman, you're up.
We're ready when you are.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Hopefully I'll keep Mr. Chair.
Correct.
Um,
Today I am presenting Senate
Bill 175, which is a simple bill
that expands the uses of the
childcare revolving loan fund.
And this is the fun that's how
the NMFA, which is why I have
Marquita Russell here with me
today for technical questions.
This fund was created by the
legislature in 2003 with the
intent of helping providers,
childcare providers around the
state expand their business with
access to small interest loans.
Since then, it has only been
funded twice, once in 2005 and
once last year.
When it received 1.75 million.
In this year's Governor's budget
request and the LFC budget,
there's a $10 million
appropriation, which we expect
to be in-house Bill 2 when it
gets here.
And the one thing that SB 175 is
attempting to do is to allow
the, the loans from this fund to
be paid back on a contract for
services basis and to qualify
for the contract for service
repayment options, the childcare
provider must meet the criteria
found on the bottoms of page 3
and 4, such as being located in
childcare desert, offering
non-traditional hours of care
and a few other things.
It also expands the eligibility
of the loan to allow employers
who wish to offer their
employees childcare services to
build out such programs.
And we all know that access to
capital is what childcare
providers in our state really
need to expand and develop their
programs. We know that many
parents struggle to find
childcare in their communities
and that many providers would
like to offer more services, but
just can't get that capital.
So we're hoping this will help
solve that problem.
And with that, I'll see if
Marquita wants to add anything.
Mr. Chairman, I would just say
that this will allow us to make
more childcare loans.
Anybody in the room and support?
One person
3 people will take note of that.
Anybody in opposition?
The 3 people in support, nobody
in opposition we don't have any
Zoom questions from committee
members.
You know questions from
committee members, can I have a
motion.
A motion for a due passed by
Senator Trill, seconded by
Senator Steinborn weal road.
Senator Brent
Why not, yes. Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier
Bea Padilia.
Senator Steinborn, Senator
Steinborn votes yes. Senator
Tobiasin.
Senator Trujillo.
Senator Trujillos, yes, Senator
Woods. Senator Woods votes yes,
Senator Schendo with Senator
Woods too this morning. Yes,
Senator Shindo votes yes,
Senator Munoz.
Yes.
Senator Munoz, yes, you have a
due past Wood convinced us all
to vote for your bill, so.
Thank you.
Congratulations.
See you on the floor.
Center Woods your neck, but he
is not here.
He's not here, Senator
Steinborn, I'm gonna have you
jump in the chair.
With Marquita cause she's in the
room so we can get that.
Marqui, you have all the
information we need to print the
bill. You have everything OK.
The woods as quick as you can
get us in and out.
Very good
very quickly.
You do have an amendment Senator
Woods I only amendment I've got,
Mister Chair's amendment to
strike the appropriation.
OK.
So we'll explain the bill real
quick and then we're gonna put
the amendment on.
This, this bill does several
things, but it's, it essentially
is uh
A chance to attract veterinaries
into the state by
Work for repayment of their
loan, the repayment of the loan
is essentially the 1st 2 years
will be a $15,000 repayment on a
loan to their.
To their creditor, not to them,
to their creditor.
And it's not paid until after
the year of service, the next 2
years it is.
25.
Uh, 1000 and it would be
essentially an $80,000 repayment
of loan after 4 years.
Uh, that's essentially the
financial part of this deal, uh,
Mr. Chair, if there's anything
else you'd like to talk about,
I'd be happy to talk about it.
OK.
Thank you, have any dad? No.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Mia Candelaria. I am the
financial aid manager at the New
Mexico Higher Education
Department, and I am happy to
answer any questions that you
may have this morning. Thank
you.
Anything else to add?
The more you add, the longer
we're here. Yeah. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and senators. My name is
John Winslow. I'm the extension
veterinarian with New Mexico
State University and a 38 year
veterinary practitioner, and I'm
here to answer questions as to
the need for this bill, the
finances of this bill or
anything else that I can
Help you understand why this is
so important for New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you. We do have an
amendment for the bill, Senator,
what do you want to explain this
amendment? Oh, you have a motion
for for discussion purposes for
the.
A second.
Any objection to that motion
seemed none. Senator Woods tell
us about the amendment.
I have.
Thank you. Questions from
committee members on the
amendment see none.
Any objection on a Du Past
motion for the amendment. See
none were back on the bill.
Questions on the bill.
See none of the trio.
motion for do pass from Senator
Trujil.
2nd for Senator Brant.
voting in unison today, we call
the road.
Senator Brandt, Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Campos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Padilla.
Senator Steinborn.
Sinner Steinborn votes yes,
Senator Tobiasin. Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujil.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to
clarify that my motion was to
pass as amended, to pass as
amended. Uh, yes.
It was amended so.
record the record.
Senator Trujillo votes yes.
Senator Woods, Senator Woods
votes yes. Senator Shchino,
Senator Sendo votes yes, Senator
Munoz.
Senator Munoz, we have a Du pass
7 to 0. You sit there any
longer, Senator Woods, we're
gonna charge you, Senator
Steinborg.
We do have an amendment for this
bill.
Senator Stein one real quick.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Committee,
Senate Bill 115, uh public
project revolving loan fund, New
Mexico Finance Authority's
public project revolving loan
fund projects authorization
bill.
And with that, uh, of course, we
have Marquita Russell with NMFA
who can
Mr. Chairman, the bill initially
adds 154 projects to be
authorized from the New Mexico
Finance Authorities PPRF, the
amendment, um, expands 7 of
those and adds um 45 additional
projects we close off the
application around to get on the
initial bill in mid-October, 45
more projects have come forward
in the meantime.
time and that's what the
amendment does.
discussion
A motion to move an amendment
for discussion purposes. Can I
have a second Senator Trull.
I have a corm uh.
Sympathies, uh, for discussion
purposes.
Questions on the amendment.
It's just authorizes them to,
well the bill authorizes them to
borrow money. That's right, Mr.
Chair. Can I have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
Emotion makes in a drill, 2 bike
in Padilla.
Any objection.
See none. We're back on the
bill. Questions on the bill.
See none can have a motion for a
due pass.
Move as a man.
I was like so we have a motion
by in the woods that by Senator
Treil, we call it.
Senator Brent. Senator Brandt
votes yes. Senator Compos.
Senator Gonzalez.
Senator Lanier.
Senator Padilla, Senator Padilla
Boas, Senator Steinborn.
Senator Tobiasson, Senator
Tobiasson votes yes, Senator
Trujillo.
Senator Trujillo Bosia, Senator
Woods, Senator Woods votes yes.
Senator Shchino, Senator Shindo
votes yes, Senator Munoz.
Yes.
Yes, we have a due pass 7 to 0.
We're gonna take up the 11th
ADA's budget right now so we can
make some cuts to it, and she's
in the audience and he's willing
to give us some.
It's time
Uh, we
