Here with me is Cecilia
Mavrommatis, the DFA analyst for
the Department of Information
Technology, and today we will be
going over these sections seven
budget recommendation.
Um at the top of your bullets.
There's the criteria that was
considered when making the LFC
staff recommendation. I'm not
going to go over that too much
in detail, but to start off with
the LFC recommendation, the LFC
recommendation for the section
seven appropriations totals 52.3
million, including 28 million in
general fund revenues, 13.6
million and other revenues and
10.4 million in federal funds.
Including 8.9 million in federal
funding for the Department of
Workforce Solutions, continuous
you I agile transformation.
As well as 864,000 in federal
funds for the higher education
Department for their
longitudinal data system.
The executive recommend ation
for the section seven
appropriations totals. 112
million, including 58 million in
general fund revenues, 11.2
Million and other revenues and
42.6 million in federal funding,
including 18.6 million for the
Human Services Department to
continue implementation of the
Medicaid management information
system.
And the 8.9 million federal
funding as well for the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, and I do want to
mention before I handed off to
Cecilia that the main difference
between these general fund
recommendations comes from the
Human Services Department or the
Healthcare Authority, as it is
now being called.
Human Services Department has
two main projects the Medicaid
information system as well as
the child support enforcement
projects.
The LFC budget recommendation is
not recommending.
Any new projects for the
healthcare authority because
there are prior appropriations
that have not been expanded. The
LFC is recommending that the HST
can come back next year for
these new budgets after the
appropriations that have been
given to them in past years are
expended.
With that being said, I will
turn it over to Cecilia. For
more information on the
executive recommendation. Good
morning, Mr Chairman. Question
first, because yes, this if you
go to page nine, Mr Care, I
think that is the larger font
for you to follow on
starting lfc, and I'm gonna
throw that copier out the
window.
His
Anybody in the everybody in this
room is wearing glasses except
for your senator Campos.
Yeah, and, uh, there's no way we
can read this. So I mean, second
warning to lfc me. You gotta get
a stuff that's readable. Go
ahead.
Good morning, Mr Deck. Can you
guys hear me? Okay. I'm
notoriously too loud for these
microphones. Okay, little
closer. Alright, Let's hope I
don't blow anything. People text
me So I'm warning the World Wide
Web have set my phone for focus
and so they're not going to get
there in Texas are not going to
come through if it's
Trying to text me because
they're webcasting or something
is not working. So I appreciate
that Mr Checks, Senator Sheer.
Here's number is 86753 or 90
boy.
Um, okay, so I really just
wanted to start today by
explaining a little bit more
about how this section seven
appropriations are distributed
across the state and how the
project certification committee
plays into the role for do it in
Section seven. Appropriations
unlike Section five and Section
six, Section seven
appropriations are not buckets
of money that get
Directly given to agencies they
are bound by the New Mexico
Administrative Code one tack 12
Tak nine. And if you'd like a
little more information on what
it is that governs those
conditions to meet Section
seven. I can give those to you.
Also a caveat. I we do not work
in I t There might be some
things here that we do not
understand.
Fully but everything that is
submitted as a reauthorization
request or as a new project does
come with about, um, I'd say
sometimes about a 40 page packet
of a full business case that
explains everything. This agency
is doing all the hardware that's
associated all the software that
is associated. And if you can
find someone who can really, you
know, translate the I T for you
that would
Be great. We can also connect
you with the CEOs for those
agencies as well. But
Going back to Section seven in
the project certification
process. These requests do begin
in July of the year before the
appropriation cycle, so anything
that's being asked for fiscal
year 25 agencies start to get
with the department of it and
the Enterprise Project
Management Office the first week
of July to do some training to
get the material to help them
understand what it is that they
are allowed to ask for and what
they're not allowed to ask for.
Section seven does not cover
hardware.
Exclusively. Section seven also
does not cover items that are I
T and are less than $100,000. So
sometimes you will see an I T
request. That is a section five
requests, and that's because it
does not meet that threshold.
However, sometimes you will see
a section seven requests that
has both hardware and software
and that's just because by
nature sometimes when you have
to update your systems, you need
to make sure that what you are
now using isn't compliance with
the new software that you're
buying. So sometimes you can get
a little complicated because we
will technically be approving
hardware in Section seven,
however, because they are so
closely tied to those software
programs. They kind of get
lumped under, Um
That, however, we do have the
Enterprise Project Management
office.
Who can give you all the details
you need for what falls under
those categories. And what
doesn't
So getting in July, the agencies
will get training and materials
and they will work with the
Enterprise Project Management
Office and by July the end of
July, they will send a full
business case for explaining the
intent to request a Section
seven appropriation for the
following year.
Um
By August, agencies will work on
a draft package and then they
will begin to review and correct
those packages to make sure that
what they're asking for is
appropriate for Section seven
and then by September, 1st,
which is when all the agencies
come in with their appropriation
requests.
That is when you will see the
reauthorization requests. So
these sections sevens are broken
into two categories. You have re
authorizations, and then you
have new requests. Those are two
different things. And, um part
of these timelines here can kind
of explain why the Rios will
take so long and why agencies
kind of delay getting the money
out the door.
Um
So presentations are then given
to do it from the state. C IOS
for these I T projects and in
October it's presented to the
project Certification Committee,
which I can give you more detail
on Project certification
Committee. Um, and who's part of
that committee? As part do it, D
F A. There are a few other
entities. Lfc is also part of
that committee and that is where
we go and we ask questions on
the status and the phases of
these projects.
Um
So that's when we start to
understand what the new section
seven I t requests will be for
fiscal year 25.
By statute, November 14th the do
it. Secretary sends
recommendations to DFA in the
executive office for Section
seven requests when they do send
it to DFA in the executive for
Section seven. They are done.
They are submitted with risk
assessment scores and do it will
say that these projects are high
risk to the state low risk to
the state and all sorts of
factors that go into Section
seven because it is very strict
and compliance, federally, as
well as cyber security risks
that are associated with new It.
Projects.
November 21st. The executive
recommendation is sent to lfc
And that is the recommendation
that you will see that has the
executive column and all of
that.
Um And then, after that is when
LFC will then begin drafting
their recommendation, and then
we follow on the normal process
for Section seven and the entire
fiscal year following
appropriation cycle, so
Agencies with Section seven
requests have to go to the
project Certification Committee
to release these funds in
phases.
They do not get the money all in
one lump sum, an agency will
begin a project. They will say
what the intent of that phase of
the project is. They will
present that intent and how much
money they need to the project
Certification Committee, which
includes DFA, do it in Lfc, and
then those funds are distributed
based on the need of that
project and where they are in
the phasing. So
If an agency has a $5 million
appropriation for an I T
project, they do not get $5
million upfront. They might get
$500,000 to begin phase one, and
then when they're done with that
phase, they have to report back
to the PCC. So every step of an
it project is accounted for by
the department of it by DFA and
by Lfc.
Um, and that can sometimes lead
to delays when you overlap that
with contracting and having to
do a technical review, and all
the other things that kind of
just come by nature with I t
Um, but with that, if you would
like to know more about who's on
the project Certification
committee or any of the other
details that go with how that
appropriation is distributed to
agencies and more than happy to
get more into details, But Mr
Chair if you'd like we have re
authorizations on Page nine and
new projects, I think on page
17.
And those are a little too
different.
Objectives this morning.
Oh,
Yes, Mr Chair. Page four has
both the language
preauthorizations, as well as
the new projects combined into
one Excel spreadsheet.
So if you would like to start
from there, we can.
Mr Chair Beginning on Page nine,
we will begin with the
reauthorization requests. Um
Yeah, they are.
Yeah, For 90. Yes. So, Page nine
is just a little bit bigger for
you all Mr Chair, Um, just from
the executive, um
The executive recommendation for
anything that is a language only
request.
They are approved, and that is
because with Section seven the
money that's associated to these
language request has already
been appropriated in previous
years for Section seven, so
these are not new money what the
agency does when they come back,
and they ask for a
reauthorization request. All
they're asking for is a little
bit more time to be able to
spend that money.
What the reason might be behind.
Why there is a delay is entirely
on the agency. But it is also
because the project
certification committee only
meets once a month, so there are
kind of some benchmarks that
they need to meet, and
especially with agencies like
the Department of Health, or,
Um, HST that can sometimes be a
multi million dollar project.
And when you're waiting on
federal funds to match and the
federal the federal grants are
part of the process. They kind
of take a little too long. So if
you do have questions about why
language only requests were not
approved. That would be for my,
um, my partner here, Emily
Are you gonna go through these
one by one or
Emily.
We can go through them by one by
one. Mr Chair. I would just like
to say there's only three
language we authorizations that
the lfc is not recommending. Um
those are all with the
Department of Health just
because in total they have been
appropriated $7,040,000, and
then they have 7,011,000 left in
unspent balances.
And I believe
That these were from me. Double
check? Yeah.
I'm a little confused, Emily
because everything I see is L C
language recommendations.
Yes, Mr Chair if you look on the
back of Page four, where it's
really, really tiny, Um, I have
it up here. Um and
Yeah.
We're just getting you guys
ready for the day, Mr Care?
My apologies that's hidden
behind the bullets on the front
page, but this really, really
tiny, tiny font. It will just
talk about the, um previous
language and then the amounts
that they were appropriated and
then the amounts that are left
on expended and out of those
language. Re appropriations
authorizations. There are three
that the LFC is not
recommending.
All coming from the Department
of Health because there is
7,011,000 left and unexpended
balances and, um
Prior CEO. The reason for that
is because the prior CEO was
waiting for full funding before
initiating the project. And so
we are just currently waiting
for the new CEO for the
Department of Health for these
projects.
But we can also are never mind.
Yeah, Relax. Don't worry.
We can't read it anyway. On
these small ones. Tell us Tell
everybody. Mr Chairman, I just
have a quick suggestion on on
this sheet since it's so small,
Uh, surgeons, this is actually
going to the print shop to get a
Lord larger fund, So if we want,
if I don't know up to you, mr
Chair, but if you wanted to go
to
To this sheet. We could come
back to this once people
I'm trying to figure out the
duplicate pages because four
pages four through
nine are duplicates of 10
through our duplicates of 10
through
Yeah, 16 correct.
Correct. You could pull out
those That's just a smaller
fund. That's the same as yes, 10
through exactly.
And then
That's the same as 10 through
11 or 16.
10 3 16 is just a larger font
and then six
1717 through.
20 are the references. Language
recommendations by LFC.
70 have no idea what's behind
this one because I really
Session. I guess 20 Mr Chair are
the new requests for fiscal year
25 and those might be a little
easier to go. Let's just start
off and page 10. Everybody. Tape
takes rips off four routine and
throws it in the trash will have
the larger funds No. Four
through 10, but
So what is this?
Yeah.
Where's Paige Tendons
and the hospital? This is all
the same.
This is all the same time.
So where we want to start. Let's
start on page 10 so we don't get
Hello.
Ladies, tell us where we're
going to start or we're going to
start with recommendations are
not recommendations.
Gonna start on page 17 or page
10.
Hey, there's a button. You just
pushed him. We can get chains
you want You want gold studded
changed. What kind of change you
want? We're just override.
Yeah.
So, Mr Tried. I think we'll
start with this. Um the items
that are not recommended by LFC
Page 14. Actually, it'll be on
page 13 Mr Chair for the
language only, and that will be
item number 21, the Department
of Health for the DD Case
management system.
Page 14.
Item number 21.
Item. 21 is on page 13 for me.
Yes, okay.
Go ahead.
Yes, Mr Chairs to the reason why
this is not being recommended
with the lfc is just because of
the unexpended amount that is
left in this, um, originally.
Um
So it's from 2017. Yes, um
They have about 5 million left
and unexpended amounts and they
were appropriated 5 million
before And so That is why the
LFC is not recommending this
reauthorization.
Because of the unexpended amount
that is left over.
So I don't know. Maybe we just
got to start over but on our
sheets on page 13 it says L. C
recommended language in the
sitting there and I go to page
16 or 17. That's the sheets that
I have. Lfc is not recommend
recommends and starts to starts
on page 17 for me.
Yes, I'm page 17. That is for
all of the new requests. But
then on page is just the
language only for priority
authorizations. And so these
were, um it says Lfc recommended
language. Um, not just the
language that is included in our
system called BFM. Um, but that
is the original language that
was written for these
appropriations.
So it's not that we are
necessarily recommending that
language that is just the
current language that exists
around the appropriation that
was given in the past. And so we
need one more column that said.
Loc record, not on the small
page that is being reprinted for
you. So that's why it's
complicated at this moment. But
okay, we'll get there.
It's snowing. We have nothing
else to do but shovel snow.
But to if you would like to
wait, Mr Terence 21, We're on
21. Do not recommend yes, do not
recommend for the Department of
Health Line number 21 on page
13. And again, Mr Chair That is
just because of the prior
appropriations that were given
in the past and what is left
unexpended, which is the total
amount that was originally
appropriated.
Can't
Item 22.
Okay. And then I'm actually
gonna go up to the very top one
page 13 online 19. And so this
is also for the DDP case
management system. Do not that
is a do not recommend Mr Chair,
and that is because the prior
amounts that were appropriated
are left on appropriated. Um, so
the amount that was previously
appropriated has left.
100% unexpended amount.
And then the last Do not
recommend Mr Chair for the
language reauthorization XYZ
Line 20 on page 13.
I'm even having trouble reading
this tiny little fun. Oh, but
that is because of unexpended
amounts that were private
Previously given, so those are
the only three do you not
recommend from the language?
Ah! Re authorizations from the
lfc. And so for those amounts,
the total of the appropriate and
amounts in the past is
7,040,000. And then the left the
balance that remains unexpended
from the Department of Health
for these reauthorization XYZ 7
Ah, re authorizations from the
lfc. And so for those amounts,
the total of the appropriate and
amounts in the past is
7,040,000. And then the left the
balance that remains unexpended
from the Department of Health
for these reauthorization XYZ
7,011,000.
Mr Chair. I just want to note
that lfc did not recommend
these. However, the executive
did recommend these because the
agency is just asking for a
little more time to be able to
appropriate these ones. Thank
you. Time is the only thing we
can't buy, and they have a
button to buy everything.
Senator share
So thank you, Mr Chair.
So online 19. We said it was
100% not expended.
That is correct. Mr. Chair,
Senator.
So I know we went through this
big deal about the DD waiver and
coming up with the money and
making all this happen, Mr
Chair.
And then we didn't spend the
money.
In some of this, So this goes
back a few years, 2021
Um why? What happened Because
this was a big deal. The DD
waiver was a big deal.
Mr Chair, Senator. I'm not too
sure. But I can follow up with
the Department of Health and get
back to you on why this amount
was not expended on this. All
these are old data case
management systems is that
linking they didn't need the
money because they went into a
new system.
Uh, Mr Chairman, the so a lot of
these that you'll see for
reauthorization or are just, you
know.
I'd say kind of kind of slow to
spend for it projects for for
various reasons, the largest
appropriations among those being
that the big Medicaid system the
MM, Miss, which
Worried about a half A billion
dollars now invested into that.
Um
For the for the DD waiver
system. Um, I believe that, uh,
project was not
Kicked off and so, um
What lfc recommends is not re
authoring that and having them
come back through the PCC
process. Um and basically re re
scope and re plan that project.
Mr Chair, Okay, thanks. Mr Going
to next, Emily.
Mr Chair. We can now move on to
Age 14. We can move actually now
to page 17 with the new projects
because otherwise all of the
language re authorizations are
being recommended by both the
LFC and the executive. And so
those three were the only ones
not being recommended for the
language.
And so, Mr Chair members of the
committee page 17. This is all
of the new projects that, um,
all the different agencies are
Wanting to start in FY 25 or as
well as the continuation of past
year projects.
Um Cecilia. Are there any
projects and specific you would
like to cover
Yes. Thank you, Mr Chair, first
starting online one AOC storage
attached Network solution. Um,
you'll see Lfc did not recommend
this project, and that is
because it is considered
hardware and, um, However, the
executive did recommend this
because I will read what the
attached storage network
solution is. I have a quick
right up here.
Um, but it does work in tandem
with software, and it's one of
those items that has to be
updated by both endpoints to be
able to fully function at the
agency.
Um, so a little bit about the
AOC, the end of life and end of
support for our current storage
solution have been announced. It
is a priority for the judicial
information division to purchase
and deploy a new storage
solution before our current
equipment reaches the end of its
supportable life. Lack of
funding would mean services will
be running on hardware with
limited support options and no
possibility of expansion. Lack
of support on aging hardware
opens judicial services.
Two possible catastrophic
storage failures and little
available assistance to return
services to working order
barring such failure,
replacement of the equipment
could also be complicated in the
future. If we were to attempt
this replacement after all,
storage support his ceased, so
it's one of those, um in
betweens. If we don't update
this project, we might just be
that much further behind on the
I T landscape and it might be
more costly to get up to speed
so
Mr Chair. And Mr Chairman that,
um the reason for our non
recommendation of this is is
typically we ask that hardware
be purchased, Um, either in the
base budget or through capital.
It's it's not something that we
usually funding Section seven.
Mr Chair.
Okay. Next one moving on to
items three and four. You will
see that there are no executive
recommendations for both DFA and
Secretary of State And that is
because these agencies
originally requested these
appropriations as Section five.
However, lfc determine these to
be appropriate as Section seven.
However, they did not follow
that same July framework that I
explained at the beginning of
today's, um
Hearing and so we did not have
ample opportunity to provide
risk assessments and determine
if they were a viable use of
Section seven. So that's why
there is no executive
recommendation there.
And if there are no questions, I
will move on to the next item.
Keep going. Okay. If we look at
items six line six we have the
Department of Cultural Affairs
Cyber security upgrades and
compliance. There are three
items on this list that were not
recommended by the executive.
And that is because we have
looked at opportunities to
provide for the office of
Cybersecurity, which has now
begun.
This next fiscal year, and so we
decided that this would be a
great opportunity for the office
of Cyber to go ahead and start
getting their feet wet on
providing appropriate
cybersecurity. Um
Assistance to state agencies. So
this is one of those agencies.
Mr Chair moving on to item 11,
the healthcare authority, child
support enforcement system. Um,
the executive did recommend
this. This is one of those
projects and I can explain a
little bit about the child
support enforcement system if
you'd be interested, too, But,
um
Healthcare Authority. There's a
great deal of a return on
investment on these types of
projects, primarily because the
federal government does play a
very big role in maintaining
these mighty infrastructures and
for the cost of $7 million for
the state and the federal
government has provided $14
million in return on this phase
of this project, so
It's kind of one of those
projects where the assistance
is, is almost too good to pass
up. But if you'd like a little
more detail on that child
support enforcement system I can
read what I have here, Mr Chair.
If not, I can keep going.
John are comments are there
right? And so they HST is
requesting three other
authorizations for past funding
for
I don't know what the Ackerman's
means. Somebody's gonna have to
tell me what eight Chicago means
and C s E c. Mr Chair. Each cat
means the Healthcare Authority
Department, which is the human
services division or department,
Um, And what was the other
acronym you were looking for
CFCs that is the child support
enforcement system. That is what
that stands for. And yes, the
reason that the LFC is not
recommending
Um, Human services. The
Healthcare Authority Department
for the child Support
enforcement system is like
currently have 10 million in
reauthorization request
specifically for the child
support enforcement system. And
so the LFC feels that new money.
Would be, um, it would be better
for the
HST Healthcare Authority
Department to use the money that
was previously appropriated to
them rather than recommend new
money for the same project, Mr
Chairman, that the story will be
the same on that. Mm, I s system
that that we were talking about.
There's a lot of Riyadh's for
for that money for unspent
money. And so, um, the LFC wreck
was
Basically to give those Riyadh's
but, you know, spend the money
you have before we appropriate
new money, Mr Chair.
Who's next and we're going
I can keep going, Mr. Chair. I
don't know. Did you want a
little bit of more information
on that child support, So when
it started, and or do you want
to just keep going through the
project? Keep going, because you
have 21.8 million currently
sitting there and asking for a
year I'll set you haven't spent
since 2017.
18
Understood, Mr Chair if we're
looking at item 14. This is also
one of those items that the
executive did not recommend.
because this is intended to
provide the office of
cyber security and opportunity
to provide cyber security to
agencies so this will be found
in Section five under do it.
Um Hmm.
See
Moving on to item 18 broadband
optimization and disaster
recovery.
Mm.
LFC did not recommend this item.
However, I do have, um
If this is just a quick note
from the agency regarding this,
this projects not funded deal
will be unable to replace the
end of life network equipment
and will not be able to set up a
disaster recovery site that
would enable D O. H to operate
during an emergency. It will
also force D O H to expend
additional money to acquire
expensive maintenance agreements
to service equipment that
manufacturers refused to
currently service.
And I will pass this over to Dr
Courtney and Emily. Mr Chair
that this goes back to the point
from before were usually don't
fun Hardware in Section seven.
This was listed as a lower
priority for the Department of
Health and they believe had the
most. Um, C two requests this
Europe of of any any any agency,
Mr Chair.
Okay, Moving on to the next
item, Mr. Chair item 19, the
comprehensive security. This one
was also not recommended by um
neither Lfc or the executive.
However, the executive
recommendation built this one.
This is the last item part of
that cybersecurity under Do it.
Section five request.
Um, moving to line 18, the
network endpoint Recalibration
executive recommended the full
$5.1 million to fund this
project through general funds.
Um, if this projects not funded,
will be unable to move their
desktop architecture to a thin
client model. This internal
force us to continue the cycle,
every placing desktop computers
every three years. The cycle not
only waste money, but also
contributes to landfill waste
and global warming.
And that's my notes for that
one. Mr Chair.
With no other questions. I'll
continue to the next item has a
question they'll let us know
Perfect, um, item 19, the
website modernization rebuild
The executive did fully fund
this request for 2.12 $0.2
million. However, the D O h
website modernization if this
projects not funded, dealing,
will not be able to continue the
website modernization project.
That's preventing people living
in New Mexico from receiving
health information and in a
timely manner on a device of
their choice and the delay in
the propagation of health
information can adversely
contribute to health, the health
of our population.
Um and I will move on to the
next item, Mr Chair and this one
looks like it was item. 21, the
legacy improvement and future
transformation to migrate legacy
applications to the cloud for
enemy D. The agents. The
executive did recommend the
41.6. However. Lfc, um,
recommended partial funding for
this, Um
Did you want to speak a little
bit on that?
Mr Chair. The so you know, based
on our analysis were
recommending have half of that
for this project and and would
ask the agency to come back for
the remainder enough White 26.
There may also be some funding
available at, UM other state
funds that environment to cover
the cost of this project.
Mr. Chair. Moving on to item. Um
23, the DPS asset management
system.
This item was not recommended by
the executive for the primary
Reason of one, an asset
management system already exists
in the city, New Mexico through
share, Um so one that would be,
it would be cost effective to
keep them on the system. But
more importantly, looking at the
future of share and the
successor system that we are
currently working on, it might
be more costly to have agencies
that are outside of the existing
system.
Exit those contracts and then
begin new with the new share
successor system, So, um, by not
allowing the agency to request
their own asset management
system and asking them to go
through the systems that we
currently have available in the
state. It will save money in the
long run, and it will be one
less agency that will likely say
they cannot be part of the
successor system because they
have their own projects, so it's
more so in an effort to
consolidate asset management
across the state.
And Mr Chair that from the lfc
side that this is this is a
system that's already being
built. DPS received 800,000 for
the system last year and
requested 700 to to finish
building out the system.
Um, moving on to item 25 p E D
to implement commercial off the
shelf software. Um, the
executive did recommend the
agency be able to use that
whereas LFC did not recommend
because it does not fulfill the
agency needs to keep track of
revolving district staff. Did
you have anything else?
Nope.
Moving on to item 27 the Nova
database management to enhance
and integrate current operating
systems for public education.
The executive did recommend $3.1
million in general fund for this
item. However, LFC did not the
notes here. Just a p D did not
have clear use case for the
dashboard and database.
And has issues with the data
validity and existing databases.
The agency also has current
projects that are in place and,
um
We did You want to finish that
piece?
Yes, Mr Chair for this as it
states in the LFC Comments, P d
does have three current projects
with regard authorizations and
from conversations that the LFC
has had with ped. It does not
seem that they have the means to
take on a new project when they
are currently
Having some problems with their
existing projects.
And what were those PDS comment?
But those LLCs comments
That's the LFTs comments. Okay?
And, um, Mr Chair, the last item
I want to know here, even though
we don't really see any
differences, Um, it's the HDD
shared service Enterprise
Resource planning Project for $7
million. The reason why the
agency did come in and ask for,
I think Ballpark of like, maybe
15 to $20 million for this.
Um, he has other sources of
funding that are available to
them. And because this project
works a lot with universities
that have their own revenue. Um,
we thought it would be best to
not give them as much state
money but allow them to resource
money elsewhere from the other
agencies and the other
institutions that are part of
this project with them. There
are a lot of stakeholders that
They could reach out to you to
ask for additional funding, But,
um with that, Mr Chair that
wraps up the differences on the
reauthorization as well as those
differences for the new projects
If there were any questions or
any concerns on any of these
projects, I'd be more than happy
to give you what I have. Or
email you the packages for those
projects.
Aaron Padilla. Thank you chair
and thank you for the
presentation, guys. Um, so I'm
on the doctor section of the
document that we just looked at.
There was another piece or
another set of files. The two
items related to the sea West,
um, implementation for F D.
Just I know that's language
change, and it is recommended.
Just want to make sure that all
of that remains on track and
that Madam secretary has the
funding that she needs to get
that that implementation done.
Um, I do We know yet. Is there
an additional request?
Of any kind to make sure that
that thing happens on time.
Yes, Mr Chair Senator. There is
no additional request from 50
for the C West project because
they are receiving federal funds
for sea whiz, too, so that
that's why they are not included
for, um, the
Current projects, and that's why
both the LFC and the executive
are recommending them for the
language. We authorizations
chair. If there is a need for
additional fund that will be a
request to the feds, not
obviously not us to make sure
that they stay funded to get
this thing done. Mr. Chair sent
Senator Padilla. So, um the feds
are are providing matching funds
for this project.
And what you appropriate in the
last few years C y f D still
has, um enough money to move
forward for the next fiscal year
of what we were talking with C Y
F D, um about a month ago on
that, and, um, when the session
is over there, planning on
meeting with us and and kind of
giving us their their roadmap
for us.
Um, because the project has
changed a bit since the new
secretary came in. They re
prioritized a few things, but,
um, but from from where we can
look at from the do its project
coordination Committee, PCC, um
they seem to be moving along, Mr
Chair.
Thank you Chair with your
permission, and we allow the
secretary to say a few words
just I think she wants to
comment on a few things.
On this project.
Sure.
Thank you very much. You might
want to come up here, Madam
Secretary so they can. Yeah,
thanks.
Good morning. Thank you. Um,
yes, as he indicated, right now
we are on track with the C West
funding and we did make some
changes when I came on board
because the project did not
include the agency as a whole.
Um, it was only fixing what we
were reporting in our protective
services and not tying that in
with what we were doing with our
behavioral health clients or
with our juvenile justice. And
so we've expanded the scope of
that to make sure that it's a
system that the entire agency
can utilize.
But that didn't change much of
the funding that we needed. We
had availability funding and, as
he mentioned, we are receiving
federal dollars and state
dollars are just match. But at
this point in time, we have
sufficient money to work on the
project in a contract has been
signed, and we're moving forward
on that. So if at some point
that scope changes, and there's
additional funding will make
sure and notify this body.
Thank you chair and I just want
to say thank you, Madam
Secretary because I know that
the reorganization that you're
taking the journey that you're
taking the department to rebuild
and things that you're working
on glad that you to hear you say
that you're giving those
requirements to the sea West
implementer so that it's built
in the manner that the
department's gonna look like,
basically tomorrow rather than
the way it looked yesterday, So
please keep that on track.
Thank you. Thanks. Chair.
Thanks. Thanks. Any other
questions? Senator Bert?
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Um on
page 17 items 60 C a the do it
is going to kind of take absorb
this. Is that correct? Yes. Mr
Chair and Senator. The intent is
to have one Do you remember?
Last year there was a $10
Million appropriation to do it
and 3 million of that was to rld
for cybersecurity response
incident.
Kind of the same idea how that
will be.
Distributed between Do it and D.
C a will be negotiated between
those two agencies so, but it
would still be going to that
agency and I just, it says up
raising compliance. When I see
the word compliance. I think
we're either out of compliance
or we're getting close to being
out of compliance. So my
question would be Mr Chair.
Is how quickly will they get
this done? I mean, we were
looking at a massive amount of
work for do it, And this is
probably a smaller job would be
more estimate and there are
probably others some smaller
jobs in here. Um, how quickly
are they going to get to that? I
mean, that's that's something
that
Is of concern to me, um and how
we're going to accomplish
Actually, all of this.
So, uh,
Mm, Chair
secretary secretary
Chair, Senator. Um thank you for
asking that so our CI Oh, Doug
Patika is taking a phased
approach to compliance. Um, we
recently hired a cybersecurity
or a computer security
specialist this last fiscal
year, and he has been doing an
audit of our systems and so we
have implemented.
Some, um
Compliance areas. Um, but we are
looking to obviously expand and
to deal with bringing ourselves
fully into compliance with the
ever changing environment of
cyber security, So and that's
one of the issues is that the
goalpost keeps changing, and so
we need to stay in compliance.
Rather than being currently out
of compliance. We need to
continue to move as the goal
Rather than being currently out
of compliance. We need to
continue to move as the goalpost
moves well and and thank you for
that answer, And thank you, Mr
Jeremy. Because it does. It's a
constantly evolving process.
And the longer we wait, the
farther behind we get, and then
it costs more, and then it is
more time consuming.
As are all of these projects, so
I appreciate the answer on that
particular issue, and then my
other question Mr Chair is again
what I mentioned earlier.
This is a massive amount of work
Anytime does do it have the
capacity to get all this done
this next year or is or over the
next two or three years. Um, I
guess we've checked with the
agency and and they say they can
do this. I don't want to throw
money after again. I mean, we
just talked about certain things
that had millions of dollars
applied to it, and they haven't
even touched that money as yet.
And again, I'm assuming because
they don't have the capacity to
get it done. So are we sure that
all this money that we are going
to put into this budget is going
to be able to be used.
You know, within the next one or
two years.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair and
Senator Do it did ask for fiscal
year 25 request that enhances
that office of cybersecurity
with additional ft and funding
that will support that office to
do these projects, Um, in
discussion with the state C I O
Raja Sam Van Damme. He did seem
confident that these projects
were within their realm of
possibility and just small
enough to be able to work with
them to get these compliance is
out.
Part of what's happening right
now. For fiscal year, 25 is the
New Cybersecurity Act has
required do it to come up with
compliance metrics for agencies
to follow. So in some ways, this
is a little bit of a pilot
project to say. Hey, these are
you know, we have federal
compliance is to I t and then we
also are still Excuse me working
on state compliance is And I
think that
That's where we're starting to
develop. And where we're
starting to get our feet. Um,
what in that process? Um,
however do it would be the best
person to speak to what they're
capable of doing. I am We are
their analysts who were kind of
aware of what their but
understand That's why I caution
about asking the question. But I
do want to ask it in public
forum because I am concerned not
just on compliance, but I mean,
there's a
Lot of stuff in here, and I
don't know, you know, for the
whole agency and for the entire
state, you know?
Can we? Can we accomplish this?
And 1 to 2 years, which is what
we hope.
We'll get done. I think, because
again, it's a moving goalpost,
Not just cybersecurity, but, uh,
software you know about the time
you get it up and running,
there's upgrades or they go to
something different. So I just
want to be very cautious about
because we're looking at
Probably hundreds of millions of
dollars.
To be spent.
So again. I know you don't have
the exact answer to that. But I
think we should Mr. Chairman
certainly ask, do it Next time
they're in front of us. Can they
actually handle this capacity?
Thank you, Mr. That's a lamp.
Thank you, Mr Chair centered.
Thanks.
Mhm.
Thank you, Mr Chair members of
the committee.
Good morning, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is Joseph Simon I'm an
analyst with the Legislative
Finance Committee and with me at
the table today is when props
used the Secretary of Finance
and administration and Patrick
Shafer, Who's the General
Council of the Department of
Finance and Administration.
You should have in front of you
a sheet that looks like this,
Um, is I'm just gonna give you a
quick, high level overview of
it. So, um
In the special session of 2021.
You all transferred little more
than $1.4 billion from state and
local fiscal recovery funds
received by the state to the
Appropriation Contingency Fund
for Appropriations two projects
over the last several years. You
have made appropriations. Um and
some of those funds have been
spent, but we're, um, still
looking at spending plans.
From agencies and so this sheet
you have in front of you was an
effort with staff of LFC, D F A,
um, The governor's office, Uh,
Senate Finance Committee and the
House Appropriation of Finance
Committee to get a good idea of
agency spending plans. Um
Uh, for those funds that you
have already appropriated, so
this sheet sort of divided into
several different sections, the
first one at the top are areas
where we have seen agencies have
some pretty significant, um,
balances that haven't been
encumbered. Yet Those might be
planned or even obligated for
certain programs.
Um, and in some cases, uh, the
agency provided some detail, but
in other, uh, cases we weren't
able to get detailed spending
plans and what I mean by
detailed spending fans. What we
sort of asked agencies for was
okay.
What? You know who are who are
your awardees? Who are your
vendors? Um, And you know where.
Where is this money going to end
up going? And so, uh, we got a
lot of good detail on some of
those spending plans, but there
were others that that we're
highlighting here for you where
we weren't necessarily able to
get that kind of detailed
information on vendors.
And then they're usually there
are comments on the side that
provide a little bit of context
to the agency's plans for
spending those so, um, if you
flip to page Page three, this
says down here at the bottom,
Um you can see so for the you
know for the agencies with, um
with a little bit of limited
detail, provided we had a total
of 166 million in
appropriations.
Um, there was there was either
encumbrances are good detail
provided for you know, more than
$90 million of that, so a good
amount, But you can see the
other columns there. 24 Million
where funds were reported by the
agency is being obligated. But
there was not that kind of
detailed vendor level. Um,
awards or where there was a
little less information
provided.
Um
You know, so that we sort of
started off with with areas that
we want to take, Maybe a little
closer. Look at, But then you
can see the next section of this
is where we actually got.
Really. We've got pretty good
spending plans and a lot of
detail from agencies on, um
their spending plans for these
funds. So, um, you can just, you
know, highlight a couple here.
You know, we got really good.
Information, for example, from
the Cultural Affairs department
about you know exactly what
facilities those awards are
gonna be made to. We got some
some good information from the
energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department about state
park improvements and where
those are going to be deployed.
Uh, so, uh, I should say, Mr
Chair, Senate Finance Committee
staff has access to all of those
and and can provide you with
with that that a little more
detail on each of those.
Um, then, uh, the next section
beginning on Page four. You'll
see. These are areas where the
agency reported that those those
balances are fully obligated and
again in general, when those
funds were fully obligated, we
were able to get some pretty
detailed, um, information on
where the agency was planning on
spending.
Those amounts.
And then finally, sort of the
best news. Mr Chair is on the
very back page. So here you can
see these appropriations
totalled about 166 million.
Those appropriations have at
this point been fully expended.
Um so, uh,
Did. That's just sort of the
overview of the process we went
through and, um
And with that, I'll hand it over
to secretary props for his
comments.
Good morning, Mr Chairman.
Members of committee, Wayne
Props with Department of Finance
and administration.
I thank you for the opportunity
to be with you this morning.
Mr Chairman. Uh,
Sometimes you give us homework
and like kids. We grumble about
that homework, but
This particular assignment we
welcomed and I think it's been a
really good exercise not only
for the Department of Finance
and administration, but all of
the agencies sitting behind me.
To take a minute. Look more
closely at where we are in
spending this money because Mr
Chairman, there's nobody in the
room. Who wants that money spent
more than you and I so I want to
thank Joey and Legislative
Finance Committee staff.
This has been a very
collaborative effort that's been
ongoing now for about two
months.
I think. Two months ago when we
first met, it seems like we're
pretty far apart in terms of
where we thought the state was
and expanding these funds, But I
think since then we both have
gotten higher level of
confidence that agencies are
obligating the money and we are
spending it And in many cases,
we have plans detailed plans to
spend the money.
Um, in some areas perhaps, uh,
we've fallen behind on some
appropriations.
But it's good to identify those
if we can get those catch caught
up, and if we can't than those
funds can be potentially used
for other purposes.
As Joey indicated the LSC data
shows that over 900 million of
the roughly 1 billion and
S fo R F appropriations have
either been fully expended.
Encumbered or obligated, and by
obligated, we mean some granted.
With plans or with immediate
plans to do so. That's about
88%. That's are in those
categories in two years.
Mr Chairman, as an example of
that, Um
The Department of Finance and
Administration has been awarded
$252 million in funds.
I'm not sure if that makes us
the largest awarded or not, but
I would imagine we're pretty
close.
We have encumbered 99.9% of that
252 million, leaving less than
200,000. That hasn't been, uh,
at least at a minimum obligated.
As you know, Mr Chairman. These
awards are active and underway
and virtually all of your house
districts and we think they're
active in all 42 Senate
districts as well. So this money
is in your communities.
Doing good work and we are
appreciative of the efforts of
the Legislature to appropriate
these funds to the agencies that
have received them. We do miss
think Mr Chairman, that there
are some risks. Of course, The
greatest risk of all is that we
send money back and we all want
to avoid that.
But it's just one example. Um
All s frf. Affordable housing
projects will revert on 630 of
2025.
Which would leave them short of
18 months to fully expand those
dead. Those dollars by the
federal deadline of December
31st of 2026.
So we do have some deadlines
coming up. Mr Chairman and
members of the committee are
well aware of them. The LSC is
aware of them, D F A and the
again the agency's here today
are aware of those deadlines.
We want to make sure that those
deadlines don't artifact
artificially.
Uh, cut short an opportunity to
spend these dollars in your
communities.
So we will look forward to
continuing the work that we've
been doing over the last couple
of months with LSC and this
committee to ensure that all of
the funds that New Mexico has
been
Awarded, uh, are obligated by
the federal deadline and are
able to be put to use again in
your communities joined here by
today by Patrick Schafer, who is
not only our general counsel,
but also is the head of our
Federal grants. Bureau, Of
course, have Dr Andrew Minor
who's been the lead for the FIFA
on this as well as
A number of local government
division staff responsible for
getting billions of dollars out
the door, not only from these
funds and of course agencies
behind me as well to answer any
specific questions on the items
that were mentioned earlier by
Joey. So with that, Mr Chairman,
happy to
Happy to continue the discussion
with you.
Um what So, Mr Chairman, I
hadn't planned on running them
one by one. But if you want you
want to do that we can. We can
do that. Just okay.
And we can provide you with more
detail on that
01 force or yes, Uh, yes, Mr
Chairman. Sorry that I was
moving the four over. Yeah, Yes,
exactly. Yeah, even though I'm
not wearing my glasses, either.
So, just a quick question When
you start talking about the
housing and and are the money
that was
Designated for that and deadline
coming up.
Just on the mechanics on how
that moves through.
Yeah.
Do you solicit request for?
Proposals.
Had does that work? I mean, if I
if if I was somewhere that that
needed housing, which all across
the Mexico we need housing.
Is the hiccup that we don't have
the contractors.
To build. It is a hiccup that we
don't have the
The proposals for the
For the money. Where Where is
that here? Got bad. We have a
idea of that.
Mr Chairman and senator would
deserve particular item which
you are referencing.
I think well, so you you just
made a statement that there was
some Martin money that for
housing had to be spent. But
25, I think you said.
You just elaborate on that a
little bit. Maybe I think that
you may be referring to and is,
Let's look at Page five, and
this was not some hours. But
Wayne secretary, Um word says
that on the award risks it says
that, um, the recovery funds for
affordable housing projects will
revert on June 30th.
It deprives them 18 months to
expand as allowed by the federal
deadline. Um and the deadline
would be December 31st of 26.
Maybe you can explain a little
bit on that Senator Woods is
that Chairman which you were
referring to about that
expiration? Yeah, that's that's
assistant. What? I'm
You can explain. Maybe they can
explain for sure. Mr Chairman
members of the committee, uh,
the state fiscal recovery fund
appropriations have three
separate reversion conditions.
Three separate reversion dates.
There was 10 million
appropriated in 2021 for
affordable housing and then 10
million in 2022 for affordable
housing as well.
The governor's office in
coordination with Department of
Finance and Administration
opened up a grant program for
affordable housing across the
state and also tribal nations.
Those projects are now all
obligated by the Department of
Finance Administration to the
recipients, the federal
expenditure deadline is December
31st 2026.
Meaning that that project under
the federal rules would have
until 2026 to fully expand and
realized that project under
state reversion date. All that
money would have to go back by
June. 30th 2025. Okay, so so
that reversion date precedes the
federal expenditure deadline
with these, um, state fiscal
recovery fund reversion dates
generally by 18 months, if not
more.
There's other reversion dates
for capital projects, funds as
well and other projects around
New Mexico that are all subject
to that anticipated reversion
date that would deprive for
expenditure of the sub
recipient. You
Mhm.
Go ahead. Go ahead. Um well, my
question is
Hmm. My question is alright.
We've got to $10 million deals.
We've got we've got
The money out the door we've got
we've got it obligated, but the
projects aren't complete.
Is that right? Mr Chairman,
members of the committee.
They're all currently underway
and being developed at this
point.
So
Before we can say we're done
with those
$20 million projects.
They have to be completed.
The money has been obligated to
those projects and the
developers and the housing
authorities and the tribal
nations and the other recipients
are currently spending under
those projects. And what we're
saying is that the state
reversion deadline.
Accelerates the time when that
money is going to have to go
back to the state and its gonna
deprive the recipients from 18
months to fully expand. The
other issue is that once that
money goes back by the reversion
date, it's going to be too late
to re appropriate. So it's gonna
strand the money and the state
of New Mexico will not get the
full benefit of those funds.
I understand that problem. The
question I have is
When do we consider these
projects complete?
Well under federal. Yes, Under
the federal rules, they would
have until December 31st 2026 to
fully expand. Okay. Understate
rules, they would only have
until December the Earth June
30th 2025 to fully expand,
understand that part
The question I'm asking, Is it
when you have a certificate of
occupation? When is it
considered a complete project?
I suppose when there is a C 00
Certificate of occupancy.
Say that one more time I would
agree with you, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee that
the project would be complete
when the construction industries
division or the local government
issues a certificate of
occupancy.
Okay, That's that's what I was
wondering. Yeah.
Just the mechanics of it on how
We say that's complete, so thank
you for that Rodriguez.
You're good. I'm good. Thank
you. Yeah, idea. Thank you.
Chair and thanks to gentlemen
Secretary, So I was hoping we
can get maybe just a comment
from the film office on, uh, the
acting secretary on film related
questions that came up a little
while ago.
And if he's paying attention or
not, but, uh
Mark Roper. Yeah, so just a
quick comment a couple of
comments on comments made around
film seriously additional
information that maybe we should
be aware I've got you know
Netflix and the heart of my
district here in North American
headquarters. Wanna make sure
we're taking good care of that
gang. Mr. Chair, Senator.
members of the committee. Thank
you for the question, and I've
I've got Amber Dotson here with
me. Also who is the director of
the film division?
So as we specifically looked to
the RP funds, but it it's fair
to look at also the additional
$20 million in capital outlay
because there's $40 million
sitting sitting there as the
share pointed out, so it's fair
to talk about them.
Kind of collectively but
specifically on the RP funds. We
are in the midst of executing
Elijah, a wooden Mexico State
university that will be
executed.
Within days that
That idea will move $15 million
out of the ARP of funding
directly to New Mexico State
University for the build out of
the film academy at at their at
their campus.
We've already obligated
approximately $400,000 for some
design work and other work
that's going on with the film
academy.
And then remaining the remaining
about $4.5 million. A portion of
that will be used to continue
with design work collectively
across both both campuses and
there would be a small portion
of it. That will be part of the
idea that has already been
executed with C. N. M. For the
Albuquerque campus at the rail
yards.
On the $20 million for capital
outlay. Very similarly, We have
a $15 million executed Aiga with
the central New Mexico, Um
University to do their work at
the rail yards we have we have
already encumbered
And have our first invoice from
CNN to move that $15 million. So
collectively, we are about $35
million between the two income
bird and we have a plan forward
for the remaining $5 million. So
Mr Chair members of the
committee. I appreciate your
diligence. Um as secretary props
also also said we welcome this,
but I think at this point the
fact that we have and execute an
I G A and one. That's
Momentarily going to be
executed. It would. It would
really move things backwards and
getting this money out the door
if we were to try to do a direct
appropriation to New Mexico
State Embassy NM. What were the
train is already down the track.
Well.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. It depends on the
project. So in some, it maybe
takes months and this particular
incidents because there was
some design work and some other
things that need to be done to
define what those ideas were
between the two universities.
It's It's taken longer to stand
this one up, but they are in
One has been executed in one
will be executed moment and in
this instance it took about 18
months. Yes, thank you very
much. And if there is at all
possible, Ms Dodson that for a
production to land right in the
middle of Gallup, or a local
state senator to ride a horse
across the screen while it's
happening. I mean, it just kind
of like hiyo silver, and I think
that would be go a long way.
So if there's any way we could
get that done in the next month
or so. I appreciate that.
Senator. Mr. Chair. We look
forward to that. I don't need to
be in any movies. You know what
I want to see you happen to be
here happen to be friends with
John Wayne's grandson. There we
go Picture, right. I knew there
was a connection somewhere, and
my point is, if you want to lose
opera money, and you won't be
the only state that sends our
money back, all right ahead.
You're the laughingstock of the
100th.
Uh,
Talking about dollars and being
the chairs was the money spent
because I will tell you right
now In this committee, Eric quit
in front of another state
senator told us that the film
office overpaid expenditures on
films.
3 to $5 million. You want three
more millions for special
Olympics? Do you want it for
three more million for DD
waiver? You want to just let
them override the Legislature by
saying we're we don't really
care what we spend. We'll just
spend and then we'll ask for a
supplemental at the end of the
year that is our legislative
authority and appropriating
authority that we take an oath
to you.
And so
This is I mean, this is not a
fun exercise. This is an
exercise to say.
You're in business. I'm in
business and my going to waste
money.
Watching someone film a movie
down the street when they should
be over there, pushing this snow
and filming a tiktok. I mean,
this is this is a
This is an exercise that we
should happen yesterday. Really?
Chap me pretty hard because
Our legislative appropriation
authorities had just went out
the window completely.
Well, I agree with you, Mr
Chairman, and I thought that's
why I'd be a good idea to have
all the light of day and be able
to ask these folks questions as
we did. So. Thank you also had
thank you to the economic
illness also had a couple of
follow ups for the C. Y F D
portions of this report. I don't
know if Secretary designate
Cassano's wants to come up and
address just a few of the
comments that were made on that
section as well.
Good morning again.
Yeah. So I think you had some
follow up questions or comments
that you wanted to make
regarding, you know, worth worth
things stand right now.
Um, sure. So, with respect to
the $20 million that you guys
are seeing unspent for C Y f D,
um we all know there's a huge
need for behavioral health
services and what that looks
like. And so this was something
that was incredibly concerning
to me when I came on board in,
you know, May June time frame
and found out that that money
hadn't been spent or allocated
and there wasn't um
You know a sufficient plan in
place to do that. And so working
with H s D, where the money was
allocated to, um over the course
of the last five or six months.
Um, you know, proved to be a
little bit challenging for us,
as we all had different ideas of
where that needed to be spent
and how that needed to be done,
but it really gave us an
opportunity to look at it
holistically to make sure that
serving the clientele that we
both serve could meet the needs
of what that looks like. And so
we do have a plan in place.
I know that it was submitted.
You know, it's not comprehensive
because it doesn't have actual
providers yet.
But it does detail what we're
looking to do. And so that was
provided. I don't know if you
have copies of that. But I have
copies and I'm happy to leave
that for you guys to look at,
But it really details what we're
doing with respect to, you know,
money for thriving family plans
were going to be doing more
focused work on foster families
and Children in state custody.
We're doing looking at our
shelter continuum and how we can
increase those, Um we're doing
more trauma training supports
and community crisis response.
And so there is a plan for C Y f
d. We're working on that right
now we've spent about
$1.3 million. We have another
million encumbered and we're
working with providers and
vendors, which, as you all know,
there's not a lot in the state
and so even working at how we
recruit vendors from out of
state to bring them here to
provide those services, so I
just wanted to make sure that
you know, you all know that
there is a plan in place. Um and
I'll leave that with you guys
pass that out. And then I also
with your permission will pass
out the
Capital outlay more detail that
was asked about yesterday. So
unless anybody has any specific
questions, I just wanted to make
sure that thank you Chair and
thank you. Sorry.
I'm not on the bad list.
Um, there were. There was two
items. Well, we talked about the
C West. And then there were a
few other items You wanted that
you mentioned a follow up to the
capital conversation made
yesterday She brought some
additional details. Put money C
Y F G has the 20 million
behavioral health, it might be
under HST because the money was
allocated to them. But then we
did an MOU to move the money to
see why FD so that we could, um
expended.
Meeting the behavioral health
needs for Children comes through
HST and then flows over to you
to actually do the actual
service delivery, so I didn't
want HST to be put on the spot
if they were on the list on the
bad list. Um, since we have
taken the responsibility for
making sure those dollars are
spent, that's about to the tune
of 20 million. Yes. Okay. Thank
you. Thanks. Chair. Thank you
very much. Any questions from
anyone?
No. Alright. Thank you.
No, Mr Chair. That's exactly
where I was going. So that's
fine. We're going to listen to
that. Thank you very much, Mr
Chairman and the first question,
of course, and I really
appreciate the work that
continues to go on with the
opposite the state engineer in
regards to believe it's item
number nine.
On dam rehabilitation, and I
know that the Jains Wallace
Memorial Park Power Dam is is a
big project. Can you Can you
elaborate a little bit in terms
of that, and then what the focus
is going to be as we continue
with them rehabilitation in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Senator. Crumples,
Mr Chair. Appreciate the
question, Um
We've we've been appropriated
$40.3 million of ARPA.
Funds, and one of the larger
ones that we received was $10
million for the Power Lake Dam
in Santa Rosa.
And, uh, we've worked very
closely with D F a
Death and team because of the
oddities of RP dollars with the
federal requirements versus you
know, state appropriation
requirements, and I think we've
ironed out a lot of the real
tricky details of what it takes
to actually get this. This
funding funds expended. So that
was that was kind of a bit of a
hill decline.
But I think we've achieved it.
Um and and we think we've got a
really good process in place.
The other thing, I would say,
too, is that um, just just
because of the nature of of the
funding and the capital Ali's
that comes to our agency.
Uh, we've become really good
contract administrators as
opposed to being, uh, fully
staffed to actually manage these
projects on our own. So, so
that's one of the consequences
of of of of having a lot of
funds appropriated to our
agency.
We've become really good at that
contract management. Um, with
that said, we have executed an
agreement with the city of Santa
Rosa.
Ah, we are in the process of
working closely with their
engineering firms to actually
get the finalization of design
and administration moving
forward.
And we fully expect to to fully
obligated and expand that $10
million. We also have on the
capital side that you will talk
about tomorrow. We have
statewide damn monies that will
help supplement the cost
increases over. You know, above
this amount.
That also applies to another
capital project for Petersen Dam
in Las Vegas. So these funds are
being commingled and managed
together in order for us to
achieve the goals of the
specific entities of need.
Uh, we've also expanded
Alright, begin expanding, Uh,
close to half of the 40.3
million public, you know,
allocated to our agency, and we
have sufficient bandwidth and
And agreements in motion.
To complete all of our, um
Uh, obligations if you will, by
May of 2024, and I'd like to
also echo what Secretary Props
said regarding, uh the
importance of extending that
deadline for expenditure to get
closer to matching the federal
deadlines. In order for the
expenditure side, uh, to allow
us once we're obligated.
You know, expenditure extension
will be very helpful to the
agency as well. Thank you. Thank
you very much, Mr Chair and just
a couple of other comments in
regards to that, as we
Prepare if you will with for the
drought mitigation. I know
that's an important issue as we
move forward.
Even though we see if you will
the snow out there. I know that
continues to be a significant
issue for New Mexico and you
might just briefly talk a little
bit about that. And then I just
want to compliment. Of course,
the work that's going on with
outdoor recreation.
Whether state parks and the
coordination across the board as
we continue to deal directly
with the environment that does
take care of you will of, uh,
our wildlife. We continue to go
ahead and ensure that our
communities have the necessary
water for their continuous
assistance and an existence and
then deeper than that, with the
resources that are here. I know
that you all have done your due
diligence.
To continue to improve and to
make sure those dollars are
going to be expended and that
goes back to what the chair
continues to elaborate, and that
is these resources are here. We
continue to go ahead and do the
planning.
Let's get those dollars out to
our communities and that in in
itself, I believe over a period
of time.
I will help us as we continue to
deal with the area of
prosperity, jobs and the other
things that definitely are going
to help all of our communities
across the state. So with that,
if you just please mention a
little bit in terms of that
drought mitigation that that we
continue to deal with. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Senator Campos.
Yes, we have a couple of line
items in in in the RP dollars in
particular and then a lot of
other specials in capital. Uh,
appropriations that we were made
to our agency last year that
complement each other again and
and a large one of 15 million is
dedicated to drought mitigation.
And compact administration if
you will.
Um, for the middle Rio Grande.
Um and that's what working
closely with the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy district to
do voluntary following and my
understanding is they've
advertised that to their
constituents back in October,
and they have identified well
over 3000 acres.
Of of voluntary, um
Uh, following, uh, with a
deadline of February 29th this
year, uh to, uh, to build their
portfolio there, and they expect
probably at least double or
more, uh, interest there so that
will help us on Contact
Administration making up on our
our shortages to the Rio Grande
Compact and our debit.
Um, as well as using some of
those funds to, uh, improve the
channel conditions in the lower
Rio Grande in order the lower
part of the middle Rio Grande in
order for us to expedite
deliveries on a more consistent
basis down the Elephant Butte so
that this funding will be a also
available to leverage
significant federal dollars.
That have been appropriated
under B l and I r a specific to
middle Rio Grande and lower Rio
Grande. So we're we're We think
we're going to be able to
significantly leveraged
installers as well. Thank you
very much. Mr Chair. I have
other questions. I'm not going
to bring him but this time but
again, thank you very much for
allowing me this opportunity to
hear about what's going on the
water.
Ah!
Senator Woods one second
Let me ask you something, Mike,
and in just listen have an
honest conversation because if I
would take General fund money
and say, Okay, you have $40
million sitting right here.
If anything goes wrong in these
projects.
Anything in there?
The contractor, the engineer
says. Oh, we found a different
soil condition now we got to
redesign for that soil
condition. Rebuilding both. You
guys are shaking your heads and
I'm in the construction world.
This happens all the time,
right?
That could throw you into the
timeline past the completion
date to expand all the money.
Correct.
Hmm. There there, there could be
a some risk to that. But in my
professional opinion about what
we've got on the table for this
And the the work and the
planning that's already been
accomplished in partnership with
like MRG CD and others. Um, we
we feel
You know, highly confident.
That, uh, particularly if the
deadline is matched with the
federal expenditure deadlines.
That that we will easily be able
to get this. This these funds
expended the way they're
structured in our system, And
that may not be true of all of
their dollars, but certainly
when we've set it up, But if I
gave you the option and said,
You know what, Mike, I'm gonna
replace that with General fund
so you're still able to get your
projects done right? And if
anything happens to the timeline
You're you're safe.
Would that be the smarter thing
to do for these projects?
Well, um, Mr Chair members of
the committee the color of the
funds.
The way that they're structured
for Arte.
Is they from the state's
perspective? If we're if we got
it expended if you will, or
certainly obligated by by
transfer with our
Our contract E or, you know, or
entity Emergency D or the city
of Las Vegas wherever that is.
Then then it's technically off
of the of the state books. If we
go with my view is that if we
shifted right now, mid course
into a general fund status than
that that changes the color
enough to where we would have to
probably re readdress our
agreements with the entities
that that we already have
negotiated.
Just my opinion anyways. Why
would it change? It's just a
different
Funding sources wouldn't change
the structure of any money and
just say
This is a replacement for the
$30 million. You're still on
course to do exactly what you
do. And if anything happens
You have the extended timeframe.
I mean, you're don't think your
I G says this is maybe it does,
But maybe it doesn't but maybe
said, these are federal arbor
dollars and you have to be able
to complete by this date.
And they're accepting that
responsibility because
I'd almost bet you what's going
to happen. Somebody is not going
to complete and they say, Oh,
we're halfway done with this.
And we'll be like the village
and Maura Building a judicial
system for 20 years.
And and
I'm just not willing to risk
that. But I mean
I mean, you and and the exact
will not be here in 2027.
I think that's when they go out,
right?
And the while you may be, but
there may have been different
exact and they're just going to
say, Look what happened.
I'm just
I'm like a banker right now.
Today like I'm gonna I'm gonna
give you money or lend you
money. But I'm gonna I want to
see vouchers. I want to see
construction progress. I want to
see all that. And at the end of
the day is my loan risk worth
swapping you out money, or
should I just swap your money
and say Okay, give you the time
and in that you need without
Having to sweat because
I mean, you know when the
construction world right now.
Finding an engineer.
Finding an engineer in New
Mexico is pretty damn tough, or
you're on a three or four month
waitlist. Anything engineered
And and then they're in design
for 6 to 8 months with anything
that's over 10 million and then
you're gonna be another 18
months to two years in
construction.
Mr Chair and your deputies dying
to say something, Okay, I'm just
talking. I'm just just a real
conversation. Yes. Yeah. You
want to be a winner, or do you
want to be a loser? And how do
we win? Well, I appreciate the
candidate exchange of Mr Chair,
I think you make a good 0.1 area
is dance, but you know that that
can be more complex.
Um and and but
A lot of our other categories, I
think are pretty well scoped out
and I know we can we can we can
accomplish that, or whatever the
source of funding is, you know,
we're gonna do be dealing, take
our due diligence to make sure
that the the project
accomplished under the standards
that have been developed for
that project. So if they're you
know, that would be about the
only one. I could think of that
that that makes sense to swap
the funds.
Yeah, I just don't want you
Common sense tells you why make
you sweat money, right? Because
agencies? No. Oh, well, I didn't
get my capital spent all just
asked for an extension, right?
There is no asking for an
extension here, right? The
federal government is going to
say if you haven't spent your
money, we want our money back,
giving you six years to spend
it.
In common sense tells me
Give people
The
Authority. Well, give people the
thought process to say I want to
sweat this project and trying to
get it done. Or should someone
just say? Hey, we're just gonna
swap $30 million. Its just a
swap to me, right?
I'm gonna take 30 million in
General fund and I'm gonna take
your 30 million are profound.
And you're gonna have the 30
million for the exact same
projects that you wanted that
you did in our papa.
That you started and begin.
And I'm gonna swap that money
and say Okay, now I'm gonna
It's just a swapping of money. I
pulled 30 million from general
funds and they say Okay, now I
can spend this money and I know
it gets spent.
And it gives you the timeline.
And damn is a big project. I
mean,
Depending of its dirty concrete,
But
Gives you guys the time and the
flexibility to succeed.
In. We're trying to help. I'm
thinking, how do we win and not
send any money back?
And not make you say, well, our
contractor bankrupt or
contractors failed, or, you
know, I mean, we had a car hit a
semi the other day, leaving
talented. Take a load right, And
it's like, never went the whole
whole week because
Blew the axle out blue, the bent
the rims. Whole thing. Gotta go
to Albuquerque.
Landon Axl had to drive to
Amarillo and get an excellent
and it just happens. So I'm
If you tell us and you would
say, come back to some. Maybe we
come back and say you know what?
This might be a better way for
us to do. It might give us
A better way to complete
projects. I'm fine with that.
But if you tell us, no, I can
get it done well.
2027 may not be here in 2025 so
I mean, you guys should think
about that. And those are the
agencies are listening.
It's common sense for me to
To figure out things so that
money spent
Because I can spend the money.
Immediately.
And meet the deadline.
All. I'm doing this swapping
money from one hand to the
other.
Thank you about it. Yeah, and I
do have other, You know, there's
other projects out there that we
know we could spend the money on
that. They're not on the list,
But so if there's no list, and
you went too far down this road
to make that swap.
Right, right. But if I took and
said okay for this project in
these dams in Santa Rosa and
where we listed
Maybe we could just swap that
money and then
Then you got a longer timeline.
Yeah, we can't even put a longer
timeline on the money. In fact.
It certainly makes sense.
Appreciate that perspective,
Senator Campbell's will be
calling you get that timeline
because he has a warm water
hatchery over there.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I guess lets you who's here in
Lansing. I see you. You're next
in the audience is pull you up.
Tourism has a balance of, um Mr
Chair. Tourism was one of those
that provided us really good
detail on how they were going to
spend it, so you'll find most of
their appropriation under the
fully obligated category. And
then there's um one online 20
where it's essentially fully
obligated. There's a very small
amount, but yeah, tourism was
one where there was a
A lot spent,
so I'm lying 20 if you look up
at our top screen right there,
right?
Yeah, yeah.
You have a 50,000? What's your
balance there?
Yeah, it looks like 50,026
million, so it's a really small
balance.
Can you buy beautification trash
bags for Senator Stein, born at
the height of the side of the
roads with that money?
Mr Chairman.
So that was money. Money money
will be obligated for marketing
purposes. However, they exist
within our national marketing
contract.
Okay. Perfect overalls. I'm
sorry. That's another
husband.
No. They're called vest. They're
called safety vest. They are
orange and lime green. I just
want to double check. Let's see
Who else is there
all the higher ed secretary
shaking her head at me? Come on
up. Thank you, Mr Chairman. Just
so members know we're probably
gonna go into executive and do
language And then that may just
finish us for the day so
You're going to make a comment?
No, Go ahead. Is it because I Mr
Chair? Is it because I didn't
name ever? Georgina that you're
calling me up? No, no, no. You
shook your head over me when I
looked at your like, Yeah, I
want to come up. Mr Chairman,
Right? Exactly. Exactly. Yeah,
we do. Color Lativa G, like la
Becky G.
Mr Chair. I do have this really
brief for you. Lion 60, nursing
endowed faculty expansion. We
did expand that money. We
enrolled nearly 400 new students
and supported over 6800
currently enrolled students. The
dollars went to eight community
colleges. Five branch campuses
in 34 year universities and, of
course, the University of New
Mexico's Health Sciences Center.
Line. 61 is the opportunity
scholarship. I'm happy to report
that there is 76 cents left in
that fund, but we do plan on
spending it next year. So don't
worry about that. So we have
spent down nearly all of the
$103 million and then line 62
Teacher Loan repayment fund. As
some of you know, we awarded
over 900 teachers.
With debt relief this past year
We have $26,000 left in that
fund. However, it is already
obligated to our teachers for
next year. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you Members, Senator
Woods. I didn't have a question,
Did you? You have a question for
the State Engineering committee
members.
Done.
Okay. Thank you, Joey.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'll need a
motion to go and I guess
second motion by center shirt
and go into executive second
Base Center. Rodriguez any
objection to go into the way we
got
So we're gonna go into executive
session discussed language.
An executive
Any objection to the motion of
going into executive committee.
Yeah, See, Nunn will wait until
they clear the room.
LFC staff will be staying with
us.
We offer Webcast.
