Chaves County.
A bill sure Senate district one
which is important.
State senator crystal diamond
from Senate district thirty five
Dogo lunacy Erin Dona Ana County
Senator Campos.
Thank.
I'm gonna good morning I'm
senator Nancy Rodriguez district
twenty four in Santa Fe.
Good morning I'm centerman gives
us in the district for Gallup.
Requests can possible McKinley
and San Juan can.
So we all heard this bill on
Friday there was some issues I
think they got resolved over the
weekend
we know what the Senate's two
does I'm and I'm gonna go to
public comment.
First and then then go back to
the Mr chair is there a point to
where we still working on point
one is to because the order.
Point one is this up there's not
a point to I haven't seen in
centers there there's not a
point to correct thank you Mr I
think that is a yes okay that is
correct there is no.
No there is none yes Sir you're
correct.
Just just for our virtual
audience head shaking doesn't
come often.
Like the horse in the morning
this morning
So let's go to public comment
and.
This call are soon yet how many
have for me it against.
Okay you want to let them in
and.
So those people on do not I
can't see your name I can't see
anything so you can who are the.
Just let.
No Way Out of there's no way to
presume that.
I will come up once they start
talking.
All right now and then anybody
in the audience on the
substitute in support.
Has it changed from Friday.
Anybody in opposition in the
audience.
We have the two one soon
correct.
Go ahead I'm sorry.
Mr chairman members of the
committee brick that died I'm a
supervisor on the blue full
water conservation district and
I'm not really stand in
opposition I just have some
concern about the bill in Lee
County we really struggled
finding representation from
south of the southern part of
the county we've tried for for
five years to get a
representative from Jalal Yunus
the southern part of pop we
haven't been able to find one to
provide we feel that someone
from eleven ten so I just have
concern on the one point three
one three that we might not be
able to fill some of those seats
thank you Mr chair thank you
we're gonna go to I can't see
your name on the zoom ma'am are
you in support or opposition is
to support first on the
substitute bill point one
version.
The next one.
Still need you need on mute
ma'am I don't know if you can
hear us I can't see your name
from here.
Mary
In requests.
Are you in support opposition
we're taking support first.
Your muted then.
In opposition okay.
In support.
great bend like are you he was
in the audience C. J. garrison
are you in support or
opposition.
Ellen white.
Okay we'll take opposition
missing from.
Go ahead.
Okay
I'm not sure I haven't done this
before some exactly sure what I
need to do.
Well you are if you're in
opposition the bill tell us why
you're standing in opposition in
two minutes or less.
Okay.
my concerns are regarding the
age of the people that will be
allowed on the
election boards and the working
you know.
I also.
Thank.
Education regarding the E. R.
owes and whether that would
include the L. one hundred and
whether they would need to
register before every election I
think that would be the best
thanks committee.
The central on.
Thanks.
You know I would also
I am.
Concerns with the challenges in
the limitations placed on the
challengers as far as a lot of
different parts of of what's
happening with the challengers
allowing them to see
particular information regarding
voters and the places where they
can you know occupy space.
To to really observe the
election process.
For the registration of electors
We is prescribed a uniform
process to identify voters who
may be eligible for
cancellation.
And I I concerns about that
because we really need to meet
the and we are a standard for
cancellation and we do need
significant amount of voter roll
cleanup I think that should be
in the state clearly that that
needs to be done by the
secretary of state's office.
That.
And then I yeah I do appreciate
the ending of the Lexus known as
seven PM on on election day.
Okay Senate.
Yes.
Thank you I don't know if we
have Ellen white or CJ garrison.
If you don't jump on real
quickly I'm gonna go the
secretary of state real quickly
secretary we know we had some
issues with this bill I know you
guys worked over the weekend are
you comfortable with everything
that's in this piece of
legislation and and you're good
and you support yes Mr chairman
thank you for asking we are all
that thank you questions from
committee members.
Everybody stayed home did their
homework this weekend.
Senator so it's still very
quickly can the the Sanchez
answer the objections that we
just heard.
This some of my frankly don't
understand certainly I'm Mr wood
and Center share.
So there's a there's a concern
about allowing sixteen and
seventeen year olds to serve on
election boards actually sixteen
seventy rules have been allowed
to serve election boards for the
last twelve years that wasn't a
policy that was adopted on in
two thousand and ten.
And and in addition to that.
now we require.
Now that we don't we have
qualified residents witcher was
it's kind of a pre registration.
Before being eighteen.
We which we did not have twelve
years ago we can allow them to
register to vote.
And insist that like every other
member the election board they
have to register to vote even if
they're not in a motor.
So in this bill we don't create
a new policy of sixteen
seventeen year olds serving
election boards what we do do is
we say if you're going to serve
you have to be registered to
vote just like everybody else so
we tightened the restrictions in
this bill for what current law
office.
Okay.
Thank you Mr.
Senator Steinborn thank you on
that point what what we require
that Mr I mean the the the
respect me working at the polls
is a.
Job opportunity some people get
into it if we're allowing and I
passed the bill allowing sixteen
seventeen as people workers
which to prove to be a great
thing and the senior citizens
loved it and they they can't
service providing judges but but
why.
Why require them to to register
to the synchronicity.
Mr chairman and senator mark.
Every everybody else's serves on
the election board is required
to be registered both.
So since we allow now we did not
win when you pass that bill
there was no Avenue for some
sixty or seventy will be pre
registered about.
We now have that provision and
all.
And so because everybody else
has to register to vote then
they should be registered to
vote as well.
Some anyway Mr chair I have
still not sure her to get answer
there other than everyone else
is required to do it especially
since you're talking about six
year seventeen year old I'm just
curious what's what's the what's
the I mean I can understand
because you have partisan
positions within that board and
you have it.
Balance and that's really
important but the is that the
same rationale to sixteen and
seventeen year old or they pick
based upon their partisanship or
is it just required for them to.
Mr chairman and Senator
Steinborn.
It so when we passed the bill
twelve years ago.
We have to create an exception
to the rule.
There's no longer a reason to
create is to have an exception
to the rule.
So we should not have an
exception where there's not a
good reason to have one.
Frankly I might flip the
question around you under what
circumstances would we want
someone who's not registered to
vote to serve on election board.
Chairman in the case of a
sixteen year old who's trying to
provide for their family and get
a work opportunity and.
You know wants to get their
first basically civic experience
working at a call and you know
voter registration whether you
know the that's a whole other
conversation with me I think
everyone should automatically be
registered to vote but but I I
still has a good reason does me
I'm not going to support the
bill but in the case of a six
year seventy year old too many
times this is their first
experience getting into it
to say you have to register to
vote in fact.
In fact to me that sounds a
little exclusive and.
so again I could see rationale
for people within that were
filling partisan positions on
boards but in their case in a I
still haven't heard a good
reason other than everyone else
has to do it but.
That's okay.
Thank you Mr thank you any other
questioners.
Thank you Mr chairman thank the
sponsors
I didn't see it in here but is
there anything related to open
primaries in this
Spent a lot of time reading your
bill's sponsors this weekend and
I didn't see anything in there
but can you address that at all
Mr chairman separately at I
congratulate you on getting a
lot of sleep this weekend
and and every time we wake up
service in the bill again to
fall back asleep.
Exactly but the no there's
nothing in here about open
primaries there is no open
primary provision in this bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
last question I had is just the
promulgation of rules does all
of that squarely sit still with
the secretary of state's office
or or other things here that the
secretary state office secretary
secretary of state's office
would not have the ability to
weigh in on.
With regard to some of these
items certainly Mr chairman and
Senator Padilla pursuant to one
dash to dash one point one the
secretary of state has general
rule making authority with
regard to elections and election
code however under the state
rules act pursuant to fourteen
dash forty five point seven
no rule can can conflict with
the statute so we're dispatches
clear them the secretary of
state's office lacks the ability
to contradict the statute the
secretary of state does have the
ability to explain the statute.
We have our secretary of state
here Mister chairman Sanchez do
you agree madam secretary.
If it's alright with you Mr
chairman.
Mister chairman Senator by the
end that is correct and and I
don't see anything within the
context of this legislation that
our office would not have the
ability to through the at the
administrative roles process to
to clarify as necessary to
develop process sees such that
we have uniform process these
across the state center.
Thank you Mr chairman that's.
Move to pass Mr chair.
Once again Senator Woods.
Yes Mr chair of still got a
question on purging voter rolls.
my my father in law died five
years ago chair.
Then is he now resides in the
National Cemetery over here in
Santa Fe County so I can't say
he's not a resident of Santa Fe
County but he is still
getting political mail.
In the mailbox that we still
have in Santa Cruz New Mexico so
is it my duty or my wife's duty
to go to the county clerk and
have his name removed from the
rules this.
Whose duty is that a man
explained it to me Mr chair
Senator Ivey Soto to be happy to
a Mister chairman Senator what's
first of all obviously if we
don't council's registration we
do need to transfer him to Santa
Fe County.
and and and so we can we can
help out with that after the
hearing.
On however.
It one of the things that this
bill proposal so right now when
when people.
when people pass on.
Oftentimes the county clerk is
going to be able to see the
obituary in the local newspaper.
And based on that a bit sure is
going to be able to cancel the
person's registration.
We also do get updates from.
the bureau vitals better records
Department of Health.
Regarding that's in New Mexico
however on the eastern side of
the state some people from
elections administration
perspective brother in
considerably.
It's on in Texas as opposed to
New Mexico and so then we don't
always get that information for
the bureau of vital records.
Under this bill for the first
time.
we have a clear directive that
the secretary of state through
their participation with what's
called Eric the electronic
registration information center.
To have them.
Compare our the registration
database to the national social
security death index.
Database.
And and that if if we then get a
positive hit.
That that your father law now
resides at the national cemetery
here in Santa Fe state of in
Santa Cruz then once this bill
is passed will be able to cancel
his registration immediately.
Okay and and I do wonder.
Under this bill how often will
that database be checked
to to determine that.
Life or death situation.
Mister chairman Senator Woods
that currently is being done
every six months the secretary
of state's office does have the
ability to wrap it up to every
month once once they can do
something more meaningful with
the information but right now
they do do a check every six
months.
Thank you Mr thank you we'll
make sure Senator Diamond takes
my for Christmas card list.
I do center I do have some
questions on that so if you have
a real ID right and you gotta
going you gotta show up so for
some form of utility bill right
and you have an eighteen year
old kid who wants to register
the vote it's living in the
parents house has no utility
bill.
I think I read you can accept
college ID then maybe they're
not in college right.
What are their choices to to
guarantee their form.
So if they want to register.
On twenty eight or more days
before the election.
Then they can register and and
we do.
And their information is
verified whether there are to be
do and and that gets gets passed
through they can go online and
they can register online and
that information is verified
that way.
If they register during the
twenty eight days imminently
prior to election.
Then that person will need to
have a photo ID.
Under this bill photo ID issued
by the state the federal
government or an Indian nation
tribe or public.
Now if that ID has an address.
And the address matches where
they're planning to register to
vote that's all they need.
So if you got a kid is living at
the parents house and I come in
with their ID and it's got their
parents address on that's all
they need they don't need
anything else.
And then let me let me give you
a situation.
So you have a some of the run
for office in New Mexico the to
registered voters and I know how
to turn off my cell some watch
In their vehicles registered in
Arizona their driver's license
in Arizona they claim residency
in New Mexico and then they
would get purged from the rolls
and not be considered a New
Mexico.
Is if they have a I'm sorry
Senator Padilla.
The lighter now we have to move
in do not pass.
We're done here today were
adjourned this.
The chairs much thinner better
looking Senate Bill federal
agency so what would happen and
and and that situation is
because the person has a
driver's license in another
state they would be put on the
list of people to be part.
After two general elections if
they don't vote in an election.
But they voted election then
they would they be put back on
the what's what's called the act
last that doesn't really mean
active or inactive it just means
that they the date that they
have voted since we've
identified that and then the
next time we do a track we would
put them back on the what's
called the in very list.
And then they would come back up
the and very list when they vote
and then they go back on the
American haven't this this
happens with the price of people
all over the state.
Even though their vehicles on
the registration and everything
is in Arizona I mean the so Mr
chairman that's you know given
given that I've I believe
vehicle registration is more
expensive in Arizona than it is
in New Mexico that's something
that the person may want to
reconsider but
but but you know we have the
exact same situation along the
eastern border of the state
where people often times a lot
of a cell phone number from
Texas
they may have a car registered
in Texas
but that but they're New Mexico
resident.
Thank center Senator Hemphill.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this bill forward
Senators my question is I only
made it one time through the the
bill is there anything in here
about having to provide a social
security number in order to
vote.
Mr chairman and senator bill
actually since the late nineteen
fifties New Mexico's reports of
security number nor developed.
and so and in fact for the
privacy act of nineteen seventy
four was was passed by Congress
restricting the use of social
security numbers as an
identifier on New Mexico was was
grandfathered
I'm sorry got accepted an
exemption at that time from the
privacy act and I'm seventy four
in terms of sort registration
database because we've been
continuously using it.
Our system late fifties.
When the help America vote act
two thousand two was passed we
were grandfathered we want to
six states that were
grandfathered at that time we
use in the full social security
number.
And and and to the state we are
one of three states that
continues to use the full social
security number as the
identifier that really is the
gold standard
this bill does not require the
use of the social security
number anymore that we've
already had it we just simply
clarifying some places because
we will also in a restaurant
vote.
If they fill out the paper form.
But using the last four digits
because we don't want
No you got you got some good
standing out in front of target
Russian people to vote in and
your expected to give them your
legal name address full date of
birth and full sourceyour the
number.
I'm not really sure the prison
going to do it right so we allow
when you're filling out the
paper form for person to to find
their V. D. number or to provide
December the last four digits of
sister number because that has
led to some confusion between
last four digits and a full
social security number we're
simply clarifying some places
full but that has always been
what it is but that is not in
the policy.
And and and and by the way a
Senate Mr chairman etcetera
Happel if we had not been using
the full social security number
it would not be lawful for us to
begin used in that this time.
Thank you for that response
Mister chairman Senator thank
you for rural entertain a motion
moved to pass Mr.
Mr chair may I ask one quick
question as a follow up to your
question if they wrote in
In New Mexico they have all the
shares on registration do we
check with there's on to see if
they're voting in Arizona as
well or is there any checks and
balances in that particular
situation it's a little
convoluted little complicated
but
So that states do check for
duplicate registrations and as
soon as an economic Arizona's in
our and by the Texas is coming
online with Eric as well so we
are one of the original states
that that have joined the
consortium yes so somebody votes
in New Mexico involved in
Arizona we would get a
notification that and I
appreciate that Mr as you play
the scenario I mean there's a
lot of avenues we go down so I'm
just checking on that particular
one because that could be a
problem absolutely don't thank
you Mr chair the question
chairman I you know I think that
is quite a bit of discussion and
rightfully so has taken place in
this piece of legislation yes
lots of interaction
collaboration changes improve
the improvements and so on and
I'm going to move a do pass Mr
chairman
this is been present thank you.
Thank you so we're working on
the substitute bill on a do pass
motion for Senate substitute
Senate finance service to for
Senate bill six second we have a
motion by Senator.
Rodriguez's second by Senator
share.
That will call the roll point of
playing the bipartisan really.
So.
Made a motion for what okay so
you made a motion second by
Senator share path we call the
roll thank you.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
Burt.
Senator Burt yes Senator Campos
yes Senator Campos yes Senator
Diamond yes Senator Diamond yes
Senator Gonzales yes Senator
Gonzales yes Senator Hemphill
yes Senator no yes Senator
Padilla yes Senator Padilla yes
Senator share yes Senator sure
yes Senator Steinborn.
Senator Steinborn yes Senator
Woods Senator Woods yes Senator
Rodriguez yes Senator Rodriguez
yes and senator Munoz yes
gentleman yes yes that is
etcetera you have a new castle
location Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you so much
for your time and attention I
know you have a number of
agencies you need to get back to
so thank you for for a here in
this bill thank you members
before you leave.
So we're waiting on the still
waiting on the exact capital.
the reconciling it now so
Senator Rodriguez can introduce
that capital bill and and then
we can begin on Capitol the
house so hopefully some of you
paid attention to what the house
did this this weekend and House
Appropriations and and move
money around and we'll have a
rack up for you but from here on
out we're gonna make sure we
kind of need to have a quorum so
we can be gone that me or Dawn
or somebody know so that it's
not just me and four Republican
sitting.
Just in case something happens.
No pun intended but I will need
to members in their chairs and
then we're gonna be going to
house bill two so I did schedule
some stuff for Saturday on the
calendars because is that moves
over and coming over we're gonna
have a lot of bills and a lot of
things some of those are in the
budget some are in the budget
we're gonna hear a Stewart's
clean and clean with.
Sanders Act tomorrow so brush
yourself up on that.
Senator time when you have
something thank you I'm just
curious I family thing today.
we don't have anything this
afternoon.
So enjoy your time off there but
in will.
Want to ruin everyone's
afternoon however
are we gonna hear from tourism.
We're trying to hear from
tourism but I spoke to them
today that love the present at
least an hour.
I know they love to present that
in in the problem is we've got
so much stuff to do in terms of
did present they did get money
in the and the special session
of fifteen million I know that
that you've been text me left
and right and everybody else
under the sun the other times
gonna get valuable if if we if
we got a call agencies back in
will let her present I haven't
seen the executive director on
the adding any additional money
to tourism there wasn't any in
the executive director in so
we'll just have to be because I
get the same tax you do
about people wanting to present
that's why I asked you before if
there's something you want to
hear or something just let us
know we didn't scheduling thing
today because the numbers are
not going to change.
And so
they're pretty much going to
come out with a flat projection
today saying there's no really
changing new money a lien holder
flat
I think the biggest issue that
we're gonna run into in the
state and is is what's inflation
gonna do to us.
And what's gonna happen in the
second and third quarter of next
year to slow the economy because
there's too much money out there
in the column is moving too fast
and and people are going to.
Go crazy and we'll see what
happens I mean oil and gas could
go up and down and in the
prepare for that.
There but this only thing is and
you and I talked about it but
just for the benefit of the
committee so to make sure that
the Special Olympics funding
that goes through the tourism
department is protected if they
were going to come and that was
one of the questions I have for
them because we if you all might
recall it just somehow magically
I don't know how this happened
but it fell out of the budget a
couple years ago in a lot of us
got together and got that put
back in someone make sure it's
still there so I don't know
somebody can send it through and
if you get with staff and you
start tracking the LFC racks the
house appropriation rex to the
Special Olympics in the line or
net art LFC staff member they'll
track that for you.
It's if anybody has a special
appropriation the the other
thing is and you really need to
think about this because this I
will go to in the morning on
Saturday.
How do you spend three billion
billion dollars correctly.
How do you spend three million
dollars in the state the state
we need to make sure everybody's
protected we do the right thing.
We load the next three weeks to
get done with so so don't just
start picking vessel projects
think about all of New Mexico
not just everybody's District
think about what's going to
happen and how we're gonna spend
the correctly so it does get
into the car this is a point no
Mr chairman I would support if
we do start hearing a sitting
and I would certainly support to
resent having a time before.
Like to make the tourism pills
this weekend so Mister chairman
that Justin in open committee I
just want to ask the office can
I get a line item on where the
Special Olympics money is and
that's all I really want and I
know what we got bigger things
to deal with with this is just a
super important as well and what
will do for you Center premium
will spend some time with one of
our staff members showing you
how to receive read the LFC rex
that HFC transfers and so you
can track certain things to the
budget as they move forward.
It becomes very hard I think
we're good thank you.
What.
Where.
Four four.
This morning.
All.
One
of our studios this afternoon.
If.
For you know that's for us so we
were already we that's when we
were there last week.
Right.
I.
Here we are.
This year at one thirty you
our life is.
This probably will take a long
time.
This is the other.
Senator Wirth.
Sierra one point.
That I was just.
Committee the other day.
I.
This is about the.
I have cool.
I'll just make it.
Okay.
You have this right what is yes.
Crystal.
Thanks for your gifts.
Your.
On the floor.
Our search.
Yes what's important is the
biggest.
As we get.
Yes it is good.
Might be the last weekend
actually local the two members
seven two seven.
Well just retired last year
we're almost the same.
Seventy one.
To just quit work and she's
she's not hearing what Santa Fe
and all this but it's kind of
close capital so she came on
opening day for a little bit
social for the Human she was an
ardent let every nurse there
most Mrs for ever.
Hello have another question.
Would you say of.
I'm from the bush Representative
would help the tourism.
Hello
my district has all of that so I
have the doggo
Dona ana and Sierra so I
wondered yes I have the entire
in my district the.
To make another one is this to
make it down there yes come on.
Recent tier C. on.
We have a dictation Committee
one time there for.
Yeah specific actions on what
is one thing is not to have a
six million dollars.
In terms of the.
