Yes. Um, as we as we get started
Uh, make sure your mics are
where they can.
Be heard. Zoom operator Tell
Introduce us to the Zuma break,
So we know
Then absolutely can see you.
It was s say her name again,
Elita? No, No, we'll tell us
what it is.
Holidays holiday.
Right?
We know who you are there, the
jolly rancher
Are waiting for the sponsor. You
know, as center woods, What do
you call Happy Cowboy?
Senator Padilla.
Up in school.
Good representative. You sit
there real quietly will be done
in five or last minutes.
It is a promise. Uh,
We are efficient in the Senate.
We were just about to start
making cuts for the house, but
you save them.
So if you want to start really
quickly as quickly as you go
through it, all I remember is
have been briefed by me and and
we know the process and we know
where we're going to be at the
end of the day.
It's your bullet points and
We're ready to go. You need to
pull the mic closer. Make sure
the green light is on when you
talk. Okay? Are we live on?
Zoom? We're ready. So we're
ready.
Mr Chairman, We're here on House
Bill one.
And Robur. See, I got from the
Legislative Council services
with me, and I wonder if you
need any detail at all on the
bill role. You want to go over
the detail and then we'll go to
questions from committee
members.
All I did on the house floor was
I went over the various
sections, the legislative
appropriation screaming the
session Appropriation house, the
Senate they lfc L. E S. C and so
forth, all right ahead.
Right ahead.
Those bullet points.
Okay?
Mr Chairman and members of the
Senate Finance Committee. Good
afternoon. Um
House Bill one includes
$7,021,900 for the expenses of
the legislative session, the 24
legislative session included in
there are costs for per diem and
mileage for house and Senate
members and session staff for
the House, the Senate chief
clerk.
And the Legislative Council
service specifically for the L.
And the Legislative Council
service specifically for the
LCS. Excuse me for the annual
appropriations of the agency's
council service, $10,623,900.
Ah and then for interim
expenses. $3 million pre session
$510,000 intern program $60,000
National Organization dues
$475,100.
Legislative information system
hardware, software and service
agreements. 2.7 million Senate
Rules committee that meets
during the interim 35,000.
Contractual obligations for the
capital Billions Planning
Commission 250,000. In addition
to that
L O. C, um, budget is
$7,316,800 Legislative Education
Study Committee, $1,856,500
House chief clerk $3,357,300
Senate.
Chief clerk, $3,367,100. Both
chief clerks also include the
leadership staffing, and lastly,
$400,000 cash balances for the
New Mexico compilation
Commission.
Or the publication of the Mexico
laws online at no charge to the
public and all attorneys and the
like.
Mr Chairman. With that I will
return to leader Chase if she
has any additional
I think we could go to questions
from there. Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Let me explain to our
members first. Uh, I've never
done house Bill one before, but
I know it's an agenda item and
so as the chair of Loc, we
started a little bit earlier
than normal in getting these
numbers.
We knew there were some bills
coming that they wanted to
create a new division or agency
for health and human services,
and we agreed with the person
that was going to present that
that we wanted we would help
them out. Instead of creating a
whole division put add
additional employees into LFC.
That's a three additional
employees for an $8 billion
budget into lfc.
I
So people know in in
Talking to Charles and and me
making a decision added
additional FTE s into lfc.
We have never seen an expansion
in Lfc, but we went from a $5
billion budget $10 billion
budget and being in business,
you have to plan for what's
happening and what's coming your
way and so
Uh, the loc wreck is higher than
it should be.
Partly because we're adding
employees for healthcare. We're
adding employees could add
employees. It's Charles
decision.
For additional
Agency requests and tracking
money. We're creating a new fund
this year. That's almost a
billion dollars.
We know that Loc employees, um,
worked very hard and Dylan Gnr,
highly intelligent, incredible
in and we want to keep that in.
And we increased them employees
wages.
Um, I did add another division
director.
Um and
In lfc, because as we grow, our
agency should grow.
We always look to agencies and
tell them you know, you can only
do this and and do that, and and
we've expanded.
Almost 30% more.
$4 billion more, and the
Legislature has always never
taken care of itself
appropriately.
Hmm. And if you're going to run
a business and operation
We need to make sure that we
have the money. We have the
staff and we have the capability
to do that.
Role for those people don't know
managers about 200 employees.
Mr.
Mr Chairman Noise closer about
110 120 110 120.
A and L. E. S c. They have 15 to
18.
Actually 1111 so
And an lfc. We have 46.
40. I'm saving this money. I'm
over shooting the numbers, So
I'm saving this money. So I
mean, but really if the
Legislature
Tells us we've never taken a big
chunk.
Like we've given to state
agencies like the executive
move.
And we're the ones that are non
paid volunteers.
I spend a lot of our time.
Working on issues our staff that
we have should be well paid.
And have the staff competent to
do that and have enough staff to
do that, so they're not strung
out like chickens.
Trying to to do 10 different
things.
Uh, at the time, so
Uh, if you want to blame the LFC
increase on me.
Go right ahead. But that is my
choice that is creating a better
government. For everyone. It's
creating a better place for the
legislature, and it's creating
more efficiencies.
And if the taxpayers want to
complain and out, disclose what
I pay in taxes, and they can
come to me and say I'll make a
decision. Um, but I just want,
you know, we had a rough time in
lfc.
Because we haven't hired an LFC
director in 26 years.
And and that was a process and
then
You know, you look across Loc.
And are we paying our directors
in the right pay scale?
As executives of of an agency or
corporation. Well, we kinda
adjusted some last year. We need
to make another big adjustment
this year.
We had adjusted the bottom and
the top priority in the Senate
and the house, but we had never
got the middle.
And so we had to make do this
mass expansion.
To get people in the middle paid
correctly because there's people
that may have just started that
are paying more than people that
had 20 years of servicing.
Yeah. You know, it was a task to
get through this. We had several
meetings and
House Bill. One has never come
out. This early capital has
never come out this early,
right? And so we're just getting
try to create the best
government with efficiencies and
staff as we can.
Senator share Did you have a
question?
No, Mr Chair. I think you
addressed the my concern. Thank
you.
Senator Stein born. Thank you,
Mr Chair and welcome. Um, later,
and Raul have a couple questions
number one, I think. Remind me,
did we pass represent McQueen's
bill last session to require
that amendments and things we
posted
Hmm. Would you kind of speak to
that and and speak to if we
funded any additional staffing
to help committees complaint,
Mr. Chair, Senator Stein born
role nodded affirmatively when I
asked if we did.
But
What we have failed to do over
the years is is, as the
executive branch grows, and we
just stay the same and don't get
paid and so forth.
We just give Lfc or Legislative
Council or the L. E S C more
work to do.
With the same amount of money,
So it's just as you said, we're
trying to account for that now
and really have the most
responsible legislature we can
to get the expert advice for our
oversight. Sure, thank you and
roll. Would you speak to that
issue a little bit?
Thanks, Mr Chairman and Senator
House Concurrent Resolution one
last year. Both houses it does
require that we post the agency
analyses and that we also post
the proposed amendments and
substitution whether they passed
or not.
That is in place. So if you look
on the website, you'll see three
new bars that will open up as
those are being posted. Uh and
we did work on that over the
interim. Mostly, it was an
update to
The online system and the
processes and our staff and I T
staff worked with Lfc who
Um
Maneuvers the or takes care of,
I should say of the fires as
they come in and that that
process is in place. So, Mr
Chair and leader enroll so our
amendments as their proposed on
bills supposed to be posted
fairly real time online.
Is that? What the rule Mr
chairman and Senator Stein born
I'd have to go back and look at
the exact language usually put
in there as soon as practicable.
Number one. I will. I will say
that will make every effort to
post them as soon as possible.
Um, but secondly, I would simply
excuse me simply remind the
committee that, um we are in the
process.
Uh huh.
Updating, upgrading and having a
fully integrated bill, drafting
committee and chamber process,
and we hope to have that in
place by 2026 that will make
that that much smoother if you
will. Cool. Well, thank you. And
personally, I mean, I think
those those kinds of things and
showing bill histories and all
those things are really great
for
For government and transparency.
So, um, but I really have taught
me through the years that we're
gonna ask these things. We need
to fund it. So you're right.
Madam Leader, and that's just
But that's something I know. I
value. Um
And then I just want to ask a
question about the internship
program $60,000. How many
interns a year do we get to
participate in that and do they
come from all over the state?
Mr Chairman and Senator intern.
Program is for five interns up
to five interns. Usually we get
three college interns that are
on our staff from July 1st
through December 31st and we
have
One or two law student interns
roughly from mid May to mid
August. Um and we've had that in
place for quite some time. We
increased it by by $5000.
because we're hoping to pay them
a little bit more, most of them
help with the interim
committees. The last 10 interns
do a lot more legal research to
assist the drafters.
We have a lot more demand. Mr.
We have a lot more demand than
those five that want to
participate in that.
Mr Chairman and Senator, we We
really don't. In fact, it's been
a little tricky to actually get
people to apply. We've reached
out. We reached out to all New
Mexico universities and
colleges. And I think once or
twice we've had inquiries from
Former New Mexico residents who
are attending school elsewhere.
Um
But the demand isn't there. I
don't know. I know you all we
all send it out over social
media. I try to share but I
don't know how broadly we market
it, but that's cool that we do
that though That's all happens.
Sure. Thank you. Media. Thank
you, Mr Chair and Madam leader
and Mr Bush saga, So just a
quick question on there's a lot
in here, obviously, and there's
some significant increases in
what have you and we've had a
number of discussions on
Interim staffing for legislators
and
Any number of fashion. There was
an awful lot of research being
done with, you know, legislators
being interviewed? You know the
whole story? Um, but I mentioned
that along the lines of chair
with the leader said the House
leader said, Is there anything
here that does anything to that
process or that work being done?
Is there anything that funds any
of that activity here?
For the interim period for
legislative offices and
legislative support, if not an
office. Legislative support. Not
in this bill, Mr Chairman.
I just thought we had done
something to funds last year to
fund the study or something in
this. We did do that. That's
what I thought.
is their work or budgeting or a
proposal of some kind that
continues that work. How we
Moved down that that road any
further.
Not here. All right. Thanks.
Just asking. Thank you. I think
that's coming in the bill.
And in the appropriate place,
then, is not where House Bill
one should be until there stood
up and we decide how that
structure is gonna work. Senator
Woods, Mr Chair quickly. I know
that this is probably something
that
As usual, but in these bills,
but I noticed in the FR it says
significant issues, it said
section 1011 and 12 I know 12 is
always in there the emergency
clause but the provide for
transfer authorities. Is that
always been in the bill.
In the past, Mr Chair and Madam
Floor Leader. Mr. Chair,
Senator. Yes, it is. It's a
standard boilerplate language,
and, um
Well.
Those have some limitations on
them. I would say that this does
much to create a coequal branch
of government because the
executive Hasbara Authority, the
administrative Office of the
Courts, has bar authority.
And Mr Chair, Metal floor
leader. Is there any oversight
on that at all? Or are we just
Do those bars come before?
Lfc or the
Um, Mr Chairman. I'm going to
let Mr Bursey Aga answer that.
Mr Mr Chairman and Senator
Woods. There is no oversight by
any of the committees. Um lfc
LSC or legislative council to my
knowledge.
Hmm. Certainly not for the
council. I don't know if
Elliot's NLC report that to the
respective chairs, however, uh
the requests are usually done.
Excuse me, The transfer is
usually done.
At the request of, um leaders,
For example, there are some
leaders who would prefer to have
contract staff and the
leadership offices versus
employees, regular full time
employees, So we've on
occasional move money from
contracts to salaries, or vice
versa.
For the Legislative Council
Service. I worked with our
assistant director for
administration and chief
financial officer Inessa, Um,
when we've had to make similar
adjustments, we've moved money
from contracts to salaries and
the like, but it doesn't happen
very often. Only as needed your
birth the end of the year in
close and Mr Chair of the last
question I have is
The legislative performance
measures are we who who does
those who does?
How do we know how efficiently
we are, Uh, accomplishing
whatever task it is, Mr Chair.
Mr.
It's It's a section 11. Mr
Chairman, Mr Chairman and
Senator, um
That has been boilerplate
language that has been in the
feed bill for quite some time.
Um
Frankly there, I'm not aware of
any specific performance
measures that are in place for
any of the chief clerk's offices
or the legislative offices.
Because a lot of what is
required is in statute, Uh,
staffing interim committees
providing analysis for the
members and the like, and if
something goes wrong, I can
assure you that, um
Gwen.
Or Charles, or I do hear from
members and our respective
chairs. Okay, Thank you very
much, Mr German.
Thank you See, no one else for
questions can have a motion
Second motion by Senator
Gonzalez, second by
Senator Rodrigues.
Where you call the roll, please.
Senator Bert
Senator. Compost? Yes, Senator
Brantley? Yes.
Senator Gonzalez
Senator Hemphill. Senator
Padilla. Yes, Senator Scherer,
Senator Stein, born
Senator Woods.
Yes.
Senator, Vice chair Rodriguez.
And chairman. Ah's Yes. Yes.
Living in the affirmative, 11
Affirmative will be on the floor
tomorrow. Thank you Appreciate
your time and I and I know
people are questioning right?
How did this get there? How did
that get there right it at some
point.
I'm going to make a decision.
As the chair of Loc. Do I want a
better lfc? Yes. You want the
ability to do things better?
Yes.
Hmm. And
You know, we've increased
I'm just going to think of an
agency the environment acquired
by 36% and the Legislature's
increased theirs by maybe 5%
over the or 2% you may know
this.
Mr Chairman. I just want to
point out for your benefit when
you are debating the bill if
there is a debate that there's
an updated F I R After the House
floor debate today, the last
sentence in the synopsis of
house Bill one. They didn't
hospital went increases.
recurring legislative expenses.
To 30.4 million. It's a 5.8%
increase compared to FY 24
because some of the increases
are much larger.
Because they're smaller but
altogether.
It's just over.
Five of the top of your head
just for what did we increased
last year's budget By and
You know?
Mr Termite. I don't have that
information. Thank you
Appreciate it.
Thank you. Ah!
Tomorrow. We're going on and off
the floor.
I don't know, other than the
feed bill on the floor, so
The committee members will kind
of play it by here. We're just
starting to hear agencies.
And so
May not be in tomorrow and in on
Friday, I'll have to see where
we're at. Um and I'll let you
know.
So
You can post start. You can post
our schedule, but we know we're
going on the floor in the
morning, and then we're going. I
got to go to committees
Committee and then
We're taking a lunch break, and
then we're going back on the
floor and then back to
committees committee so
Be close if we have a meeting.
Amazing.
We're not meeting in the
morning.
So
That's kind of where we're at.
We're in flux right now, because
yeah, possibly after right?
Yeah, depending on the time of
the floor,
no more urgent.
